
=== PDF PAGE 177 ===
150      Buprenorphine
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Bupivacaine Liposome Injectable Suspension 1.3% (13.3 mg/mL) in 
10 mL and 20 mL single-use vials; Exparel®; (Rx)6
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Buprenorphine
(byoo-pre-nor-feen)  Buprenex®, Simbadol®, Zorbium®
Opioid Partial Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Partial mu-opioid agonist used primarily as an injectable and 
buccal (ie, oral transmucosal [OTM]) analgesic, especially in 
cats
	
▶Often used as a component of short-term immobilization and 
anesthetic drug combinations 
	
▶Buccal/OTM administration is well tolerated and can be effec-
tive, but bioavailability is low by this route, as is standard  
(0.3 mg/mL) buprenorphine administered SC.
	
▶Longer onset of action and longer duration of action as com-
pared with most other opioids
	
▶Rarely, may cause respiratory depression
	
▶Because of tight buprenorphine receptor binding, standard 
doses of naloxone may not completely reverse drug effects.
	
▶DEA Schedule III (C-III) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Buprenorphine is most often used as an analgesic for mild to mod-
erate pain or in preanesthetic drug combinations in small animals. 
In most species, buprenorphine provides less analgesia than pure 
mu-opioid agonists (eg, morphine, hydromorphone) and it is less se-
dating than most other opioids (particularly butorphanol). For acute 
pain control, buprenorphine may have the disadvantage of a longer 
onset of action than other opioids.
In dogs, an isoflurane MAC-sparing effect occurs at IV dosages of 
0.01 mg/kg, 0.05 mg/kg, and 0.1 mg/kg1 but methadone (0.3 mg/kg) 
provided more effective presurgical analgesia than buprenorphine 
(0.02 mg/kg) in dogs sedated with acepromazine and medetomi-
dine prior to undergoing ovariohysterectomy (OHE).2 Use of the 
feline-labeled Simbadol® (0.02 mg/kg IM) prior to surgery in dogs 
(pretreated with acepromazine and carprofen and undergoing ovari-
ohysterectomy) provided similar postoperative analgesia as standard 
buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg IM) but more dogs in the standard bu-
prenorphine group (3/12) required postoperative rescue analgesia 
(vs 0/12 for Simbadol®).3 Oral transmucosal (OTM) administration 
can provide effective analgesia (0.02 and 0.12 mg/kg were studied)4 
but bioavailability is low and variable with this route.5 When used 
epidurally in combination with bupivacaine for stifle arthroplasty, 
buprenorphine produced sufficient analgesia for up to 24 hours.6 Bu-
prenorphine/bupivacaine combination for infraorbital nerve block 
had an isoflurane-sparing effect and extended the duration of anal-
gesia to 48 to 96 hours.7
In cats, one product (Simbadol®) is a high-concentration (1.8 mg/ 
mL), long-duration (72 hour) form of buprenorphine that is FDA- 
approved for SC administration for the control of postoperative pain 
associated with surgical procedures. A transdermal buprenorphine 
solution is FDA-approved for the control of postoperative pain. It is 
applied by veterinary staff in the clinic or hospital 1 to 2 hours prior 
to surgical procedures and provides analgesia for 4 days.8 
In one study, when combined with medetomidine (0.002 mg/kg), 
standard concentration buprenorphine (0.3 mg/mL; 0.002 mg/kg) 
given IM provided equivalent analgesia to that provided by butorph-
anol (0.4 mg/kg) or methadone (0.5 mg/kg).9 Combined with dex-
medetomidine (0.001 mg/kg), butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg) provided 
better sedation and less vomiting than buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg) 
when administered IM to cats.10 With standard buprenorphine, 
buccal/OTM administration can be a practical, effective method for 
controlling postoperative pain. However, IV or IM administration 
of buprenorphine provides better postoperative (OHE) analgesia as 
compared with SC or buccal/OTM administration, and the cats re-
ceiving buprenorphine by the OTM route experienced a high prev-
alence of treatment failure.11 Multidose injectable formulations may 
be less palatable to cats when given by the OTM route than the pre-
servative-free formulation.12 Combining opioids such as buprenor-
phine with short-term NSAIDs for postoperative pain control pro-
vides better analgesia than buprenorphine alone.13 
In the UK and Australia, there are licensed buprenorphine prod-
ucts that are labeled for postoperative analgesia in dogs, cats, and 
horses and potentiation of the sedative effects of centrally acting 
agents in dogs and horses.
Pharmacology/Actions
Buprenorphine has partial agonist activity at the mu receptor and is 
a kappa-receptor antagonist. Buprenorphine is considered 30 times 
more potent than morphine and exhibits many of the same actions as 
the pure opioid agonists. It produces a dose-related analgesia; how-
ever, at higher doses, analgesic effects may plateau. Buprenorphine 
has a high affinity for, and slow dissociation from, mu receptors in 
the CNS, which may explain its relatively long duration of action. 
In dogs, sedative effects are generally seen after 15 minutes, but an-
algesia may not develop fully until 30 minutes postadministration. 
Analgesia is unlikely to persist for 12 hours unless pain is mild. A 6- 
to 8-hour duration of analgesic effect is often reported but analgesia 
may be as short as 4 hours, with high variability between cats.13 Mul-
timodal analgesia with frequent pain assessment is recommended. 
The high-concentration, long duration buprenorphine product lasts 
72 hours when given SC to cats.
The cardiovascular effects of buprenorphine may cause a decrease 
in both blood pressure and cardiac rate. Rarely, human patients may 
exhibit increases in blood pressure and cardiac rate. Respiratory de-
pression is a possibility and decreased respiratory rates have been 
noted in horses treated with buprenorphine. GI effects appear to be 
minimal in cats treated with buprenorphine.
Pharmacokinetics
In cats, buprenorphine is rapidly and completely absorbed when 
given IM.14 Peak concentrations after SC injection can vary widely; 
blood concentrations are low and do not appear to correlate with an-
algesic effect. Buprenorphine has a volume of distribution at steady-
state (VDss) of ≈3 to 8 L/kg and a clearance of ≈8 to 20 mL/kg per 
minute. Elimination half-life is ≈6 to 7 hours. When administered 
by the buccal/OTM route, bioavailability is low and highly variable 
(≈20% to 30%).13,15 The human transdermal patch buprenorphine 
(Transtec®; UK) applied to cats has demonstrated widely variable 
blood concentrations and, without a loading dose, does not appear 
to provide adequate analgesia. Individual variability in response to 
buprenorphine administration by all administration routes, espe-
cially SC and OTM, has been reported. Some cats may not receive 
sufficient analgesia from buprenorphine.13 
In dogs, oral bioavailability is very low (5%), but buprenorphine 
administered via the buccal/OTM route is ≈35% to 50% absorbed.5 
Elimination half-life ranges from 4 to 9 hours,16 and wide interpa-
tient variability exists. In a small pilot study, application of topical 
buprenorphine patches showed that plasma concentrations in-
creased during the first 36 hours, then remained between 0.7 and 
1 ng/mL during the study period.17 In greyhounds, when buprenor-
phine was administered IV, the volume of distribution, plasma clear-


=== PDF PAGE 178 ===
Buprenorphine      151
ance, and terminal half-life were 3.54 L/kg, 10.3 mL/minute/kg, and 
3.96 hours, respectively.18 A pharmacokinetic study in 6 mongrel 
dogs resulted in a volume of distribution, plasma clearance, and ter-
minal half-life of 4.68 L/kg, 23.3 mL/minute/kg, and 3.97 hours,19 
respectively, when buprenorphine was administered IV, and a termi-
nal half-life of 12.74 hours when the extended-release injection was 
administered SC.20
In horses, the onset of action is ≈15 minutes after IV dosing. 
Buprenorphine is variably absorbed after IM administration and 
bioavailability is ≈50% to 80%.21 Volume of distribution is ≈2.5 to 
3 L/kg.22,23 The peak effect occurs within 30 to 45 minutes and the du-
ration of action may last up to 8 hours. Elimination half-life after an 
IV or IM dose is ≈3.5 to 6 hours.22,23 Because acepromazine exhibits 
a similar onset and duration of action, many equine clinicians favor 
using acepromazine in combination with buprenorphine. One study 
found plasma buprenorphine concentrations between 0.34 and 
2.45 ng/mL after IV administration of 10 μg/kg.24 In foals younger 
than 21 days of age, buprenorphine 0.01 – 0.02 mg/kg IV had a VDss 
of 6.5 L/kg; clearance was 56 mL/kg/minute, and elimination half-life 
was ≈2 hours.25 The same dosage administered sublingually was only 
25% bioavailable, and plasma concentration reached the presumed 
therapeutic concentration briefly in only one foal; however, physio-
logic changes did occur, indicating absorption of the drug. The ther-
apeutic concentration could be lower in foals than in other species.
Elimination half-life was 1 to 2.7 hours after IV and SC adminis-
tration in alpacas, and SC bioavailability was 64%.26
The distribution of the drug has not been well studied. Data from 
work done in rats reflect that buprenorphine concentrates in the liv-
er but is also found in the brain, GI tract, and placenta. It is highly 
bound (96%) to plasma proteins (not albumin).
In most species, buprenorphine is metabolized in the intestinal 
wall and liver27,28 by N-dealkylation likely via CYP3A4 (forming nor-
buprenorphine, which is active). Buprenorphine and norbuprenor-
phine also undergo glucuronidation; metabolites are then eliminat-
ed by biliary excretion into the feces (≈70%) and urinary excretion 
(≈27%).
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
The drug is contraindicated in patients with a known hypersensitiv-
ity to it or other opioids.
Because of the potential for decreased clearance with subsequent 
exaggerated/prolonged effects, all opioids should be used with cau-
tion in patients that have hypothyroidism, impaired hepatic func-
tion, or adrenocortical insufficiency (Addison’s disease), and in pe-
diatric, geriatric, or severely debilitated patients.
Rarely, patients may develop respiratory depression from bu-
prenorphine; therefore, it should be used cautiously in patients with 
compromised pulmonary function. Like other opioids, buprenor-
phine must be used with caution in patients with head trauma, in-
creased CSF pressure, or other CNS dysfunction (eg, coma), as any 
degree of respiratory depression could result in excessive partial 
pressure of arterial carbon dioxide with a subsequent increase in in-
tracranial pressure.
Patients with severe hepatic dysfunction may eliminate the drug 
more slowly than normal patients. Buprenorphine may increase bile 
duct pressure and should be used cautiously in patients with biliary 
tract disease29; however, this appears to not have any clinical impact. 
As with all opioids, buprenorphine should also be used with caution 
in horses that show signs of diminished GI tract motility.
Opioid analgesics are contraindicated in patients stung by scor-
pions (eg, Centruroides spp), as these drugs may potentiate venom 
effects.30
Mild sedation can occur in both dogs and cats, making buprenor-
phine an important component of a preanesthetic protocol; howev-
er, excitement can occur in horses and, less commonly, in cats, as is 
true of other opioids. Mild postoperative hyperthermia can occur in 
cats.28
Because buprenorphine can cause excitement in horses, when it 
is used as a preoperative analgesic, an IV sedative should be admin-
istered prior to, or in conjunction with, the buprenorphine injec-
tion.22,23
The standard formulation of buprenorphine by the SC route is not 
recommended due to poor absorption. Buprenorphine should not 
be administered via the intrathecal or peridural routes. 
The transdermal solution requires ≈30 minutes to dry, and once 
dried the risk for human buprenorphine exposure following contact 
of the administration site is limited. Clinic staff should use personal 
protective equipment (impermeable gloves, eye protection, labora-
tory coat) when preparing or administering any of the concentrated 
buprenorphine products.8
Adverse Effects
Although rare, respiratory depression appears to be the major ad-
verse effect. Other adverse effects (eg, sedation, nausea, vomiting, 
bradycardia, excitement [primarily cats and horses]) may be noted 
but generally occur less frequently as compared with other opioids. 
In dogs, as with other opioids, salivation, bradycardia, hypother-
mia, agitation, dehydration, and miosis have been reported. Tachy-
cardia, vomiting, and high blood pressure rarely occur. Injection site 
reactions and skin lesions have been noted with the non-FDA-ap-
proved extended-release injectable formulation and are most likely 
due to a reaction to the vehicle.31 SC administration of high-concen-
tration buprenorphine to dogs resulted in varying degrees of seda-
tion, reduced appetite, panting, whining, and hyperptyalism.20  
In cats, as with other opioids, mydriasis and behavioral effects (eg, 
excessive purring, pacing, rubbing, hiding) can be seen. Vomiting, 
salivation, anorexia, and hyperthermia occur rarely; however, hyper-
thermia was observed in ≈28% of cats on the day after surgery; con-
stipation and mydriasis also were noted.32 Vomiting occurred in 55% 
of cats receiving buprenorphine/dexmedetomidine combination 
with only 5% vomiting in cats receiving dexmedetomidine/butorph-
anol.10 In a study, high doses of standard buprenorphine (0.24, 0.72, 
and 1.2 mg/kg/day SC) for 9 consecutive days were well tolerated in 
young cats. Adverse effects included hyperactivity, tachycardia, diffi-
culty in handling, disorientation, agitation, and mydriasis.33 
In horses, buprenorphine may cause ataxia, excitement, and dimin-
ished gut sounds, but colic has not been a major concern. All horses 
(n = 4) developed constipation after receiving a single SC or IM dose 
of an experimental sustained-release buprenorphine formulation.34 
Administration with a sedative (eg, acepromazine, detomidine) may 
help decrease excitement and cardiac and respiratory rates.
In rabbits, SC buprenorphine reduced food and water intake, GI 
transit, and fecal output.35,36 
The primary adverse effect seen in humans is sedation, with an 
incidence of ≈66%.29 Buprenorphine may cause urine retention or 
difficulty voiding, particularly with high IV doses or epidural ad-
ministration.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safe use of veterinary buprenorphine formulations in breeding, preg-
nant, or lactating animals has not been established. The drug crosses 
the placenta. Although no controlled studies have been performed 
in domestic animals or humans, the drug has exhibited no evidence 
of teratogenicity or causing impaired fertility in laboratory animals. 
Early fetal death and postimplantation loss have been noted in rats.27 
The Vetergesic® 0.3 mg/mL solution for injection for dogs and cats 
label (Canada) states that the drug is contraindicated preoperatively 
for cesarean section due to concerns for respiratory depression in 
offspring.27


=== PDF PAGE 179 ===
152      Buprenorphine
In rats, maternal milk buprenorphine concentration equaled or 
exceeded that of plasma27; however, maternal milk buprenorphine 
concentrations are low in humans37 and no adverse effects were seen 
in 4-week-old infants nursing from buprenorphine-treated women.38 
There are no data for commonly encountered veterinary species.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The intraperitoneal LD50 of buprenorphine has been reported to 
be 243 mg/kg in rats. The ratio of lethal dose to effective dose is at 
least 1000:1 in rodents. Because of the apparent high index of safety, 
life-threatening acute overdoses should be rare in veterinary medi-
cine, but most overdoses will cause clinical signs. Common findings 
in dogs (in decreasing frequency) include vocalization, ataxia, hy-
persalivation, hypothermia, and lethargy.
Treatment with naloxone and doxapram has been suggested for 
cases of acute overdoses causing respiratory or cardiac effects.27 Sec-
ondary to buprenorphine’s high affinity for the mu-opioid receptor, 
high doses and/or repeated doses of naloxone may be required to 
treat respiratory depression. See Naloxone.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving buprenorphine and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks 
should be weighed, and additional monitoring performed when 
appropriate. NOTE: Drug interactions may be positive rather than 
adverse (eg potentiation of local anesthetic effects when combined 
with buprenorphine).
	■Anesthetics, Local (eg, mepivacaine, bupivacaine): When 
buprenorphine and the local anesthetic agent are combined in the 
same syringe and injected perineurally, the anesthetic action may 
be potentiated.
	■Anticonvulsants (eg, phenobarbital, phenytoin): May de-
crease plasma buprenorphine concentrations 
	■Benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam, midazolam): Case reports of 
humans developing respiratory/cardiovascular/CNS depression; 
use combination with caution
	■CNS Depressant Agents (eg, anesthetic agents, antihista-
mines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, phenothiazines, tran-
quilizers): May cause increased CNS or cardiorespiratory depres-
sion when used with buprenorphine
	■Desmopressin: The concurrent use of desmopressin and opi-
oids may increase the risk for hyponatremia. 
	■Erythromycin: 
Can 
increase 
plasma 
buprenorphine 
­concentrations
	■Halothane: Reduced hepatic blood flow during anesthesia can 
increase buprenorphine effects.
	■Ketoconazole, Itraconazole, Fluconazole: Can increase 
plasma buprenorphine concentrations
	■Metoclopramide: Concurrent use of metoclopramide and bu-
prenorphine may increase the risk for CNS depression. 
	■Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs; eg, selegiline, 
amitraz): Possible additive effects or increased CNS depression; 
combination is not recommended in humans due to additional 
risk for serotonin syndrome29
	■Naloxone: Will reduce analgesia but is less effective at reversing 
buprenorphine effects as compared with other opioids
	■Opioids (Pure Mu-Agonists) (eg, fentanyl, hydromor-
phone): Buprenorphine may potentially antagonize some analge-
sic effects but may also reverse some of the sedative and respirato-
ry depressant effects of pure agonists.
	■Pancuronium: If used with buprenorphine, may cause increased 
conjunctival changes
	■Phenobarbital: Concurrent use of phenobarbital and bu-
prenorphine may result in increased risk for CNS depression and/
or decreased plasma concentrations of buprenorphine. 
	■QT Prolonging Agents (eg, cisapride, quinidine, sotalol): 
Concurrent use can increase the risk for life-threatening arrhyth-
mias in humans; significance in veterinary patients is unknown. 
	■Rifampin: Potentially decreased plasma buprenorphine concen-
trations
	■Serotonergic Agents (eg, clomipramine, fluoxetine, mir-
tazapine, trazodone): Concurrent use may increase the risk for 
serotonin syndrome.29
	■Tramadol: May increase the risk for serotonin syndrome and 
respiratory depression29
Laboratory Considerations
None noted
Dosages
DOGS:
Analgesia (all extra-label):
a)	 General use: 5 – 30 μg/kg (0.005 – 0.03 mg/kg) IV or IM 
every 4 to 6 hours; consider extended dosing interval to 8 to 
12 hours for treating mild pain. NOTE: SC administration 
of buprenorphine does not provide clinical analgesia due to 
erratic drug absorption.39 
b)	Constant rate infusion (CRI): Following an IV loading 
dose of 5 – 10 μg/kg (0.005 – 0.01 mg/kg), 2 – 4 μg/kg/
hour IV CRI has been suggested. Acceptable analgesia was 
described in a pharmacokinetic study evaluating a loading 
dose of 15 μg/kg (0.015 mg/kg) IV administered after re-
covery from anesthesia, followed by 2.5 μg/kg/hour IV CRI 
for 6 hours.40 
c)	 Postoperative analgesia: 10 – 20 μg/kg (0.01 – 0.02 mg/kg) 
IV or IM.41,42 For further pain relief, repeat if necessary 
with 10 μg/kg (0.01 mg/kg) after 3 to 4 hours or 20 μg/kg 
(0.02 mg/kg) every 5 to 6 hours; exact timing is based on 
expected duration of the dose administered, degree of pain, 
and results of pain assessment. 
d)	Postoperative analgesia using the feline-labeled bu-
prenorphine product (Simbadol®): In dogs undergoing 
ovariohysterectomy, buprenorphine 20 μg/kg (0.02 mg/kg) 
IV, IM in combination with acepromazine 0.02 mg/kg IM 
as a premedication followed by carprofen 4.4 mg/kg SC ad-
ministered after induction of anesthesia provided immedi-
ate postoperative analgesia (duration not determined).39
e)	 Buccal (oral transmucosal; OTM) for postsurgical anal-
gesia: Based on study results, the authors concluded that 
120 μg/kg (0.12 mg/kg) buccally before OHE was an effec-
tive analgesic with minimal intraoperative and postoper-
ative adverse effects.43 Under experimental conditions, 30 
μg/kg (0.03 mg/kg) provided antinociceptive effects.44
Premedication before surgery or as an anesthetic adjunct (extra- 
label): NOTE: Many potential combinations have been suggested; 
the following are examples and are not inclusive. For additional 
information, refer to anesthesia-specific references. 
a)	In one study, buprenorphine 20 μg/kg (0.02 mg/kg) was 


=== PDF PAGE 180 ===
Buprenorphine      153
combined in the same syringe with either acepromazine 
0.03 mg/kg or dexmedetomidine (dosed by body surface area 
at 250 μg/m
2) and injected IM prior to induction of anesthe-
sia. IV catheters were placed 30 to 45 minutes after premed-
ication, and general anesthesia was induced with propofol 
or alfaxalone. Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg IV was given after in-
duction and before surgery started. General anesthesia was 
maintained with isoflurane. Both combinations (buprenor-
phine with either acepromazine or dexmedetomidine) result-
ed in suitable anesthesia and analgesia for dogs undergoing 
elective procedures; some animals required additional anal-
gesia within 4 hours of the premedication. Postsurgical anal-
gesic differences were not clinically significant.45
b)	In another study, the efficacy and cardiorespiratory effects 
of a combination of dexmedetomidine 15 μg/kg, ketamine 
3 mg/kg, and either buprenorphine 40 μg/kg, butorphanol 
0.2 mg/kg, or hydromorphone 0.05 mg/kg as a single IM in-
jection (with or without reversal by atipamezole) in dogs un-
dergoing castration was tested. Supplemental isoflurane was 
used when anesthesia was considered inadequate during sur-
gery. The authors concluded that the most suitable analgesic 
with this drug combination was buprenorphine and that the 
use of atipamezole after surgery shortened recovery times.46
CATS:
Analgesia: 
a)	 Control of postoperative pain associated with surgical 
procedures (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
i.	 Using the high-concentration SC injection (Simbadol®): 
0.24 mg/kg SC once daily for up to 3 days.28 Administer 
the first dose ≈1 hour prior to surgery. Do not dispense 
for administration at home by the pet owner due to the 
risks associated with the high concentration of Simbadol® 
(1.8 mg/mL) compared with other buprenorphine products.
ii.	 Using the transdermal solution (Zorbium®): The label dos-
age provides a dosage range of 2.7 – 6.7 mg/kg, and the du-
ration of analgesia is 4 days.8 Apply to healthy and non-in-
jured skin at the dorsal cervical region; part hair prior to 
application. Administer in the veterinary clinic or hospital 
1 to 2 hours prior to surgical procedure.
•	For cats weighing 1.2 to 3 kg (2.6 to 6.6 lb): 0.4 mL 
(8 mg)
•	For cats weighing greater than 3 kg (6.6 lb) and up to 
7.5 kg (16.5 lb): 1 mL (20 mg) 
b)	 General use and postoperative analgesia (extra-label): 
10 – 30 μg/kg (0.01 – 0.03 mg/kg) standard buprenorphine 
IM, IV, or buccal/OTM every 4 to 8 hours. Dosages at the 
high end of the dosing range may be required for more 
severe pain. NOTE: If using buccal/OTM, suggest using 
upper end of dosing range or higher (up to 0.05 mg/kg). 
Use of high-concentration buprenorphine (Simbadol®) 
0.12 – 0.24 mg/kg buccal/OTM provided analgesia under 
experimental conditions with a duration of 8 to 12 hours 
(not 24 hours as provided by SC administration).47
c)	 Constant rate infusion (extra-label): Although not report-
ed in cats, anecdotally the use as an infusion is the same as 
that used in dogs.
Premedication before surgery or as an anesthetic adjunct (ex-
tra-label): NOTE: Many potential combinations have been sug-
gested; the following are examples and are not inclusive. For addi-
tional information, refer to anesthesia-specific references.
a)	 0.01 – 0.03 mg/kg buprenorphine IM either 30 minutes pri-
or to or combined with medetomidine 0.1 mg/kg (or dex-
medetomidine 0.05 – 0.08 mg/kg) and ketamine 10 mg/kg 
and given IM for a brief, light plane of anesthesia. Inhalant 
may be needed for longer-term anesthesia or moderate-se-
vere pain-level procedures.48 Atipamezole can be used to 
reverse the alpha-2 agonist, if desired.
b)	In one study, buprenorphine at 20 μg/kg (0.02 mg/kg) was 
combined in the same syringe with either acepromazine 
0.03 mg/kg or dexmedetomidine (dosed by body surface 
area at 250 μg/m2) and injected IM. IV catheters were 
placed 30 to 45 minutes after premedication and general 
anesthesia induction was done using propofol or alfax-
alone. Meloxicam was given IV (0.3 mg/kg) after induction 
before surgery started. General anesthesia was maintained 
with isoflurane. Both combinations (buprenorphine with 
either acepromazine or dexmedetomidine) resulted in suit-
able anesthesia and analgesia for cats undergoing elective 
procedures; some animals required additional analgesia 
within 4 hours of the premedication. Cats given dexmede-
tomidine were more sedated than when acepromazine was 
used. Analgesic effect differences postsurgery were not clin-
ically significant.45
c)	 In a study assessing analgesia after OHE, one of the proto-
cols used was: 10 minutes prior to surgery, ketamine 60 mg/
m2 (≈3 mg/kg), midazolam 3 mg/m2 (≈0.2 mg/kg), medeto-
midine 600 μg/m2 (≈30 μg/kg), and buprenorphine 180 μg/
m2 (≈9 μg/kg) were combined and given as a single IM injec-
tion in the quadriceps muscles. In addition, either carprofen 
(4 mg/kg) or meloxicam (0.3 mg/kg) was given SC. All pro-
tocols in the study provided adequate analgesia.49
HORSES: 
Neuroleptanalgesia (all extra-label): 
a)	 4 – 10 μg/kg (0.004 – 0.01 mg/kg) IV; usually given with a 
sedative such as acepromazine and/or detomidine.50–52 IM 
administration could also be used, but bioavailability may 
be reduced, and onset of action delayed.
b)	Analgesia: 10 μg/kg (0.01 mg/kg) IV, given 5 minutes after 
administration of an IV sedative.41 A single dose may be 
repeated if necessary, after no less than 1 to 2 hours. A case 
report noted 6 μg/kg (0.006 mg/kg) sublingually every 12 
hours provided analgesia to a 5-month-old filly with a C1 
fracture.53 
c)	 To potentiate sedation: 5 μg/kg (0.005 mg/kg) IV given 5 
minutes after administration of an IV sedative.41 The dose 
may be repeated after 10 minutes if necessary. 
SHEEP:
Sedation (extra-label): 0.02 mg/kg combined with acepromazine 
0.03 mg/kg and given IM provided similar sedation as morphine/
acepromazine.54
SWINE:
Analgesic (extra-label): 0.04 mg/kg IM once effectively reduced 
lameness55 and alleviated castration-related pain behaviors56 in 
piglets.
FERRETS:
Analgesic (extra-label): 0.01 – 0.05 mg/kg SC or IM 2 to 3 times 
daily.57Anecdotally can use as a preanesthetic/anesthetic adjunct 
combined with an alpha-2 agonist and ketamine at the same dos-
ages listed for cats.
RABBITS/GUINEA PIGS:
Analgesic (all extra-label):
a)	 Rabbits:
1.	 0.05 mg/kg SC, IM, or IV every 4 to 12 hours; 0.5 mg/kg 
rectally every 12 hours58
2.	 One study in rabbits found that a compounded buprenor-
phine extended release (ER) formulation was at least as 


=== PDF PAGE 181 ===
154      Buprenorphine
effective as commercially available buprenorphine for 
postoperative analgesia. The ER formulation was prepared 
using FDA-approved buprenorphine powder and a pro-
prietary polymer matrix. The product was administered 
at 0.12 mg/kg SC as a single injection and compared with 
commercially available buprenorphine at 0.02 mg/kg SC 
every 12 hours.59
b)	 Guinea pigs: 0.05 mg/kg SC or IV every 4 to 12 hours 60
Premedication or anesthetic adjunct in rabbits (all extra-label):
a)	 Compromised patients: 0.05 – 0.1 mg/kg SC61
b)	 Buprenorphine 0.03 – 0.05 mg/kg IM or SC either 30 min-
utes before or combined with medetomidine 0.25 mg/kg 
(or dexmedetomidine 0.125 mg/kg) and ketamine 15 mg/
kg IM or SC for a brief, light plane of anesthesia. Inhalant 
may be needed for longer-term anesthesia or moderate-se-
vere pain-level procedures.62 Atipamezole can be used to 
reverse the alpha-2 agonist, if desired.
c)	 Healthy animals before uncomplicated elective proce-
dures: buprenorphine 0.02 – 0.06 mg/kg combined with 
midazolam (0.25 – 0.5 mg/kg) and given IM within 20 min-
utes of procedure; used with a local or line incisional block 
using lidocaine and bupivacaine 63
MICE/RATS:
Analgesic: 
a) Mice: 
i. Postprocedural pain control (label dosage, FDA-indexed): 
•	Using extended-release buprenorphine suspension: 
3.25 mg/kg SC as a single injection.64 If needed, a single 
repeat dose may be administered 72 hours after the initial 
dose.
•	Using extended-release buprenorphine solution: 
1 – 1.5 mg/kg SC65 
ii. Using standard buprenorphine (extra-label): 
0.05 – 0.1 mg/kg SC every 12 hours60
b) Rats: 
i. Postprocedural pain control using extended-release 
buprenorphine product (label dosage, FDA-indexed): 
0.65 mg/kg SC as a single injection.64 If needed, a single 
repeat dose may be administered 72 hours after the initial 
dose.
ii. Using standard buprenorphine (extra-label): 0.01 – 0.05 mg/ 
kg SC or IV every 8 to 12 hours or 0.1 – 0.25 mg/kg PO 
every 8 to 12 hours60
Monitoring
	■Analgesic efficacy (pain scores)
	■Respiratory effects (respiratory rate, ETCO2, SpO2)
	■Cardiac effects (heart rate, ECG, blood pressure)
	■Body temperature (in cats, due to potential development of hy-
perthermia)
Client Information
	■Buprenorphine is an opioid analgesic often used for short-term 
pain relief. It is given either by injection or buccally (ie, oral trans-
mucosally [OTM]; squirted into the side of the mouth).
	■When giving buccally/OTM to cats, gently squirt or drip just un-
der the tongue or in the cheek pouch for the best effect. The doses 
are very small for this potent drug, so be sure you are giving the 
exact amount your veterinarian has prescribed.
	■Sedation is the most common side effect.
	■Buprenorphine is classified as a schedule III (C-III) controlled 
drug by the federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) and re-
quires a new written prescription for refills. Use of this medica-
tion in animals or humans other than those for whom they are 
prescribed is illegal.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Buprenorphine is a thebaine derivative and a synthetic partial-opi-
oid agonist. It occurs as a white crystalline powder with a solubility 
of 17 mg/mL in water and 42 mg/mL in alcohol. The commercially 
available injectable product (Buprenex®) has a pH of 3.5 to 5 and is a 
sterile solution of the drug dissolved in D5W. Terms of potency are 
expressed in terms of buprenorphine. The commercial human prod-
uct contains 0.324 mg/mL of buprenorphine HCl, which is equiva-
lent to 0.3 mg/mL of buprenorphine. Autoclaving may considerably 
decrease drug potency.
Buprenorphine HCl may also be known as buprenorphini hydro-
chloridum, CL-112302, NIH-8805, UM-952; trade names include 
Animalgesics®, BupaqB, Buprenex®,  Buprenodale®, EthiqaXR®, Simba-
dol®, Suboxone®, Subutex®, and Temgesic®,   and  Vetergesic®.
Storage/Stability
Buprenorphine Injection 1.8 mg/mL (Simbadol®) should be stored 
at temperatures up to 25°C (77°F) and protected from light and ex-
cessive heat (greater than 40°C [104°F]). The vial has a 56-day in-use 
shelf-life. 
Buprenorphine transdermal solution should be stored at tem-
peratures up to 25°C (77°F) and protected from light.
As a controlled substance, buprenorphine must be stored in an 
area that is substantially constructed and securely locked in accor-
dance with DEA regulations. Follow applicable local, state, and fed-
eral rules regarding disposal of unused or wasted controlled drugs.
Store buprenorphine extended-release injectable suspension vials 
(Ethiqa XR®) at temperatures between 15°C and 25°C (59°F-77°F) or 
refrigerated. Do not freeze. Discard 28 days after broaching. Wear 
gloves when handling. Allow drug to reach room temperature before 
administration. 
Store buprenorphine extended-release injectable solution (Bu-
preLab-Rat®) between 15° and 30°C (59°-86°F). Discard 28 days after 
broaching.
Buprenorphine 0.3 mg/mL injection should be stored at 20°C to 
25°C (68°F-77°F) and protected from prolonged exposure to light. 
Temperatures above 40°C (104°F) or below freezing should be 
­avoided. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Buprenorphine is reported to be compatible with the following 
IV solutions and drugs: acepromazine, atropine, diphenhydramine, 
D5W, D5W with normal saline, glycopyrrolate, haloperidol, hy-
droxyzine, lactated Ringer’s solution, normal saline, scopolamine, 
and xylazine. Although no published data could be located to sup-
port stability for these combinations, buprenorphine injection has 
also been mixed in syringes with detomidine, dexmedetomidine, 
ketamine, medetomidine, and midazolam.
Buprenorphine is reportedly incompatible with diazepam and 
lorazepam.
An in vitro study demonstrated that a 3 mg/mL buprenorphine 
solution compounded for buccal/OTM use was stable for at least 90 
days when stored at room temperature or refrigerated.66 A buccal/
OTM buprenorphine suspension was prepared by dissolving a 2 mg 
sublingual tablet in 0.6 mL deionized water and adding to 6 mL sim-
ple syrup (final concentration, 0.3 mg/mL). The product had a pH of 
3.9 and was stable for 21 days at room temperature or refrigerated. 
A pharmacokinetic study using this formulation showed that peak 
concentration and AUC were ≈45% and ≈50% lower, respectively, 


=== PDF PAGE 182 ===
Buspirone      155
with the compounded product as compared with the commercial 
injection (0.3 mg/mL).67 
Buprenorphine injection (0.3 mg/mL) diluted 1:10 with bacterio-
static saline experienced less than 10% drug loss when stored in glass 
vials for 180 days either refrigerated or at room temperature. Storage 
in plastic syringes for 180 days resulted in more than 80% loss at 
room temperature and 28% loss refrigerated.68
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula-
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
Buprenorphine Injection 1.8 mg/mL in 10 mL multidose vials; Sim-
badol®; (Rx; DEA C-III). FDA-approved (NADA #141-434) for use 
in cats 
Buprenorphine Transdermal Solution: 20 mg/mL in 0.4 mL or 1 mL 
applicator tubes; Zorbium®; (Rx; DEA C-III). FDA-approved (NADA 
#141-547) for use in cats
Buprenorphine Extended-Release Injectable Suspension: 1.3 mg/mL 
(buprenorphine hydrochloride, equivalent to 1.2 mg/mL buprenor-
phine) as a lipid-encapsulated formulation in 1.6 and 3 mL multi-
dose vials; EthiqaXR®; (Rx; C-III). Not FDA-approved; legally mar-
keted as an FDA-indexed product under MIF 900-014. Extra-label 
use is prohibited.
Buprenorphine Extended-Release Injectable Solution: 1 mg/mL in 
5 mL multidose vials; BupreLab-Rat; Rx; C-III). Not FDA-approved; 
legally marketed as an FDA-indexed product under MIF 900-006. 
Extra-label use is prohibited.
A compounded sustained-release formulation by ZooPharm has 
been used in several domestic and wildlife species, such as dogs,69 
cats,70 rabbits,59 Göttingen minipigs,71 sheep,72,73 elephant seals,74 and 
macaques.75
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Buprenorphine HCl for Injection: 0.324 mg/mL (equivalent to 
0.3 mg/mL buprenorphine); 1 mL amps, vials, and syringes; Bupren-
ex, generic; (Rx, C-III)
Buprenorphine HCl Sublingual Tablets: 2 mg and 8 mg (as base); 
generic; (Rx, DEA C-III)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Buspirone
(byoo-spye-rone)  BuSpar®
Anxiolytic
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Nonbenzodiazepine anxiolytic agent used in dogs and cats.
	
▶May take a week or more to be effective; not appropriate for 
acute treatment of situational anxieties
	
▶Use with caution in patients with severe hepatic or renal 
disease.
	
▶Adverse effects are relatively uncommon; cats may exhibit 
behavior changes.
	
▶Many potential drug interactions
Uses/Indications
Buspirone may be effective in treating certain behavior disorders in 
dogs and cats, principally those that are phobia-related and those 
associated with social interactions. Buspirone may also be useful 
for urine spraying,1 fear-related behavior,2 or psychogenic alopecia3 
in cats. Approximately 50% of cats show a decrease in urine mark-
ing when buspirone is given, and the drug may be more effective in 
multi-cat households than in single-cat households.1
Although no comparative studies have been performed, other 
drugs (eg, fluoxetine, clomipramine) are likely more effective.
Pharmacology/Actions
Buspirone is an anxioselective agent. Thus, unlike benzodiazepines, 
buspirone does not possess any anticonvulsant or muscle relaxant 
activity and little sedative or psychomotor impairment activity. Bus-
pirone does not have significant affinity for benzodiazepine recep-
tors and does not affect GABA binding. It appears to act as a partial 
agonist at serotonin (5-HT1A) receptors and as an agonist/antagonist 
of dopamine (D2) receptors in the CNS. In neurons, buspirone slows 
neuronal serotonin depletion.
Pharmacokinetics
In a limited study done in 6 cats,4 oral administration of buspirone 
gave peak concentrations in ≈1.4 hours, but oral bioavailability ap-
peared to be significantly lower than in humans. Transdermal ad-
ministration of buspirone (PLO-base) did not yield detectable con-
centrations (ELISA method). However, a study comparing the effects 
of oral versus transdermal buspirone on urine marking indicated a 
significant reduction in urine marking frequency for both groups 
and there was no difference in efficacy between the two groups. This 
study administered the medication for 35 days and included 17 cats 
in each group.5 
In humans, buspirone is rapidly and completely absorbed but a 
high first-pass effect limits systemic bioavailability to ≈5%. Binding 
to plasma proteins is very high (95%). In rats, the highest tissue con-
centrations are found in the lungs, kidneys, and fat. Lower concen-
trations are found in the brain, heart, skeletal muscle, plasma, and 
liver. The elimination half-life (in humans) is ≈2 to 4 hours. Buspi-
rone is hepatically metabolized to several metabolites (including the 
active 1-PP). These metabolites are primarily excreted in the urine.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Buspirone is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it. Clear-
ance of buspirone may be reduced in animals with either significant 
renal or hepatic disease, therefore increasing the risk for adverse ef-
fects. Because buspirone may blunt disinhibitory neural processes, it 
should be used with caution in aggressive animals. Sedation is pos-
sible, although less than with other anxiolytic drugs; use this drug 
with caution in working or service dogs, as their level of alertness 
may be affected.
Because buspirone often takes a week or more for effect, it should 
not be used as the sole therapy for situational anxieties.
Do not confuse BusPIRone and BuPROPion.
Adverse Effects
Buspirone is generally well-tolerated; adverse effects are usually min-
imal. Bradycardia, GI disturbances (eg, inappetence, vomiting), and 
stereotypic behaviors (eg, excessive grooming, pacing) are possible. 
Cats may demonstrate increased affection, which may be the desired 
effect. In multi-cat households, cats that have previously been ex-
tremely timid in the face of repeated aggression from other cats may, 
after receiving buspirone, become less anxious and more assertive.
In humans, the most likely adverse effect profile seen with buspi-
rone includes dizziness, headache, nausea, anorexia, and restlessness; 
other neurologic effects (including sedation) may be noted. Rarely, 
tachycardias and other cardiovascular clinical signs may be present.


=== PDF PAGE 579 ===
552      Fluticasone
continue treatment for 4 weeks beyond 2 negative monthly skin 
scrapings
	■Adverse effects (eg, decreased appetite, vomiting, diarrhea)
Client Information 
	■Keep this medicine and all medicines out of the reach of other 
animals and children. Keep the product in the original packaging 
until use to prevent unintended exposure. 
	■Chewable tablets should be administered with a meal.
	■For the topical dog product, avoid bathing or swimming for 3 
days after application.
	■Do not apply this medicine to irritated skin. Do not contact the 
application site or allow children to contact the application site 
until dry. Skin irritation has been reported in humans after close 
contact with the application site within 4 days of application. 
Contact a physician if there are any concerns. Be sure to have the 
product label available when calling.
	■Do not eat, drink, or smoke while handling the topical products. 
The topical products are flammable. Keep away from heat, open 
flames, sparks, or other sources of ignition. 
	■Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water immediately 
after use.
	■Report any side effects, including adverse neurologic effects such 
as tremors, difficulty walking, or seizures, to your veterinarian.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Fluralaner is an isoxazoline-substituted benzamide derivative insec-
ticide and acaracide. It has a molecular weight of 556.29 and an octa-
nol/water partition coefficient of 5.35. The spot-on solution is color-
less to yellow. ATCvet code is QP53BX, and trade name is Bravecto®.
Storage/Stability
Do not store fluralaner chewable tablets above 30°C (86°F) or topical 
solutions above 25°C (77°F). Store in the original packaging to pro-
tect from moisture. The topical solution is highly flammable. Keep 
away from heat, sparks, open flame, or other sources of ignition.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status 
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Fluralaner Chewable Tablets for Dogs: 112 mg, 250 mg, 500 mg, 
1000 mg, and 1400 mg; Bravecto®; (Rx). FDA-approved. NADA 
#141-426 
Fluralaner Chewable Tablets for Dogs: 45 mg, 100 mg, 200 mg, 
400 mg, and 560 mg; Bravecto® 1-Month; (Rx). FDA-approved. 
NADA #141-532 
Fluralaner 280 mg/ml Topical Solution for Dogs: 112 mg, 250 mg, 
500 mg, 1000 mg, and 1400 mg; Bravecto® topical solution for dogs; 
(Rx). FDA-approved. NADA #141-459
Fluralaner 280 mg/ml Topical Solution for Cats: 112.5 mg, 250 mg, 
and 500 mg; Bravecto® topical solution for cats; (Rx). FDA-approved. 
NADA #141-459
Fluralaner 28% (280 mg/mL) and Moxidectin 1.4% (14 mg/mL) Top-
ical Solution for Cats: 0.4 mL, 0.9 mL, and 1.8 mL tubes; Bravecto® 
Plus topical solution for cats; (Rx). FDA approved. NADA #141-518 
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
 
Fluticasone
(floo-ti-ca-sone)  Flovent®
Glucocorticoid, Inhaled 
Prescriber Highlights 
	
▶Glucocorticoid used most commonly in veterinary medicine 
as an inhaled aerosol as local treatment of a condition while 
minimizing systemic adverse effects
	
▶Has shown efficacy in the treatment of feline asthma, as well 
as chronic inflammatory airway disease in dogs and horses 
	
▶Adverse effects include possible suppression of HPA axis and 
secondary nasal demodicosis.
	
▶Must be used with a species-appropriate delivery device
	
▶Expense may be an issue.
Uses/Indications 
The inhaled aerosol formulation of fluticasone is used for treatment 
of canine chronic bronchitis, feline asthma and chronic bronchitis, 
and equine asthma. The optimal dosing of inhaled corticosteroids 
is unknown, and currently there are no studies specifically showing 
any advantages of inhaled corticosteroids over oral prednisolone in 
dogs and cats with naturally occurring airway disease.1 In an 8-week 
study in cats (n = 9) with naturally occurring lower airway disease 
that compared oral prednisolone with fluticasone administered via 
inhalation twice daily, the authors concluded both treatments were 
effective in eliminating clinical signs and reducing airway eosino-
philia; oral glucocorticoids were associated with more robust im-
provement in airway resistance and static compliance.2
The authors in one study3 concluded that the benefits of using in-
haled corticosteroids in the treatment of severe equine asthma (SEA) 
include a more rapid effect on lung function and airway smooth 
muscle remodeling as compared with antigen avoidance alone, with-
out inducing detectable adverse effects with prolonged use. However, 
antigen avoidance leads to better control of inflammation and has 
additional beneficial effects on pulmonary function of inhaled cor-
ticosteroid-treated horses, even when clinical signs are apparently 
controlled by medication.
Pharmacology/Actions 
Like other glucocorticoids, fluticasone has potent anti-inflammatory 
activity. Fluticasone has an affinity 18 times more than dexametha-
sone for human glucocorticoid receptors.4 In a feline study, inhaled 
fluticasone significantly reduced airway eosinophilia.5 For a more 
thorough discussion of glucocorticoid effects, refer to Glucocorti-
coid Agents, General Information.
Pharmacokinetics 
In humans administered inhaled fluticasone aerosol via the lungs, 
≈30% is absorbed into systemic circulation; a dose of 880 µg showed 
peak plasma concentrations of 0.1 to 1 ng/mL. Volume of distribu-
tion averages 4.2 L/kg and is 91% bound to plasma proteins. Fluti-
casone is metabolized via CYP 3A4 isoenzymes to a metabolite with 
negligible pharmacologic activity. Following IV administration, ter-
minal elimination half-life is ≈8 hours, with most of the drug excret-
ed in the feces as parent drug and metabolites.
Medication administered via metered-dose inhalers was con-
firmed to deposit in the respiratory tract of dogs breathing tidally 
both with and without sedation; significantly more drug is deposited 
with nebulization.6
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Fluticasone is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it, and is 
not indicated for treatment of acute bronchospasm (eg, status asth-
maticus); cases of fluticasone-induced paradoxical bronchospasm 
have been reported in humans.4 


=== PDF PAGE 580 ===
Fluticasone      553
When transitioning patients from systemic steroid therapy to in-
haled steroids, wean slowly off systemic therapy to avoid acute adre-
nal insufficiency. During this transition period, patients should re-
ceive supplemental systemic steroid therapy during periods of acute 
stress or if severe asthma attacks occur during the withdrawal stage. 
Adverse Effects 
In humans, the most likely adverse effects are pharyngitis and upper 
respiratory infection. Although inhaled steroids generally cause sig-
nificantly fewer adverse effects than injectable or oral therapy, sup-
pression of the HPA axis can occur. 
One study comparing ACTH-stimulated cortisol concentrations 
in healthy beagles, found that inhaled budesonide did not signifi-
cantly affect cortisol concentrations, but oral prednisolone 1 mg/kg/
day and inhaled fluticasone 250 µg twice daily did have a significant 
effect on cortisol concentrations after 35 days of treatment.7 Evi-
dence of pituitary-adrenal axis inhibition was identified in 2 dogs; 1 
dog developed signs of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism (eg, weight 
gain, PU/PD, alopecia, skin thinning, abdominal distension, hepato-
megaly, panting).8
A study in cats given different dosages of inhaled fluticasone 
did not show significant HPA axis suppression at 44 µg, 110 µg, or 
220 µg every 12 hours.5 Cats treated with inhaled corticosteroids 
may develop localized demodicosis on the muzzle/nasal planum.9,10
Another study in horses demonstrated that long-term inhaled 
fluticasone did not cause detectable effects on innate and adaptive 
(both humoral and cell-mediated) immune parameters studied.11 
Suppression of serum cortisol has been documented in horses treat-
ed long-term with inhaled fluticasone.12
Reproductive/Nursing Safety 
Fluticasone given SC to laboratory animals caused a variety of tera-
togenic effects, including growth delays, cleft palate, omphalocele, 
and delayed cranial ossification.4 See Glucocorticoid Agents, Gener-
al Information.
It is not known if the drug enters maternal milk; use with caution 
in nursing dams.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
An acute overdose of this medication is unlikely, but there have been 
reported cases of dogs puncturing canisters of albuterol and devel-
oping adverse effects. A similar occurrence with fluticasone would 
unlikely require treatment. Chronic overdoses could result in signif-
icant HPA axis suppression and adverse effects related to iatrogenic 
hyperadrenocorticism.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions 
Although the manufacturer states that due to the low systemic plas-
ma concentrations associated with inhalational therapy clinically 
significant drug interactions are unlikely, use caution when flutica-
sone is used in conjunction with other drugs that can inhibit CY-
P3A4 isoenzymes (eg, ketoconazole); theoretically, fluticasone con-
centrations could be increased.
Laboratory Considerations 
	■Intradermal skin testing (IDST) for allergens: A related inhaled 
corticosteroid (ie, budesonide) in cats (for 1 month) eliminated 
skin reactivity in 3 out of 6 cats tested.13 The authors suggested 
a 2-week withdrawal if using IDST, but withdrawal may not be 
necessary if using serum IgE testing for allergies. This same effect 
may apply to inhaled fluticasone.
Dosages
NOTES:  
1.	 Optimal dosing of inhaled corticosteroids is unknown, and 
there have been no studies specifically demonstrating advan-
tages of inhaled glucocorticoids over oral prednisone/prednis-
olone in patients with naturally occurring airway disease.
2.	 When using inhalant therapy, dogs and cats must take 7 to 10 
breaths (3 to 5 breaths for horses) (with the appropriate deliv-
ery device [eg, AeroDawg, AeroKat, AeroHippus] still placed) 
after each time the metered dose inhaler (MDI) has been actu-
ated to ensure the maximal dose is inhaled.
DOGS:
NOTE: Most commonly, when starting fluticasone, oral gluco-
corticoid therapy is continued for 10 to 14 days with a tapering 
overlap.14
Adjunctive treatment for chronic tracheobronchial disease (ex-
tra-label): Using 110 – 220 µg/puff MDI, administer 1 puff 2 to 
4 times daily via an appropriate delivery device.15-17 Adjust dose 
based on clinical response.
Eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy (extra-label): 100 – 250 µg/puff 
MDI twice daily8,15; dose can be adjusted based on clinical response. 
CATS:
NOTE: Most commonly, when starting fluticasone, oral gluco-
corticoid therapy is continued for 10 to 14 days with a tapering 
overlap.14
Chronic bronchitis, feline asthma (extra-label): 
1.	 Initially, 44 µg/puff or 110 µg/puff MDI, 1 puff every 12 hours5 
2.	 110 µg/puff MDI, 1 puff twice daily. Cats with more serious 
disease may require fluticasone 220 µg MDI.18,19
3.	 250 µg MDI once daily20 (NOTE: In the United States, the 
250 microgram/puff concentration is labeled as 220 µg/puff; 
see Dosage Forms)
Feline idiopathic chronic rhinitis; (extra-label): 220 µg/puff 
MDI, 2 puffs every 12 hours in combination with oral predniso-
lone. Once fluticasone therapy has been comfortably implement-
ed, begin dose reductions of oral prednisolone (typically, 25% 
­every 2 weeks) while monitoring clinical signs.21,22 
HORSES:
Severe equine asthma (SEA; formerly known as recurrent air-
way obstruction [RAO], heaves; extra-label): 
1.	 2000 µg MDI every 12 hours for 1 month, then adjust dos-
ages (2000 – 3000 µg every 12 to 24 hours) to control clinical 
signs3,11
2.	 6000 µg MDI every 12 hours prevented acute exacerbations of 
SEA but did not treat acute SEA exacerbations as well as dexa-
methasone IV.23 
Monitoring 
	■Efficacy: control of cough and/or other respiratory signs (eg, exer-
cise intolerance, tachypnea, wheezing)
	■Clinical signs of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism (eg, polyuria/
polydipsia, polyphagia)
Client Information 
	■Shake the inhaler well before using. Do not puncture or incinerate 
the can. This product must be used with a spacer device appropri-
ate for the species being treated.
	■When using inhaled fluticasone with an appropriate spacer/face-
mask (eg, AeroDawg, AeroKat) in dogs and cats, the following tips 


=== PDF PAGE 581 ===
554      Fluvoxamine
have been recommended24:
1.	 Allow the cat to get used to the device over several days, letting 
it investigate (eg, leaving the device by food bowl).
2.	 Reward (ie, praise, food, catnip, stroking) fearless approaches 
to the device, and start placing it near the cat’s face. 
3.	 Practice putting the mask over the cat’s face without anything 
in the chamber. 
4.	 Make sure the mask is placed snugly over the muzzle.
5.	 With the mask on, actuate the MDI and allow the animal to 
take 7 to 10 breaths before removing.
6.	 Container will last ≈2 months when used at 1 puff twice per 
day.
	■When using inhaled fluticasone with an appropriate spacer/face-
mask (eg, AeroHippus) in horses, the following tips have been rec-
ommended:
1.	 Slowly introduce the AeroHippus Chamber. Start with the 
mask only, getting your horse used to the feel of it.
2.	 Reward your horse with treats before and/or after treatment.
3.	 If your horse does not respond well to the sound of the inhal-
er, depress the inhaler behind your back before bringing the 
AeroHippus Chamber forward and placing mask over horse’s 
nostril.
4.	 With the mask over the nostril, allow the horse to take 3 to 5 
breaths for each puff (actuation) from the MDI.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Fluticasone propionate, a trifluorinated glucocorticoid, occurs as a 
white to off-white powder that is practically insoluble in water and 
slightly soluble in ethanol.
Fluticasone may also be known as CCI-18781, fluticasoni propi-
onas, Advair Diskus®, Cutovate®, Flixotide®, Flixonase®, Flovent®, and 
Flutivate®.
Storage/Stability 
Fluticasone propionate aerosol for inhalation (Flovent® HFA) should 
be stored between 59°F to 86°F (15°C to 30°C); protect from freezing 
and direct sunlight, and do not store near heat or open flame. Store 
canister with the mouthpiece down.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status 
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
NOTE: The Association of Racing Commissioners Internation-
al (ARCI) has designated fluticasone as a class 4 substance. Use of 
this drug may not be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check 
rules and regulations before entering in a competition while this 
medication is being administered. Contact local racing authorities 
for further guidance. See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Fluticasone Propionate Aerosol for Inhalation: 44 µg/actuation, 
110 µg/actuation, and 220 µg/actuation in 10.6-g and 12-g canis-
ters with actuator. Each canister contains 120-metered inhalations; 
Flovent® HFA; (Rx). NOTE: In countries outside the United States, 
Flovent® HFA canister concentrations may be listed as 50 µg, 125 µg, 
and 250 µg per actuation; the difference in labeling relates to where 
the drug concentration is measured (eg, metering valve [eg, 50 µg] vs 
actuator nozzle [44 µg]). There are also breath-activated dry powder 
inhalers (ie, Flovent® Diskus, Advair Diskus® [with salmeterol]), but 
they are not suitable for veterinary use.
Fluticasone is also available commercially in combination as:
Fluticasone Propionate/Salmeterol Aerosol for Inhalation: fluticasone 
propionate 45 µg/salmeterol 21 µg/actuation; fluticasone propionate 
115 µg/salmeterol 21 µg/actuation; and fluticasone propionate 230 µg/
salmeterol 21 µg/actuation equivalent to salmeterol xinafoate 30.45 µg 
in 12-g pressurized canisters containing 120-metered inhalations. 
Nasal solutions, topical creams, and ointments containing flutica-
sone are also available. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Fluvoxamine
(floo-vox-a-meen)  Luvox® 
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor (SSRI) 
Prescriber Highlights 
	
▶Uncommonly used selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor 
(SSRI) antidepressant similar to fluoxetine; can be used in dogs 
and cats for a variety of behavior disorders, but little informa-
tion available to recommend its use in place of more common-
ly prescribed SSRIs
	
▶Contraindications include patients with known hypersen-
sitivity or who are receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
(MAOIs). 
	
▶Use with caution in patients with severe cardiac, renal, or 
hepatic disease; dosages may need to be reduced in patients 
with severe renal or hepatic impairment.
	
▶May take up to 8 weeks before efficacy can be fully assessed
	
▶Adverse effect profile not well established. Possible adverse 
effects in dogs include anorexia, lethargy, GI effects, anxiety, 
irritability, insomnia, hyperactivity, or panting, as well as 
aggressive behavior in previously nonaggressive dogs. Cats 
may exhibit sedation, decreased appetite/anorexia, vomiting, 
diarrhea, behavior changes (eg, anxiety, irritability, sleep dis-
turbances), and changes in elimination patterns.
	
▶Many possible drug interactions. Coadministration of more 
than one serotonergic drug is not recommended due to the 
risk for the development of serotonin syndrome.
Uses/Indications 
Fluvoxamine may be considered for use in treating a variety of be-
havior-related disorders in dogs and cats, including aggression and 
stereotypic behaviors (and other obsessive-compulsive behaviors). 
Because of a lack of published information documenting its safety 
and efficacy in animals, it is not commonly prescribed. 
Pharmacology/Actions 
Fluvoxamine is a highly selective inhibitor of the reuptake of sero-
tonin in the CNS, thereby potentiating the pharmacologic activity of 
serotonin. Fluvoxamine has little effect on dopamine or norepineph-
rine and apparently no effect on other neurotransmitters. 
Pharmacokinetics 
There are limited data on the pharmacokinetics of fluvoxamine in 
domestic animals. In dogs, fluvoxamine appears to be completely 
absorbed; only about 10% of a dose is excreted unchanged in the 
urine.1,2 The half-life appears to be similar to humans (15 hours).1 No 
pharmacokinetic information for cats was located.
In humans, fluvoxamine is absorbed after oral administration, but 
bioavailability is only around 50%. Peak plasma concentrations oc-
cur between 3 and 8 hours postdose. Food does not appear to affect 
the absorptive characteristics of the drug. Fluvoxamine is widely dis-
tributed in the body and about 80% bound to plasma proteins. The 
drug is extensively metabolized in the liver to nonactive metabolites 


=== PDF PAGE 826 ===
Maropitant      799
Maropitant
(ma-rahp-it-ent)  Cerenia®
Neurokinin-1 (NK-1) Receptor Antagonist, Antiemetic
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶FDA-approved in dogs for the treatment of acute vomiting 
(SC injection), and for the prevention of acute vomiting (SC 
injection, oral tablets) and the prevention of vomiting due to 
motion sickness (tablets)
	
▶The SC injection is also FDA-approved for the treatment of 
vomiting in cats.
	
▶In animals that are actively vomiting, the injectable formula-
tion is preferred to ensure the full dose is received.
	
▶Because maropitant acts at the emetic center, it is effective 
for the treatment of emesis mediated via either peripheral or 
central mechanisms. 
	
▶SC injections may cause pain and swelling at the injection site. 
Refrigerating the injection may reduce pain.
	
▶The PO dose is higher than the SC dose in dogs because of the 
decreased bioavailability of the oral tablet.
	
▶Not for use in patients with suspected toxin ingestion
Uses/Indications
Maropitant tablets are indicated for the prevention of acute vomiting 
in dogs 2 months and older and vomiting due to motion sickness in 
dogs 4 months and older.1 
Maropitant injectable solution is indicated for the prevention and 
treatment of acute vomiting in dogs 2 months and older and for the 
prevention of vomiting caused by emetogenic medication and che-
motherapeutic agents in dogs 4 months and older.2 Maropitant in-
jectable solution also is approved for treatment of vomiting in cats 4 
months or older.2
Maropitant has been effective for controlling vomiting secondary 
to a variety of stimuli, including xylazine (cats), hydromorphone 
(dogs),3–6 morphine (dogs),7–9 morphine with dexmedetomidine 
(cats),10,11 cisplatin (dogs),12–14 copper sulfate, apomorphine (dogs), 
brimonidine ophthalmic solution (cats),15 tranexamic acid (dogs),16 
and parvovirus.17–19 Maropitant demonstrated modest efficacy for 
controlling chemotherapy-induced nausea and ondansetron ap-
peared to have a better effect.14 In dogs hospitalized with parvoviral 
enteritis, maropitant was equally as effective as ondansetron in con-
trolling clinical signs.20 Maropitant reduced both nausea and vomit-
ing when administered 2 hours before preoperative administration 
of hydromorphone, acepromazine, and glycopyrrolate21; however, 
preoperative maropitant does not appear to reduce perioperative 
gastroesophageal reflux.22,23
Maropitant appears to enhance the antinociceptive effect of other 
analgesic in dogs and cats19,24–27 and has demonstrated a minimum 
alveolar concentration (MAC)-sparing effect (≈15% to 25% reduc-
tion) in dogs and cats maintained on inhalant anesthesia.19,24,28–30 
Maropitant failed to improve clinical signs, airway hyperrespon-
siveness, or eosinophilia in experimental models of acute and chron-
ic feline asthma.31,32
A 4-week treatment with oral maropitant seemed to be an effec-
tive, well-tolerated therapeutic option to control pruritus in cats with 
feline atopic skin condition.33 
Pharmacology/Actions
Maropitant is a neurokinin-1 (NK-1) receptor antagonist that acts 
in the CNS by inhibiting the binding of substance P, which is the 
key neurotransmitter involved in vomiting. Maropitant can suppress 
both peripheral and centrally mediated emesis. Maropitant has been 
shown to reduce the MAC requirements of sevoflurane and to reduce 
visceral pain in dogs, as NK-1 receptors are stimulated by substance 
P.28,30 Maropitant does not affect gastric emptying times or intestinal 
transit times, but it can decrease small intestine contraction pressure 
patterns.34 Maropitant has been shown to possess anti-inflammatory 
activity in a mouse model of pancreatitis.35
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, maropitant is rapidly absorbed after PO and SC adminis-
tration. Peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) are reached in less than 
1 hour following 1 mg/kg SC administration and less than 2 hours 
following 2 or 8 mg/kg PO administration; Cmax after IV administra-
tion is ≈3 times higher than the same dose given SC (297 ng/mL vs 
103 ng/mL, respectively) and is ≈4 times higher than 2 mg/kg PO 
(81 ng/mL). After PO administration, bioavailability is 24% 
(2 mg/kg) and 37% (8 mg/kg), which suggests first-pass metabolism 
becomes saturated at the higher dose. Feeding status does not affect 
bioavailability. Bioavailability is 91% following SC administration of 
1 mg/kg. An accumulation ratio of 1.5 occurs after use of maropitant 
every 24 hours for 5 consecutive days at 1 mg/kg SC or 2 mg/kg PO. 
Accumulation ratio is 2.18 after 2 consecutive days at 8 mg/kg PO 
daily. Accumulation ratios after 2 mg/kg and 8 mg/kg PO once daily 
for 14 days were 2.46 and 4.81 based on AUC, respectively, and 2.03 
and 2.77 based on Cmax.36 However, no accumulation was demon-
strated after administration of 2 mg/kg/day for 28 days.37
Maropitant is eliminated primarily by the liver. Hepatic metabo-
lism of maropitant involves 2 cytochrome P450 enzymes: CYP2D15 
(low capacity, high affinity) and CYP3A12 (high capacity, low affini-
ty). The nonlinear kinetics at oral doses of 2 – 16 mg/kg may be due to 
saturation of the low-capacity enzyme and increased involvement of 
CYP3A12 at higher doses. Twenty-one metabolites have been iden-
tified and the major pharmacologically active metabolite is a prod-
uct of hydroxylation. Plasma protein binding of maropitant is high 
(99.5%). Large interpatient PK variations have been observed. In 
dogs, the half-life is 8.8 hours (range: 6.07 to 17.7 hours) for 1 mg/kg 
SC, 6.9 hours for 1 mg/kg IV, and 4.03 hours (range: 2.58 to 7.09 
hours) for 2 mg/kg PO. Urinary recovery of maropitant and its major 
metabolite is minimal (less than 1%). 
In cats, bioavailability is ≈50% (PO) and 91% (SC). Protein plas-
ma binding is high (99%). Maropitant displays linear kinetics when 
administered SC within the 0.25 – 3 mg/kg dose range. Terminal 
elimination half-life in cats is ≈15 hours. Feline isoforms of CYP1A 
and CYP3A enzymes are involved in the hepatic biotransformation 
of maropitant in cats. Less than 1% of a dose is excreted unchanged 
in urine or feces.38,39
There appears to be an age-related effect on pharmacokinetics, as 
puppies (10 weeks of age) and kittens (16 weeks of age) appear to 
have a faster clearance of maropitant than adults.2
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Maropitant is most effective in preventing vomiting associated with 
chemotherapy if it is administered before the chemotherapeutic 
agent.1,2 Safe use has not been evaluated in dogs or cats that have 
GI obstructions or ingested toxins. If vomiting persists despite treat-
ment, reevaluation is needed to determine the cause.
Maropitant can cause prolongation of the QT interval because of 
cardiac potassium channel blockade. Safe use of maropitant has not 
been reported in patients with underlying cardiac disease when ad-
ministered in combination with cardiac antiarrhythmic drugs.40
Caution is advised in patients with hepatic dysfunction, as maro-
pitant is hepatically metabolized; the dose may need to be reduced by 
50% if used in these patients.
Caution is also advised when administering the higher dose of 
maropitant to prevent vomiting due to motion sickness in puppies 
younger than 11 weeks. A higher frequency and greater severity of 
histologic evidence of bone marrow hypoplasia was seen in puppies 
treated with the higher dose of maropitant as compared with control 


=== PDF PAGE 827 ===
800      Maropitant
puppies. In puppies 16 weeks or older, bone marrow hypocellularity 
was not observed.1,2
In humans, topical exposure may elicit allergic skin reactions 
in some individuals. In the event of accidental skin exposure, skin 
should be washed with soap and water. In the event of accidental 
eye exposure, eyes should be flushed with water for 15 minutes and 
medical attention should be sought.1,2
Adverse Effects
Maropitant appears to be well tolerated in dogs and cats. Allergic 
reactions are possible but rare and typically resolve with supportive 
treatment within 48 hours after the drug is discontinued.
In dogs given the higher oral dose required for prevention of 
motion sickness, the 2 most common adverse effects are pretravel 
vomiting and hypersalivation. Swelling or pain at the injection site 
has been reported following SC administration of this drug. A study 
found that dogs had less pain at the injection site when the injection 
was refrigerated and immediately injected,41 and a formulation pre-
served with benzyl alcohol was less painful than the metacresol-con-
taining product that is currently available in the US.42 Other adverse 
effects include depression and lethargy, anorexia, diarrhea, anaphy-
laxis/anaphylactoid reactions (including swelling of the head and 
face), ataxia, tremors, fever, dyspnea, collapse/loss of consciousness, 
sedation, and convulsions.1,2
In healthy dogs, IV maropitant further decreased arterial blood 
pressure caused by isoflurane anesthesia, and clinically significant 
hypotension occurred in dogs premedicated with acepromazine.43
In cats, adverse effects include depression and lethargy, anorexia, 
injection site pain, hypersalivation, dyspnea, ataxia, fever, recum-
bency, vomiting, panting, convulsion, and muscle tremors.2
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safe use of maropitant in dogs or cats used for breeding or in preg-
nant or lactating bitches or queens has not been evaluated.1,2 Because 
safety has not been established in animals, this drug should only be 
used when the maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to off-
spring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Single-dose toxicity was studied in mice and rats after PO and IV 
administration.44 No adverse effects were reported after PO admin-
istration of up to 30 mg/kg (mice) and 100 mg/kg (rats) and after IV 
administration of 6.5 mg/kg (mice) and 2.5 mg/kg (rats). Clinical 
signs of overdose in mice and rats included decreased activity, irreg-
ular or labored respiration, ataxia, and tremors. Excretion of reddish 
urine was observed in some mice and rats following IV administra-
tion.
In dogs, no serious adverse effects were noted when oral doses 
up to 24 mg/kg (3 times the highest recommended dose) were ad-
ministered 3 times longer than the proposed maximum duration of 
treatment.
Oral toxicokinetic studies with the primary metabolite were con-
ducted in mice, rats, rabbits, and dogs; it was demonstrated that the 
metabolite was well tolerated.44
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
During field safety and efficacy studies, a number of medications 
were used concomitantly with maropitant. The most common con-
comitant medication was metronidazole. Other commonly used 
concomitant medications included dextrose/Ringer’s solution IV, 
sodium chloride IV, amoxicillin, ampicillin, cefazolin, cephalexin, 
enrofloxacin, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, famotidine, sucral-
fate, cimetidine, dexamethasone, ivermectin, ivermectin/pyrantel, 
pyrantel, lufenuron/milbemycin, milbemycin, moxidectin, vitamin 
B, and vaccines. No problems were observed with any of these drugs 
when used in conjunction with maropitant.
Drug interactions with maropitant have not been thoroughly in-
vestigated. Maropitant may be susceptible to interactions because it 
is biotransformed in the liver by CYP3A12 and CYP2D15 in dogs 
and by CYP1A- and CYP3A-related enzymes in cats and is highly 
bound to plasma proteins. The following drug interactions are the-
oretical in animals receiving maropitant and may be of significance 
in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not 
necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks must be weighed 
and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
	■Calcium Channel Blockers (eg, amlodipine, diltiazem, ve-
rapamil): The UK label states maropitant Should not be used con-
comitantly with Ca-channel antagonists as maropitant has affinity 
to Ca-channels.45
	■CYP3A Inhibitors (eg, amiodarone, diltiazem, cimetidine, 
erythromycin, ketoconazole, itraconazole): May reduce maro-
pitant metabolism
	■CYP2D Inhibitors (eg, cimetidine, fluoxetine, terbinafine): 
May reduce maropitant metabolism
	■Highly Protein Bound Drugs (eg, valproic acid, oral an-
ticoagulants [rivaroxaban, warfarin], NSAIDs, salicylates, 
sulfonamides, sulfonylurea antidiabetic agents): Because maro-
pitant is highly bound to plasma proteins (99.5%), it could theo-
retically displace other highly bound drugs, causing a transient 
increase in serum concentrations of each drug. These interactions 
are unlikely to be of clinical concern because free drug concen-
trations will equilibrate through increased clearance. Monitor for 
adverse effects of each drug when using this combination.
	■QT Prolonging Agents (eg, cisapride, domperidone, quini-
dine, sotalol): Concurrent use may increase risk for QT prolon-
gation and should be avoided.
Laboratory Considerations
	■No specific concerns have been noted.
Dosages
NOTE: Refrigerating the injectable product may reduce the pain 
response associated with SC administration.
DOGS:
Label dosages (FDA-approved)1,2: 
Indication
Dosage  
form
Minimum  
age for use
Dosage 
Duration  
of therapy
Prevention  
and treatment  
of acute 
­vomiting
Injec-
tion
2 months
1 mg/kg SC  
once daily
Up to 5  
consecutive 
days
Prevention  
and treatment  
of acute 
­vomiting
Injec-
tion
4 months
1 mg/kg SC or 
IV (over 1 to 2 
minutes) once 
daily
Up to 5  
consecutive 
days
Prevention  
of vomiting 
caused by  
emetogenic  
medications or 
chemothera- 
peutic agents
Injec-
tion
4 months
1 mg/kg SC  
or IV (over 1  
to 2 minutes) 
once, 45 to 60 
minutes prior 
to emetogenic 
medications  
or chemothera-
peutic agents
Single  
injection


=== PDF PAGE 828 ===
Maropitant      801
Indication
Dosage  
form
Minimum  
age for use
Dosage 
Duration  
of therapy
Prevention of 
acute vomiting
Tablets
2 months
2 mg/kg PO  
once daily
5 days for 
dogs 2 to 7 
months of 
age; until 
vomiting 
ceases in 
dogs older 
than 7 
months
Prevention 
of vomiting 
due to motion 
sickness
Tablets
4 months
8 mg/kg PO 
once daily on 
an empty stom-
ach or with a 
small amount 
of food; do not 
feed full meal 
prior to travel
Up to 2  
consecutive 
days
Extra-label dosages:
Prevention of perioperative vomiting and improvement in re-
covery from general anesthesia after morphine use: 1 mg/kg SC 
or IV once daily more than 1 hour in advance of morphine ad-
ministration; may be used for up to 5 consecutive days
Prevention and treatment of vomiting in dogs undergoing 
multiagent chemotherapy: 2 mg/kg PO once daily for 28 days37
Antitussive as part of a multimodal approach in dogs with airway 
disease: 2 mg/kg PO every 48 hours may be useful as an antitussive 
to break the cough cycle associated with tracheal collapse. A study 
showed that although cough was decreased in patients with chronic 
bronchitis, this dosage did not decrease airway inflammation.46
Analgesia/MAC-sparing effect during ovariohysterectomy: 
a)	 1 mg/kg SC at time of premedication. Maropitant also reduced 
postoperative nausea and vomiting and improved time to food 
intake.9,24,29
b)	 Intraoperatively, administration of 1 mg/kg IV followed by 
0.03 mg/kg/hour CRI demonstrated an anesthetic sparing 
effect during visceral noxious stimulation of the ovarian liga-
ment.47 Higher doses (5 mg/kg IV followed by 0.15 mg/kg per 
hour CRI) have yielded marginally better results.47,48 Doses in-
volving continuous infusions do not appear to have superior 
MAC-sparing effects as compared with SC doses. Differences 
in study design make a direct comparison difficult.
CATS:
Treatment of vomiting in cats 4 months and older (label dosage; 
FDA-approved): 1 mg/kg SC or IV (over 1 to 2 minutes) once dai-
ly for up to 5 consecutive days2
Prevention of vomiting, including from motion sickness (extra- 
label): 1 mg/kg SC or PO.45,49 A study reported that 8 mg/cat (NOT 
mg/kg) PO was effective in reducing emesis when administered as 
early as 18 hours before emetic medications.11,50
Prevention of vomiting associated with chronic kidney disease 
(CKD) (extra-label): 4 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 24 hours 
for 2 weeks palliated vomiting associated with CKD.51
Analgesia/MAC-sparing effect during ovariohysterectomy 
(extra-label): In a proof-of-concept study, 1 mg/kg IV intraoper-
atively demonstrated an anesthetic sparing effect during visceral 
noxious stimulation of the ovarian ligament.30 Alternatively, ma-
ropitant 1 mg/kg IV bolus followed maropitant 100 µg/kg/hour 
IV CRI experienced a lower heartrate and blood pressure during 
the procedure and required less analgesic rescue during the post-
operative period compared to control cats.52   
Feline atopic skin syndrome (extra-label): 2 mg/kg PO every 
24 hours for 4 weeks seemed to be effective and well-tolerated.33 
NOTE: This dosage is from an open label, uncontrolled study, and 
further research to validate efficacy is warranted.
Monitoring
	■Clinical efficacy as indicated by decreased episodes of vomiting
	■Adverse effects
Client Information
	■When using to prevent motion sickness, administer maropitant 
2 hours before traveling with a small amount of food (not a full 
meal).
	■Some dogs may vomit after taking this medication. Giving the 
drug with a small amount of food can help prevent vomiting.
	■Do not wrap these pills tightly in food snacks, as this can prevent 
the drug from being released into the stomach.
	■If giving your animal fractions (ie, half, quarter) of a tablet, wrap 
the remaining portion of the split tablet tightly in foil and store 
away from children and other animals.
	■Do not give this medicine to puppies younger than 8 weeks, as 
bone marrow problems can occur.
	■Side effects are uncommon. Contact your veterinarian if your an-
imal experiences drooling, lethargy (ie, lack of energy), drowsi-
ness/sleepiness, lack of appetite, or diarrhea. 
	■In humans, topical exposure may elicit allergic skin reactions in 
some individuals. In the event of accidental skin exposure, wash 
skin with soap and water. In the event of accidental eye exposure, 
flush the eye with water for 15 minutes and seek medical atten-
tion. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Commercial formulations containing maropitant citrate are clas-
sified as substituted quinuclidines and have a molecular weight of 
678.81. Commercial formulations express drug potency or strength 
as milligrams of maropitant. The injection is a clear solution that may 
be colorless to light yellow and contains metacresol as a preservative.
Maropitant may also be known as CJ-11,972, Cerenia®, and Prevo-
max®.
Storage/Stability
The maropitant injectable solution contains a preservative and is 
designed for multidose use. The product label states the injectable 
solution should be stored at a controlled room temperature between 
20°C and 25°C (68°F-77°F) with excursions between 15°C and 
30°C (59°F-86°F) permitted. After the first vial puncture, the drug 
should be stored at a refrigerated temperature between 2°C and 8°C 
(36°F-46°F) and should be used within 90 days (56 days per UK la-
bel). The stopper may be punctured a maximum of 25 times.
Store maropitant tablets at room temperature 20°C to 25°C (68°F 
to 77°F) with excursions between 15°C to 30°C (59°F to 86°F). Maro-
pitant tablets are packaged in foil to protect them from moisture up-
take, which was observed in less protective packaging. A European 
stability study indicated that tablets removed from the blister pack 
and halved showed no loss of potency during the 48-hour testing 
period.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Precipitation has been reported when maropitant and pantoprazole 
are coadministered in the same IV line. Given lack of compatibility 
information, consideration should be given to administering maro-
pitant injections alone. The UK product label states that the maro-
pitant injection must not be mixed with other veterinary medicinal 
products in the same syringe.45 One study diluted maropitant in lac-
tated Ringer’s solution for use as an IV CRI, but the potency and 
stability of the admixture were not evaluated.52


=== PDF PAGE 829 ===
802      Mavacoxib
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Maropitant Citrate Injectable Solution: 10 mg/mL in 20 mL multi-
dose vials; Cerenia®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs and cats. 
Licensed for use in other countries and available in a variety of vial 
sizes
Maropitant Citrate Oral Tablets: 16 mg, 24 mg, 60 mg, and 160 mg 
in blister packs (4 tablets per pack; carton of 10); Cerenia®; (Rx). 
Labeled for use in dogs
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Mavacoxib
(mav-ah-cox-ib)  Trocoxil®
Long-Acting NSAID
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Very long-acting NSAID for dogs; half-life averages 16 to 17 
days. Not licensed/approved in the United States
	
▶First 2 doses are given 14 days apart, then at 1 MONTH inter-
vals for a maximum of 7 doses.
	
▶Contraindications include pre-existing GI disorders, coagulop-
athies, impaired renal or hepatic function, cardiac insufficien-
cy, or hypersensitivity to mavacoxib or sulfonamides.
	
▶Adverse effect profile expected to be similar to other ca-
nine-approved NSAIDs: vomiting, diarrhea, loss of appetite, 
melena, and impairment of renal function. 
	
▶Primary benefit appears to be for patients whose owners have 
difficulty adhering to a daily oral dosing regimen.
	
▶Although efficacy is long-lasting, adverse effects may persist 
and washout times to give other NSAIDs or glucocorticoids are 
prolonged.
Uses/Indications
Mavacoxib is a very long-acting oral NSAID licensed for use in dogs 
in the UK, Europe, and elsewhere. In the UK, it is labeled for the 
treatment of pain and inflammation associated with degenerative joint 
disease in dogs aged 12 months or more in cases where continuous 
treatment exceeding 1 month is indicated. Mavacoxib may be benefi-
cial in cases in which long-term NSAID administration is indicated, 
but owners have difficulty adhering to a daily oral dosing regimen. 
However, because of its long half-life and duration of action, adverse 
effects could also persist for many weeks after the drug was last given.
In a study comparing the safety and efficacy of mavacoxib with 
carprofen in 124 dogs, the 2 were statistically equivalent, and each 
had a similar rate and profile of adverse effects.1
Pharmacology/Actions
In dogs, mavacoxib is a relatively selective inhibitor of cyclooxy-
genase-2 (COX-2) versus COX-1. At therapeutic dosages, this effect 
would inhibit the production of the prostaglandins that contribute 
to pain and inflammation (COX-2) and spare those that maintain 
normal GI and renal function (COX-1). However, COX-1 and COX-
2 inhibition studies are done in vitro and do not necessarily correlate 
with clinical effects seen in patients.
Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacokinetic values for mavacoxib in dogs are widely patient 
variable. Average bioavailability after oral dosing is ≈46% when fast-
ed but nearly doubles (87%) when given with food. Peak concentra-
tions occur in ≈11 hours but range widely. In most dogs, blood con-
centrations are thought to be therapeutic, occurring ≈1 hour after 
dosing when given with food. The apparent volume of distribution 
at steady-state averaged 1.6 L/kg, and the drug is highly bound to 
canine plasma proteins (98%). Total body clearance was very low, 
2.7 mL/hour/kg, and it is primarily cleared by biliary excretion. The 
average terminal half-life was 16.6 days (range: 8 to 39 days).2 A pop-
ulation pharmacokinetic study in osteoarthritic dogs reported a typ-
ical elimination half-life of 44 days, but ≈5% of patients had Bayesian 
estimates greater than 80 days.3 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Mavacoxib is contraindicated in dogs less than 12 months of age and/
or less than 5 kg (11 lb) body weight, with GI disorders, including ul-
ceration and bleeding, evidence of a hemorrhagic disorder, impaired 
renal or hepatic function, cardiac insufficiency, or with a history of 
hypersensitivity to the active substance, any of the excipients, or to 
sulfonamides. 
Do not use concomitantly with glucocorticoids or other NSAIDs. 
Do not administer other NSAIDs within 1 month of the last admin-
istration of mavacoxib (washout period). 
Avoid use in any dehydrated, hypovolemic, or hypotensive ani-
mal, as there is a potential risk for increased renal toxicity. Concur-
rent administration of potentially nephrotoxic medicinal products 
should be avoided.4 Do not allow treated dogs to become dehydrated 
when receiving this or other NSAIDs.
Adverse Effects
Common adverse effects include vomiting and diarrhea, similar to 
other NSAIDs. Less common adverse effects include loss of appetite, 
hemorrhagic diarrhea, melena, and impaired renal function. GI ul-
ceration can occur.
GI protectants and parenteral fluids may be required for dogs 
with GI or renal adverse effects. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
The safety of mavacoxib has not been established during pregnancy 
and lactation. Per the UK label, do not use mavacoxib in pregnant, 
breeding, or lactating animals. Studies in pregnant rabbits receiving 
another coxib-class NSAID (eg, firocoxib) at dosages approximating 
those given to dogs demonstrated maternotoxic and fetotoxic effects.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In overdose safety studies performed in dogs, repeated doses (at the 
labeled frequency) of 5 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg did not demonstrate 
adverse effects, abnormal clinical chemistry, or significant histolog-
ical abnormalities. At 15 mg/kg, vomiting, softened/mucoid feces, 
and increases in clinical chemistry parameters reflecting decreased 
renal function were noted. Doses of 25 mg/kg cause GI ulceration. 
In 1 study, a dog died from GI perforation and peritonitis at the 
25 mg/kg dose.5
Oral acute overdoses of mavacoxib should be managed as with 
other NSAIDs toxicity, but because of the drug’s long duration of 
effect, prolonged monitoring and treatment may be required; con-
sulting a veterinary poison control center or the drug sponsor’s ho-
tline seems prudent until more experience has been gained with this 
agent.
As with any NSAID, overdoses can lead to GI and renal effects. 
The ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center (APCC) has not yet set 
a dosage level of concern for renal damage for dogs or cats. Decon-
tamination with emetics and/or activated charcoal is appropriate. 
For doses at which GI effects are expected, the use of GI protectants 
is warranted. If renal effects are also expected, fluid diuresis is war-
ranted.


=== PDF PAGE 983 ===
956      Ondansetron
20 mg omeprazole/1100 mg sodium bicarbonate and 40 mg ome-
prazole/1100 mg sodium bicarbonate; Zegerid®, Zegerid® OTC; (Rx 
and OTC)
Omeprazole/Sodium 
Bicarbonate 
Powder 
for 
Suspension: 
20 mg omeprazole/1680 sodium bicarbonate and 40 mg omepra-
zole/1680 sodium bicarbonate in 30 unit-dose packets; Zegerid®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Ondansetron
(on-dan-sah-tron)  Zofran®
5-HT3 Receptor Antagonist 
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Oral and injectable agent used for prevention and treatment 
of vomiting and nausea
	
▶Can be used in combination with other antiemetics
	
▶Use with caution when administering it with other drugs that 
increase serotonin in order to avoid serotonin syndrome.
	
▶Appears to be well tolerated
Uses/Indications
Ondansetron is an antiemetic that may be used to treat nausea and 
vomiting in dogs and cats. Ondansetron, metoclopramide, and maro-
pitant can be equally effective in reducing the frequency of vomiting 
in dogs with parvoviral enteritis.1,2 Ondansetron is effective for treat-
ing chemotherapy-associated nausea and vomiting3–5; in preventing 
the incidence of emesis and nausea in healthy dogs premedicated 
with hydromorphone, acepromazine, and glycopyrrolate6; and in 
treating nausea in dogs with vestibular syndrome.7 As an antiemetic 
and antinausea agent, ondansetron is as effective or more effective 
than metoclopramide1,4,8; however, maropitant appears to be as ef-
fective or more effective than ondansetron.1–4,8,9 Ondansetron has 
shown promise in the management of obstructive sleep apnea.10,11
A study in cats found that ondansetron 0.22 mg/kg IM admin-
istered with dexmedetomidine and buprenorphine (in the same 
syringe) reduced the incidence (≈33%) and severity of nausea and 
vomiting as compared with ondansetron given 30 minutes before 
dexmedetomidine and buprenorphine (67%) or when ondansetron 
was not given (76%).12
In donkeys, IV ondansetron decreased duodenal, jejunal, and ce-
cal contractility, as well as small and large intestinal motility.13 Six 
out of 30 donkeys experienced a cardiac arrhythmia that began 30 
minutes postinfusion and lasted up to 180 minutes. 
In humans, ondansetron is approved for the prevention and treat-
ment of nausea and vomiting due to chemotherapy, radiation, and 
surgery. It may be used in combination with other antiemetics.14
Pharmacology/Actions
Ondansetron is a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist. 5-HT3 receptors are 
found peripherally on vagal nerve terminals and centrally in the 
chemoreceptor trigger zone (CRTZ). Ondansetron’s effects appear to 
be mediated by the antagonism of these receptors both centrally and 
peripherally. At typical dosages, ondansetron does not have an effect 
on GI motility or transit time.
Pharmacokinetics
In cats, ondansetron’s oral bioavailability is ≈32%, but bioavailability 
is 75% when the drug is injected SC. Elimination half-life is ≈2 hours 
(IV), 1.2 hours (PO), and 3.2 hours (SC).15 Administration of on-
dansetron 2 mg SC to geriatric cats and cats with renal and hepat-
ic disease revealed reductions in clearance, which were greatest in 
cats with hepatic disease.16 Application of ondansetron in Lipoderm® 
transdermal gel to the inner ear pinnae of healthy cats resulted in no 
measurable serum ondansetron concentrations.17
After a single 8 mg oral dose was given to healthy beagles, peak 
concentrations were reached at 1.1 hours, and the elimination half-
life was ≈1.3 hours.18
In humans, ondansetron is well absorbed from the GI tract but 
exhibits some first-pass hepatic metabolism. Oral bioavailability is 
≈50% to 60%; bioavailability is ≈75% after IM administration. Oral 
dosage forms are bioequivalent. Protein binding is ≈75%. Peak plas-
ma concentrations occur ≈2 hours after oral administration. Ondan-
setron is extensively metabolized in the liver by several cytochrome 
P450 enzymes, primarily via CYP3A4. Elimination half-lives are ≈3 
to 4 hours but are prolonged in elderly patients and pediatric patients 
1 to 4 months of age, whereas half-life is reduced in pediatric patients 
younger than 4 months.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Ondansetron is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it or 
other agents in this class. Ondansetron may mask ileus or gastric 
distention; it should not be used in place of nasogastric suction or 
appropriate diagnostic assessment. Ondansetron should be used 
with caution in patients with hepatic dysfunction, as absorption may 
be increased because of reduced first-pass metabolism and halflife 
may be prolonged; dosage adjustment may be warranted in severe 
hepatic impairment.
In humans, ondansetron is pumped by P-glycoprotein (the pro-
tein encoded by the MDR1 gene, also known as ABCB1-1delta gene), 
but there are currently no data stating whether it is pumped by ca-
nine P-glycoprotein. It is suggested to use caution when administer-
ing ondansetron to dogs with the MDR1 gene mutation.19
Dose-related prolongation of the QT interval and cases of tor-
sades de pointes have been reported in humans. Patients that have 
electrolyte abnormalities, have underlying cardiac conditions, or 
take other QT-prolonging drugs can be at greater risk. Ondansetron 
caused QT prolongation in healthy dogs,20 but QT prolongation in 
sick dogs was identified by only 1 of the 2 methods used to calculate 
the QT interval.21
Serotonin syndrome has occurred in humans receiving 
­ondansetron.22
Adverse Effects
Ondansetron appears to be well tolerated. GI effects (ie, constipa-
tion, diarrhea), sedation, extrapyramidal clinical signs (eg, head 
shaking), increased liver enzymes, arrhythmias, and hypotension 
can be possible (incidence in humans is less than 10%). Headaches 
occur in 10% to 25% of humans; relevance for veterinary patients is 
unknown. Transient vision changes, including blindness, during IV 
administration, have been reported rarely in humans.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safety in pregnancy is not clearly established, but high-dose studies 
in rodents did not demonstrate overt fetal toxicity or teratogenic-
ity. A review of ondansetron use in women during pregnancy and 
the risk for birth defects noted a small increase in the incidence of 
cardiac abnormalities, and the authors concluded that ondansetron 
should be avoided during the first trimester if possible.23
Ondansetron is excreted in the maternal milk of rats.22 Caution 
should be used when 5-HT3 antagonists are administered to nursing 
patients.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdoses of up to 10 times the label dosage did not cause signifi-
cant morbidity in humans. If an overdose occurs, it should be treated 
supportively.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-


=== PDF PAGE 984 ===
Ondansetron      957
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions/Laboratory Considerations
In humans, ondansetron is a substrate of P-glycoprotein and CYP 
3A4, although other CYP isoenzymes (eg, 2D6, 1A2) are involved 
in the drug’s metabolism to a lesser extent. The following drug in-
teractions have either been reported or are theoretical in humans or 
animals receiving ondansetron and may be of significance in veteri-
nary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily 
contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and perform addition-
al monitoring when appropriate.
	■Apomorphine: Ondansetron may reduce the emetic effect of 
apomorphine. A human patient that received ondansetron and 
apomorphine developed severe hypotension and loss of con-
sciousness. In humans, use together is contraindicated.
	■Azole Antifungals (eg, itraconazole, posaconazole): May 
inhibit ondansetron metabolism, and concurrent use may in-
crease prolong QTc interval. 
	■Cisplatin: Plasma cisplatin concentrations may be decreased.
	■Cyclophosphamide: Plasma cyclophosphamide concentra-
tions may be decreased.
	■Drugs Affecting QTc Interval (eg, amiodarone, cisapride, 
procainamide, quinidine, sotalol): Theoretically, ondansetron 
may have additive effects on QTc interval; possible serious ar-
rhythmias may result.21
	■Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, 
methylene blue, selegiline): Increased risk for serotonin syn-
drome has been reported in humans.
	■Metformin: Ondansetron may increase the serum concentra-
tion of metformin.
	■P-glycoprotein Inhibitors (eg, amiodarone, cyclosporine, 
diltiazem, quinidine): In humans, these drugs may increase se-
rum concentrations of ondansetron. It is unclear if ondansetron is 
a P-glycoprotein substrate in veterinary patients.
	■Ropinirole: Ondansetron may reduce the emetic effect of 
­ropinirole.
	■Serotonergic Drugs (eg, clomipramine, fluoxetine, mir-
tazapine, trazodone): Increased risk for serotonin syndrome has 
been reported in humans.
	■Tramadol: In humans, use together may reduce the efficacy of 
both drugs. Veterinary significance is not known.
Dosages
NOTE: In humans, it is recommended that IV administration of 
ondansetron occur over at least 30 seconds, and preferably over 2 
to 5 minutes.24  
DOGS:
Antiemetic (extra-label): 0.5 – 1 mg/kg PO or IV (slowly) every 8 
to 12 hours is commonly used, although studies supporting these 
dosages are limited; however, doses of 0.1 – 0.2 mg/kg IV have 
been noted and are closer to human pediatric recommendations.
Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (extra-label): 
0.3 – 0.5 mg/kg IV (slowly) 30 minutes before chemotherapy ad-
ministration3,5,8,25; may repeat every 8 to 12 hours
Parvovirus-induced 
nausea 
and 
vomiting 
(extra-label): 
0.5 mg/kg IV (slowly) every 8 hours1,2
Obstructive Sleep Apnea (extra-label): 1 – 2 mg/kg PO twice 
­daily10,11 
Vestibular syndrome-associated nausea (extra-label): 0.5 mg/kg 
IV (slowly) as a single dose7
CATS:
Acute vomiting (extra-label): Dosage recommendations vary 
somewhat; 0.1 – 1 mg/kg IV (slowly), SC, IM, or PO every 6 to 
12 hours. Based on a pharmacokinetic study,15 oral dosages may 
need to be toward the high end and given more frequently than IV 
or SC. If using before chemotherapy, give IV (slowly) 30 minutes 
before treatment; may repeat every 6 to 12 hours.
Vomiting associated with chronic kidney disease (extra-label): 
a)	IRIS Stage 1 or 2: 0.1 – 0.2 mg/kg slow IV, SC, PO every 6 to 
12 hours26
b)	IRIS Stage 3: 0.05 – 0.1 mg/kg slow IV, SC, PO every 6 to 12 
hours26
c)	IRIS Stage 4: 0.025 – 0.05 mg/kg slow IV, SC, or PO every 6 to 
12 hours26
Reducing the incidence and severity of vomiting associated 
with dexmedetomidine/buprenorphine premedication (ex-
tra-label): Ondansetron 0.22 mg/kg IM administered with dex-
medetomidine and buprenorphine (in the same syringe)12
Monitoring
	■Clinical efficacy
Client Information
	■This medicine is used to treat or prevent severe vomiting. The oral 
medication may be given with or without food.
	■This medicine is usually tolerated well. 
	■If using orally disintegrating tablets, protect the tablets from 
moisture, and be sure hands are dry when handling them. Place 
the tablet on top of the animal’s tongue after removing it from the 
package.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Ondansetron HCl dihydrate is a selective inhibitor of the 5-HT3 
receptor. It occurs as a white to off-white powder that is sparingly 
soluble in water and alcohol. Solutions for injections have a pH of 
3.3 to 4. The potency of commercial dosage forms is expressed as an 
ondansetron base; 1 mg ondansetron is equivalent to 1.25 mg on-
dansetron HCl dihydrate.
Ondansetron HCl may also be known as GR-38032F or ondanse-
troni hydrochloridum, and Zofran®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, store oral products in tight, light-resis-
tant containers between 20°C and 25°C (68°F-77°F); temperature 
excursions of 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F) are permitted for the oral 
solution. Store orally disintegrating tablets in the original foil blisters 
and administer immediately upon opening; discard opened/unused 
tablets or tablet remnants. Store the injection between 2°C and 25°C 
(36°F-77°F) and protected from light. Solutions diluted for IV infu-
sion retain potency for 48 hours at room temperature, but the manu-
facturer recommends discarding them 24 hours after dilution.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist may be consulted for more specific information.
An ondansetron 0.8 mg/mL oral suspension can be compound-
ed by crushing oral tablets to a fine powder, suspending with Ora-
Plus®, and diluting with an equal amount of Ora-Sweet® (regular or 
sugar-free), Syrpalta®, or Cherry syrup USP27; the resulting product 
is stable for 6 weeks when refrigerated. Alternatively, using the sus-
pending vehicle, SyrSpend® SF pH 4 results in a 90-day beyond-use 
date when refrigerated or stored at room temperature.28
Drugs reported to be compatible with ondansetron when com-
bined in a syringe and administered via a Y-site include alfentan-


=== PDF PAGE 985 ===
958      Orbifloxacin
il, atropine, fentanyl, glycopyrrolate, metoclopramide, midazolam, 
morphine, naloxone, neostigmine, and propofol. Ondansetron is 
also reported to be compatible with dextrose, saline, and lactated 
Ringer’s solutions, as well as with the following drugs when ad-
ministered via a Y-site: amikacin, aminocaproic acid, amiodarone, 
azithromycin, bleomycin, butorphanol, carboplatin, carmustine, 
cefazolin, cefotaxime, cefuroxime, cisplatin, clindamycin, cyclo-
phosphamide, cyclosporine, cytarabine, dacarbazine, dactinomycin, 
daunorubicin, dexamethasone sodium phosphate, dexmedetomi-
dine, dexrazoxane, digoxin, diphenhydramine, dopamine, doxoru-
bicin HCL (also liposome form), doxycycline, famotidine, filgrastim, 
fluconazole, gemcitabine, gentamicin, heparin, hydromorphone, 
hydroxyzine, ifosfamide, lidocaine, mannitol, methotrexate, mitox-
antrone, norepinephrine, pamidronate, piperacillin-tazobactam, 
potassium chloride, procainamide, prochlorperazine, promethazine, 
ranitidine, vancomycin, vinblastine, vincristine, zidovudine, and 
zoledronic acid.
A precipitate may form when mixed with alkaline solutions. On-
dansetron is reportedly incompatible with amphotericin B (conven-
tional and lipid-based forms), ampicillin/sulbactam, furosemide, 
pantoprazole, and phenobarbital sodium.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Ondansetron HCl Tablets: 4 mg and 8 mg; Zofran®, generic; (Rx)
Ondansetron Orally Disintegrating Tablets or Oral Film: 4 mg and 
8 mg (as base); Zofran® ODT, Zuplenz®, generic; (Rx)
Ondansetron HCl Oral Solution: 0.8 mg/mL (4 mg/5 mL) in 50 mL; 
Zofran®, generic; (Rx)
Ondansetron HCl Injection: 2 mg/mL in 2 mL single-dose syringes 
and 20 mL single- or multi-dose vials; Zofran®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Orbifloxacin
(or-bi-flox-a-sin)  Orbax®
Fluoroquinolone Antibiotic 
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Fluoroquinolone antibiotic labeled for treating skin and soft 
tissue infections in dogs and cats and for treating bacterial 
urinary infections in dogs.
	
▶Contraindications: Immature dogs during the rapid growth 
phase; known hypersensitivity to this class of drugs. Caution: 
Known or suspected CNS disorders
	
▶Adverse effects: GI effects most likely
	
▶In cats, tablet and suspension formulations are not 
­bioequivalent.
	
▶Many potential drug interactions
	
▶Federal law prohibits extra-label use in food-producing 
­animals.
Uses/Indications
Orbifloxacin is indicated for treatment of susceptible skin and soft 
tissue bacterial infections in dogs and cats. In dogs, it is also indi-
cated for treatment of UTIs. It is recommended that orbifloxacin be 
reserved for documented resistant UTIs, but it is a good first-line 
choice for pyelonephritis or infections that involve the prostate.1 In 
addition, fluoroquinolones are recommended as second-tier drugs 
for treatment of bacterial folliculitis.2 
Orbifloxacin may also be of benefit in treating susceptible 
gram-negative infections in horses, although clinical data are lacking 
and an equine formulation is not available.
The World Health Organization has designated orbifloxacin as 
a Critically Important (Highest Priority) antimicrobial for human 
medicine.3 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) has desig-
nated quinolones as Veterinary Critically Important Antimicrobial 
(VCIA) Agents in veterinary species.4
Pharmacology/Actions
Orbifloxacin is a concentration-dependent bactericidal agent. It acts 
by inhibiting bacterial DNA-gyrase (a type II topoisomerase), there-
by preventing DNA supercoiling and DNA synthesis. The net result is 
disruption of bacterial cell replication. Like other fluoroquinolones, 
orbifloxacin has demonstrated a significant postantibiotic effect for 
both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. Clinical efficacy is 
associated with achieving a peak orbifloxacin concentration 10 times 
greater than bacterial MIC,5,6 resulting in infrequent (once-daily) ad-
ministration of high doses.
Like other fluoroquinolones, orbifloxacin has excellent activity 
against many gram-negative bacteria and many gram-positive bac-
teria. This includes most species and strains of Klebsiella spp, Staph-
ylococcus pseudintermedius or S aureus, E coli, Enterobacter spp, 
Campylobacter spp, Bartonella spp, Shigella spp, Proteus spp, and 
Pasteurella spp. Some strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and other 
Pseudomonas spp are resistant to orbifloxacin and most Enterococcus 
spp are resistant. Like other fluoroquinolones, orbifloxacin has weak 
activity against most anaerobes and is not a good choice when treat-
ing known or suspected anaerobic infections. Acquired resistance 
can occur in virtually any bacterial species but is most commonly 
encountered in Enterobacteriaceae (E coli and related species) and 
staphylococci. 
Pharmacokinetics
After oral administration in dogs or cats, orbifloxacin is apparently 
nearly completely absorbed, although the suspension formulation 
results in lower and more variable plasma levels in cats as compared 
with tablets.7 Dogs receiving 7.5 mg/kg PO had an average peak or-
bifloxacin concentration of ≈6 µg/mL 2 hours after administration. 
Cats receiving orbifloxacin tablets 7.5 mg/kg PO had peak plasma 
level of 6 µg/mL as compared with 3 µg/mL in cats receiving an 
equivalent dose of orbifloxacin suspension. The drug is distributed 
well (Vd=1.2 L/kg in dogs; 1.3 L/kg in cats) and only slightly bound 
to plasma proteins (8% dogs; 15% cats). Orbifloxacin is eliminated 
primarily via the kidneys. Approximately 50% of the drug is excreted 
unchanged. Serum half-life after oral dosing is ≈5.5 hours in dogs 
and 4.5 to 7.5 hours in cats. Urine levels remain well above MICs for 
susceptible organisms for at least 24 hours after dosing.
In horses, orbifloxacin is well absorbed after oral administration 
(bioavailability is ≈70%) and distributes in many body fluids and en-
dometrial tissue. Protein binding is relatively low (≈20%). Elimina-
tion half-life is ≈3.5 to 9 hours.8,9
Rabbits receiving 20 mg/kg PO reached a peak concentration of 
3 µg/mL at 2 hours after administration. Volume of distribution was 
1.3 L/kg, and terminal half-life was 8.6 hours.10
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Some fluoroquinolones can cause arthropathies in immature, grow-
ing animals, and the risk posed by orbifloxacin is unclear. Because 
dogs appear to be more sensitive to this effect, the manufacturer 
states that the drug is contraindicated in immature dogs during the 
rapid growth phase (age 2 to 8 months in small- and medium-sized 
breeds and up to 18 months in large and giant breeds). The drug is 
also contraindicated in dogs and cats known to be hypersensitive to 
orbifloxacin or other drugs in its class (quinolones). Orbifloxacin use 
is contraindicated in patients receiving cyclosporine.


=== PDF PAGE 1314 ===
Ursodiol      1287
(not layers), chickens (not layers), swine, and honey bees. Slaughter 
withdrawal swine = 2 days; chickens = 1 day; turkeys = 5 days. Com-
plete honey bee treatments at least 4 weeks prior to the main honey 
flow.
There are many FDA-approved tylosin phosphate products available 
via veterinary feed directive for use in beef cattle, swine, and honey 
bees. Many of these products have other active ingredients included 
in their formulations.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Ursodiol
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA)
(ur-soe-dye-ole)  Actigall®, URSO®
Choleretic; Bile Acid; Hepatoprotectant
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Bile acid that may be useful for adjunctive treatment of 
hepatobiliary disease in dogs and cats, particularly cholestat-
ic disorders; may also be effective in treating biliary sludge 
(microlithiasis)
	
▶Contraindicated in the presence of extrahepatic bile duct 
obstruction or vanishing bile duct syndrome; do not use in 
rabbits and other hindgut fermenters because of bacterial 
metabolism to the hepatotoxic bile acid, lithocholic acid. 
	
▶Appears to be well tolerated in dogs and cats; should be given 
with food
Uses/Indications
In small animal species, ursodiol may be useful as adjunctive therapy 
for the medical management of acute and chronic cholestatic hepa-
tobiliary disorders by ameliorating the progression of inflammatory 
and degenerative changes associated with these conditions1–7; it may 
also aid in the resolution of biliary sludge accumulation (ie, micro-
lithiasis).8,9 Ursodiol can also be used as part of the medical manage-
ment of gallbladder mucoceles by protecting against hepatobiliary 
epithelial damage that occurs with this condition; however, there is 
no evidence that ursodiol aids in the medical dissolution of mature 
gallbladder mucoceles and surgical correction is indicated in many 
patients.10,11
Although ursodiol is approved to dissolve cholesterol choleliths 
in humans,12 it will not dissolve choleliths in small animal species as 
they are commonly composed of calcium carbonate (dogs) or calci-
um bilirubinate (cats), not cholesterol.
Pharmacology/Actions
Ursodiol is a noncytotoxic bile acid that has several pharmacologic 
actions.13–15 After oral administration, ursodiol decreases intestinal 
absorption of cholesterol and suppresses hepatic synthesis and se-
cretion of cholesterol, and ultimately reduces cholesterol saturation 
in the bile. In veterinary medicine, ursodiol is used for its choler-
etic (increased bile flow) properties. It increases the expression of 
membrane transport proteins on the canalicular membrane of he-
patocytes that are responsible for the movement of bile acids from 
hepatocytes to the bile canaliculi. Secretion of ursodiol into the bile 
ducts stimulates the flow of bicarbonate-rich bile and promotes the 
elimination of toxic bile acids. A process known as cholehepatic 
shunting allows for the recirculation of ursodiol from the cholangio-
cytes back to the hepatocytes. 
Ursodiol has antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and some mild im-
munomodulatory effects. It promotes hepatobiliary cytoprotection 
by replacing the more toxic hydrophobic bile acids (eg, lithocholic 
acid, deoxycholic acid), which accumulate in the bile acid pool with 
cholestatic liver disease. Additionally, it is antiapoptotic through its 
ability to stimulate cell survival pathways; ursodiol also acts as a mo-
lecular chaperone and protects against endoplasmic reticulum-me-
diated hepatobiliary cellular stress caused by toxic bile acids. 
Pharmacokinetics
Ursodiol is well absorbed from the small intestine after oral admin-
istration. In humans, up to 90% of the dose is absorbed from the 
small intestine into the portal circulation. Absorption is improved 
in the presence of food.12 Once it reaches the liver, it is extracted 
from the portal circulation, conjugated with either taurine or gly-
cine in hepatocytes, then secreted into bile. Ursodiol concentrates 
in the gallbladder, and the concentration in bile plateaus at ≈30% 
to 50% of total bile acid after ≈3 weeks. After biliary secretion into 
the duodenum, the majority of conjugated ursodiol is extracted by 
the apical bile acid transporter in the ileum, deposited into the por-
tal circulation, and transported back to the liver. A small portion of 
conjugated ursodiol in the intestinal tract may be deconjugated by 
bacterial enzymes and either be absorbed there or pass to the colon 
where it may be eliminated or converted to other bile acids (includ-
ing the potentially hepatotoxic bile acid, lithocholic acid), which also 
are eliminated in the feces. In most species, with the exception of 
hindgut fermenters, the amount of this hepatotoxic bile acid gener-
ated is minimal and inconsequential.
The very small quantities of unconjugated ursodiol that enter the 
systemic circulation are bound (70%) to plasma proteins, and less 
than 1% is excreted in the urine. Ursodiol has been detected in the 
serum of dogs and cats following oral administration.3,16
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Ursodiol is contraindicated in rabbits and other hindgut fermenters 
as it is converted into the hepatotoxic bile acid, lithocholic acid.17 It 
is also contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it or other bile 
acid products and in patients with complete extrahepatic bile duct 
obstruction. Ursodiol should also be used cautiously in dogs and 
cats with histologically confirmed hepatic ductopenic disorders (eg, 
cholangitis, cholangiohepatitis) as it may lead to progressive biliary 
damage. The benefits of using ursodiol should be weighed against its 
risks in patients with complications associated with choleliths (eg, 
biliary obstruction, biliary fistulas, cholecystitis, pancreatitis, chol-
angitis). Ursodiol does not dissolve radiopaque, calcified cholesterol, 
or radiolucent bile pigment choleliths.12
Adverse Effects
Ursodiol appears to be well tolerated in dogs and cats.16,18–20 A study 
in 20 healthy dogs given ursodiol 10 to 15 mg/kg PO daily showed 
no changes in hepatic ultrasound, serum liver enzymes, total biliru-
bin, cholesterol, or triglyceride concentrations after 6 to 8 weeks of 
administration.20 An additional study in 12 healthy dogs at the same 
dose showed no changes in serum bile acids testing and hepatic his-
topathology after 7 days of therapy.19 Two studies in normal cats giv-
en ursodiol showed no changes in CBC, biochemical panel, urinaly-
sis, ultrasound, or hepatic histopathology, but a significant decrease 
in serum cholesterol was noted.16,18 See Laboratory Monitoring.
In humans taking ursodiol, elevated liver enzymes, diarrhea, 
abdominal pain, and other GI effects have rarely been noted.12 Al-
though hepatotoxicity has not been associated with ursodiol therapy 
in humans, there are some patients with an inability to sulfate litho-
cholic acid (a naturally occurring bile acid and also a metabolite of 
ursodiol). These patients are at risk for increased concentrations of 
lithocholic acid as bile acid sulfation is a mechanism for bile acid 
detoxification. The clinical significance of this information for dogs 
and cats is unclear.


=== PDF PAGE 1315 ===
1288      Ursodiol
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
No evidence of impaired fertility or fetal harm was found in preg-
nant rabbits or rats given ursodiol 7 times or 22 times, respectively, 
the maximum human labeled dose.12 It does not cross the placenta 
and has been safely used in the treatment of intrahepatic cholestasis 
of pregnancy in women.21
It is not known whether ursodiol is excreted in breast milk. Be-
cause minimal drug is systemically absorbed, clinical effects on nurs-
ing animals are unlikely.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdoses of ursodiol would most likely cause diarrhea, although 
salivation and vomiting have been noted in dogs. Treatment, if re-
quired, could include supportive therapy, oral administration of an 
aluminum-containing antacid (eg, aluminum hydroxide suspen-
sion), or gastric emptying (if large overdose) with concurrent ad-
ministration of activated charcoal or cholestyramine suspension.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving ursodiol and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
	■Aluminum-containing Antacids: May bind to ursodiol, 
thereby reducing its efficacy
	■Cholestyramine: May bind to ursodiol, thereby reducing its 
efficacy
	■Cyclosporine: May increase cyclosporine serum concentra-
tions
	■Estrogens: May increase hepatic cholesterol secretion and 
counteract ursodiol effects in humans; significance in veterinary 
patients is unknown.
	■Fenofibrate: Fibrates increase cholesterol formation and may 
counteract ursodiol effects in humans; significance in veterinary 
patients is unknown.
	■Gemfibrozil: Fibrates increase cholesterol formation and may 
counteract ursodiol effects in humans; significance in veterinary 
patients is unknown.
	■Taurine: Although not documented, concern has been raised 
that chronic administration of ursodiol in cats may lead to tau-
rine deficiency.
Laboratory Considerations
	■Ursodiol may falsely elevate total serum bile acid test results, al-
though the magnitude of this change may not be clinically rele-
vant.16,19,20 It is recommended to stop ursodiol for a minimum of 2 
to 3 days before performing total serum bile acid testing.
Dosages
DOGS:
Medical treatment of biliary sludge (microlithiasis) and ad-
junctive treatment of acute and chronic nonobstructive choles-
tatic disorders or chronic hepatitis (extra-label): 10 – 15 mg/kg 
PO with food once daily day or divided twice daily22
CATS:
Adjunctive treatment of nonobstructive acute and chronic 
cholestatic disorders (extra-label): 10 – 15 mg/kg PO with food 
once daily day or divided twice daily6
Lymphocytic cholangitis: 15 mg/kg PO with food daily pro-
duced morphologic and immunohistochemical improvements, 
although prednisolone reduced inflammation to a greater extent 
and promoted longer survival.1,2
BIRDS:
Adjunctive treatment of liver disease (extra-label): 10 – 15 mg/kg 
PO once daily23
Monitoring
	■Periodic abdominal ultrasonography based on the clinical pre-
sentation of the underlying condition being treated (eg, biliary 
sludge)
	■Baseline and periodic (eg, every 3 to 6 months) serum liver chem-
istry panel (eg, ALT, ALP, GGT, total bilirubin)
Client Information
	■Ursodiol is used to help animals with liver, pancreas, and/or gall-
bladder problems. 
	■This medicine works best when given with food. It also has a bitter 
taste that can often be masked when the medicine is given with 
food. 
	■Ursodiol is usually well-tolerated by dogs and cats. Diarrhea is the 
most common side effect. Contact your veterinarian if you have 
any concerns about your animal’s condition.
	■Do not give this medicine to rabbits, guinea pigs, rodents, or 
­horses.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Ursodiol, also known as ursodeoxycholic acid, is a naturally occur-
ring bile acid. It occurs as a white or almost white, bitter-tasting crys-
talline powder that is practically insoluble in water and freely soluble 
in alcohol.
Ursodiol may also be known as acidum ursodeoxycholicum, 
UDCA, or ursodesoxycholic acid; many trade names are available, 
including Actigall®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer, store ursodiol at 
room temperature (20°C to 25°C [68°F-77°F]) in tight containers. 
Half tablets maintain acceptable quality for up to 28 days when 
stored in the bottle at room temperature. Because of the bitter taste, 
store the segments separately from whole tablets. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Ursodiol 50 mg/mL oral suspension can be compounded from 
commercially available tablets. Triturate 20 ursodiol 250 mg tablets 
with 50 mL of Ora-Plus® and qs ad to 100 mL with Ora-Sweet®. The 
resulting suspension retains 90% potency for 90 days when stored 
at both 5°C (41°F) or 25°C (77°F). Compounded preparations of 
ursodiol should be protected from light and shaken well before use.24
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Ursodiol Oral Capsules: 300 mg; Actigall®, generic; (Rx)
Ursodiol Oral Tablets: 250 mg and 500 mg; URSO®-250 and -Forte, 
generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb


=== PDF PAGE 1316 ===
Valacyclovir      1289
Valacyclovir
(val-ay-sye-kloe-veer)  Valtrex®
Antiviral
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Potentially useful for treating equine herpes viral infection; 
however, definitive proof is lacking
	
▶Prodrug of acyclovir with improved oral absorption
	
▶Should not be used in cats due to lack of efficacy and pro-
found toxicity (ie, nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, myelosup-
pression)
	
▶Use with caution and consider dose reduction in patients with 
renal insufficiency.
	
▶Patients must be adequately hydrated during treatment.
	
▶Appears to be well tolerated in horses, but experience is 
limited
Uses/Indications
Valacyclovir may be effective for treating equine herpesvirus 1 
(EHV-1) infection, although evidence to support this use is limited. 
In horses experimentally exposed to EHV-1, valacyclovir was effec-
tive in reducing viral replication as measured by decreased viral load 
in blood, nasal secretions, and bronchoalveolar fluid; however, viral 
load in the CSF did not differ from placebo.1 Clinical signs improved 
when valacyclovir was given prior to EHV-1 exposure as well when 
given up to 2 days after viral challenge. In ponies experimentally in-
fected with EHV-1 that received valacyclovir 1 hour prior to inocula-
tion, the drug reduced respiratory signs, but not other clinical signs.2 
These findings resemble the experience in humans, where treatment 
is more likely to be successful when initiated early (ie, with the earli-
est symptom or sign of disease).
Valacyclovir treatment was reported in a retrospective study of 
7 naturally occurring cases of EHV-1.3 Another report of 31 horses 
treated with valacyclovir also found a strong decrease of EHV-1 viral 
load in nasal secretions and blood in all treated horses.4 Successful 
valacyclovir use was reported in 2 stallions during an outbreak of 
equine coital exanthema5 and in a single case of equine multinodular 
pulmonary fibrosis6; however, valacyclovir failed to reduce viral load 
in 6 horses diagnosed with equine multinodular pulmonary fibrosis, 
and 5 horses were euthanized due to progression of clinical signs.7 
Valacyclovir did not suppress FHV-1 replication in cats.8 
In humans, valacyclovir is used for treatment, suppression, and/
or prevention of herpes and varicella viral infections, and, at high 
doses, for prevention of cytomegalovirus infections in immunocom-
promised patients.
Pharmacology/Actions
As a prodrug, valacyclovir is rapidly and almost completely hydro-
lyzed to the nucleoside analogue acyclovir and L-valine. Viral-spe-
cific thymidine kinase then converts acyclovir to acyclovir mono-
phosphate, which is further phosphorylated to the active acyclovir 
triphosphate. Acyclovir triphosphate is incorporated into the viral 
DNA to cause viral DNA chain termination and thereby inhibits vi-
ral DNA synthesis and replication. Variations in acyclovir sensitivity 
and resistance are likely mediated by differing sensitivity, or outright 
deficiency of, viral thymidine kinase.9,10  
The primary goal of antiherpetic therapy is to decrease viral repli-
cation until the immune system mounts an appropriate response and 
controls active infection.9
In humans, valacyclovir has antiviral activity against herpes labia-
lis, herpes simplex, herpes zoster, varicella zoster, and cytomegalovi-
rus. Resistance of herpes simplex and varicella zoster to acyclovir has 
been reported in humans and can result from changes in thymidine 
kinase or DNA polymerase.11
Pharmacokinetics
In horses, oral absorption of valacyclovir is 8-fold greater than acy-
clovir,12 with bioavailability reported as 26%12 and up to 50% when 
the drug is administered after intragastric lavage.13 The effect of 
food on oral absorption is uncertain. The pharmacokinetic profile 
of valacyclovir at 20 mg/kg PO was nearly identical to acyclovir at 
10 mg/kg administered as an IV infusion over 1 hour.12 Peak serum 
concentration was reached ≈50 minutes after administration.12,13 
Volume of distribution was 9.8 L/kg,12 but penetration into the CSF 
was minimal.10 Protein binding was low at 10% to 20%.12 Elimina-
tion half-life of unbound acyclovir was 8.8 hours.12 Following ad-
ministration of valacyclovir 40 mg/kg PO every 8 hours (mixed 
in applesauce), acyclovir serum concentration remained above 
3 μg/mL (the EC50
12) for 60% of the dosing interval,10 and concen-
trations from nasal swabs were 50% to 100% of serum concentra-
tion.2 Serum acyclovir concentration (mean peak concentration, 
1.5 μg/mL on day 4) was lower than expected in 6 horses with EHV-5 
that received valacyclovir 30 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for 48 hours, 
then 20 mg/kg every 12 hours for 8 additional days.7
After a single dose of valacyclovir 40 mg/kg was given orally in 
eastern box turtles, peak concentration of 1.9 μg/mL was reached 
13 hours after dosing, and half-life was 15.2 hours. In this species, 
valacyclovir 40 mg/kg PO every 24 hours is predicted to maintain 
concentrations above 0.45 μg/mL.14
In humans, valacyclovir is rapidly absorbed, with peak concentra-
tions reached after 1.5 hours. Bioavailability is ≈55% and is not af-
fected by food. Conversion to acyclovir occurs with first-pass hepatic 
and intestinal metabolism. Acyclovir is widely distributed into most 
tissues, and protein binding is ≈15%. Acyclovir undergoes minimal 
hepatic metabolism and is excreted equally via the kidneys (47%) 
and in the feces (46%). Elimination half-life is ≈3 hours but increases 
to 14 hours in patients with end-stage renal disease. Hepatic impair-
ment does not alter acyclovir pharmacokinetics.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Valacyclovir should not be used in patients that are hypersensitive to 
valacyclovir or acyclovir.11 Valacyclovir should not be used in cats, as 
it has caused significant toxicity (eg, severe myelosuppression, coag-
ulative necrosis of the renal tubular epithelium, centrilobular atro-
phy and hepatic necrosis) in this species.8 
Valacyclovir should be used with caution in patients with renal 
insufficiency, and in those that are geriatric (with or without dimin-
ished renal function), dehydrated, or receiving nephrotoxic drugs, 
as use under these conditions has resulted in acute kidney injury in 
humans11; dosage modification may be considered in patients with 
significant renal impairment. Maintaining hydration in patients re-
ceiving valacyclovir is critical, as the drug may precipitate in—and 
cause damage to—the renal tubules.11 
Do not confuse valACYclovir with valGANciclovir or 
VANcomycin.
Adverse Effects
Valacyclovir appeared to be well tolerated in horses enrolled in phar-
macokinetic or experimental studies.
In cats infected with feline herpesvirus 1 (FHV-1), lethargy, de-
hydration, and significant decreases in WBC and neutrophil counts 
were noted 6 to 9 days after initiation of valacyclovir at 60 mg/kg PO 
every 6 hours; histologic changes included bone marrow suppres-
sion, coagulative necrosis in the renal tubules, centrilobular atrophy, 
and hepatic necrosis.8 The drug did not suppress FHV-1 replication.
In humans, GI distress (eg, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain), 
CNS depression, agitation, confusion, seizures, encephalopathy, and 
ophthalmologic, hematologic, and dermatologic conditions have 
also been reported.11 CNS adverse reactions are more common in 
geriatric patients; however, they have also been reported in adults 
