
===== AVCN ckd 410-420 =====
--- pdf page 410 ---
382 Nutritional Management of Skin Diseases
treatment in a dog with hepatocutaneous reactions of companion animals (1): duration
syndrome. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 31 (5): 1514–1519. of elimination diets. BMC Vet. Res. 11: 225–227.
National Research Council (NRC) Ad Hoc Outerbridge, C.A. (2010). Hepatocutaneous
Committee on Dog and Cat Nutrition (2006). syndrome. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Nutrient Requirements of Dogs and Cats. Medicine Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 7e (ed.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press. S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman), 112–116.
Norton, A. (1987). Skin lesions in cats with St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders.
vitamin B (pyridoxine) deficiency. Proc. Annu. Outerbridge, C.A., Marks, S., and Rogers, Q.
Members Meet. Am. Acad. Vet. Dermatol. Am. (2002). Plasma amino acid concentrations in
Coll. Vet. Dermatol. 3: 24. 36 dogs with histologically confirmed
Oberkirchner, U., Linder, K., Zadrozny, L., and superficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND). Vet.
Olivry, T. (2009). Resolution of clinical signs Dermatol. 13: 177–187.
of canine glucagonoma associated necrolytic Patel, A., Whitbread, T.J., and McNeil,
migratory erythema with subcutaneous P.E. (1996). A case of metabolic epidermal
octreotide. NAVDF 2009 Abstr. Vet. Dermatol. necrosis in a cat. Vet. Dermatol. 7: 221–226.
20: 215. Patterson, S. (1995). Food hypersensitivity in 20
Olivry, T. and Bizikova, P. (2010). A systematic dogs with skin and gastrointestinal signs.
review of the evidence of reduced allergenicity J. Small Anim. Pract. 36 (12): 529–534.
and clinical benefit of food hydrolysates in Peterson, L.L., Shaw, J.C., Acott, K.M. et al. (1984).
dogs with cutaneous adverse food reactions. Glucagonoma syndrome: in vitro evidence that
Vet. Dermatol. 21: 32–41. glucagon increases epidermal arachidonic acid.
Olivry, T. and Mueller, R.S. (2017). Critically J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 11: 468–473.
appraised topic on adverse food reactions of Puigdemont, A., Brazis, P., Serra, M., and
companion animals (3): prevalence of Fondati, A. (2006). Immunologic responses
cutaneous adverse food reactions in dogs and against hydrolyzed soy protein in dogs with
cats. BMC Vet. Res. 13: 51–54. experimentally induced soy hypersensitivity.
Olivry, T. and Mueller, R.S. (2018). Critically Am. J. Vet. Res. 67: 484–488.
appraised topic on adverse food reactions of Raditic, D.M., Remillard, R.L., and Tater,
companion animals (5): discrepancies K.C. (2011). ELISA testing for common food
between ingredients and labeling in antigens in four dry dog foods used in dietary
commercial pet foods. BMC Vet. Res. elimination trials. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim.
14: 24–28. Nutr. (Berl.) 95: 90–97.
Olivry, T. and Mueller, R.S. (2019a). Critically Reedy, L.M., Miller, W.H., and Willemse, T.
appraised topic on adverse food reactions of (1997). Allergic Skin Diseases of Dogs and Cats.
companion animals (7): signalment and Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
cutaneous manifestations of dogs and cats Rees, C.A., Bauer, J.E., Burkholder, W.J. et al.
with adverse food reactions. BMC Vet. Res. (2001). Effects of dietary flax seed and
15: 140–145. sunflower seed supplementation on normal
Olivry, T. and Mueller, R.S. (2019b). Critically canine serum polyunsaturated fatty acids and
appraised topic on adverse food reactions of skin and hair coat condition scores. Vet.
companion animals (8): storage mites in Dermatol. 12: 111–117.
commercial pet foods. BMC Vet. Res. 15: 385–389. Rhoads, J.D., Fliegelman, M.T., and Panzer,
Oliv
--- pdf page 411 ---
­eferenies 383
Sampson, H.A. and Burks, A.W. (2009). Adverse zinc- responsive dermatosis. Res. Vet. Sci.
reactions to foods. In: Middleton’s Allergy: 44: 41–44.
Principles and Practice, 6e (ed. E. Middleton), Verlinden, A., Hesta, M., and Millet, S. (2006).
1139–1167. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. Food allergy in dogs and cats: A review. Crit.
Scott, D.W. and Sheffy, B.E. (1987). Dermatosis Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 46: 259–273.
in dogs caused by vitamin E deficiency. Waldron, M.K., Hannah, S.S., and Bauer,
Companion Anim. Pract. 41: 42. J.E. (2012). Plasma phospholipid fatty acid
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H., and Griffin, and ex vivo neutrophil responses are
C.E. (2001). Muller & Kirk’s Small Animal differentially altered in dogs fed fish- and
Dermatology, 6e. Philadelphia, PA: WB linseed- oil containing diets at the same
Saunders. n- 6:n- 3 fatty acid ratio. Lipids 47 (4): 425–434.
Shepartz, B. (1973). Regulation of Amino Acid Walton, D.K., Center, S.A., Scott, D.W., and
Metabolism in Mammals. Philadelphia, PA: Collins, K. (1986). Ulcerative dermatosis
WB Saunders. associated with diabetes mellitus in the dog.
Shimomura, Y., Aoki, N., Rogers, M.A. et al. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 22: 79–88.
(2003). Characterization of human keratin- Wang, K., Zhou, B., Kuo, Y.M. et al. (2002). A
associated protein 1 family members. novel number of zinc transporter family is
J. Investig. Dermatol. Symp. Proc. 8: 96–99. defective in acrodermatitis enteropathica. Am.
Sohier, J., Jeanmougin, M., Lombrail, P., and J. Hum. Genet. 71: 66.
Passa, P. (1980). Rapid improvement of skin Watson, T.D. (1998). Diet and skin disease in
lesions in glucagonoma with intravenous dogs and cats. J. Nutr. 128: 2783S–2789S.
somatostatin infusion. Lancet 1: 40. Watson, A.L., Fray, T.R., Bailey, J. et al. (2006).
Sousa, C.A., Stannard, A.A., Ihrke, P.J., and Dietary constituents are able to play a
Reinke, S.I. (1988). Dermatosis associated beneficial role in canine epidermal barrier
with feeding generic dog food: 13 cases function. Exp. Dermatol. 15: 74–81.
(1981–1982). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 192: Werner, A. and Harvey, R.G. (1995). Diet and
676–680. veterinary dermatology. WALTHAM Focus
Tiffany, S., Parr, J.M., Templeman, J. et al. 5: 11–19.
(2019). Assessment of dog owners’ White, S.D. (1986). Food hypersensitivity in 30
knowledge relating to the diagnosis and dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 188: 695–698.
treatment of canine food allergies. Can. Vet. White, S.D. (1998). Food allergy in dogs.
J. 60: 268–274. Compend. Contin. Educ. Pract. Vet. 20: 261–269.
Torres, S.M.F., Caywood, D.D., O’Brien, White, S.D. and Sequoia, D. (1989). Food
T.D. et al. (1997). Resolution of superficial hypersensitivity in cats: 14 cases (1982–1987).
necrolytic dermatitis following excision of a J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 194 (5): 692–695.
glucagon- secreting pancreatic neoplasm in a White, S.D., Bourdeau, P., Rosychuk,
dog. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 33: 313–319. R.A.W. et al. (2001). Zinc responsive
Uchida, Y., Moon- Fanelli, A.A., Dodman, dermatosis in dogs: 41 cases and literature
N.H. et al. (1997). Serum concentrations of review. Vet. Dermatol. 12: 101–109.
zinc and copper in Bull Terriers with lethal Wicke, C., Halliday, B., Allen, D. et al. (2000).
acrodermatitis and tail- chasing behavior. Am. Effects of steroids and retinoids on wound
J. Vet. Res. 58: 808–810. healing. Arch. Surg. 135: 1265–1270.
Van den Broek, A.H.M. and Simpson, Willis- Mahn, C., Remillard, R., and Tater, K.
J.W. (1992). Fat absorption in dogs
--- pdf page 412 ---
384
15
Nutritional Management of Kidney Disease
Yann Queau and Denise A. Elliott
Chronic Kidney Disease clean water at all times. Providing water at sev-
eral locations in the house may facilitate water
Dietary therapy has remained at the forefront intake. Cats have very sensitive whiskers and
of the management of chronic kidney disease many seem to prefer a large bowl in which the
(CKD) for decades. There are two fundamental whiskers do not touch the sides of the bowl. A
applications of nutrition in CKD: the first is the variety of water types (home filtered, distilled,
key role that certain nutrients have in altering bottled, warm tap water, cold tap water) can be
disease progression, and the second is the role offered. Some pets prefer running water, and
of nutrition in maintaining body weight, con- water fountains are now commercially available
trolling uremic symptoms, and improving the to encourage water intake. It is important to
quality of life. keep the food and water bowls away from the lit-
ter box area.
When fluid balance cannot be maintained
Water
with these techniques, cautious fluid sup-
Compensatory polydipsia balances excessive plementation should be used to prevent dehy-
fluid loss associated with osmotically driven dration and attendant vascular depletion.
polyuria; however, some patients will fail to con- Maintenance fluids (e.g. Plasma-L yte® 56 [Baxter
sume sufficient water to prevent volume deple- Healthcare, Deerfield, IL, USA], 40 mEq/l;
tion. Therefore, methods should be employed Plasma-L yte M, 40 mEq Na/l; Normosol™ M
that encourage the patient to drink and main- [ICU Medical, San Clemente, CA, USA],
tain fluid balance. An increase in water turnover 40 mEq/l) can be administered subcutaneously
can be achieved by feeding diets that contain daily by the pet’s caretaker. Chronic administra-
≥70% moisture (retorted can/pouch/tray, com- tion of lactated Ringer’s solution (LRS;
mercially frozen ± added water, extruded kibble 130 mEq/l) or normal saline (154 mEq/l) can
soaked in sufficient water, or balanced home- cause hypernatremia if sufficient free water is
cooked diets ± added water) or by increasing not provided or consumed. Conversely, 5% dex-
feeding frequency (increasing number of meals trose in water can cause cellulitis and abscess
per day) (Anderson 1982; Kirschvink et al. 2005). formation and should not be administered
The patient should have easy access to fresh and subcutaneously.
Applied Veterinary Clinical Nutrition, Second Edition. Edited by Andrea J. Fascetti,
Sean J. Delaney, Jennifer A. Larsen, and Cecilia Villaverde.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
--- pdf page 413 ---
­Choniic idneeyDisease 385
Energy Stage I/II: Progression
The intact nephron hypothesis is the prevailing
Sufficient energy needs to be provided to pre-
theory of the progression of renal disease
vent endogenous protein catabolism to support
(Hostetter et al. 1981; Spencer et al. 2021). In
gluconeogenesis that will result in malnutrition
this model, once a critical threshold of function-
and exacerbation of azotemia. Prevention of
ing nephrons is reached, the remaining surviv-
malnutrition by ensuring adequate energy and
ing nephrons hypertrophy and undergo an
nutrient intake is crucial in the management of
increase in glomerular plasma flow and glomer-
kidney disease, and lower body condition scores
ular filtration rate (GFR). The capillary blood
(BCS) in dogs and body weights in cats have
flow and pressure gradient across the capillary
been associated with shorter survival (Parker
wall increase, and the chemical and electrical
and Freeman 2011; Freeman et al. 2016;
selective glomerular barriers are impaired
Rudinsky et al. 2018). Often, weight loss has
as a result. These changes increase the amounts
already occurred at the time of diagnosis
of protein entering the glomerular filtrate.
(Greene et al. 2014; Freeman et al. 2016). The
Ultimately the tubular resorptive processes for
maintenance energy requirements are a good
protein are overwhelmed. The tubular cells are
starting point to determine the amount of calo-
stimulated to secrete cytokines and inflamma-
ries required each day. A commonly used equa-
tory mediators, including endothelin-1 , mono-
tion indicates that adult cats require 1.2–1.4 ×
cyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1 ), and
RER (where RER = resting energy require-
RANTES (regulated on activation, normal T- cell
ment = 70 × (BW [Kg]0.75)), and dogs require
expressed and secreted; also known as CCL5,
1.6–1.8 × RER (see Chapter 3). This starting
chemokine ligand 5), which stimulate intersti-
point should be adjusted based on serial deter-
tial fibrosis and inflammation, contributing
minations of body weight and BCS. Carbohydrate
to progressive renal damage (Remuzzi and
and fat provide the non-p rotein sources of
Bertani 1998). Accordingly, protein restriction
energy in the diet. Fat provides approximately
has been demonstrated to slow the rate of
twice the energy per gram compared to carbo-
progression of renal disease in rats and people
hydrate. Therefore, fat increases the energy
by reducing renal blood flow, GFR, and
density of the diet, which allows the patient to
proteinuria.
obtain its nutritional requirements from a
It is less certain if dietary protein restriction
smaller volume of food. A smaller volume of
alters the progression of renal disease in cats or
food minimizes gastric distension, which can
dogs, as most studies do not support it (Finco
reduce the likelihood of nausea and vomiting
et al. 1985, 1992a, b, 1994, 1998, 1999;
unless gastric emptying is delayed too greatly.
Robertson et al. 1986; Polzin et al. 1988; Brown
et al. 1991b; Adams et al. 1993). However, these
studies have been performed using the rem-
Protein
nant kidney model, which does not necessarily
Dietary protein modification has been a main- reflect naturally occurring disease. In addition,
stay for the management of CKD for decades. some of the studies have been confounded by
However, over the years dietary protein restric- alterations in energy and/or phosphate intake
tion has also been the subject of much contro- in addition to protein
--- pdf page 414 ---
386 Nutritional Management of Kidney Disease
(King et al. 2006, 2007; Kuwahara et al. 2006; dietary protein intake increased the magnitude
Syme et al. 2006; Jepson et al. 2007, 2009; of proteinuria (Polzin et al. 1988). Dietary pro-
Chakrabarti et al. 2012). Furthermore, studies tein restriction may be most beneficial to limit
in dogs with naturally occurring CKD have proteinuria in glomerular disease (see later),
reported that a UPC value greater than 0.5 or 1 but for cats and dogs with naturally occurring
at initial evaluation is associated with an tubulointerstitial CKD, further studies are
increased risk of uremic morbidity and mortal- required.
ity (Jacob et al. 2005; Wehner et al. 2008; Nonetheless, the current recommendation of
Rudinsky et al. 2018), and the risk of adverse the International Renal Interest Society (IRIS)
outcomes increases as the magnitude of pro- is to implement a restricted-p rotein diet in con-
teinuria increases (Jacob et al. 2005). Therefore, junction with an ACE inhibitor and/or an ARB
therapeutic strategies should be employed to for dogs with a UPC >0.5 and for cats with a
minimize proteinuria (Lees et al. 2005). UPC >0.4, regardless of the IRIS stage
Angiotensin- converting enzyme (ACE) inhibi- (IRIS 2023).
tor therapy has been shown to reduce glomeru-
lar capillary pressure and to lower the UPC, Stage III/IV: Uremia
and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) may Azotemia and uremia are due to the accumula-
also be used alone or in combination with an tion of protein metabolites derived from exces-
ACE inhibitor for that purpose (Vaden and sive dietary protein and degradation of
Elliott 2016). endogenous protein. High protein intake exac-
The effect of dietary protein restriction on erbates the azotemia and morbidity of CKD,
proteinuria in cats and dogs with CKD is not while protein malnutrition is strongly corre-
clear. Initial studies in feline remnant kidney lated with morbidity and mortality (Polzin
models suggested a beneficial effect of protein et al. 1983).
restriction (28% vs. 52% dry matter [dm]) on The rationale for formulating a diet that con-
the development of glomerular lesions (Adams tains a reduced quantity of high- quality protein
et al. 1993, 1994). However, the effect of pro- is based on the premise that controlled reduc-
tein in this study was confounded with that of tion of non- essential amino acids results in
calorie intake, as the low-p rotein diet was con- decreased production of nitrogenous wastes,
sumed in lesser quantities, probably as a result with consequent amelioration or elimination
of lower palatability. A subsequent study in of clinical signs, even though renal function
cats to evaluate the role of protein versus calo- remains essentially unchanged. Indeed, the
rie restriction showed that calorie – and not various nitrogen waste products (blood urea
protein – restriction was responsible for the nitrogen [BUN] is a routinely used surrogate
protective effect on renal morphology and pro- marker), also called “uremic toxins,” have a
teinuria (Finco et al. 1998). There have not myriad of negative effects, such as nausea, car-
been any reports on the effect of dietary protein diovascular effects, decreased red blood cell
restriction and proteinuria in dogs with natu- survival, blood loss by gastrointestinal ulcera-
rally occurring tubulointerstitial kidney dis- tions, or impaired platelet function (Vanholder
ease. However, in studies using the remnant et al. 2003, 2018).
kidney m
--- pdf page 415 ---
­Choniic idneeyDisease 387
Ross et al. 2006). Therefore, every patient factor to consider for maintenance of lean body
symptomatic for stage III/IV CKD should ben- mass. Overall caloric intake (which ultimately
efit from a protein-r estricted diet, while simul- affects the amount of protein ingested), protein
taneously avoiding excessive restriction to quality (i.e. digestibility and essential amino
prevent the risk of protein malnutrition (i.e. acid profile), the role of other nutrients (such
hypoalbuminemia, anemia, weight loss, and/ as carbohydrate) in protein turnover, and acid–
or loss of muscle mass). base status can all contribute to changes in lean
The minimal dietary protein requirements of body mass and may in fact dictate the optimal
cats and dogs with CKD are not known, but protein concentration to be fed to an individual
have been presumed to be similar to the mini- animal with kidney disease. Finally, it should
mal protein requirements of healthy animals: be remembered that dietary protein is also a
for cats, 3.97 g/kg BW0.67 or 40 g/Mcal; and for main source of phosphorus, a nutrient of great
dogs, 2.62 g/kg BW0.75 or 20 g/Mcal (NRC 2006). importance in the management of CKD,
However, in recent years the degree of protein and that careless dietary supplementation
restriction adequate for animals with kidney with protein may therefore have deleterious
disease has caused some controversy, especially consequences.
in cats (Larsen 2016; Polzin and Churchill 2016; Based on current evidence, the consensus is
Scherk and Laflamme 2016). Indeed, it has to implement a restricted-p rotein diet to
been suggested that the true protein require- decrease azotemia in cats and dogs with stage
ment of cats to maintain lean body mass is III/IV disease and also to consider it from stage
higher than previously determined, which II as part of a “renal diet,” especially if it ena-
might in part be due to the lack of sensitivity of bles dietary phosphorus restriction (IRIS 2023;
classic assessment methods such as nitrogen Sparkes et al. 2016).
balance (Laflamme and Hannah 2013).
Nevertheless, there is to date no published evi-
Phosphate
dence that cats fed protein concentrations close
to the published recommended allowance Phosphate retention is one of the most common
develop protein malnutrition. In the study by regulatory derangements of CKD that arises
Laflamme and Hannah evaluating body com- secondary to reduced glomerular filtration of
position by dual X-r ay absorptiometry (DEXA), phosphorus. It occurs early in CKD and plays a
there was no statistical difference in lean body key role in the genesis and progression of
mass change between the cats fed the lowest- or fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 3 increase,
the highest-p rotein diets for two months renal secondary hyperparathyroidism, hypocal-
(Laflamme and Hannah 2013). Likewise, lean cemia, relative or absolute deficiency of
body mass assessed by DEXA was maintained 1,25- dihydroxyvitamin D (calcitriol), and renal
in older cats with early CKD (IRIS I/II) fed osteodystrophy (Nagode and Chew 1992;
their maintenance energy needs with a diet Barber and Elliott 1998; Tang et al. 2021b).
containing 67 g protein/Mcal (~24% ME) over CKD–mineral and bone disorder (CKD-M BD)
six months (Hall et al. 2019). In cats with natu- is the term used to describe these clinical, bio-
rally occurring CKD, there was also no appar- chemical, hormonal, and imaging abnormali-
ent negative effect of feeding a pro
--- pdf page 416 ---
388 Nutritional Management of Kidney Disease
interstitial inflammation and fibrosis, and may retention. In addition, FGF-2 3 is an independ-
contribute to progressive renal damage (Nagode ent predictor of the development of azotemia
and Chew 1992). Dogs with higher serum phos- (Finch et al. 2013), CKD progression, and mor-
phate and Ca-P O product have a poorer prog- tality (Geddes et al. 2015) in both dogs and cats.
4
nosis (Lippi et al. 2014; Rudinsky et al. 2018), Studies have clearly shown that by minimiz-
and in cats high serum phosphate is associated ing hyperphosphatemia, secondary hyperpar-
with poorer outcome (King et al. 2007; Boyd athyroidism and its sequelae can be prevented
et al. 2008; Geddes et al. 2015). (Ross et al. 1982; Brown et al. 1991a; Finco
In the traditional “trade- off” hypothesis, the et al. 1992a, b; Nagode and Chew 1992; Barber
initial increase in both intracellular and plasma et al. 1999). In one study of dogs with surgically
phosphate concentration triggers parathyroid induced reduced renal function, dogs fed a low-
hormone (PTH) synthesis and secretion. PTH phosphorus diet (0.44% dm) for 24 months had
works at the level of the proximal tubule to a 75% survival versus a 33% survival in dogs fed
decrease phosphate reabsorption and so a high-p hosphorus diet (1.44% dm) (Finco
increases the excretion of phosphate, which et al. 1992b). Renal function also deteriorated
compensates for the reduced glomerular filtra- more rapidly in the high-p hosphorus group.
tion of phosphorus. However, the trade- off Ross et al. reported that cats with laboratory-
for maintaining normophosphatemia is that induced reduced renal mass that were fed a
increased PTH concentrations also trigger the phosphorus-r estricted diet (0.24% dm) showed
release of calcium and phosphate from bone little or no histologic change compared with
via the stimulation of calcitriol synthesis by the cats fed a “typical” diet containing 1.56% dm
kidneys. As renal mass further decreases, phosphorus. The cats in the “typical” dietary
calcitriol production becomes insufficient to phosphate group had evidence of mineraliza-
limit hyperparathyroidism. Nevertheless, this tion, fibrosis, and mononuclear cell infiltration
hypothesis does not explain all the metabolic in the renal tissue (Ross et al. 1982). The effi-
changes observed in renal secondary hyperpar- cacy of dietary phosphate restriction in cats
athyroidism, especially calcitriol concentra- with naturally occurring CKD has also been
tions that are below what would be expected published. Dietary phosphate restriction alone
from decreased renal mass only (de Brito or as part of a modified diet for the manage-
Galvao et al. 2013). FGF-2 3 is a phosphatonin ment of CKD is clearly associated with a
produced by osteocytes and osteoblasts, which reduction in both plasma phosphate, PTH con-
acts with its co-f actor Klotho to decrease serum centration, and FGF-2 3 (Barber et al. 1999;
phosphate. This is achieved by decreasing Elliott et al. 2000b; Geddes et al. 2013b).
phosphate renal tubular reabsorption and Furthermore, control of phosphate concentra-
inhibiting 1α hydroxylase activity in the kid- tions has been associated with a reduction in
ney, thus lowering calcitriol synthesis and sub- all- cause mortality in cats with naturally occur-
sequently intestinal phosphorus absorption. In ring CKD (Elliott et al. 2000b). The mechanism
addition, FGF-2 3 decreases PTH production, of how phosphate restriction sl
--- pdf page 417 ---
­Choniic idneeyDisease 389
<6 mg/dl for stage IV disease. The first step to effectiveness. The plasma phosphate concen-
control plasma phosphate concentration is to tration should continue to be monitored every
limit the dietary intake of phosphate. The 2–4 weeks, and dosage adjustments made
plasma phosphate concentration should be accordingly until the target plasma phosphate
reassessed within two weeks of implementing concentration is achieved. Side effects of
dietary restriction. Commercial or homemade phosphate binders can include hyporexia/gas-
renal diets have different degrees of phospho- trointestinal signs (e.g. aluminum hydroxide,
rus restriction; if the first attempt is not effec- sevelamer hydroxide, lanthanum carbonate),
tive in controlling the plasma phosphate aluminum toxicity that causes neurologic signs
concentration, a diet with lower phosphorus (i.e. aluminum hydroxide), and effects on vita-
content can be selected. Plasma total and ion- min (especially vitamin K) and possibly taurine
ized calcium should be monitored, as hypercal- status (e.g. sevelamer hydrochloride).
cemia has been reported in cats with CKD (van Given these side effects, dietary phosphate
den Broek et al. 2017), and may develop when restriction remains the preferred means to
feeding phosphorus-r estricted diets (Geddes reduce dietary intake. There are no indications
et al. 2021; Schauf et al. 2021; Tang et al. 2021a; for phosphate binders to be used alone and in
van den Broek et al. 2022). It has been resolved the absence of concurrent dietary phosphate
by feeding diets with less severe phosphorus restriction.
restriction (e.g. selected “senior” diets) (Geddes Calcitriol replacement therapy has been
et al. 2021; Schauf et al. 2021); feeding renal advocated by some authors to help limit renal
diets with a lower calcium content and Ca : P secondary hyperparathyroidism and additional
ratio may also be attempted. renoprotective effects (Nagode et al. 1996; de
If dietary restriction alone does not allow Brito Galvao et al. 2013). The serum phosphate
plasma phosphate maintenance within the rec- and ionized calcium concentrations should be
ommended ranges, intestinal phosphate bind- within the reference range/interval prior to
ers should be added to the treatment plan beginning therapy, and hyperparathyroidism
(Table 15.1). Intestinal phosphate binding should be confirmed by PTH concentration
agents combine with phosphate contained in measurement. Calcitriol should not be given
dietary and digestive secretions to form insolu- with meals because it enhances intestinal
ble complexes that are excreted in the feces. calcium and phosphate absorption. Serum cal-
They should be mixed with the food prior to cium and phosphate concentrations need to be
feeding to ensure maximal phosphate binding continuously monitored to avoid hypercalce-
mia and soft tissue mineralization. The risk of
hypercalcemia is heightened by the concurrent
Table 15.1 List of intestinal phosphorus binding
administration of calcium-b ased intestinal
agents and typical doses recommended.
phosphate binding agents (i.e. calcium acetate
and calcium carbonate). The serum PTH con-
Aluminum hydroxide 60–90 mg/kg/day
centration should return to normal or almost
Calcium acetate 60–90 mg/kg/day
normal within several weeks of initiating
Calcium carbonate 60–90 mg/kg/day
therapy.
Calcium 200 mg/kg twice
carbonate + chitosan daily
Electrolytes
Sevelamer hydrochloride 50–160 mg/kg
twice daily
Sodium
Lantha
--- pdf page 418 ---
390 Nutritional Management of Kidney Disease
ability of the remaining nephrons to excrete occurring CKD. Syme (2003) reported that sys-
sodium, and the concern that whole-b ody tolic blood pressure did not change following
sodium accumulation would contribute to the the introduction of a sodium-r estricted “renal
development of hypertension. Hypertension is care” diet to cats with naturally occurring
indeed more common in cats with CKD, its risk CKD. Plasma aldosterone concentration and
increases with time and IRIS stage (Bijsmans plasma renin activity were higher when cats
et al. 2015; Hori et al. 2018), and it has been were consuming a sodium-r estricted renal diet.
implicated as a factor that contributes to the Consistent with IRIS recommendations and
progression of CKD. Approximately 20–32% of the American College of Veterinary Internal
cats with naturally occurring CKD have arte- Medicine (ACVIM) consensus statement on
rial blood pressures >175 mmHg (23.3 kPa), hypertension (Brown et al. 2007), there is cur-
which places them at severe risk of target organ rently no evidence to suggest that lowering
(i.e. kidney, eye, brain, heart) damage second- dietary sodium will reduce blood pressure in
ary to hypertension (Syme et al. 2002; Hori cats or dogs with CKD. At the same time,
et al. 2018). Jacob et al. (2003) reported that moderately sodium-r estricted therapeutic diets
31% of dogs with naturally occurring CKD had for the nutritional management of renal disease
systolic blood pressure >160 mmHg (21.3 kPa). remain common and recommended (Pouchelon
Dogs with naturally occurring CKD and a sys- et al. 2015). Antihypertensive therapy is clearly
tolic blood pressure >180 mmHg (24 kPa) were and universally recommended to maintain the
more likely to develop a uremic crisis and to die systolic blood pressure <160 mmHg (21.3 kPa)
compared with dogs that had a normal systolic in cats and dogs with CKD (IRIS 2023; Brown
blood pressure (Jacob et al. 2003). Furthermore, et al. 2007). Note that ACE inhibitors can lead
the risk of developing a uremic crisis and of to hyperkalemia, as summarized later.
dying increased significantly as systolic blood
pressure increased. Potassium
There have not been any published studies to Hypokalemia has been well recognized for
demonstrate that dietary sodium restriction decades as a complication of CKD. The mecha-
will alleviate hypertension or slow disease pro- nism of action is unclear and includes inade-
gression. In healthy cats and dogs, dietary quate potassium intake, acidifying diets, and/
sodium intake up to 3.1 g/Mcal in cats and or increased urinary losses. Hypokalemia
4.1 g/Mcal in dogs does not affect blood pres- occurs in about 20% of cats with CKD, although
sure or renal or cardiac functions (Xu this number may underestimate the true preva-
et al. 2009, 2016; Reynolds et al. 2013; Chetboul lence of whole-b ody potassium depletion
et al. 2014; Nguyen et al. 2017). Altering sodium (DiBartola et al. 1987; Theisen et al. 1997).
intake from 0.5 to 3.25 g Na/Mcal did not influ- Hypokalemia can occur at any stage of disease.
ence the development of hypertension nor Elliott and Syme (2003) reported hypokalemia
affect GFR in dogs with surgically induced in 14.3% of cats with stage II, 25% of cats with
renal reduction (Greco et al. 1994a, b). A study stage III, and 30% of cats in stage IV disease.
in cats with surgically induced kidney disease Segev et al. (2010) reported that hypokalemia
reported that sodium 
--- pdf page 419 ---
­Choniic idneeyDisease 391
potassium- depleted diet has been associated It is important to note that not all cats with
with naturally occurring CKD and a decline in CKD are hypokalemic. Indeed, hyperkalemia
GFR (Dow et al. 1987, 1990; DiBartola was reported in 13% of cats with CKD in one
et al. 1993). Dow and Fettman hypothesized study (Dow et al. 1989), and in 22% of cats with
that potassium depletion may lead to a self- end- stage renal disease in another study (Elliott
perpetuating cycle of renal damage and further and Barber 1998). Segev et al. (2010) reported
potassium loss (Dow and Fettman 1992). that 71 of 152 (41%) of dogs with naturally
However, the causal relationship between occurring CKD had at least one reported epi-
whole-b ody potassium deficit and progressive sode of hyperkalemia, defined as a serum
renal injury remains to be proven. potassium concentration above the reference
Clinically, hypokalemia is generally mild, range/interval of 5.3 mmol/l. Furthermore,
without overt clinical signs. Hypokalemia 16% of dogs had at least one episode in which
causes generalized muscle weakness and pain the serum potassium concentration was
that may present as cervical ventroflexion and a >6.5 mmol/l. Postulated contributors to hyper-
stiff, stilted gait (Dow et al. 1987). Hypokalemia kalemia include advanced kidney disease,
impairs protein synthesis, promotes weight dietary potassium intake, and the concurrent
loss, and contributes to polyuria by decreasing use of medications such as ACE inhibitors.
the renal responsiveness to ADH (antidiuretic Management of hyperkalemia includes rul-
hormone). Hypokalemia also appears to be ing out contributory factors such as thrombo-
associated with an increased risk of systemic cytosis and medications. A complete dietary
hypertension in cats with CKD (Syme history, including treats and nutritional supple-
et al. 2002). ments, should be obtained to ascertain the
Potassium supplementation is indicated patient’s daily potassium intake. This informa-
when the serum potassium concentration is less tion is used to identify and implement a dietary
than 4 mEq/l (4 mmol/l) (Sparkes et al. 2016). regime that would provide less dietary potas-
This may be achieved by oral potassium gluco- sium. It is important to note that hyperkalemia
nate or potassium citrate supplementation can occur in dogs with naturally occurring
(1–4 mEq per cat every [q]12 h) (Sieberg and CKD that receive therapeutic renal diets (Segev
Quimby 2020). Potassium chloride can be acidi- et al. 2010). In this situation, a potassium-
fying and therefore counterproductive for sup- reduced, commercial renal diet or a home-
plementation in CKD. Clinical improvement in prepared diet specifically formulated for the
appetite and activity level has been noted fol- patient by a board certified veterinary nutri-
lowing potassium supplementation, although tionist® or a Diplomate of the European College
palatability of the supplement may be a con- of Veterinary and Comparative Nutrition
cern in some cats. Muscle weakness typically should be prescribed.
resolves within five days of institution of ther-
apy. However, a randomized controlled clinical
Acid–Base Balance
trial failed to identify any beneficial effect of
potassium gluconate supplementation on blood The kidneys are essential in the regulation of
pressure or kidney function in cats with natu- acid–base balance. One of their key roles is to
rally occurring CKD (Elliott and Syme 2003). excrete 
--- pdf page 420 ---
392 Nutritional Management of Kidney Disease
complement and may contribute to the pro- vomiting, muscle weakness, and weight loss, in
gression of kidney disease. Metabolic acidosis addition to limiting the catabolic effects of met-
increases the catabolism and degradation of abolic acidosis on protein metabolism. It
skeletal muscle protein, disrupts intracellular remains to be determined if there is any benefi-
metabolism, and promotes dissolution of bone cial effect to provide alkali supplementation
mineral. These cellular disruptions exacerbate prior to the detection of metabolic acidosis.
azotemia, contribute to the loss of lean body
mass, and promote renal osteodystrophy.
Long- Chain Omega- 3 Fatty Acids
Metabolic acidosis also increases the likelihood
that hypokalemia will occur or exacerbates Long- chain omega-3 fatty acids (eicosapentae-
pre- existing hypokalemia as potassium moves noic acid [EPA] and docosahexaenoic acid
out of the cells in response to metabolic acido- [DHA]) compete with the long- chain omega-6
sis and is lost in urine. fatty acid arachidonic acid (AA), and alter
Metabolic acidosis is typically evident in eicosanoid, thromboxane, and leukotriene
stage III–IV disease (Elliott et al. 2003a, b; production (Bauer et al. 1999). Studies in
Slawuta et al. 2020). Dibartola et al. (1987) laboratory-i nduced renal disease in dogs have
reported that 62.7% of cats with CKD had reported that supplementation with menhaden
a bicarbonate concentration <15 mmol/l. fish oil (rich in long- chain omega-3 polyunsat-
Another study of 59 cats with naturally occur- urated fatty acids) was considered to be reno-
ring CKD reported that 15% of cats with late- protective compared with safflower oil (varietal
stage III and 52.6% of cats with stage IV CKD rich in omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids;
had evidence of acidosis (Elliott et al. 2003b). and notably not rich in the omega-9 monoun-
The blood bicarbonate concentration should saturated fatty acid oleic acid, like the common
be maintained in the range of 18–24 mmol/l. variety available now) and beef tallow (rich in
Therefore, alkalinization therapy (e.g. potas- saturated fatty acids) (Brown et al. 1998).
sium citrate, sodium bicarbonate, calcium Supplementation with menhaden fish oil low-
carbonate) should be implemented when the ered glomerular capillary pressure, reduced
bicarbonate concentration is <18 mmol/l. proteinuria, and slowed progressive decline in
Dietary protein restriction results in the con- the GFR (Brown et al. 1998).
sumption of reduced quantities of protein- Omega-6 fatty acids appeared to be detrimen-
derived acid precursors; however, this alone is tal to renal disease (Brown et al. 2000). Brown
rarely adequate to prevent metabolic acidosis. et al. reported that supplementation with
The choice and dose of alkalinization therapy omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids (using an
will need to be individualized for each patient. omega-6 rich variety of safflower oil) to dogs
Factors to consider include the effect on palat- with laboratory-i nduced CKD was associated
ability when added to the diet, the presence of with increased glomerular capillary pressure,
hypokalemia (where potassium salts will be glomerular enlargement, and increased eicosa-
chosen), the presence of hyperkalemia (where noid excretion rates.
potassium salts will be avoided), the presence Similar studies have not been reported in
of hyperphosphatemia (where calcium salts cats. Lipid metabolism is complex

===== AVCN diabetes 468-478 =====
--- pdf page 468 ---
440 Nutritional Management of Lower Urinary Tract Disease
Stevenson, A.E. (2002). The incidence of Tefft, K.M., Byron, J.K., Hostnik, E.T. et al.
urolithiasis in cats and dogs and the influence (2021). Effect of a struvite dissolution diet in
of diet in formation and prevention of cats with naturally occurring struvite
recurrence. PhD thesis, Institute of Urology urolithiasis. J. Feline Med. Surg. 23 (4):
and Nephrology, University College London. 269–277.
Stevenson, A.E., Wigglesworth, D.J., Smith, Terris, M.K., Issa, M.M., and Tacker,
B.H. et al. (2000). Effects of dietary potassium J.R. (2001). Dietary supplementation with
citrate supplementation on urine pH and cranberry concentrate tablets may increase
urinary relative supersaturation of calcium the risk of nephrolithiasis. Urology 57 (1):
oxalate and struvite in healthy dogs. Am. 26–29.
J. Vet. Res. 61: 430–435. Thomsen, M.K., Svane, L.C., and Poulsen,
Stevenson, A.E., Markwell, P.J., and Blackburn, P.H. (1986). Canine urinary tract infection.
J.M. (2002). The effect of diet on calcium Detection, prevalence and therapeutic
oxalate urinary relative supersaturation (RSS) consequences of bacteriuria. Nord. Vet. Med.
of stone- forming (SF) and normal (N) dogs. 38 (6): 394–402.
J. Vet. Intern. Med. 16 (3): 377. Thumchai, R., Lulich, J., Osborne, C.A. et al.
Stevenson, A.E., Hynds, W.K., and Markwell, (1996). Epizootiologic evaluation of
P.J. (2003). Effect of dietary moisture and urolithiasis in cats: 3,498 cases (1982–1992).
sodium content on urine composition and J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 208 (4): 547–551.
calcium oxalate relative supersaturation in Tiselius, H.G., Berg, C., Fornander, A.M., and
healthy miniature schnauzers and labrador Nilsson, M.A. (1993). Effects of citrate on the
retrievers. Res. Vet. Sci. 74 (2): 145–151. different phases of calcium oxalate
Stoller, M.L., Chi, T., Eisner, B.H. et al. (2009). crystallization. Scanning Microsc. 7 (1):
Changes in urinary stone risk factors in 381–389, discussion 389–390.
hypocitraturic calcium oxalate stone formers Willeberg, P. (1984). Epidemiology of naturally
treated with dietary sodium supplementation. occurring feline urologic syndrome. Vet.
J. Urol. 181 (3): 1140–1144. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 14 (3):
Suksawat, J., Cox, H.U., O’Reilly, K.L. et al. 455–469.
(1996). Inhibition of bacterial adherence to Williams, J. (2009). Surgical management of
canine uroepithelial cells using cranberry blocked cats. Which approach and when?
juice extract. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 10 (5): 167. J. Feline Med. Surg. 11 (1): 14–22.
Tarttelin, M.F. (1987a). Feline struvite Wing, D.A., Rumney, P.J., Preslicka, C.W., and
urolithiasis: factors affecting urine pH may be Chung, J.H. (2008). Daily cranberry juice for
more important than magnesium levels in the prevention of asymptomatic bacteriuria in
food. Vet. Rec. 121 (10): 227–230. pregnancy: a randomized, controlled pilot
Tarttelin, M.F. (1987b). Feline struvite study. J. Urol. 180 (4): 1367–1372.
urolithiasis: fasting reduced the effectiveness Xu, H., Laflamme, D.P., and Long, G.L. (2009).
of a urinary acidifier (ammonium chloride) Effects of dietary sodium chloride on health
and increased the intake of a low magnesium parameters in mature cats. J. Feline Med. Surg.
diet. Vet. Rec. 121 (11): 245–248. 11 (6): 435–441.
Tate, N.M., Minor, K.M., Lulich, J.P. et al. (2021). van Zuilen, C.D., Nickel, R.F., van Dijk, T.H.,
Multiple variants in XDH and MOCOS and Reijngoud, D.J. (1997). Xanthinuria in 
--- pdf page 469 ---
441
17
Nutritional Management of Endocrine Diseases
Andrea J. Fascetti and Sean J. Delaney
Metabolic regulation occurs on many levels. (IDDM) and non-i nsulin- dependent diabetes
The diseases discussed in this chapter alter mellitus (NIDDM) are commonly used; how-
metabolic regulation and energy metabolism. ever, etiopathogenesis is not considered in this
The clinical signs of these diseases are mani- classification, which may impact treatment.
fested by alterations in subcellular homeosta- Most dogs with diabetes are classified as
sis. Nutrition can be an important aspect of the IDDM. Cats can be diagnosed with either
management of endocrine diseases including IDDM or NIDDM. To make matters more com-
diabetes mellitus (DM), lipid disorders, hypo- plicated, cats can have one form and then revert
and hyperthyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, to the other over time. It has been hypothesized
and feline idiopathic hypercalcemia. that beta- cell function in these animals can
fluctuate, moving them from one category into
the next (Zicker et al. 2010).
Diabetes Mellitus Dietary management in animals with IDDM
does not eliminate the need for insulin replace-
DM is an endocrine disorder that occurs in both ment, but in some cases it may improve glyce-
cats and dogs. It describes an alteration in the mic control. In patients with NIDDM, dietary
cellular transport and metabolism of glucose therapy can also improve glycemic control and
caused by insufficient insulin release from the may (in some cases) eliminate the need for
pancreas (absolute and/or relative to sensitiv- exogenous insulin therapy. Regardless of the
ity), a lack of insulin receptors, or an inability type of diabetes, the following factors should
of the insulin receptors to transduce the signal. be considered in every patient: overall health
This results in elevated glucose concentrations and body condition, presence of other diseases,
and an inability of tissues to uptake and utilize type of diet, nutrient composition of the diet,
the glucose they need. While there are various nutritional adequacy of the diet, the animal’s
general classifications of DM described in caloric requirement, and feeding schedule.
humans, applying these classifications to dogs
and cats is difficult due to the imperfect under-
Nutritional Factors
standing of the etiopathogenesis and because
familial histories and diagnostic tests used in Water
humans are not readily available (Kirk Often overlooked, water is one of the key nutri-
et al. 1993; Nelson et al. 1993; Gilor et al. 2016). ents for all animals and is especially important
The terms insulin- dependent diabetes mellitus in animals with diabetes. Diabetics have
Applied Veterinary Clinical Nutrition, Second Edition. Edited by Andrea J. Fascetti,
Sean J. Delaney, Jennifer A. Larsen, and Cecilia Villaverde.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
--- pdf page 470 ---
442 Nutritional Management of Endocrine Diseases
increased water losses associated with osmotic two broad categories: insoluble and soluble.
diuresis secondary to glucosuria, as well as Soluble fibers (e.g. pectins, gums, mucilages,
ketonuria if diabetic ketoacidosis is present. fructooligosaccharides, and some hemicellu-
Fresh, clean water should be available at loses) have high water- holding capacity, delay
all times. gastric emptying, slow the rate of nutrient
absorption across the intestinal surface, and
Energy are highly fermentable by intestinal bacteria.
Many cats and dogs with diabetes have the clas- Insoluble fibers (e.g. cellulose, lignin, and
sic energy-r elated dichotomy of polyphagia most hemicelluloses) have less initial water-
with weight loss. In general, the clinical holding capacity, decrease gastrointestinal
response of animals with DM to dietary manip- transit time, and are less efficiently fermented
ulation is dependent upon the level of control of by gastrointestinal bacteria. Fiber is proposed
the primary disease process, and the presence or to promote the slowed digestion and absorp-
absence of secondary diseases. Weight loss may tion of digestible dietary carbohydrate, and to
be secondary to poorly controlled diabetes or an reduce insulin peaks after meals. Some soluble
underlying infection, and weight gain may be fibers also form gels in aqueous solutions,
due to the presence of another problem such as thereby binding glucose and water and pre-
a thyroid disorder or Cushing’s disease. venting their transfer to the absorptive surface
In cats, like humans, the relationship between of the intestine.
obesity and DM is well documented (Rand There have been a number of studies exam-
et al. 2004; Lund et al. 2005; Prahl et al. 2007; ining the use of dietary fiber in diabetic dogs.
Laflamme 2010). Studies have shown that base- Most have small sample sizes and confounding
line insulin concentrations and insulin response factors; however, in general positive effects of
to a glucose load increases in dogs as a function fiber- enriched diets have been described. In
of their degree of obesity (Mattheeuws one study, dogs with experimentally induced
et al. 1984). In cats, the development of feline diabetes had significant reductions in 24-h our
obesity was accompanied by a 52% decrease in blood glucose fluctuations when fed a diet con-
tissue sensitivity to insulin and diminished glu- taining either 15% soluble or insoluble fiber on
cose effectiveness (Appleton et al. 2001). Weight a dry matter basis (Nelson et al. 1991). Dogs
loss can reverse this and promote insulin sensi- consuming the high-f iber diets were consum-
tivity (Hoenig et al. 2007). The tissues of other ing fewer calories than the dogs fed the control
obese species (monkeys and rodents) have diet, and the effect may have been secondary to
decreased numbers of insulin receptors and the fiber, a reduction in calorie intake, or both.
those receptors that are present have reduced A second study assessed dogs with DM fed a
binding affinity. Over time, these changes canned diet supplemented with either 20 g of
reduce the body’s ability to respond to insulin. wheat bran (insoluble fiber) or 20 g of guar
gum (soluble fiber) (Blaxter et al. 1990).
Fiber Compared to control dogs that consumed the
Fiber is not considered nutritionally essential canned diet without added fiber, both fiber
for dogs or cats, but is often used in diabetic sources reduced postprandial hypergl
--- pdf page 471 ---
Diaaetes ellitts 443
were fed canned diets with either 11% or 23% dogs in the study by the fourth month; the
total dietary fiber on a dry matter basis. The authors attributed this to underfeeding the
composition of the diets was similar and dogs. An increase in dietary fiber consumption
caloric intake was controlled to maintain body or calorie restriction may have been responsible
weight. Nine of the eleven dogs in the study for the positive findings.
improved with respect to daily insulin require- Finally, a study in 12 dogs with stable DM
ment, fasting blood glucose, urinary glucose compared two commercially available diets
excretion, glycosylated hemoglobin concentra- that differed in fat content, but that both had
tions, and serum cholesterol while eating the predominantly insoluble fiber (90% insoluble;
high- fiber food. The remaining two dogs had total fiber 50 g/1000 kcal) to a control diet with
better glycemic control when they were eating a mix of types (75% insoluble, 25% soluble;
the low- fiber diet. Overall, when dogs had bet- total fiber 35 g/1000 kcal) (Fleeman et al. 2009).
ter glycemic control, they were consuming Each group of four dogs was fed the diets in a
fewer calories. This finding suggests that different sequence in a Latin square design.
caloric intake may have partially influenced When the dogs were fed the higher-f iber diet
glycemic control in this study. with lower energy density, lower fat, and
The effects of both insoluble and soluble higher protein, statistically significant weight
dietary fiber were examined in a study in dogs loss occurred (although the mean was less
with naturally occurring DM (Kimmel than 2% body weight over the two-m onth feed-
et al. 2000). Seven dogs were fed one of three ing period). However, there was no difference
dry diets for a one-m onth period. One diet was in the insulin requirements of the dogs when
a low-f iber diet (total dietary fiber not they were fed the different diets.
reported), a second diet was a high-f iber diet There are very few studies specifically evalu-
containing only insoluble fiber (73 g/1000 kcal), ating the effects of dietary fiber on naturally
and the third diet contained both soluble and occurring DM in cats. One early study
insoluble fiber sources (56 g/1000 kcal). The described the effects of the oral sulfonylurea
dogs had significantly better glycemic control drug glipizide in 20 cats fed commercial diets
while consuming the high–insoluble fiber diet high or low in fiber for 12 weeks (Nelson
compared to the other two diets. Fructosamine et al. 1993). Benefits of the higher- fiber diet
concentrations were lower in dogs when con- were reported, including one cat successfully
suming both fiber- supplemented diets, com- maintained only on diet and no oral or inject-
pared to the low-f iber diet. Although the able therapies for DM, but statistical analysis
calorie composition of the diets was similar of response rates was not possible. A rand-
and caloric intake did not differ between the omized crossover study in cats with DM com-
groups, there were differences with respect to pared the effect of the same canned diet mixed
the soluble carbohydrate sources between the with either insoluble fiber (cellulose, 19% total
diets. It is unknown if this difference had any dietary fiber [dry matter]) or starch (low insol-
impact on the findings. uble fiber, 4.1% total dietary fiber [dry matter])
Another study looked at the effect of feeding for 24 weeks (Nelson
--- pdf page 472 ---
444 Nutritional Management of Endocrine Diseases
61 vs. 11 g/1000 kcal) than in carbohydrate caloric dilution that occurs secondary to the
content (29% vs. 37% on an energy basis). addition of the fiber? Alternatively, is it related
Another study investigated the effects of a to the amount and type of soluble carbohy-
low- carbohydrate/low- fiber canned diet com- drate in the diet? Perhaps it is a combination of
pared to a moderate- carbohydrate/high- fiber both. Furthermore, the ability of fiber to
canned diet in 63 cats with DM (Bennett provide long-t erm health benefits, improve
et al. 2006). While cats in both groups were quality of life, or reduce or eliminate the com-
able to discontinue insulin and reverted to a plications associated with diabetes has not yet
nondiabetic state during the 16- week trial, this been determined.
was significantly more likely in the low-
carbohydrate/low- fiber diet group (68% on the Fat
low- carbohydrate/low- fiber diet and 41% on Diabetic animals often have accompanying
the moderate- carbohydrate/high- fiber diet). It abnormalities in lipid metabolism such as
is important to note that only crude fiber was hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia,
reported and was used to calculate the carbo- or both. Concurrent pancreatitis is common in
hydrate content. Since crude fiber analysis many diabetics. Fat should be restricted in
does not capture all insoluble fiber or any solu- patients with these problems. The degree of fat
ble fiber, the total fiber was undefined but cer- restriction is dependent on the patient’s diet
tainly underestimated, and the carbohydrate history and current fat consumption at the
concentration was therefore overestimated; time of diagnosis for both hyperlipidemia (see
the inaccuracy likely impacted the diets to a later) and pancreatitis (see Chapter 12).
different extent based on the expected variable
content of fiber types. In addition, the source Protein
of fiber, carbohydrate, and other nutrients dif- Diabetic animals may have increased amino
fered between the diets. The diets were com- acid losses through their urine. Patients that
mercial products that were not controlled in are not well controlled will also experience
energy density, in any nutrient, or in ingredi- muscle wasting as protein is catabolized to
ent profile. The low- carbohydrate/low- fiber meet energy needs. Currently there are two
diet contained soybean meal and corn gluten basic approaches to managing diabetes in dogs
meal, whereas the moderate- carbohydrate/ and cats: high- carbohydrate/moderate- protein
high- fiber diet contained ground corn. Corn foods or low- carbohydrate/“high- protein”
gluten meal is a high-p rotein product of corn diets. It should be noted that many diets for-
with most of the soluble carbohydrates mulated to be lower in carbohydrate and
extracted and therefore will have a lower glyce- higher in fat are not truly higher in protein
mic index compared to whole ground corn. compared to typical maintenance diets.
Soybean meal has a low glycemic index as well.
The use of carbohydrates with a lower glyce- Digestible Carbohydrates
mic index in the low- carbohydrate/low- fiber Glucose is one of the most important secreta-
diet may have also influenced the overall find- gogs of insulin in healthy subjects. Carbo-
ings of the study. hydrates that are ingested and absorbed result
Research examining the efficacy of fiber sup- in physiologic responses that are dependent
plementation in diabetes 
--- pdf page 473 ---
Diaaetes ellitts 445
ranking system for food based on its effects on pet foods and the increasing rates of obesity
blood glucose concentrations. In general, and DM in cats are frequently cited as evi-
because they are more slowly digested and dence for this theory. However, the scientific
absorbed, complex carbohydrates with more evidence about to be summarized counters
fiber (such as barley) have a lower glycemic these claims.
index than starchy foods with lower fiber Insufficient insulin secretion and impaired
(such as potatoes) or simple carbohydrates insulin sensitivity are the major abnormalities
with more mono- and disaccharides (such as of feline diabetes. The “carnivore connection”
those with fructose or sucrose). One study in paradigm hypothesizes that these abnormali-
healthy dogs looked at the glycemic response of ties are the result of long- term feeding of die-
five different starch sources: corn, wheat, bar- tary carbohydrate (Miller and Colaquiri 1994).
ley, rice, and sorghum fed at 30% of the diet on While it is true that experimentally induced
a dry matter basis for two weeks (Sunvold and hyperglycemia is detrimental to feline beta-
Bouchard 1998). Rice consumption resulted in pancreatic cells, the same is true in omnivores
the highest postprandial glycemic index of the (de- Oliveira et al. 2008; Zini et al. 2009).
five sources, sorghum the lowest. Wheat and Furthermore, hyperglycemia has not been
corn generated an intermediate response, shown to result from either the typical starch
and barley had a lower response than wheat concentrations present in commercial diets
and corn. A second study in dogs examined the (de- Oliveira et al. 2008; Laflamme et al. 2022)
glucose and insulin response in healthy dogs or even when simple sugars are fed at high
consuming extruded diets with six different concentrations (Drochner and Muller-
starch sources (cassava flour, brewers’ rice, Schlosser 1980; Kienzle 1994).
corn, sorghum, peas, or lentils) (Carciofi Due to the strong association between obesity
et al. 2008). This study reported greater imme- and the development of DM in cats, carbohy-
diate postprandial and insulin responses (area drate has been often blamed for both condi-
under the curve <30 minutes) for brewers’ rice, tions. However, epidemiologic studies report
corn, and cassava flour. A similar study exam- that obesity is associated with high-f at foods
ined the same six starch sources in extruded and not high- carbohydrate foods (Scarlett and
feline diets (de- Oliveira et al. 2008). When Donoghue 1998; Lund et al. 2005). In fact,
compared to the other five starch sources, only there are some studies that suggest that high-
corn stimulated an increase in the glucose carbohydrate, low-f at diets have an obesity-
response at 4 and 10 hours following a meal. protective effect (Michel et al. 2005; Backus
Plasma insulin concentrations increased not et al. 2010). Notably, prospective research has
only when the cats were fed the diet containing directly implicated dietary fat, not carbohy-
corn, but also those containing sorghum, peas, drate, as a risk factor for unwanted weight gain
and brewer’s rice. in neutered cats (Nguyen et al. 2004; Backus
There has been a trend recently among some et al. 2007). Exchanging dietary carbohydrate
veterinarians, animal professionals, and pet for protein does appear to be helpful for weight
owners to eschew carbohydrates as an loss and managing diabetes in some cats
unhealthful food source f
--- pdf page 474 ---
446 Nutritional Management of Endocrine Diseases
in cats (Nguyen et al. 2004; Backus et al. 2007; comparison aspect of this study, there were
McCann et al. 2007; Slingerland et al. 2009; four different products that varied in nutrient
Cave et al. 2012). profile, and conclusions with regard to specific
Recent investigations into obesity and the characteristics are not justified.
pathogenesis of DM in cats have led to the Of course, it is not possible in any study to
hypothesis that feline diabetics might have accurately assess in isolation the impacts of
improved glycemic control, or in some cases either fiber or any macronutrient, including
even revert to a nondiabetic state, when dietary digestible carbohydrate, due to the resulting
carbohydrate is restricted. However, there are changes in energy density and obligatory modi-
few data investigating this theory. Of the pub- fications in fat and/or protein. As such, studies
lished studies involving dietary interventions in are not able to draw conclusions regarding pos-
cats with DM, only four compared two or more itive or negative benefits of dietary starch con-
diets (Nelson et al. 1993, 2000; Bennett centration per se. There appears to be some
et al. 2006; Hall et al. 2009). Each study reported clear evidence that supplementation with
improvement or remission of DM for cats in insoluble fiber helps reduce the glycemic
every dietary group, and none of them tested response and may benefit diabetic patients,
the carbohydrate concentration in isolation. which may be due to the reduction in calorie
The two studies reporting that most cats density, altered gastrointestinal transit, and
appeared to benefit from a higher-f iber diet nutrient absorption, or any other factor. The
were described earlier (Nelson et al. 1993, 2000). roles of carbohydrate and protein concentra-
In the third study, also described earlier, the tions are less clear. However, some clinicians
diets tested differed in almost every way utilize low- carbohydrate/high-p rotein exclu-
(macro- and micronutrient content, fiber type sively for cats and some dogs with DM. There is
and amount, ingredients, digestibility, calorie no specific contraindication to this approach,
density, etc.), so any conclusions related to a although such diets are often higher in fat and
specific dietary difference are not possible calories. Assuming that it is not counter to the
(Bennett et al. 2006). The third published study management of any other concurrent condi-
comparing diets in cats with DM was a small tion (such as pancreatitis or hyperlipidemia),
clinical trial that enrolled 12 newly diagnosed and that the ideal weight can be achieved and
or otherwise uncontrolled patients (Hall maintained, such diets are an option for suc-
et al. 2009). Over a 10- week period, six cats cessful management of DM in dogs and cats. It
were fed the dry and/or canned versions of a seems clear that overweight or obese diabetic
therapeutic diet formulated for feline DM (one patients that lose weight also develop better
each ate only dry and canned, and four ate control, or in some cases revert to a nondiabetic
both) and six were fed both the dry and canned state. As such, weight loss to achieve an ideal
versions of an over-t he- counter adult cat food. body condition may be the most effective modi-
The therapeutic diets were higher in protein fication toward achieving better glycemic con-
and fiber, and lower in carbohydrate compared trol or, in cats, reverting
--- pdf page 475 ---
Diaaetes ellitts 447
Only when the primary disease is not con- while undergoing stabilization, as long as it is
trolled, diabetic ketoacidosis or a secondary balanced and otherwise appropriate. However,
problem develops, do these become more of a adjustments in the feeding schedule may be
concern. needed. Particularly in dogs, consistency in the
Chromium is an essential dietary trace ele- diet, amount, and timing of meals is impor-
ment involved in carbohydrate and lipid tant, so that insulin can be properly coordi-
metabolism. Chromium functions as a cofactor nated. This is likely less critical in cats, which
for insulin, and its presence is necessary for the appear to have slower gastrointestinal absorp-
cellular uptake of glucose. The effect of oral tion and do not display post-m eal hyperglyce-
chromium supplementation on glucose toler- mia (Martin and Rand 1999; De- Oliveira
ance in healthy dogs and cats has been evalu- et al. 2008). In patients that are difficult to
ated with conflicting results (Spears et al. 1998; regulate (and where a secondary disease pro-
Appleton et al. 2002). The only study done to cess has been ruled out), a diet change, either
determine the effect of oral chromium supple- to a high- fiber diet or in some patients, a low-
mentation on glycemic control in diabetic dogs carbohydrate diet may be beneficial.
did not support any beneficial or harmful If adjustments to fiber intake are desired,
effects in the dosage range of 20–60 μg/kg body this may be done by changing to a fiber-
weight (BW)/d (Schachter et al. 2001). enhanced food or adding fiber to the animal’s
current diet. Fiber can be added as a mixed
fiber source such as psyllium husk powder,
Food Type
1–3 tbsp per day, soluble fiber such as guar
Semi- moist pet foods or snacks should not be gum or wheat dextrin, 2–4 tsp per day, or insol-
fed to diabetic pets. In dogs, postprandial blood uble fiber such as wheat bran, 1–3 tbsp per day.
glucose and insulin responses were highest in Fiber supplementation should be divided
dogs fed semi- moist foods, compared to dry or equally over the daily meals. Be aware that
canned foods (Holste et al. 1989). This is most some fiber sources contain artificial sweeten-
likely due to the use of sucrose, fructose, and ers such as xylitol and should be avoided; oth-
other simple carbohydrates in many semi- ers include sucrose and add unwanted calories
moist products. Despite wide tissue expression and digestible carbohydrate. Using some
of ketohexokinase (Springer et al. 2009), cats canned food to deliver the fiber (by mixing
do not appear to metabolize fructose, which them together) can be helpful especially in
may lead to intolerance and polyuria due to cats, but care should be taken to ensure that
fructosuria (Kienzle 1994). supplemental soluble fiber has “gelled” prior
to feeding to prevent rejection of the changed
texture or even a potential choking hazard.
Feeding Recommendations and
Plain canned pumpkin can be used, but due to
Assessment
the high moisture content it contains only
Remembering that every patient is unique, the about half of the fiber per unit volume of psyl-
optimal nutritional approach to managing a lium. Pumpkin pie filling should not be
diabetic patient will vary from animal to ani- used due to its sugar content. Start at the lower
mal. It is important that the diet fed to any dia- dose and titrate up as needed (larger amounts
betic is readily and reliably consumed, so may be needed for large- or g
--- pdf page 476 ---
448 Nutritional Management of Endocrine Diseases
are also consistent with regard to treat type and Classification and Etiology
time of day offered, as well as low in calories.
Hyperlipidemic states can be classified as post-
Minimizing or avoiding treats high in digesti-
prandial, primary, or secondary. Postprandial
ble carbohydrates and fat is recommended.
hyperlipidemia is the most common hyper-
Maintenance of ideal body condition is
lipidemia in dogs and cats (Schenck and
important in patients with diabetes. In over-
Elliott 2010). This is a normal physiologic phe-
weight animals, a conservative weight loss
nomenon caused by increased circulating chy-
protocol should be considered once the initial
lomicrons. In some cases (depending upon the
medical problems are controlled. When dogs
diet and amount of fat consumed) this can per-
and cats with diabetes lose weight, glucose
sist anywhere from 7 to 12 hours after a meal
tolerance improves. Weight loss may result in
(Bauer 2004). However, even when a high-f at
enhanced tissue sensitivity to insulin, neces-
diet is consumed, serum triglycerides are not
sitating lower daily insulin requirements. As
expected to exceed 500 mg/dl in a normal ani-
a result, the patient should be carefully moni-
mal. Circulating chylomicrons carry only a
tored and insulin doses adjusted as needed.
fraction of the body’s cholesterol, so meal con-
During weight loss, frequent monitoring and
sumption has little impact on cholesterol dur-
caloric adjustment should be the norm, rather
ing the 6–12-h our postprandial period.
than the exception, in any patient with a
Primary causes of hyperlipidemia are either
disease process including diabetes (see
genetic or familial. The principal forms in
Chapter 9).
dogs and cats are idiopathic hyperlipidemia of
miniature schnauzers and hyperchylomi-
Hyperlipidemia cronemia of cats. The disease in miniature
schnauzers is characterized by excess concen-
Hyperlipidemia (also referred to as hyperli- trations of circulating very low- density lipo-
poproteinemia) is a disturbance of lipid meta- proteins (VLDL) with or without concurrent
bolism that results in an elevation in lipids in hyperchylomicronemia (Whitney et al. 1996;
the blood, particularly triglycerides (triacyl- Jaeger et al. 2003; Xenoulis et al. 2007).
glycerides) and/or cholesterol (Johnson 2005). Familial hyperlipidemia in cats is caused by
In the fasted state, hyperlipidemia is an the production of an inactive form of lipopro-
abnormal laboratory finding and is caused tein lipase (LPL), which results from a mis-
by the accelerated synthesis or reduced coding of a single amino acid; inheritance is
degradation of lipoproteins. Among dogs and autosomal recessive. Cats with this disease
cats, the most clinically relevant type of have increased fasting hyperchylomicronemia
hyperlipidemia is the finding of an excess and slight elevations in VLDL (Backus
blood concentration of triglycerides (hyper- et al. 2001).
triglyceridemia or hypertriacylglyceridemia). Secondary hyperlipidemia is associated with
Hypercholesterolemia is a state of excess cho- endocrine disorders (i.e. DM, hypot hyroidism,
lesterol in the blood. Unlike humans, most of and hyperadrenocorticism) or pancreatitis.
the cholesterol in dogs is carried on high- Hypertriglyceridemia and hypercholester-
density lipoproteins (HDL), the smallest lipo- olemia can be seen with hypothyroidism
protein (Johnson 2005). Patients with (Schenck et al. 2004). In dogs with
hyp
--- pdf page 477 ---
­yyerliyideeia 449
Hypercholesterolemia is believed to result A blood sample to confirm hypertriglyceri-
from impaired low- density lipoprotein (LDL) demia should be obtained following a 12-h our
clearance from the circulation. It is postulated fast. Serum should be submitted for analysis.
that in hypothyroid dogs an absolute deficiency Clear serum usually has a triglyceride concen-
in T3 leads to an increase in the hepatic pool tration of less than 200 mg/dl. Serum turbidity
of cholesterol. Subsequently, more cholesterol generally begins to occur between 200 and
is carried by LDL. In turn, LDL-r eceptor activ- 300 mg/dl, and lactescent serum is seen around
ity is also downregulated (Schenck 2006). 1000 mg/dl (Bauer 1995; Johnson 2005).
Activation of hormone- sensitive lipase (HSL)
by reduced insulin levels in DM causes Management and Assessment
the release of large quantities of free fatty
Every attempt should be made to determine
acids into the bloodstream (Schenck and
the underlying cause for the hyperlipidemia.
Elliott 2010). These excess free fatty acids are
Hyperlipidemia that occurs secondary to an
converted to VLDL particles by the liver and
underlying metabolic disease often improves
released back into the circulation. Additionally,
with correction or treatment of the problem
insulin deficiency reduces the production of
(Whitney 1992; Johnson 2005). Dietary treat-
LPL, resulting in the reduced clearance of tri-
ment of hyperlipidemia is a lifelong commit-
glycerides from VLDL. In hyperadrenocorti-
ment, and the importance of nutritional
cism, a similar mechanism for hyperlipidemia
management should be discussed and empha-
has been proposed (Schenck and Elliott 2010).
sized with the owner. It has been suggested
Stimulation of HSL releases free fatty acids
that triglyceride concentrations greater than
into the bloodstream; these free fatty acids are
500 mg/dl mandate treatment, even if the ani-
packaged into VLDL by the liver and sent out
mal is asymptomatic, to prevent possible com-
into the circulation. Glucocorticoids inhibit
plications (Whitney 1992; Xenoulis and
LPL activity, thereby reducing the clearance of
Steiner 2010). While primary hypercholester-
triglyceride-r ich lipoproteins.
olemia is associated with less severe complica-
tions, it is recommended that values greater
Clinical Signs and Diagnosis
than 750 mg/dl be treated (Schenck and
Clinical signs associated with hyperlipidemia Elliott 2010; Xenoulis and Steiner 2010).
are variable and can be different in every patient. Restriction of dietary fat is the foundation
Some patients have no clinical signs and are for the treatment of hypertriglyceridemia.
diagnosed on routine blood work. The most Chylomicrons are produced from fat of dietary
common clinical presentations include vomit- origin. The success of nutritional therapy is
ing (often intermittent), diarrhea, and/or highly dependent upon the veterinarian’s abil-
abdominal discomfort. Triglyceride concentra- ity to select a product that is appropriate for the
tions in excess of 1000 mg/dl have also been individual animal they are treating. One key
associated with pancreatitis, cutaneous xan- piece of information that is frequently not con-
thomas, lipemia retinalis, seizures, peripheral sidered or even obtained is the patient’s diet
nerve paralysis, and abnormal behavior history. A diet history should include not only
(Schenck and Elliott 2010). In addition, it is now the names and amounts of commercial food
well
--- pdf page 478 ---
450 Nutritional Management of Endocrine Diseases
that provides 20% of the calories or less from cholesterol concentrations were less than
fat on a metabolizable energy (ME) basis 310 mg/dl and mean triglyceride con-
(Xenoulis et al. 2020). However, in many centrations were less than 400 mg/dl) (De
patients more severe restriction is often indi- Albuquerque et al. 2021). Dogs were fed low- or
cated, sometimes as low as 10% fat ME or less. moderate-f at diets (24 or 33 g/1000 kcal, respec-
The diet history is so critical because it guides tively), and cholesterol and triglycerides were
the degree of restriction that is indicated for an satisfactorily controlled in both groups after
individual patient. For example, if the patient 90 days of fish oil supplementation that pro-
is currently consuming a diet that contains vided approximately 104 mg eicosapentaenoic
25% of the calories from fat, restricting to 20% acid (EPA) + docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)/kg
fat calories is unlikely to have a significant BW. In the veterinary literature, menhaden fish
impact. Treats should be restricted to low-f at oil has been used by some authors (220–330 mg/
treats as well. Baby carrots, rice cakes, and salt- kg BW daily) (Bauer 1995; Schenck and
free nonfat pretzels are good human food alter- Elliott 2010). It is important to remember that
natives. In addition to monitoring the fat the administration of fish oil will increase
intake, calorie intake should be carefully mon- intake of both fat and calories, which must be
itored as well. Caloric restriction is also indi- considered when assessing total dietary fat
cated in overweight patients, as excess dietary intake relative to meeting the goals for a par-
energy increases VLDL production. ticular patient.
The authors have seen many animals fed Other measures to address hyperlipidemia in
fiber- enhanced or weight-l oss foods based on veterinary patients have also been tried, includ-
the incorrect assumption that a high-f iber or ing niacin, chitosan, and high-f iber diets, as
weight- loss diet is automatically a low-f at diet. well as drugs such as HMG- CoA reductase
It is also important to also note that the dry and inhibitors and fibric acid derivatives. Niacin has
canned formulas of the same diet can be vastly been used in dogs (25–100 mg/d) to reduce tri-
different in fat content. It is important to check glyceride concentrations (Bauer 1995). It is pro-
the fat content of the diet directly from the posed to act by decreasing fatty acid release
manufacturer’s website or product guide, and from adipocytes and reducing the production of
provide clear guidelines to the client and sup- VLDL particles. It has been reported to reduce
port staff to ensure that the patient receives the serum triglyceride concentrations in dogs for
correct product. several months without any negative effects
Diets rich in omega-3 fatty acids have been (Whitney 1992; Bauer 1995; Johnson 2005).
used with some success to improve hypertri- Negative side effects of using niacin include
glyceridemia in humans and experimental ani- vomiting, diarrhea, erythema, pruritus, convul-
mals by reducing the production of VLDLs sions, and death (Chen et al. 1938; Bauer 1995;
(Illingworth et al. 1989; Froyland et al. 1995). Xenoulis and Steiner 2010).
Fish oils are poor substrates for triglyceride- One study compared the efficacy of chitosan
synthesizing enzymes and therefore are poor and the HMG- CoA reductase inhibitor
VLDL formers. In a study in

===== AVCN hepatic 318-328 =====
--- pdf page 318 ---
290 Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Diseases
Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 285 Lin, H.C., Kim, B.H., Elashoff, J.D. et al. (1992).
(1): G128–G136. Gastric emptying of solid food is most
LeBlanc, C.J., Dietrich, M.A., Horohov, potently inhibited by carbohydrate in the
D.W. et al. (2007). Effects of dietary fish oil canine distal ileum. Gastroenterology 102 (3):
and vitamin E supplementation on canine 793–801.
lymphocyte proliferation evaluated using a Lindhe, J., Hamp, S.E., and Loe, H. (1975).
flow cytometric technique. Vet. Immunol. Plaque induced periodontal disease in beagle
Immunopathol. 119 (3–4): 180–188. dogs. A 4- year clinical, roentgenographical
LeBlanc, C.J., Horohov, D.W., Bauer, J.E. et al. and histometrical study. J. Periodontal Res. 10
(2008). Effects of dietary supplementation (5): 243–255.
with fish oil on in vivo production of Lippert, A.C., Faulkner, J.E., Evans, A.T. et al.
inflammatory mediators in clinically normal (1989). Total parenteral nutrition in clinically
dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 69 (4): 486–493. normal cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 194 (5):
Lee, J.Y., Plakidas, A., Lee, W.H. et al. (2003). 669–676.
Differential modulation of Toll- like receptors Ljungmann, K., Hartmann, B., Kissmeyer-N ielsen,
by fatty acids: preferential inhibition by n- 3 P. et al. (2001). Time- dependent intestinal
polyunsaturated fatty acids. J. Lipid Res. 44 (3): adaptation and GLP-2 alterations after small
479–486. bowel resection in rats. Am. J. Physiol.
Lee, J.Y., Zhao, L., Youn, H.S. et al. (2004). Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 281 (3): G779–G785.
Saturated fatty acid activates but Lloyd, K.C. (1994). Gut hormones in gastric
polyunsaturated fatty acid inhibits Toll- like function. Baillieres Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 8
receptor 2 dimerized with Toll- like receptor 6 (1): 111–136.
or 1. J. Biol. Chem. 279 (17): 16971–16979. Logan, E.I., Finney, O., and Hefferren, J.J. (2002).
Leib, M. (2000). Treatment of chronic idiopathic Effects of a dental food on plaque
large- bowel diarrhea in dogs with a highly accumulation and gingival health in dogs.
digestible diet and soluble fiber: a J. Vet. Dent. 19 (1): 15–18.
retrospective review of 37 cases. J. Vet. Intern. Loureiro, B.A., Sembenelli, G., Maria, A.P.J. et al.
Med. 14: 27–32. (2014). Sugarcane fibre may prevent hairball
Levine, J.S., Allen, R.H., Alpers, D.H. et al. formation in cats. J. Nutr. Sci. 3: e20.
(1984). Immuno- cytochemical localization of Loureiro, B.A., Monti, M., Pedreira, R.S. et al.
the intrinsic factor- cobalamin receptor in (2017). Beet pulp intake and hairball faecal
dog- ileum: distribution of intracellular excretion in mixed- breed shorthaired cats.
receptor during cell maturation. J. Cell. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. (Berl.) 101 (Suppl
Biochem. 98 (3): 1111–1118. 1): 31–36.
Liddle, R.A. (1997). Cholecystokinin cells. Ann. Luckschander- Zeller, N., Hammer, S.E.,
Rev. Physiol. 59: 221–242. Ruetgen, B.C. et al. (2019). Clonality testing as
Lim, B.O., Lee, S.H., Park, D.K. et al. (2003). complementary tool in the assessment of
Effect of dietary pectin on the production of different patient groups with canine chronic
immunoglobulins and cytokines by enteropathy. Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol.
mesenteric lymph node lymphocytes in mouse 214: 109893.
colitis induced with dextran sulfate sodium. Luhrs, H., Gerke, T., Muller, J.G. et al. (2002).
Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 67 (8): 1706–1712. Butyrate inhibits NF- κB activation in lamina
Lin, H.C., Do
--- pdf page 319 ---
­eferences 291
characteristics of dogs and cats examined at Marks, S.L., Cook, A.K., Reader, R. et al. (1999).
private veterinary practices in the United Effects of glutamine supplementation of an
States. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 214 (9): amino acid- based purified diet on intestinal
1336–1341. mucosal integrity in cats with methotrexate-
Lupton, J.R. (1995). Butyrate and colonic induced enteritis. Am. J. Vet. Res. 60 (6):
cytokinetics: differences between in vitro and 755–763.
in vivo studies. Eur. J. Cancer Prev. 4 (5): Marks, S.L., Laflamme, D.P., and McCandlish,
373–378. A.P. (2002). Dietary trial using a commercial
Lupton, J.R. (2004). Microbial degradation hypoallergenic diet containing hydrolyzed
products influence colon cancer risk: the protein for dogs with inflammatory bowel
butyrate controversy. J. Nutr. 134 (2): 479–482. disease. Vet. Ther. 3 (2): 109–118.
Maddison, K.J., Shepherd, K.L., Hillman, Marlett, J.A. and Fischer, M.H. (2003). The active
D.R. et al. (2005). Function of the lower fraction of psyllium seed husk. Proc. Nutr. Soc.
esophageal sphincter during and after 62 (1): 207–209.
high- intensity exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. Marsilio, S. (2021). Feline chronic enteropathy.
37 (10): 1728–1733. J. Small Anim. Pract. 62: 409–419.
Magne, M.L. (1992). Pathophysiology of Marsman, K.E. and McBurney, M.I. (1995).
inflammatory bowel disease. Semin. Vet. Med. Dietary fiber increases oxidative metabolism
Surg. (Small Anim.) 7 (2): 112–116. in colonocytes but not in distal small
Maher, J.W., Crandall, V., and Woodward, intestinal enterocytes isolated from rats.
E.R. (1977). Effects of meal size on J. Nutr. 125 (2): 273–282.
postprandial lower esophageal sphincter Marsman, K.E. and McBurney, M.I. (1996).
pressure (LESP). Surg. Forum 28: 342–344. Dietary fiber and short- chain fatty acids affect
Maleki, S.J., Chung, S.Y., Champagne, E.T. et al. cell proliferation and protein synthesis in
(2000). The effects of roasting on the isolated rat colonocytes. J. Nutr. 126 (5):
allergenic properties of peanut proteins. 1429–1437.
J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 106 (4): 763–768. Marthinsen, D. and Fleming, S.E. (1982).
Maleki, S.J., Viquez, O., Jacks, T. et al. (2003). Excretion of breath and flatus gases by
The major peanut allergen, Ara h 2, functions humans consuming high- fiber diets. J. Nutr.
as a trypsin inhibitor, and roasting enhances 112 (6): 1133–1143.
this function. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 112 (1): Martin, C.J., Patrikios, J., and Dent, J. (1986).
190–195. Abolition of gas reflux and transient lower
Mandigers, P.J., Biourge, V., van den Ingh, esophageal sphincter relaxation by vagal
T.S.G.A.M. et al. (2010). A randomized, blockade in the dog. Gastroenterology 91 (4):
open- label, positively- controlled field trial of a 890–896.
hydrolyzed protein diet in dogs with chronic Martin, L., Matteson, V., and Wingfield,
small bowel enteropathy. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 24 W. (1994). Abnormalities of serum
(6): 1350–1357. magnesium in critically ill dogs: incidence
Mansfield, C.S., James, F.E., Steiner, J.M. et al. and implications. J. Vet. Emerg. Crit. Care
(2011). A pilot study to assess tolerability of 4: 15–20.
early enteral nutrition via esophagostomy Marx, F.R., Machado, G.S., Pezzali, J.G. et al.
tube feeding in dogs with severe acute (2016). Raw beef bones as chewing items to
pancreatitis. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 25: 419–425. reduce dental calculus in Beagle dogs. Aust.
Marks, S.L., Cook, A.K., Griffey, S. et al. (1997). Vet. J. 94: 18
--- pdf page 320 ---
292 Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Diseases
secretion in Guinea pig crypt cells. Mroz, Z., Jongbloed, A.W., and Kemme,
Gastroenterology 116 (6): 1342–1347. P.A. (1994). Apparent digestibility and
Mattison, C.P., Bren- Mattison, Y., Vant- Hull, retention of nutrients bound to phytate
B. et al. (2016). Heat- induced alterations in complexes as influenced by microbial phytase
cashew allergen solubility and IgE binding. and feeding regimen in pigs. J. Anim. Sci. 72
Toxicol. Rep. 3: 244–251. (1): 126–132.
Mayer, K., Meyer, S., Reinholz- Muhly, M. et al. Mu, H. and Hoy, C.E. (2000). Effects of different
(2003). Shorttime infusion of fish oil- based medium- chain fatty acids on intestinal
lipid emulsions, approved for parenteral absorption of structured triacylglycerols.
nutrition, reduces monocyte proinflammatory Lipids 35 (1): 83–89.
cytokine generation and adhesive interaction Muller- Lissner, S.A. (1988). Effect of wheat bran
with endothelium in humans. J. Immunol. 171 on weight of stool and gastrointestinal transit
(9): 4837–4843. time: a meta analysis. Br. Med. J. (Clin. Res.
McBurney, M.I. (1991). Potential water- holding Ed.) 296 (6622): 615–617.
capacity and short- chain fatty acid production Nebel, O.T. and Castell, D.O. (1973). Inhibition
from purified fiber sources in a fecal of the lower oesophageal sphincter by fat – a
incubation system. Nutrition 7 (6): 421–424. mechanism for fatty food intolerance. Gut 14
McKay, L.F., Eastwood, M.A., and Brydon, (4): 270–274.
W.G. (1985). Methane excretion in man—a study Nelson, R.W., Dimperio, M.E., and Long,
of breath, flatus, and faeces. Gut 26 (1): 69–74. G.G. (1984). Lymphocytic- plasmacytic colitis
McManus, C.M., Michel, K.E., Simon, D.M. et al. in the cat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 184 (9):
(2002). Effect of short- chain fatty acids on 1133–1135.
contraction of smooth muscle in the canine Nelson, R.W., Stookey, L.J., and Kazacos,
colon. Am. J. Vet. Res. 63 (2): 295–300. E. (1988). Nutritional management of
McNally, E.F., Kelly, J.E. Jr., and Ingelfinger, idiopathic chronic colitis in the dog. J. Vet.
F.J. (1964). Mechanism of belching: effects of Intern. Med. 2 (3): 133–137.
gastric distension with air. Gastroenterology Nemeth, T., Solymosi, N., and Balka, G. (2008).
46: 254–259. Long- term results of subtotal colectomy for
Meyer, J.H., Elashoff, J.D., Domeck, M. et al. acquired hypertrophic megacolon in eight
(1994). Control of canine gastric emptying of dogs. J. Small Anim. Pract. 12: 618–624.
fat by lipolytic products. Am. J. Physiol. 266 Newsholme, P., Gordon, S., and Newsholme,
(6 Pt 1): G1017–G1035. E.A. (1987). Rates of utilization and fates of
Mohr, A.J., Leisewitz, A.L., Jacobson, L.S. et al. glucose, glutamine, pyruvate, fatty acids and
(2003). Effect of early enteral nutrition on ketone bodies by mouse macrophages.
intestinal permeability, intestinal protein loss, Biochem. J. 242 (3): 631–636.
and outcome in dogs with severe parvoviral Oba, P.M., Utterback, P.L., Parsons, C.M. et al.
enteritis. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 17 (6): 791–798. (2019). Chemical composition, true nutrient
Moreau, N.M., Martin, L.J., Toquet, C.S. et al. digestibility, and true metabolizable energy of
(2003). Restoration of the integrity of rat chicken- based ingredients differing by
caeco- colonic mucosa by resistant starch, but processing method using the precision- fed
not by fructo- oligosaccharides, in dextran cecectomized rooster assay. J. Anim. Sci. 97
sulfate sodium- induced experimental col
--- pdf page 321 ---
­eferences 293
Olson, N.C. and Zimmer, J.F. (1978). Protein- gastro- oesophageal reflux in healthy subjects.
losing enteropathy secondary to intestinal Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 15 (2): 233–239.
lymphangiectasia in a dog. J. Am. Vet. Med. Perkins, N.D. (2007). Integrating cell- signalling
Assoc. 173 (3): 271–274. pathways with NF- kappaB and IKK function.
Ontsouka, C.E., Burgener, I.A., Mani, O., and Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8 (1): 49–62.
Albrecht, C. (2010). Polyunsaturated fatty Perner, A. and Rask- Madsen, J. (1999). Review
acid- enriched diets used for the treatment of article: the potential role of nitric oxide in
canine chronic enteropathies decrease the chronic inflammatory bowel disorders.
abundance of selected genes of cholesterol Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 13 (2): 135–144.
homeostasis. Domest. Anim. Endocrinol. 38 Pilla, R., Guard, B.C., Steiner, J.M. et al. (2019).
(1): 32–37. Administration of a synbiotic containing
Paquette, D.W., Waters, G.S., Stefanidou, enterococcus faecium does not significantly
V.L. et al. (1997). Inhibition of experimental alter fecal microbiota richness or diversity in
gingivitis in beagle dogs with topical dogs with and without food- responsive
salivary histatins. J. Clin. Periodontol. 24 (4): chronic enteropathy. Front. Vet. Sci. 6: 277.
216–222. Pimentel, M., Mayer, A.G., Park, S. et al. (2003).
Passos, M.C., Serra, J., Azpiroz, F. et al. (2005). Methane production during lactulose breath
Impaired reflex control of intestinal gas transit test is associated with gastrointestinal disease
in patients with abdominal bloating. Gut 54 presentation. Dig. Dis. Sci. 48 (1): 86–92.
(3): 344–348. Pimentel, M., Lin, H.C., Enayati, P. et al. (2006).
Paterson, S. (1995). Food hypersensitivity in 20 Methane, a gas produced by enteric bacteria,
dogs with skin and gastrointestinal signs. slows intestinal transit and augments small
J. Small Anim. Pract. 36 (12): 529–534. intestinal contractile activity. Am. J. Physiol.
Patrikios, J., Martin, C.J., and Dent, J. (1986). Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 290 (6):
Relationship of transient lower esophageal G1089–G1095.
sphincter relaxation to postprandial Poksay, K.S. and Schneeman, B.O. (1983).
gastroesophageal reflux and belching in dogs. Pancreatic and intestinal response to dietary
Gastroenterology 90 (3): 545–551. guar gum in rats. J. Nutr. 113 (8): 1544–1549.
Patz, J., Jacobsohn, W.Z., Gottschalk- Sabag, Poley, J.R. and Hofmann, A.F. (1976). Role of fat
S. et al. (1996). Treatment of refractory distal maldigestion in pathogenesis of steatorrhea in
ulcerative colitis with short chain fatty acid ileal resection. Fat digestion after two
enemas. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 91 (4): 731–734. sequential test meals with and without
Pavlick, K.P., Laroux, F.S., Fuseler, J. et al. cholestyramine. Gastroenterology 71
(2002). Role of reactive metabolites of oxygen (1): 38–44.
and nitrogen in inflammatory bowel disease. Preiser, J.C., Peres- Bota, D., Eisendrath, P. et al.
Free Radic. Biol. Med. 33 (3): 311–322. (2003). Gut mucosal and plasma
Pearson, M., Teahon, K., Levi, A.J. et al. (1993). concentrations of glutamine: a comparison
Food intolerance and Crohn’s disease. Gut 34 between two enriched enteral feeding
(6): 783–787. solutions in critically ill patients. Nutr.
Pehl, C., Waizenhoefer, A., Wendl, B. et al. J. 2: 13.
(1999). Effect of low and high fat meals on Ramakrishna, B.S., Mathan, M., and Mathan,
lower esophageal sphincter motility and V.I. (1994). Alteration of colonic ab
--- pdf page 322 ---
294 Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Diseases
gingivitis in the dog. J. Small Anim. Pract. 38 nonspecific dietary sensitivity. Am. J. Vet. Res.
(4): 147–151. 63 (4): 617–622.
Rawlings, J.M., Gorrel, C., and Markwell, Romagnani, S. (2004). The increased prevalence
P.J. (1998). Effect on canine oral health of of allergy and the hygiene hypothesis: missing
adding chlorhexidine to a dental hygiene immune deviation, reduced immune
chew. J. Vet. Dent. 15 (3): 129–134. suppression, or both? Immunology 112 (3):
Reddy, B.S., Engle, A., Simi, B. et al. (1992). 352–363.
Effect of dietary fiber on colonic bacterial Rondeau, M.P., Meltzer, K., Michel, K.E. et al.
enzymes and bile acids in relation to colon (2003). Short chain fatty acids stimulate feline
cancer. Gastroenterology 102 (5): 1475–1482. colonic smooth muscle contraction. J. Feline
Reed, N., Gunn- Moore, D., and Simpson, Med. Surg. 5 (3): 167–173.
K. (2007). Cobalamin, folate and inorganic Rose, L., Rose, J., Gosling, S. et al. (2017).
phosphate abnormalities in ill cats. J. Feline Efficacy of a probiotic- prebiotic supplement
Med. Surg. 9 (4): 278–288. on incidence of diarrhea in a dog shelter: a
Rehfeld, J.F., Friis- Hansen, L., Goetze, J.P. et al. randomized, double- blind, Placebo controlled
(2007). The biology of cholecystokinin and trial. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 31 (2): 377–382.
gastrin peptides. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 7 (12): Rossi, G., Cerquetella, M., Gavazza, A. et al.
1154–1165. (2020). Rapid resolution of large bowel
Reidelberger, R.D., Hernandez, J., Fritzsch, diarrhea after the administration of a
B. et al. (2004). Abdominal vagal mediation of combination of a high- fiber diet and a
the satiety effects of CCK in rats. Am. probiotic mixture in dogs. Vet. Sci. 7 (1): 21.
J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 286 (6): Roth, J.A., Frankel, W.L., Zhang, W. et al. (1995).
R1005–R1012. Pectin improves colonic function in rat short
Reimund, J.M., Hirth, C., Koehl, C. et al. (2000). bowel syndrome. J. Surg. Res. 58 (2): 240–246.
Antioxidant and immune status in active Ruaux, C.G., Steiner, J.M., and Williams,
Crohn’s disease. A possible relationship. Clin. D.A. (2005). Early biochemical and clinical
Nutr. 19 (1): 43–48. responses to cobalamin supplementation in
Reinhart, G.A. and Vaughn, D.M. (1995). Dietary cats with signs of gastrointestinal disease and
Fatty Acid Ratios and Tissue Fatty Acid severe hypocobalaminemia. J. Vet. Intern. Med.
Content. Lake Buena Vista, FL: InnoPet. 19 (2): 155–160.
Renegar, K.B., Johnson, C.D., Dewitt, R.C. et al. Rudinsky, A.J., Rowe, J.C., and Parker,
(2001). Impairment of mucosal immunity by V.J. (2018). Nutritional management of
total parenteral nutrition: requirement for IgA chronic enteropathies in dogs and cats. J. Am.
in murine nasotracheal antiinfluenza Vet. Med. Assoc. 253 (5): 570–578.
immunity. J. Immunol. 166 (2): 819–825. Russell, J. and Bass, P. (1985). Canine gastric
Reynolds, R.P. and Effer, G.W. (1988). The effect emptying of fiber meals: influence of meal
of differential vagal nerve cooling on feline viscosity and antroduodenal motility. Am.
esophageal function. Clin. Invest. Med. 11 (6): J. Physiol. 249 (6 Pt 1): G662–G667.
452–456. Rutgers, H.C., Batt, R.M., Elwood, C.M. et al.
Ristic, J.M. and Stidworthy, M.R. (2002). Two (1995). Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
cases of severe iron- deficiency anaemia due to in dogs with chronic intestinal disease. J. Am.
inflammatory bowel disease in the dog. Vet. Med. Assoc. 206 
--- pdf page 323 ---
­eferences 295
Saker, K.E., Eddy, A.L., Thatcher, C.D. et al. Simpson, K.W., Fyfe, J., Cornetta, A. et al. (2001).
(1998). Manipulation of dietary (n- 6) and Subnormal concentrations of serum
(n- 3) fatty acids alters platelet function in cats. cobalamin (vitamin B12) in cats with
J. Nutr. 128 (12 Suppl): 2645S–2647S. gastrointestinal disease. J. Vet. Intern. Med.
Salvia, G., Vizia, B., Manguso, F. et al. (2001). 15: 26–32.
Effect of intragastric volume and osmolality Simpson, J.M., Martineau, B., Jones, W.E. et al.
on mechanisms of gastroesophageal reflux in (2002). Characterization of fecal bacterial
children with gastroesophageal reflux disease. populations in canines: effects of age, breed
Am. J. Gastroenterol. 96: 1725–1732. and dietary fiber. Microb. Ecol. 44 (2):
Salvioli, B., Serra, J., Azpiroz, F. et al. (2005). Origin 186–197.
of gas retention and symptoms in patients with Sparkes, A.H., Papasouliotis, K., Sunvold,
bloating. Gastroenterology 128 (3): 574–579. G. et al. (1998a). Bacterial flora in the
Sang, Q. and Goyal, R.K. (2000). Lower duodenum of healthy cats, and effect of
esophageal sphincter relaxation and activation dietary supplementation with fructo-
of medullary neurons by subdiaphragmatic oligosaccharides. Am. J. Vet. Res. 59 (4):
vagal stimulation in the mouse. 431–435.
Gastroenterology 119 (6): 1600–1609. Sparkes, A.H., Papasouliotis, K., Sunvold,
Sangild, P.T., Tappenden, K.A., Malo, C. et al. G. et al. (1998b). Effect of dietary
(2006). Glucagon- like peptide 2 stimulates supplementation with fructooligosaccharides
intestinal nutrient absorption in parenterally on fecal flora of healthy cats. Am. J. Vet. Res.
fed newborn pigs. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. 59 (4): 436–440.
Nutr. 43 (2): 160–167. Stechmiller, J.K., Childress, B., and Porter,
Sarna, S.K. and Lang, I.M. (1989). Colonic motor T. (2004). Arginine immunonutrition in
response to a meal in dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 257 critically ill patients: a clinical dilemma. Am.
(5 Pt 1): G830–G835. J. Crit. Care 13 (1): 17–23.
Schrezenmeir, J. and de Vrese, M. (2001). Steenkamp, G. and Gorrel, C. (1999). Oral and
Probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics – dental conditions in adult African wild dog
approaching a definition. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 73 skulls: Apreliminary report. J. Vet. Dent. 16
(2 Suppl): 361S–364S. (2): 65–68.
Scott, J., Berry, M.R., Gunn, D.L. et al. (1990). Stookey, G.K., Warrick, J.M., and Miller,
The effects of a liquid diet on initial and L.L. (1995). Effect of sodium
sustained, stimulated parotid salivary hexametaphosphate on dental calculus
secretion and on parotid structure in the rat. formation in dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 56 (7):
Arch. Oral Biol. 35 (7): 509–514. 913–918.
Sethi, A.K. and Sarna, S.K. (1991). Colonic motor Straathof, J.W., Ringers, J., Lamers, C.B. et al.
response to a meal in acute colitis. (2001). Provocation of transient lower
Gastroenterology 101: 1537–1546. esophageal sphincter relaxations by gastric
Shi, X.Z. and Sarna, S.K. (2004). G protein- distension with air. Am. J. Vet. Gastroenterol.
mediated dysfunction of excitation- 96 (8): 2317–2323.
contraction coupling in ileal inflammation. Straathof, J.W., van Veen, M.M., and Masclee,
Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 286 A.A. (2002). Provocation of transient lower
(6): G899–G905. esophageal sphincter relaxations during
Sifrim, D., Silny, J., Holloway, R.H. et al. (1999). continuous gastric distension. Scand.
Patterns of gas and liquid reflux during J. Gastroenterol. 37 (
--- pdf page 324 ---
296 Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Diseases
pressure in the dog. Am. J. Vet. Res. 46 (8): Thomas, R.P., Hellmich, M.R., Townsend, C.M. Jr.
1684–1690. et al. (2003). Role of gastrointestinal hormones
Strombeck, D.R., Turner, W.D., and Harrold, in the proliferation of normal and neoplastic
D. (1988). Eructation of gas through the tissues. Endocr. Rev. 24 (5): 571–599.
gastroesophageal sphincter before and after Thor, P.J., Copeland, E.M., Dudrick, S.J. et al.
gastric fundectomy in dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 49 (1977). Effect of long- term parenteral feeding
(1): 87–89. on gastric secretion in dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 232
Studer, E. and Stapley, R.B. (1973). The role of (1): E39–E43.
dry foods in maintaining healthy teeth and Tolbert, M.K., Murphy, M., Gaylord, L., and
gums in the cat. Vet. Med. Small Anim. Clin. Witzel- Rollins, A. (2022). Dietary
68 (10): 1124–1126. management of chronic enteropathy in dogs.
Sturniolo, G.C., Di, L., Ferronato, A. et al. (2001). J. Small Anim. Pract. 63: 425–434.
Zinc supplementation tightens “leaky gut” in Toll, J., Erb, H., Birnbaum, N. et al. (2002).
Crohn’s disease. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 7 Prevalence and incidence of serum
(2): 94–98. magnesium abnormalities in hospitalized cats.
Suchner, U., Heyland, D.K., and Peter, K. (2002). J. Vet. Intern. Med. 16 (3): 217–221.
Immune- modulatory actions of arginine in Tomlin, J., Lowis, C., and Read, N.W. (1991).
the critically ill. Br. J. Nutr. 87 (Suppl 1): Investigation of normal flatus production in
S121–S132. healthy volunteers. Gut 32 (6): 665–669.
Sunvold, G.D., Hussein, H.S., Fahey, G.C. Jr. Toresson, L., Steiner, J.M., Olmedal, G. et al.
et al. (1995). in vitro fermentation of cellulose, (2017). Oral cobalamin supplementation in
beet pulp, citrus pulp, and citrus pectin using cats with hypocobalaminaemia: a
fecal inoculum from cats, dogs, horses, retrospective study. J. Feline Med. Surg. 19
humans, and pigs and ruminal fluid from (12): 1302–1306.
cattle. J. Anim. Sci. 73 (12): 3639–3648. Toresson, L., Steiner, J.M., Razdan, P. et al.
Takagi, T., Naito, Y., Tomatsuri, N. et al. (2002). (2018). Comparison of efficacy of oral and
Pioglitazone, a PPAR- gamma ligand, provides parenteral cobalamin supplementation in
protection from dextran sulfate sodium- normalising low cobalamin concentrations in
induced colitis in mice in association with dogs: a randomised controlled study. Vet.
inhibition of the NF- kappaB- cytokine J. 232: 27–32.
cascade. Redox Rep. 7 (5): 283–289. Tremolaterra, F., Villoria, A., Serra, J. et al.
Tams, T.R. (1993). Feline inflammatory bowel (2006). Intestinal tone and gas motion.
disease. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 18 (10): 905–910.
Pract. 23 (3): 569–586. Tromp, J.A., Jansen, J., and Pilot, T. (1986).
Tan, B.J. and Diamant, N.E. (1987). Assessment Gingival health and frequency of tooth
of the neural defect in a dog with idiopathic brushing in the beagle dog model. Clinical
megaesophagus. Dig. Dis. Sci. 32 (1): 76–85. findings. J. Clin. Periodontol. 13 (2): 164–168.
Tanaka, M., Hanioka, T., Kishimoto, M. et al. Vaden, S.L., Hammerberg, B., Davenport,
(1998). Effect of mechanical toothbrush D.J. et al. (2000). Food hypersensitivity
stimulation on gingival microcirculatory reactions in soft coated wheaten terriers with
functions in inflamed gingiva of dogs. J. Clin. protein- losing enteropathy or protein- losing
Periodontol. 25 (7): 561–565. nephropathy or both: gastroscopic food
Tenenhaus, M., Hansbrou
--- pdf page 325 ---
­eferences 297
yeast and bacteria in Crohn’s disease. Aliment. Virag, L., Szabo, E., Gergely, P. et al. (2003).
Pharmacol. Ther. 15 (10): 1647–1653. Peroxynitrite- induced cytotoxicity:
Van Den, B.J., Cahill, J., Emmanuel, A.V. et al. mechanism and opportunities for
(2002). Gut mucosal response to food antigens intervention. Toxicol. Lett. 140–141: 113–124.
in Crohn’s disease. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. Wander, R.C., Hall, J.A., Gradin, J.L. et al.
16 (11): 1903–1915. (1997). The ratio of dietary (n- 6) to (n- 3) fatty
Van Geffen, C., Saunders, J.H., Vandevelde, acids influences immune system function,
B. et al. (2006). Idiopathic megaoesophagus eicosanoid metabolism, lipid peroxidation and
and intermittent gastrooesophageal vitamin E status in aged dogs. J. Nutr. 127 (6):
intussusception in a cat. J. Small Anim. Pract. 1198–1205.
47: 471–475. Wang, S., Martins, R., Sullivan, M.C. et al.
Velasco, N., Hernandez, G., Wainstein, C. et al. (2019). Diet- induced remission in chronic
(2001). Influence of polymeric enteral enteropathy is associated with altered
nutrition supplemented with different doses microbial community structure and synthesis
of glutamine on gut permeability in critically of secondary bile acids. Microbiome 7: 126.
ill patients. Nutrition 17 (11–12): 907–911. Ward, P.B. and Young, G.P. (1997). Dynamics of
Venkatraman, A., Ramakrishna, B.S., Shaji, Clostridium difficile infection. Control using
R.V. et al. (2003). Amelioration of dextran diet. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 412: 63–75.
sulfate colitis by butyrate: role of heat shock Warrell, D.A., Fawcett, I.W., Harrison, B.D. et al.
protein 70 and NF- κB. Am. J. Physiol. (1975). Bronchial asthma in the Nigerian
Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 285 (1): savanna region. A clinical and laboratory
G177–G184. study of 106 patients with a review of the
Verbrugghe, A., Hesta, M., Daminet, S. et al. literature on asthma in the tropics. Quar.
(2012). Propionate absorbed from the colon J. Med. 44 (174): 325–347.
acts as gluconeogenic substrate in a strict Wasmer, M.L., Willard, M.D., Helman, R.G. et al.
carnivore, the domestic cat (Felis catus). (1995). Food intolerance mimicking
J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. (Berl.) 96 (6): alimentary lymphosarcoma. J. Am. Anim.
1054–1064. Hosp. Assoc. 31 (6): 463–466.
Verstraete, F.J., van Aarde, R.J., Nieuwoudt, Weatherill, A.R., Lee, J.Y., Zhao, L. et al. (2005).
B.A. et al. (1996). The dental pathology of Saturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids
feral cats on Marion Island, part II: reciprocally modulate dendritic cell functions
periodontitis, external odontoclastic mediated through TLR4. J. Immunol. 174 (9):
resorption lesions and mandibular thickening. 5390–5397.
J. Comp. Pathol. 115 (3): 283–297. Weese, J.S. and Arroyo, L. (2003). Bacteriological
Vickers, R.J., Sunvold, G.D., Kelley, R.L. et al. evaluation of dog and cat diets that claim to
(2001). Comparison of fermentation of contain probiotics. Can. Vet. J. 44 (3): 212–216.
selected fructooligosaccharides and other fiber Wehr, U., Elsbett, K., and Krammer, S. (2005).
substrates by canine colonic microflora. Am. Effects of stable vitamin C (STAY- C 50) on
J. Vet. Res. 62 (4): 609–615. oral health in cats. 2004 Nestle Purina
Videla, S., Vilaseca, J., Antolin, M. et al. (2001). Nutrition Forum Proceedings: A Supplement to
Dietary inulin improves distal colitis induced Compendium for Continuing Education for
by dextran sodium sulfate in the rat. Am. Veterinarians 27 (3A): 76.
J. Gastroenterol. 96 (5): 148
--- pdf page 326 ---
298 Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Diseases
Wichert, B., Schuster, S., Hofmann, M. et al. on proliferation of gingival cells and
(2002). Influence of different cellulose types collagen synthesis. J. Clin. Periodontol.
on feces quality of dogs. J. Nutr. 132 (6 Suppl 31 (1): 40–44.
2): 1728S–1729S. Yamka, R.M., Harmon, D.L., Schoenherr,
Wikingsson, L. and Sjoholm, I. (2002). Polyacryl W.D. et al. (2006). in vivo measurement of
starch microparticles as adjuvant in oral flatulence and nutrient digestibility in dogs
immunisation, inducing mucosal and fed poultry by- product meal, conventional
systemic immune responses in mice. Vaccine soybean meal, and low- oligosaccharide
20 (27–28): 3355–3363. low- phytate soybean meal. Am. J. Vet. Res. 67
Wilcock, B. (1992). Endoscopic biopsy interpretation (1): 88–94.
in canine or feline enterocolitis. Semin. Vet. Med. Yanoff, S.R., Willard, M.D., Boothe, H.W. et al.
Surg. (Small Anim.) 7 (2): 162–171. (1992). Short- bowel syndrome in four dogs.
Wildi, S.M., Tutuian, R., and Castell, D.O. (2004). Vet. Surg. 21 (3): 217–222.
The influence of rapid food intake on Yazdanbakhsh, M., Kremsner, P.G., and van Ree,
postprandial reflux: studies in healthy volunteers. R. (2002). Allergy, parasites, and the hygiene
Am. J. Gastroenterol. 99 (9): 1645–1651. hypothesis. Science 296 (5567): 490–494.
Will, K., Nolte, I., and Zentek, J. (2005). Early Yeh, C.K., Johnson, D.A., Dodds, M.W. et al.
enteral nutrition in young dogs suffering from (2000). Association of salivary flow rates with
hemorrhagic gastroenteritis. J. Vet. Med. A maximal bite force. J. Dent. Res. 79 (8):
Physiol. Pathol. Clin. Med. 52 (7): 371–376. 1560–1565.
Willard, M.D., Simpson, R.B., Delles, E.K. et al. Yin, L., Laevsky, G., and Giardina, C. (2001).
(1994). Effects of dietary supplementation of Butyrate suppression of colonocyte NF- κB
fructo- oligosaccharides on small intestinal activation and cellular proteasome activity.
bacterial overgrowth in dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. J. Biol. Chem. 276 (48): 44641–44646.
55 (5): 654–659. Zentek, J., Hall, E.J., German, A. et al. (2002).
Winter, T.A. (2006). The effects of Morphology and immunopathology of the
undernutrition and refeeding on metabolism small and large intestine in dogs with
and digestive function. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. nonspecific dietary sensitivity. J. Nutr. 132 (6):
Metab. Care 9 (5): 596–602. 1652S–1654S.
Wojdemann, M., Wettergren, A., Hartmann, Zentek, J., Fricke, S., Hewicker- Trautwein,
B. et al. (1998). Glucagon- like peptide- 2 M. et al. (2004). Dietary protein source and
inhibits centrally induced antral motility in manufacturing processes affect macronutrient
pigs. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 33 (8): 828–832. digestibility, fecal consistency, and presence of
Wood, H.O. (1944). The surface area of the fecal Clostridium perfringens in adult dogs.
intestinal mucosa oin the rat and in the cat. J. Nutr. 134: 2158S–2161S.
J. Anat. 78: 103–105. Ziegler, T.R., Evans, M.E., Fernandez- Estivariz,
Wyman, J.B., Dent, J., Heddle, R. et al. (1990). C. et al. (2003). Trophic and cytoprotective
Control of belching by the lower oesophageal nutrition for intestinal adaptation, mucosal
sphincter. Gut 31 (6): 639–646. repair, and barrier function. Annu. Rev. Nutr.
Xia, Y. and Zweier, J.L. (1997). Superoxide and 23: 229–261.
peroxynitrite generation from inducible nitric Zijlstra, R.T., Donovan, S.M., Odle, J. et al.
oxide synthase in macrophages. Proc. Natl. (1997). Protein- energy malnutrition
--- pdf page 327 ---
299
12
Nutritional Management of Exocrine Pancreatic Diseases
Cecilia Villaverde and Marta Hervera
The main function of the exocrine pancreas is system. The gastric phase is mediated by gas-
to synthesize and secrete substances to allow trin, a hormone released in response to gas-
for the proper digestion and absorption of tric distention and the presence of nutrients
food. The pancreas synthesizes and secretes (such as protein). The intestinal phase is
digestive enzymes that break down protein, mediated by cholecystokinin (CCK) and
fat, and carbohydrates into their smaller, secretin (also gastrin and vasoactive intesti-
absorbable components. These enzymes are nal peptide), which are hormones synthe-
secreted as inactive zymogens, which are kept sized by the intestinal mucosa. Secretin
separate from lysosomes in the pancreatic release is stimulated by the presence of acid
tissue to avoid premature activation. Other in the intestine and intraluminal fatty acids
protection mechanisms include pancreatic (Watanabe et al. 1986). CCK secretion is stim-
trypsin inhibitors present in pancreatic juice ulated by amino acids, acidic pH, and long-
(which can inactivate free trypsin) and chain fatty acids (Figure 12.1). CCK not only
antiproteases present in plasma (such as alpha- stimulates pancreatic secretion, it also results
macroglobulin) that capture proteases that in delayed gastric emptying and voiding of
escape into circulation (Mansfield and the gall bladder.
Jones 2001). The relative potency of different nutrients to
The pancreas also secretes bicarbonate, to stimulate CCK secretion seems to be species
reach optimal pH in the small intestine for specific. In humans, amino acids, protein, and
enzyme activity; intrinsic factor, to allow long- chain triglycerides are more effective
absorption of vitamin B12; and bacteriostatic than carbohydrates (Karhunen et al. 2008). In
substances, to prevent bacterial proliferation dogs, fatty acids (Sun et al. 1992), amino acids,
in the small intestine. and peptides stimulate CCK release, but intact
Diet plays an important role in regulating proteins do not (Meyer and Kelly 1976). Cats
pancreatic secretion (Strombeck 1996). A secrete CCK in response to long- chain triglyc-
complex system involving the nervous and erides and proteins (Backus et al. 1995).
endocrine systems is responsible for pancre- Although amino acids also stimulate CCK
atic secretion regulation. The cephalic phase release in the cat, intact protein is more potent
is mediated by the autonomous nervous (Backus et al. 1997).
Applied Veterinary Clinical Nutrition, Second Edition. Edited by Andrea J. Fascetti,
Sean J. Delaney, Jennifer A. Larsen, and Cecilia Villaverde.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
--- pdf page 328 ---
300 Nutritional Management of Exocrine Pancreatic Diseases
Fat
Protein Carbohydrate
Sugars
Amino
acids and Long-
peptides chain
fatty
acids
Cholecystokinin Pancreatic secretion
Intestine
Figure 12.1 Response of cholecystokinin secretion by intestinal mucosal cells to different macronutrients
in the small intestinal lumen.
Pancreatitis The differentiation is based on histopathol-
ogy and not on clinical signs, although in vet-
Pancreatitis is defined as inflammation of the erinary medicine pancreatic biopsies are not
pancreas, but also includes disorders that commonly collected. Canine acute pancreatitis
involve necrosis or fibrosis (Xenoulis 2015). does not just tend to have sudden onset, but
Currently there is no standardized classifica- also is accompanied by severe clinical signs
tion of the disease in veterinary medicine. One and is often associated with systemic compli-
way of classification is to extrapolate from cations. Canine chronic pancreatitis has
human medicine as acute or chronic (Steiner milder clinical signs and a more insidious
and Williams 1999; Williams and Steiner 2005). course. This is less true in cats, where a study
Acute pancreatitis refers to inflammation that has shown that there is poor correlation
completely resolves with removal of the incit- between clinical signs and histopathology
ing cause, whereas chronic pancreatitis is findings (Ferreri et al. 2003). Histopatho-
characterized by irreversible histopathologic logically, chronic pancreatitis is the most
changes in the pancreas (such as fibrosis and common form of the disease in cats (De Cock
atrophy). et al. 2007).

===== AVCN cardiac 458-468 =====
--- pdf page 458 ---
430 Nutritional Management of Lower Urinary Tract Disease
Occasionally, uroliths may be composed of (Lulich and Osborne 1992; Bartges 2000;
more than one mineral. Most commonly, cal- Adams et al. 2008; Lulich et al. 2009;
cium phosphate apatite or ammonium urate Williams 2009).
may be mixed with struvite when induced by a
urease-p roducing microbial urinary tract infec-
Matrix- Crystalline Urethral Plugs
tion. These minerals become incorporated into
the struvite urolith, because ammonium ions Figure 16.18 shows a matrix- crystalline ure-
produced from the metabolism of urea by thral plug.
microbial urease combine with uric acid, and Urethral matrix- crystalline plugs occur in
carbonate produced from the metabolism of approximately 20% of male cats under 10 years
urea by microbial urease combines with cal- of age that present with obstructive lower uri-
cium and phosphorus in alkaluria (Osborne nary tract disease (Kruger et al. 1991). Urethral
et al. 1999b). Medical dissolution of these uro- plugs have only been observed to occur in male
liths is possible following protocols for dissolu- cats. They are composed of at least 45–50%
tion of infection-i nduced uroliths. Direct matrix (see later for typical matrix composi-
preventive measures are toward controlling the tion) and variable amounts of mineral; they
causative bacterial urinary tract infection. may be composed entirely of matrix (Osborne
Compound uroliths also form when a uro- et al. 2003). Struvite is the most common min-
lith of one mineral forms and a different min- eral found in urethral plugs (84% of all miner-
eral precipitates around the first mineral. This als found in plugs) (Osborne et al. 2009).
occurs most commonly when a calcium oxa- Multiple factors are thought to be associated
late urolith forms and a secondary urinary with urethral plug formation. If a mineral is
tract infection with a microbe that produces present in the urethral plug, then risk factors
urease develops, resulting in struvite forming associated with that crystal formation, as dis-
around the calcium oxalate urolith. Calcium cussed previously, are involved, at least in part.
oxalate uroliths must be removed physically as Compared with uroliths, urethral plugs con-
they cannot be dissolved, and preventive meas- tain large quantities of matrix. Components of
ures are directed toward prevention of calcium matrix that may be important in urethral plug
oxalate formation. formation include Tamm–Horsfall mucopro-
tein, serum proteins, cellular debris, and
Surgically and Minimally Invasive
Management of Uroliths
Although some uroliths, such as struvite,
urate, and cystine, may be dissolved medically,
others, such as calcium oxalate and compound
uroliths with calcium oxalate nidus or core, are
not amenable to medical dissolution. Even
with uroliths composed of minerals that may
be dissolved medically, sometimes it is more
desirable to physically remove the uroliths.
Physical removal of uroliths may be done by
surgery (e.g. cystotomy, urethrotomy, and/or
urethrostomy) or by minimally invasive tech-
Figure 16.18 Matrix- crystalline urethral plug
niques (e.g. catheter- assisted retrieval, voiding
expressed from the distal urethra of a 6- year- old
urohydropropulsion, cystoscopic removal, castrated male domestic shorthair cat with urethral
and/or cystoscopy with laser lithotripsy) obstruction.
--- pdf page 459 ---
­dropathraCrstrtrs 431
virus- like particles (Kruger and Osborne 1990; prospective study of cats with idiopathic cysti-
Osborne et al. 1996b). tis, recurrence of clinical signs occurred in 11%
Management of urethral matrix- crystalline of cats that consumed a canned/retorted food
plugs involves relieving the obstructive uropa- when compared with 39% of cats consuming a
thy (Osborne et al. 1996a). Modifying urine dry/extruded food (Markwell et al. 1999). The
composition by feeding a therapeutic diet may diets evaluated in this study were acidifying
be beneficial if minerals are present in the ure- and formulated to prevent struvite crystalluria
thral plug. Increasing urine volume may help and urolithiasis. In another study, clinical
to decrease the concentration of minerals and improvement and decreased recurrence of
matrix components in urine. Successful pre- clinical signs in cats with idiopathic cystitis
vention of recurrent urethral obstruction by were associated with the feeding of canned
utilizing diets designed to reduce urine pH and foods (Gunn-M oore and Shenoy 2004). The
urine magnesium and phosphorus concentra- findings of these studies have resulted in the
tions has been reported (Osborne et al. 1991). recommendation to feed canned food to cats
Perineal urethrostomy may be considered in with idiopathic cystitis; however, these studies
cats with recurrent urethral plug formation; were not randomized controlled trials.
however, it is associated with complications, Furthermore, specific dietary ingredients have
including recurrent bacterial urinary tract not been evaluated in cats with idiopathic
infections, urethral stricture, and clinical signs cystitis.
of lower urinary tract disease (Osborne Environmental modification appears to
et al. 1991; Williams 2009). In one study of cats benefit many cats with idiopathic cystitis
with urethral obstruction due to matrix- (Buffington et al. 2006). Modifications for
crystalline plugs, uroliths, or unidentified indoor cats with idiopathic cystitis include
causes that were managed medically, recur- providing a canned diet, good litter box man-
rence of urethral obstruction occurred in agement, climbing structures, an appropriate
approximately one- third; therefore, surgery number of food and water dishes, and
may be necessary (Gerber et al. 2008). increasing water intake. Non- steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs are often described
despite a lack of evidence for effectiveness. A
Idiopathic Cystitis trial with oral glucosamine (125 mg N- acetyl
glucosamine per cat per day) demonstrated
The most common cause of lower urinary improvement of the owners’ perceived mean
tract disease in cats less than 10 years of age is health score compared to placebo, although
feline idiopathic cystitis (FIC) (Kruger not significantly different from the placebo
et al. 1991; Buffington et al. 1997). Idiopathic group, as both groups improved due to the
cystitis is characterized by signs of lower uri- feeding of canned food (Gunn- Moore and
nary tract disease (i.e. hematuria, stranguria, Shenoy 2004).
pollakiuria, and inappropriate urination) Stress management seems to be important
without identifiable causes. Often the clinical when managing FIC (Forrester and Towell
signs resolve in 3–7 days; however, recurrence 2015). Therapeutic urinary stress diets con-
is variable and unpredictable. Because no spe- tain L- tryptophan and milk protein hydro-
cific cause has been identified, no specific lysate (also known as a
--- pdf page 460 ---
432 Nutritional Management of Lower Urinary Tract Disease
of short-t erm supplementation of L-t ryptophan preventing recurrent bacterial urinary tract
on behavioral responses associated with infections (Bartges 2005). Cranberry juice or
anxiety and stress- related disorder in cats. extract has been recommended for preventing
Results showed that supplementation of cats recurrent infections. Cranberries contain
with dietary tryptophan may be a beneficial proanthocyanidins that bind to type 1 pili and
adjunct to decrease signs of stress and anxiety P fimbriae of Escherichia coli, thereby prevent-
and improve animal welfare (Pereira ing adhesion of E. coli to the uroepithelium
et al. 2004). Furthermore, Beata et al. (2007) (Howell 2007; Guirguis- Blake 2008; Jepson
provided evidence for the efficacy of alpha- and Craig 2008; Wing et al. 2008; Guay 2009).
casozepine in the short-t erm management of Despite widespread use and availability, there
anxiety in cats. A non-r andomized short-t erm are few controlled clinical trials supporting
study has shown dietary therapy with the use of cranberries as prophylaxis, although
L- tryptophan and alpha- casozepine to reduce there are some. The only in vitro study with
FIC episodes that included stranguria, periu- canine cells did not find benefit (Suksawat
ria, hematuria, dysuria, and pollakiuria et al. 1996). Cranberries should, however, not
(Naarden and Corbee 2020). Results from be prescribed with concurrent calcium oxalate
these studies suggest that supplementation of uroliths as they are high in oxalate (Terris
L- tryptophan and alpha- casozepine is benefi- et al. 2001).
cial for stress management in cats with Probiotics are recommended by some for
FIC. However, evidence about the effects of prevention of recurrent infections. The theory
supplementation of these nutrients on long- behind probiotics is to modify enteric microbi-
term FIC management and recurrence is not ota and, ultimately, urogenital microbiota.
available. There is little evidence of effectiveness; how-
ever, certain strains of Lactobacillus have been
shown to be beneficial in some women and
Urinary Tract Infections children in controlled studies (Lee et al. 2007;
Reid 2008; Abad and Safdar 2009).
Management of urinary tract infections There are many botanicals that have been rec-
involves eradication or control of predisposing ommended for prevention of urinary tract infec-
factors and antimicrobial therapy; however, tions, most commonly Uva ursi, which contains
several nutritional strategies may be useful in tannins and arbutin that may be bactericidal
preventing recurrent bacterial urinary tract and anti-i nflammatory (Head 2008). Little evi-
infections. Bacterial urinary tract infections dence exists for effectiveness.
occur more frequently in animals with predis- Mannose inhibits adherence of E. coli to the
posing conditions (e.g. diabetes mellitus, uroepithelium in vitro by binding to type 1 pili
hyperadrenocorticism, chronic renal failure, and shows promise in preliminary studies in
and hyperthyroidism); therefore, management human beings (Domenici et al. 2016; Genovese
of these conditions, including diet, may help to et al. 2018).
decrease recurrent bacterial urinary tract Not all feline and canine urinary tract
infections (Bartges 2005). Obesity is a common disorders are associated with dietary factors;
nutritional disorder and the incidence of bac- however, most benefit from nutritional man-
terial urinary tract infecti
--- pdf page 461 ---
Reeerenaes 433
Summary ● Uroliths occur when urine is oversaturated
with minerals that precipitate. Dietary modi-
● Lower urinary tract disease occurs com- fication may be useful for medically dissolv-
monly in cats and dogs, with urolithiasis, ing and for preventing uroliths. Calcium
urinary tract infections (dogs), and idio- oxalate and struvite uroliths occur most
pathic cystitis (cats) occurring most commonly in cats and dogs.
frequently. ● Dietary modification may also be useful in
managing cats with idiopathic cystitis.
References
Abad, C.L. and Safdar, N. (2009). The role of Symposium on Health and Nutrition of
lactobacillus probiotics in the treatment or Geriatric Cats and Dogs, Orlando, FL.
prevention of urogenital infections—a Bartges, J.W. (2000). Diseases of the urinary
systematic review. J. Chemother. 21 (3): 243–252. bladder. In: Saunders Manual of Small Animal
Adamama-M oraitou, K.K., Pardali, D., Prassinos, Practice (ed. S.J. Birchard and R.G. Sherding),
N.N. et al. (2017). Evaluation of dogs with 943–957. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.
macroscopic haematuria: a retrospective study of Bartges, J.W. (2001). Calcium oxalate
162 cases (2003–2010). N. Z. Vet. J. 65 (4): 204–208. urolithiasis. In: Consultations in Feline
Adams, L.G., Berent, A.C., Moore, G.E., and Internal Medicine (ed. J.R. August), 352–364.
Bagley, D.H. (2008). Use of laser lithotripsy for Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.
fragmentation of uroliths in dogs: 73 cases Bartges, J.W. (2005). Bacterial urinary tract
(2005–2006). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 232 (11): infections. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
1680–1687. Medicine (ed. S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman),
Albasan, H., Osborne, C.A., Lulich, J.P. et al. 1800–1808. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.
(2009). Rate and frequency of recurrence of Bartges, J.W. and Callens, A.J. (2015).
uroliths after an initial ammonium urate, Urolithiasis. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim.
calcium oxalate, or struvite urolith in cats. Pract. 45: 747–768.
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 235 (12): 1450–1455. Bartges, J.W., Cornelius, L.M., and Osborne,
Aparicio, V.A., Nebot, E., Garcia- del Moral, C.A. (1999a). Ammonium urate uroliths in
R. et al. (2013). High protein diets and renal dogs with portosystemic shunts. In: Current
status in rats. Nutr. Hosp. 28 (1): 232–237. Veterinary Therapy XIII (ed. J.D. Bonagura),
Bai, S.C., Sampson, D.A., Morris, J.G., and 872–874. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.
Rogers, Q.R. (1989). Vitamin B6 requirement Bartges, J.W., Osborne, C.A., Felice, L.J. et al.
of growing kittens. J. Nutr. 119: 1020–1027. (1992a). Canine xanthine uroliths: risk factor
Balaji, K.C. and Menon, M. (1997). Mechanism management. In: Current Veterinary Therapy
of stone formation. Urol. Clin. North Am. XI (ed. R.W. Kirk and J.D. Bonagura), 900–905.
24 (1): 1–11. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.
Bannasch, D., Safra, N., Young, A. et al. (2008). Bartges, J.W., Osborne, C.A., Polzin, D.J. et al.
Mutations in the SLC2A9 gene cause (1992b). Recurrent sterile struviterocystolithiasiss
hyperuricosuria and hyperuricemia in the in three related Cocker Spaniels. J. Am. Anim.
dog. PLoS Genet. 4 (11): e1000246. Hosp. Assoc. 28: 459–469.
Bartges, J.W. (1996). Lower urinary tract disease Bartges, J.W., Osborne, C.A., Koehler, L.A. et al.
in older cats: What’s common, what’s not? (1994a). An algorithmic approach to canine
--- pdf page 462 ---
434 Nutritional Management of Lower Urinary Tract Disease
urate uroliths. In: 12th Annual Veterinary cats. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. (Berl.)
Medical Forum of the American College of 105 (3): 579–586.
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 476–477. San Bovée, K.C. (1986). Canine cystine urolithiasis.
Francisco, CA: Omnipress. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 16 (2):
Bartges, J.W., Osborne, C.A., Lulich, J.P. et al. 211–215.
(1994b). Prevalence of cystine and urate Brain, P.H. (1988). Portosystemic shunts— urate
uroliths in bulldogs and urate uroliths in calculi as a guide to diagnosis. Aust. Vet. Pract.
dalmatians. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 204 (12): 18 (1): 3–4.
1914–1918. Brons, A.K., Henthorn, P.S., Raj, K. et al. (2013).
Bartges, J.W., S.L. Tarver, and Schneider, C. SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 mutations in autosomal
(1998). Comparison of struvite activity recessive or dominant canine cystinuria: a
product ratios and relative supersaurations new classification system. J. Vet. Intern. Med.
in urine collected from healthy cats 27: 1400–1408.
consuming four struvite management diets. Brown, C. and Purich, D. (1992). Physical-
Ralston Purina Nutrition Symposium, chemical processes in kidney stone formation.
St.Louis, MO. In: Disorders of Bone and Mineral Metabolism
Bartges, J.W., Osborne, C.A., Lulich, J.P. et al. (ed. F. Coe and M. Favus), 613–624. New York:
(1999b). Methods for evaluating treatment of Raven Press.
uroliths. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Buckley, C.M., Hawthorne, A., Colyer, A. et al.
Pract. 29 (1): 45–57, x. (2011). Effect of dietary water intake on
Bartges, J.W., Osborne, C.A., Lulich, J.P. et al. urinary output, specific gravity and relative
(1999c). Canine urate urolithiasis. supersaturation for calcium oxalate and
Etiopathogenesis, diagnosis, and struvite in the cat. Br. J. Nutr. 106 (Suppl 1):
management. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small S128–S130.
Anim. Pract. 29 (1): 161–191, xii–xiii. Buffington, T. (1989). Struvite urolithiasis in
Bartges, J.W., Kirk, C., and Lane, I.F. (2004a). cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 194 (1): 7–8.
Update: management of calcium oxalate Buffington, C.A., Rogers, Q.R., and Morris,
uroliths in dogs and cats. Vet. Clin. North Am. J.G. (1990). Effect of diet on struvite activity
Small Anim. Pract. 34 (4): 969–987, vii. product in feline urine. Am. J. Vet. Res. 51 (12):
Bartges, J.W., Kirk, C.A., and Moyers, T. (2004b). 2025–2030.
Influence of alkalinization and acidification Buffington, C.A., Blaisdell, J.L., and Sako,
on urine saturation with calcium oxalate and T. (1994). Effects of Tamm- Horsfall
struvite and bone mineral density in healthy glycoprotein and albumin on struvite crystal
cats. Urol. Res. 32 (2): 172. growth in urine of cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. 55 (7):
Bartges, J.W., Kirk, C.A., Cox, S.K. et al. (2013). 965–971.
Influence of acidifying or alkalinizing diets on Buffington, C.A., Chew, D.J., Kendall, M.S. et al.
bone mineral density and urine relative (1997). Clinical evaluation of cats with
supersaturation with calcium oxalate and nonobstructive urinary tract diseases. J. Am.
struvite in healthy cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. Vet. Med. Assoc. 210 (1): 46–50.
10: 1347–1352. Buffington, C.A., Westropp, J.L., Chew, D.J. et al.
Beata, C., Beaumont- Graff, E., Coll, V. et al. (2006). Clinical evaluation of multimodal
(2007). Effect of alpha- casozepine (Zylkene) environmental modification (MEMO) in the
on anxiety in cats. J. Vet. Behav.: Clin. Appl. management of cats with idiopathic cystitis.
Res. 2 (2):
--- pdf page 463 ---
Reeerenaes 435
cats with normal and reduced renal function. oxalate excretion in cats. J. Anim. Sci. 92 (2):
Am. J. Vet. Res. 65 (5): 620–627. 577–584.
Burggraaf, N.D., Westgeest, D.B., and Corbee, Domenici, L., Monti, M., Bracchi, C. et al. (2016).
R.J. (2021). Analysis of 7866 feline and canine D- mannose: a promising support for acute
uroliths submitted between 2014 and 2020 in urinary tract infections in women. A pilot
the Netherlands. Res. Vet. Sci. 137: 86–93. study. Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 20 (13):
Carr, S.V., Grant, D.C., DeMonaco, S.M., and 2920–2925.
Shepherd, M. (2019). Measurement of Finco, D.R., Barsanti, J.A., and Crowell,
preprandial and postprandial urine calcium to W.A. (1985). Characterization of magnesium-
creatinine ratios in male Miniature induced urinary disease in the cat and
Schnauzers with and without urolithiasis. comparison with feline urologic syndrome.
J. Vet. Intern. Med. 34: 754–760. Am. J. Vet. Res. 46 (2): 391–400.
Case, L.C., Ling, G.V., Franti, C.E. et al. (1992). Finke, M.D. and Litzenberger, B.A. (1992). Effect
Cystine- containing urinary calculi in dogs: of food intake on urine pH in cats. J. Small
102 cases (1981–1989). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. Anim. Pract. 33 (6): 261–265.
201 (1): 129–133. Forrester, S.D. and Towell, T.L. (2015). Feline
Caudarella, R. and Vescini, F. (2009). Urinary idiopathic cystitis. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small
citrate and renal stone disease: the preventive Anim. Pract. 45 (4): 783–806.
role of alkali citrate treatment. Arch. Ital. Urol. Furrow, E., Patterson, E.E., Armstrong, P.J. et al.
Androl. 81 (3): 182–187. (2015). Fasting urinary calcium- to- creatinine
Chamsuwan, S., Angkanaporn, K., and oxalate- to- creatinine ratios in dogs with
Dissayabutra, T. et al. (2021). The calcium oxalate urolithiasis and breed-
association between single nucleotide matched controls. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 29 (1):
polymorphism in vitamin D receptor and 113–119.
calcium oxalate urolithiasis in dogs. J. Vet. Geddes, R.F., van den Broek, D.H.N., Chang,
Intern. Med. 35 (5): 2263–2270. Y.- M. et al. (2021). The effect of attenuating
Ching, S.V., Fettman, M.J., Hamar, D.W. et al. dietary phosphate restriction on blood
(1989). The effect of chronic dietary ionized calcium concentrations in cats with
acidification using ammonium chloride on chronic kidney disease and ionized
acid- base and mineral metabolism in the adult hypercalcemia. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 35 (2):
cat. J. Nutr. 119 (6): 902–915. 997–1007.
Clark, W.T. and Cuddeford, D. (1971). A study of Genovese, C., Davinelli, S., Mangano, K. et al.
amino acids in urine from dogs with cystine (2018). Effects of a new combination of plant
urolithiasis. Vet. Rec. 88: 414–417. extracts plus d- mannose for the management
Coe, F.L., Parks, J.H., and Asplin, J.R. (1992). of uncomplicated recurrent urinary tract
The pathogenesis and treatment of kidney infections. J. Chemother. 30 (2): 107–114.
stones. N. Engl. J. Med. 327 (16): 1141–1152. Gerber, B., Eichenberger, S., and Reusch,
Cowgill, L.D., Sevgev, G., Bandt, C. et al. (2007). C.E. (2008). Guarded long- term prognosis in
Effects of dietary salt intake on body fluid male cats with urethral obstruction. J. Feline
volume and renal function in healthy cats. Med. Surg. 10 (1): 16–23.
J. Vet. Intern. Med. 21 (3): 600–601. Gow, A.G., Fairbanks, L.D., Simpson, J.W. et al.
DiBartola, S.P., Chew, D.J., and Horton, (2011). Xanthine urolithiasis in a Cavalier
M.L. (1991). Cystinuria in a cat. J. Am. Vet. King
--- pdf page 464 ---
436 Nutritional Management of Lower Urinary Tract Disease
Guay, D.R. (2009). Cranberry and urinary tract on cystine urolithiasis and urinary cystine
infections. Drugs 69 (7): 775–807. excretion. Br. Vet. J. 149 (3): 235–251.
Guirguis- Blake, J. (2008). Cranberry products for Houston, D.M., Weese, H.E., Evason, M.D. et al.
treatment of urinary tract infection. Am. Fam. (2011). A diet with a struvite relative
Physician 78 (3): 332–333. supersaturation less than 1 is effective in
Gunn- Moore, D.A. and Shenoy, C.M. (2004). dissolving struvite stones in vivo. Br. J. Nutr.
Oral glucosamine and the management of 106 (Suppl 1): S90–S92.
feline idiopathic cystitis. J. Feline Med. Surg. Howell, A.B. (2007). Bioactive compounds in
6 (4): 219–225. cranberries and their role in prevention of
Hamm, L.L. and Simon, E.E. (1987). Roles and urinary tract infections. Mol. Nutr. Food Res.
mechanisms of urinary buffer excretion. Am. 51 (6): 732–737.
J. Physiol. 253 (4 Pt 2): F595–F605. Hughes, K.L., Slater, M.R., Geller, S. et al. (2002).
Hardy, R.M. and Klausner, J.S. (1983). Urate Diet and lifestyle variables as risk factors for
calculi associated with portal vascular chronic renal failure in pet cats. Prev. Vet. Med.
anomalies. In: Current Veterinary Therapy VIII 55 (1): 1–15.
(ed. R.W. Kirk), 1073. Philadelphia, PA: Ito, H. (1991). Combined administration of
W.B. Saunders. calcium and citrate reduces urinary oxalate
Hawthorne, A.J. and Markwell, P.J. (2004). excretion. Hinyokika Kiyo 37 (10): 1107–1110.
Dietary sodium promotes increased water Jacinto, A.M., Mellanby, R.J., Chandler, M. et al.
intake and urine volume in cats. J. Nutr. (2013). Urine concentrations of xanthine,
134 (8 Suppl): 2128S–2129S. hypoxanthine and uric acid in UK Cavalier
Head, K.A. (2008). Natural approaches to King Charles spaniels. J. Small Anim. Pract.
prevention and treatment of infections of the 54 (8): 395–398.
lower urinary tract. Altern. Med. Rev. 13 (3): Jepson, R.G. and Craig, J.C. (2008). Cranberries for
227–244. preventing urinary tract infections. Cochrane
Henthorn, P.S., Liu, J., Gidalevich, T. et al. (2000). Database Syst. Rev. (1): CD001321. https://doi.
Canine cystinuria: polymorphism in the canine org/10.1002/14651858.CD001321.pub5.
SLC3A1 gene and identification of a nonsense Johnson, C.A., Armstrong, P.J., and Hauptmann,
mutation in cystinuric Newfoundland dogs. J.G. (1987). Congenital portosystemic shunts
Hum. Genet. 107 (4): 295–303. in dogs: 46 cases (1979–1986). J. Am. Vet. Med.
Hess, R.S., Kass, P.H., and Ward, C.R. (1998). Assoc. 19 (11): 1478–1483.
Association between hyperadrenocorticism Kirk, C.A., Ling, G.V., Franti, C.E. et al. (1995).
and development of calcium- containing Evaluation of factors associated with
uroliths in dogs with urolithiasis. J. Am. Vet. development of calcium oxalate urolithiasis in
Med. Assoc. 212 (12): 1889–1891. cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 207 (11):
Hezel, A., Bartges, J.W., Kirk, C.A. et al. (2007). 1429–1434.
Influence of hydrochlorothiazide on urinary Kirk, C.A., Ling, G.V., Osborne, C.A. et al.
calcium oxalate relative supersaturation in (2003). Clinical guidelines for managing
healthy young adult female domestic calcium oxalate uroliths in cats: medical
shorthaired cats. Vet. Ther. 8 (4): 247–254. therapy, hydration, and dietary therapy. In:
Hoppe, A. and Denneberg, T. (2001). Cystinuria Managing Urolithiasis in Cats: Recent Updates
in the dog: clinical studies during 14 years of and Practice Guidelines (ed. A.C. Kraje
--- pdf page 465 ---
Reeerenaes 437
Kpercny, L., Palm, C.A., Segev, G. et al. (2021a). ammonium phosphate urolithiasis in cats.
Urolithiasis in cats: evaluation of trends in J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 219 (9): 1228–1237.
urolith composition and risk factors Lekcharoensuk, C., Osborne, C.A., Lulich,
(2005- 2018). J. Vet. Intern. Med. 35 (3): J.P. et al. (2002). Associations between dietary
1397–1405. factors in canned food and formation of
Kpercny, L., Palm, C.A., Segev, G., and Westropp, calcium oxalate uroliths in dogs. Am. J. Vet.
J.L. (2021b). Urolithiasis in dogs: evaluation of Res. 63 (2): 163–169.
trends in urolith composition and risk factors Luckschander, N., Iben, C., Hosgood, G. et al.
(2005-2 018). J. Vet. Intern. Med. 35 (3): (2004). Dietary NaCl does not affect blood
1406–1415. pressure in healthy cats. J. Vet. Intern. Med.
Kraje, A.C., Bartges, J.W., DeNovo, R.C., and 18 (4): 463–467.
Millis, D.L. (2000). Effects of op- DDD on Lulich, J.P. and Osborne, C.A. (1992). Catheter-
urinary calcium excretion, parathyroid assisted retrieval of urocystoliths from dogs
hormone concentration, and bone mineral and cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 201 (1):
density in dogs with spontaneously 111–113.
occurring pituitary dependent Lulich, J.P., Osborne, C.A., Nagode, L.A. et al.
hyperadrenocorticism. J. Vet. Intern. Med. (1991). Evaluation of urine and serum
14: 384. metabolites in miniature schnauzers with
Kruger, J.M. and Osborne, C.A. (1990). The role calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Am. J. Vet. Res.
of viruses in feline lower urinary tract disease. 52 (10): 1583–1590.
J. Vet. Intern. Med. 4 (2): 71–78. Lulich, J.P., Perrine, L., Osborne, C.A. et al.
Kruger, J.M., Osborne, C.A., Goyal, S.M. et al. (1992). Postsurgical recurrence of calcium
(1991). Clinical evaluation of cats with lower oxalate uroliths in dogs. J. Vet. Intern. Med.
urinary tract disease. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 6 (2): 119.
199 (2): 211–216. Lulich, J.P., Osborne, C.A., Sanderson, S.L. et al.
Lawler, D.F., Sjolin, D.W., and Collins, (1999a). Voiding urohydropropulsion. Lessons
J.E. (1985). Incidence rates of feline lower from 5 years of experience. Vet. Clin. North
urinary tract disease in the United States. Am. Small Anim. Pract. 29 (1): 283–292.
Feline Pract. 15 (5): 13–16. Lulich, J.P., Osborne, C.A., Thumchai, R. et al.
Lee, S.J., Shim, Y.H., Cho, S.J., and Lee, (1999b). Epidemiology of canine calcium
J.W. (2007). Probiotics prophylaxis in children oxalate uroliths. Identifying risk factors. Vet.
with persistent primary vesicoureteral reflux. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 29 (1):
Pediatr. Nephrol. 22 (9): 1315–1320. 113–122.
Lekcharoensuk, C., Lulich, J.P., Osborne, Lulich, J.P., Osborne, C.A., Bartges, J.W., and
C.A. et al. (2000a). Association between Lekcharoensuk, C. (2000). Canine lower
patient- related factors and risk of calcium urinary tract disorders. In: Textbook of
oxalate and magnesium ammonium Veterinary Internal Medicine, vol. 2 (ed.
phosphate urolithiasis in cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman), 1747–1783.
Assoc. 217 (4): 520–525. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.
Lekcharoensuk, C., Lulich, J.P., Osborne, Lulich, J.P., Osborne, C.A., Lekcharoensuk,
C.A. et al. (2000b). Patient and environmental C. et al. (2004). Effects of diet on urine
factors associated with calcium oxalate composition of cats with calcium oxalate
urolithiasis in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. urolithiasis. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 40 (3):
217 (4): 515–519. 185–191.
Lekcharoensuk, C., Osbor
--- pdf page 466 ---
438 Nutritional Management of Lower Urinary Tract Disease
supersaturation with calcium oxalate in McHarg, T., Rodgers, A., and Charlton,
healthy dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 66 (2): 319–324. K. (2003). Influence of cranberry juice on the
Lulich, J.P., Osborne, C.A., Albasan, H. et al. urinary risk factors for calcium oxalate kidney
(2009). Efficacy and safety of laser lithotripsy stone formation. BJU Int. 92 (7): 765–768.
in fragmentation of urocystoliths and McKerrell, R.E., Blakemore, W.F., Heath, M.F. et al.
urethroliths for removal in dogs. J. Am. Vet. (1989). Primary hyperoxaluria (L- glyceric
Med. Assoc. 234 (10): 1279–1285. aciduria) in the cat: a newly recognised inherited
Lulich, J.P., Kruger, J.M., Macleay, J.M. et al. disease. Vet. Rec. 125 (2): 31–34.
(2013a). Efficacy of two commercially Midkiff, A.M., Chew, D.J., Randolph, J.F. et al.
available, low- magnesium, urine- acidifying (2000). Idiopathic hypercalcemia in cats. J. Vet.
dry foods for the dissolution of struvite Intern. Med. 14 (6): 619–626.
uroliths in cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 243 (8): Milliner, D.S. (1990). Cystinuria. Endocrinol.
1147–1153. Metab. Clin. North Am. 19 (4): 889–907.
Lulich, J.P., Osborne, C.A., Albasan, H. et al. Naarden, B. and Corbee, R.J. (2020). The effect
(2013b). Recent shifts in the global proportions of a therapeutic urinary stress diet on the
of canine uroliths. Vet. Rec. 172 (14): 363. short- term recurrence of feline idiopathic
Lulich, J.P., Berent, A.C., Adams, L.G. et al. cystitis. Vet. Med. Sci. 6: 32–38.
(2016). ACVIM small animal consensus Okafor, C.C., Lefebvre, S.L., Pearl, D.L. et al.
recommendations on the treatment and (2014). Risk factors associated with calcium
prevention of uroliths in dogs and cats. J. Vet. oxalate urolithiasis in dogs evaluated at
Intern. Med. 30 (5): 1564–1574. general care veterinary hospitals in the United
Luskin, A.C., Lulich, J.P., Gesch, S.C., and States. Prev. Vet. Med. 115: 217–228.
Furrow, E. (2019). Bone resorption in dogs Osborne, C.A. (1999). Medical dissolution and
with calcium oxalate urolithiasis and prevention of canine uroliths. Seven steps
idiopathic hypercalciuria. Res. Vet. Sci. 123 from science to service. Vet. Clin. North Am.
(April): 129–134. Small Anim. Pract. 29 (1): 1–15, ix.
Markwell, P.J., Buffington, C.A., Chew, D.J. et al. Osborne, C.A., Polzin, D.J., Abdullahi, S.U. et al.
(1999). Clinical evaluation of commercially (1985). Struvite urolithiasis in animals and
available urinary acidification diets in the man: formation, detection, and dissolution.
management of idiopathic cystitis in cats. Adv. Vet. Sci. Comp. Med. 29: 1–101.
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 214 (3): 361–365. Osborne, C.A., Lulich, J.P., Kruger, J.M. et al.
Marretta, S.M., Pask, A.J., Greene, R.W., and Liu, (1990). Medical dissolution of feline struvite
S. (1981). Urinary calculi associated with urocystoliths. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 196 (7):
portosystemic shunts in six dogs. J. Am. Vet. 1053–1063.
Med. Assoc. 178 (2): 133–137. Osborne, C.A., Caywood, D.D., Johnston,
Matos, A.J., Mascarenhas, C., Magalhães, P., and G.R. et al. (1991). Perineal urethrostomy
Pinto, J.P. (2006). Efficient screening of the versus dietary management in prevention of
cystinuria- related C663T Slc3a1 nonsense recurrent lower urinary tract disease. J. Small
mutation in Newfoundland dogs by Anim. Pract. 32 (6): 296–305.
denaturing high- performance liquid Osborne, C.A., Kruger, J.M., Lulich, J.P. et al.
chromatography. J. Vet. Diagn. Invest. 18 
--- pdf page 467 ---
Reeerenaes 439
Osborne, C.A., Kruger, J.M., Lulich, J.P. et al. salt concentrations on urine composition in
(1999a). Feline lower urinary tract diseases. healthy cats. Vet. J. 201 (3): 401–405.
In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Pedroia, V. (1981). Allopurinol- induced immune
vol. 2 (ed. S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman), disorders. Canine Pract. 8 (4): 19–22.
1710–1746. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders. Pereira, D.A., Aguiar, J.A.K., Hagiwara,
Osborne, C.A., Lulich, J.P., Polzin, D.J. et al. M.K. et al. (2004). Changes in cat urinary
(1999b). Medical dissolution and prevention glycosaminoglycans with age and in feline
of canine struvite urolithiasis. Twenty years of urologic syndrome. Biochem. Biophys. Acta
experience. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. 1672 (1): 1–11.
Pract. 29 (1): 73–111, xi. Prezioso, D., Strazzullo, P., Lotti, T. et al. (2015).
Osborne, C.A., Sanderson, S.L., and Lulich, Dietary treatment of urinary risk factors for
J.P. (1999c). Canine cystine urolithiasis. renal stone formation. A review of CLU
Cause, detection, treatment, and prevention. working group. Arch. Ital. Urol. Androl. 87 (2):
Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 29 (1): 105–120.
193–211, xiii. Queau, Y., Bijsmans, E.S., Feugier, A., and
Osborne, C.A., Bartges, J.W., Lulich, J.P. et al. Biourge, V.C. (2020). Increasing dietary
(2000). Canine urolithiasis. In: Small Animal sodium chloride promotes urine dilution and
Clinical Nutrition (ed. M.S. Hand, decreases struvite and calcium oxalate relative
C.D. Thatcher, R.L. Remillard and supersaturation in healthy dogs and cats.
P. Roudebush), 605–688. Marceline MO: J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 104: 1524–1530.
Wadsworth. Reid, G. (2008). Probiotic lactobacilli for
Osborne, C.A., Lulich, J.P., Albasan, H. et al. urogenital health in women. J. Clin.
(2003). Mineral composition of feline uroliths Gastroenterol. 42 (Suppl 3 Pt 2): S234–S236.
and urethral plugs: current status. In: Robertson, W.G. (1993). Urinary calculi. In:
Managing Urolithiasis in Cats: Recent Updates Metabolic Bone and Stone Disease (ed.
and Practice Guidelines, vol. 26 (ed. B.E.C. Nordin, A.G. Need and H.A. Morris),
C.A. Davis). Topeka, KS: Hill’s Pet Nutrition. 249–311. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Osborne, C.A., Bartges, J.W., Koehler, L.A. et al. Rodman, J.S. (1991). Prophylaxis of uric acid
(2004). “Feline xanthine urolithiasis: a newly stones with alternate day doses of alkaline
recognized cause of urinary tract disease” potassium salts. J. Urol. 145: 97–99.
(abstract). Urol. Res. 32 (2): 171. Rumenapf, G. and Schwille, P.O. (1987). The
Osborne, C.A., Lulich, J.P., Kruger, J.M. et al. influence of oral alkali citrate on intestinal
(2009). Analysis of 451,891 canine uroliths, calcium absorption in healthy man. Clin. Sci.
feline uroliths, and feline urethral plugs from (Lond.) 73 (1): 117–121.
1981 to 2007: perspectives from the Minnesota Sakhaee, K., Alpern, R., Poindexter, J., and Pak,
Urolith Center. Vet. Clin. North Am. Small C.Y. (1992). Citraturic response to oral citric
Anim. Pract. 39 (1): 183–197. acid load. J. Urol. 147 (4): 975–976.
Pak, C.Y., Fuller, C., Sakhaee, K. et al. (1985). Smith, B.H.E., Moodie, S.J., Wensley, S. et al.
Long- term treatment of calcium (1997). Differences in urinary pH and relative
nephrolithiasis with potassium citrate. J. Urol. supersaturation values between senior and
134 (1): 11–19. young adult cats. J. Vet. Intern. Med.
Palm, C. and Westropp, J. (2011). Cats and 11 (2): 674.
calcium ox
--- pdf page 468 ---
440 Nutritional Management of Lower Urinary Tract Disease
Stevenson, A.E. (2002). The incidence of Tefft, K.M., Byron, J.K., Hostnik, E.T. et al.
urolithiasis in cats and dogs and the influence (2021). Effect of a struvite dissolution diet in
of diet in formation and prevention of cats with naturally occurring struvite
recurrence. PhD thesis, Institute of Urology urolithiasis. J. Feline Med. Surg. 23 (4):
and Nephrology, University College London. 269–277.
Stevenson, A.E., Wigglesworth, D.J., Smith, Terris, M.K., Issa, M.M., and Tacker,
B.H. et al. (2000). Effects of dietary potassium J.R. (2001). Dietary supplementation with
citrate supplementation on urine pH and cranberry concentrate tablets may increase
urinary relative supersaturation of calcium the risk of nephrolithiasis. Urology 57 (1):
oxalate and struvite in healthy dogs. Am. 26–29.
J. Vet. Res. 61: 430–435. Thomsen, M.K., Svane, L.C., and Poulsen,
Stevenson, A.E., Markwell, P.J., and Blackburn, P.H. (1986). Canine urinary tract infection.
J.M. (2002). The effect of diet on calcium Detection, prevalence and therapeutic
oxalate urinary relative supersaturation (RSS) consequences of bacteriuria. Nord. Vet. Med.
of stone- forming (SF) and normal (N) dogs. 38 (6): 394–402.
J. Vet. Intern. Med. 16 (3): 377. Thumchai, R., Lulich, J., Osborne, C.A. et al.
Stevenson, A.E., Hynds, W.K., and Markwell, (1996). Epizootiologic evaluation of
P.J. (2003). Effect of dietary moisture and urolithiasis in cats: 3,498 cases (1982–1992).
sodium content on urine composition and J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 208 (4): 547–551.
calcium oxalate relative supersaturation in Tiselius, H.G., Berg, C., Fornander, A.M., and
healthy miniature schnauzers and labrador Nilsson, M.A. (1993). Effects of citrate on the
retrievers. Res. Vet. Sci. 74 (2): 145–151. different phases of calcium oxalate
Stoller, M.L., Chi, T., Eisner, B.H. et al. (2009). crystallization. Scanning Microsc. 7 (1):
Changes in urinary stone risk factors in 381–389, discussion 389–390.
hypocitraturic calcium oxalate stone formers Willeberg, P. (1984). Epidemiology of naturally
treated with dietary sodium supplementation. occurring feline urologic syndrome. Vet.
J. Urol. 181 (3): 1140–1144. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract. 14 (3):
Suksawat, J., Cox, H.U., O’Reilly, K.L. et al. 455–469.
(1996). Inhibition of bacterial adherence to Williams, J. (2009). Surgical management of
canine uroepithelial cells using cranberry blocked cats. Which approach and when?
juice extract. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 10 (5): 167. J. Feline Med. Surg. 11 (1): 14–22.
Tarttelin, M.F. (1987a). Feline struvite Wing, D.A., Rumney, P.J., Preslicka, C.W., and
urolithiasis: factors affecting urine pH may be Chung, J.H. (2008). Daily cranberry juice for
more important than magnesium levels in the prevention of asymptomatic bacteriuria in
food. Vet. Rec. 121 (10): 227–230. pregnancy: a randomized, controlled pilot
Tarttelin, M.F. (1987b). Feline struvite study. J. Urol. 180 (4): 1367–1372.
urolithiasis: fasting reduced the effectiveness Xu, H., Laflamme, D.P., and Long, G.L. (2009).
of a urinary acidifier (ammonium chloride) Effects of dietary sodium chloride on health
and increased the intake of a low magnesium parameters in mature cats. J. Feline Med. Surg.
diet. Vet. Rec. 121 (11): 245–248. 11 (6): 435–441.
Tate, N.M., Minor, K.M., Lulich, J.P. et al. (2021). van Zuilen, C.D., Nickel, R.F., van Dijk, T.H.,
Multiple variants in XDH and MOCOS and Reijngoud, D.J. (1997). Xanthinuria in 

===== AVCN gi 232-242 =====
--- pdf page 232 ---
204 NuitsisBo a M o gneoneoi BfdOtihBmnensl Dsone oneo
greater than 1.1% dm should be fed during the
growth period, starting at partial weaning.
Chronic calcium excess can result in a
decreased widening of the foramen for blood
vessels and the spinal cord. Great Danes pro-
vided free access to food (Table 10.5)
(Hedhammar et al. 1974; Lavelle 1989) or lim-
ited intake of food but with a high calcium
content (3.3% Ca dm) (Hazewinkel 1985) had
narrowing of the cranial aperture of the cervi-
cal vertebral bodies, causing Wallerian degen-
eration of the spinal cord and the typical signs
of wobbler syndrome: ataxia and crossed
extensor reflexes. With imaging techniques,
narrowing of the spinal canal without hernia-
tion of the nucleus pulposus can be detected.
Surgical techniques may be indicated, although
the damage to the nerve tissue may already be
irreversible. Dietary corrections and medical
Figure 10.6 Inside the medullary cavity, white
treatment are often too late to have any impact.
confluating spots are visible, indicating areas of
Differential diagnoses include vertebral or spi-
mineralization as radiologic signs of panosteitis,
which is clinically characterized by shifting nal cord malformations, cervical vertebral
lameness, varying in severity and location, with instability as seen in older dogs, discospondyli-
pain reaction upon deep palpation of the
tis, and meningitis.
long bones.
High calcium intake will have a tendency to
cause the calcium level to increase and there-
fore increase CT secretion and suppress PTH
life. Although multiple hypotheses are pro- secretion, and 1α-h ydroxylase formation lower-
posed to describe the etiopathogenesis of pan- ing 1,25(OH) 2 vitD synthesis. The increase of
osteitis, no other dietary cause has been found CT and the lowering of PTH as seen in large-
thus far (Hazewinkel et al. 2000). breed dogs may be the cause of the high inci-
The clinical signs (shifting lameness of dif- dence and severe signs of osteochondrosis in
fering severity, and pain upon deep bone pal- young dogs raised on a diet with a high calcium
pation) together with the radiologic signs content. Support for this comes from the find-
(white confluent areas within the medullary ing that the influence of high calcium intake
cavity, starting near the nutrient foramen) in did not decrease PTH levels significantly in
young dogs of large breeds until the age of young dogs of small breeds (Nap et al. 1993c).
24 months is strong evidence for this disease. In this study, Great Danes, but not miniature
The treatment is to prescribe a diet with a cal- poodles, raised on diets with a high calcium
cium content matching the requirement (with content or with an increased calcium and
possibly a three- week period of calcium defi- phosphorus ratio had severe signs of retained
ciency to induce skeletal remodeling) together cartilage cones (considered to be osteochondro-
with non- steroidal anti-i nflammatory drugs sis of the growth plates) with radius curvus as a
(NSAIDs) to help the animal overcome painful consequence; that is, elbow incongruity, bow-
periods until the age of 24 months. In order to ing of the radius, and valgus deformation of
prevent panosteitis, a diet designed for young the front and rear feet (Hazewinkel 1985;
dogs of large breeds with a calcium content no Schoenmakers et al. 2000) (Figure 10.7). These
--- pdf page 233 ---
­hne BaneBfdNuitsisBoDutsog Sneanei a tBoih ondDneeneaBmoneoi 205
2006). Calcium retention increases propor-
tionally with the calcium content of the food
and is in young dogs not less than 25–40%
(Dobenecker et al. 2006; Hazewinkel 1985;
Hedhammar et al. 1974; Nap et al. 1993a;
Schoenmakers et al. 2000), and thus a distur-
bance of the balance in calciotropic hormones
can be caused. Other dietary effects and other
causes, including breed effects and genetic
predisposition for disturbances in skeletal
growth disturbances and development, cannot
be excluded on the basis of the studies
reviewed here. Especially when owners of
breeds at risk are consulting the practicing
Figure 10.7 A 4- month- old Great Dane with
veterinarian for dietary advice, this discussion
radius curvus syndrome raised on a food with
calcium excess, calcium and phosphorus excess, or will help to formulate scientifically sup-
vitamin D excess. Butlne: Schoenmakers et al. ported advice.
(2000) / Elsevier B.V. and Tryfonidou et al. (2003) /
Elsevier.
Vitamin D Excess
Great Danes developed osteochondrosis at typi- Vitamin D is an essential vitamin in dogs and
cal locations in joint cartilage. In some cases, cats, since it cannot be synthesized in these
where Great Danes were raised on a diet with species in their skin under the influence of
excess calcium, it was not the distal growth sunlight (How et al. 1994). Since it is soluble in
plate of the ulna that was the most affected fat and transported to the liver for hydroxyla-
but the growth in length of the radius, resulting tion, the nutritional content of vitamin D is
in incongruity of the elbow with a shortened connected to the fat and liver content of the
radius (Hazewinkel 1985; Schoenmakers ingredients. In balanced dog foods, the raw
et al. 2000). Lavelle (1989) and Slater et al. ingredients are supplemented with vitamin D
(1992) demonstrated a correlation between together with other essential nutrients by the
calcium supplementation and the development manufacturer in the vitamin pre- mix. The con-
of skeletal diseases, especially in large-b reed tent of the pre- mix is not declared on the label
dogs. In beagles and crossbred foxhounds, of the end product and thus the level of
Dobenecker et al. (2006) could demonstrate a the separate vitamins and minerals cannot be
significantly higher calcium retention in the included in the analysis. As a result, the
beagles on supplemented food when compared available diets for companion animals can
with control beagles and the foxhounds, with have a vitamin D content exceeding recom-
a >13% decreased growth in length of the mended levels (Table 10.7) (Weidner and
antebrachium in the beagles compared with Verbrugghe 2016).
controls. In a study focused on the development of the
In conclusion, a variety of skeletal abnor- medial coronoid process (MCP) of the ulna,
malities can develop in dogs when raised on with two groups of Labrador puppies, offspring
excess food (Hedhammar et al. 1974), excess of two Labradors with medial coronoid disease
calcium (Hazewinkel 1985), excess calcium (MCD), one group was raised on a weaning
and phosphorous (Schoenmakers et al. 2000), diet (1.3% Ca, 1.03% P, and 130 IU vitamin
or excess calcium plus phosphorus, manga- D/100 g dm), the other group with 5000 IU
nese, iron, zinc, and copper (Dobenecker et al. vitamin D/100 g added, and both groups were
--- pdf page 234 ---
206 NuitsisBo a M o gneoneoi BfdOtihBmnensl Dsone oneo
followed during a maximum of 18 weeks with by a direct influence of calcium on maturing
two- weekly radiologic and CT scanning of the chondrocytes. However, in these dogs plasma
elbow joints and histologic investigation in all levels of PTH were significantly decreased and
dogs. Plasma calcium, phosphorus, total CT was significantly increased when com-
protein, and albumin levels did not differ pared with controls, which mimics the situa-
between groups, whereas the 25OHvitD and tion described under “calcium excess.” This
1,25(OH) vitD levels were twice as high in the suggests that osteochondrosis is caused in
2
supplemented group in comparison with the these dogs by an imbalance in calciotropic hor-
controls. Two dogs of the supplemented group mones and/or adaptations in the vitamin D
developed MCD and one also had a shortened metabolism, generalized or locally at growth-
radius. The subchondral bone of the MCP con- plate level, rather than due to high calcium lev-
tained retained hyaline cartilage, more in the els per se (Tryfonidou et al. 2002).
MCD- positive dogs of the supplemented group Chronic vitamin D intoxication due to inges-
than in the MCD- positive dogs of the dogs on tion of rat poison or due to excessive doses of
the control diet. The supplemented group vitamin D or its metabolites will be character-
revealed significant more collagen- X staining ized by hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia,
than the controls, reflecting more hypertrophic muscle weakness, nausea, kidney failure, and
chondrocyte activity as seen in delayed possibly death. Chronic intake of 10 000 IU/kg
endochondral ossification in cases of osteo- BW/d or a single dose of 200 000 IU/kg BW
chondrosis, leading to the conclusion that vita- results in clinical signs including polyuria and
min D supplementation does not prevent MCD vomiting (Spangler et al. 1979).
and that optimal vitamin D intake in young
dogs is important in breeds at risk for
Vitamin A Excess
osteochondrosis- related developmental skele-
tal diseases (Corbee et al. 2015a). Vitamin A is essential in bone metabolism and
Dogs raised on a diet containing a 135-f old influences chondrocyte proliferation, and
increase in the recommended dietary vitamin osteoblast and osteoclast activity, in addition
D content (54 000 vs. 4560 IU cholecalciferol/ to a variety of other functions. Vitamin A
kg diet, which corresponds to a mean [± stand- (C H OH) is present in animal fat and can, in
20 29
ard deviation, SD] of 1615 ± 60 vs. 15 ± 1 IU dogs but not in cats, be synthesized out of beta-
vitamin D/kg/BW/d) starting at the age of carotene (C H ) by cleavage with the aid of
40 56
6 weeks demonstrated an adaptation mecha- carotenase, as present in the intestinal mucosa
nism through which the increased hydroxyla- and liver cells. Therefore, the dietary require-
tion of excess vitamin D occurred in both ment of vitamin A for cats is higher than for
25OHvitD and 1,25(OH) vitD, without signs of dogs. Another difference between dogs and
2
increased calcium absorption or pathologic cats regarding vitamin A metabolism is in its
mineralization, as is commonly seen in vita- inactivation: dogs, but not cats, can form reti-
min D intoxication. This adaptation mecha- nyl esters to inactivate vitamin A, and dogs are
nism results in increased plasma concentrations able to excrete 15–60% of the daily intake as
of 24,25(OH) vitD and decreased levels of retinyl palmitate in t
--- pdf page 235 ---
­hne BaneBfdNuitsisBoDutsog Sneanei a tBoih ondDneeneaBmoneoi 207
lipoproteins. No apparent deleterious effects transforming into myofibroblasts (Corbee
were caused by high intakes of vitamin A et al. 2014). Adult cats fed a food with 100
alone: adult cats, even after a period of three times the vitamin A plus 65 times the vitamin
years on 50 and 100 times the vitamin A con- D content of the food of control cats resulted in
tent of the control cats (on 6 mg retinol equiva- an increase of plasma retinol and 25OHvitD
lents) did not develop pathologic signs (Freytag levels, osteophytosis and subtle new bone for-
et al. 2003). It was hypothesized that not only mation in the vertebrae, and signs of early sub-
the high vitamin A content but also the high clinical liver fibrosis, the latter due to hepatic
vitamin D content are prerequisites for the stellate cells overloaded with vitamin A
bone pathology typical of cats on a chronic raw (Corbee et al. 2014). The level of vitamin A
liver diet. Subtle skeletal changes (i.e. new (50% of vitamin A content of beef liver), the
bone formation) and liver pathology (i.e. fibro- calcium content of this food (much higher
sis) developed after 18 months of intake of food than beef liver), and the short duration of the
with a 100- fold increase of vitamin A and a study (18 months compared with 2–5 years in
concomitant 5- or 65-f old increase of vitamin clinical cases) may explain the subtlety of the
D; the study revealed, however, that the 5-f old pathology, compared with clinical hypervita-
increase in vitamin D protected against liver minosis A in adult cats (Hazewinkel 1994). In
fibrosis, unlike the 65-f old vitamin D intake. kittens, teratogenic effects of high vitamin A
This suggests an optimum level of vitamin D intake by the queen (1–2 times the safe upper
protection (Corbee et al. 2014). limit of vitamin A as given by NRC 2006)
In adult cats excessive vitamin A intake will include cleft palate, craniofacial and pelvic
stimulate osteoclastic bone resorption as well abnormalities, shallow ophthalmic orbits, and
as mineralization of newly formed osteoid by vascular abnormalities (Freytag et al. 2003).
vitamin A-i nduced increase of 24- hydroxylase Hypervitaminosis A can be caused in kittens
and thus of 24,25(OH)2vitD levels. Due to trac- and puppies after several weeks of oversupple-
tion of tendons on the weakened bone, bone mentation. Such kittens and puppies will have
bridges can be formed (Figure 10.8). The most reduced growth in length and osteoporosis of
significant finding in the adult cats on exces- long bones together with flaring of the meta-
sive vitamin A was subclinical liver fibrosis physeal regions. Hypervitaminosis A in dogs
due to retinol storage in the stellate cells, results in anorexia, decreased weight gain,
Figure 10.8 Extensive new bone formation without bone resorption throughout the spinal column and
around large peripheral joints has been described in cats fed on raw fish or raw liver for a prolonged time,
referred to as hypervitaminosis A. Butlne: Hazewinkel and Schoenmakers (1995).
--- pdf page 236 ---
208 NuitsisBo a M o gneoneoi BfdOtihBmnensl Dsone oneo
narrowing growth plate cartilage, new bone exostoses at the insertion site of tendons, liga-
formation, and thin cortices. Concentrations ments, and joints. Hypervitaminosis A is there-
of vitamin A in plasma will exceed the normal fore considered by some as a secondary form of
ranges for dogs (i.e. 1800–18 000 IU/l) osteoarthritis in the vertebrae and the large
(Hayes 1971). Hypervitaminosis A is seen joints (Corbee 2014a). Therapy should be
more frequently in cats than in dogs, especially started as soon as the diagnosis is made, includ-
in cats at an older age (3–13 years) and fed raw ing analgesia and food adaptation. It may be
liver and/or fish daily. Hypervitaminosis A in better to have a board certified veterinary
cats may coincide with a stiff neck and/or nutritionist® formulate a balanced homemade
enlarged joints from the front and hind legs diet without vitamin A added to it (or oxidized
(mainly elbow and stifle joint) (Figure 10.8) by cooking), since all commercially available
due to ankylosis, dull hair coat, change in char- foods contain at least the required amount of
acter (probably due to hypersensitivity and/ vitamin A (Hazewinkel 1994).
or bone pain), anorexia, and weight loss A low dose of NSAIDs can be provided to
(Hazewinkel 1994). relieve the skeletal pain and pain due to any
The recommended concentration of vitamin nerve entrapment. Since cats with hypervita-
A in dog foods is 1515 μg or 5050 IU/kg dm minosis A may have hepatic lipidosis, the dos-
with a safe upper limit 10 times this amount age of analgesia may need to be reduced.
(NRC 2006). In dogs, a history of diet supple- General improvement can be seen four weeks
mentation with cod liver oil may help to make after starting treatment; although ankylosis
the diagnosis. In cats, the history can indicate a will not disappear, the cats may remain lame,
prolonged preference for raw fish, raw liver, or but this is not due to pain.
supplements, although this is not always the
case. In a study in adult cats, a 106 IU vitamin
Nutrient Requirements for Skeletal
A/kg diet failed to produce the classic skeletal
Maintenance in Adult Animals
signs of hypervitaminosis A in three years,
suggesting an individual predisposition
(Morris 2002a). The clinical and radiologic In the adult dog under balanced conditions,
signs can support the diagnosis. Laboratory both mineralization of the skeleton and bone
investigation may reveal that retinol levels in resorption are 4–8 mg/kg BW/d, which is
the liver are increased, contrary to plasma reti- almost 100 times less than in young fast-
nol levels, which can be normal, as shown in a growing dogs (Hazewinkel 1989). Endogenous
study where 20% of cats with hypervitaminosis fecal excretion (i.e. losses of calcium via bile or
A had normal plasma levels (Morris 2002a). mucosal cells) is approximately 10–30 mg/kg
Corbee (2014a) designed a food for research and urinary losses approximately 1–7 mg/kg
cats with increased vitamin A and a low cal- BW/d. The losses can be compensated for by
cium level, thus mimicking a liver diet, and an intake of 50 mg Ca/kg BW/d. But even when
described small exostosis on vertebrae and this is not reached, the skeleton represents
larger joints. such a large reservoir of calcium that losses
In typical clinical cases of cats with hyper- can be compensated for by an increase in bone
vitaminosis A (Hazewinkel 1994; Figure 10.8), resorption. A study in adult dogs
--- pdf page 237 ---
Nuitsneoi neeustneoneoiofBtd Sneanei aM soineo olnesod nuai oso ao 209
calcium excretion is not under hormonal (e.g. thus it might be interesting to use the biologi-
PTH) control and represents a fixed amount of cally most active, but more expensive to deter-
calcium (Schoenmakers et al. 1999a). mine, metabolite 1,25(OH) D as an indicator
2
Pathologic fractures in adult dogs or cats do for sufficient or excessive vitamin D intake
not generally occur secondary to an unbal- (Table 10.6). Normal values for healthy adult
anced diet, but rather under strenuous physio- dogs of different breeds (ranging from dachs-
logic conditions such as gestation and lactation hund to German pointer) have been published
without adequate compensatory food intake. for 25OHvitD (38.5 ± 14.5 ng/ml), 24,25(OH) D
2
Two groups of nine adult Labradors fed a (40.0 ± 17.0 ng/ml), and 1,25(OH) D (76.2 ±
2
high-calcium diet (7.1 g/1000 kcal) or a test diet 15.3 pg/ml) (Corbee et al. 2012). A novel C-3
(1.7 g/1000 kcal) for 40 weeks did not reveal epimer of 25OHvitD, ranging from 30 to 75% of
any difference in general or skeletal health, the native 25OHvit D level, has been identified
kidney or hormonal functions (of both PTH in cats but not in dogs (Parker et al. 2017).
and calcitriol levels), or in blood biochemistry, Unlike postmenopausal humans, dogs do
including plasma ionized calcium concentra- not increase bone resorption after loss of
tion; only fecal calcium excretion and renal ovarian hormonal influences. Working dogs
calcium excretion (the latter to a much lower may lose extra calcium with saliva, but this is
extent) increased in the high-calcium group in only a limited amount and hardly requires any
such a way that there could be no difference compensation.
registered in the calcium balance in both The major clinical problems in relation to
groups of dogs, indicating a developmental orthopedics in adult companion animals are
adaptation in adult dogs to regulate calcium excessive energy intake (see later), excessive
uptake (Stockman et al. 2017). In a meta- phosphorus intake together with decreased
analysis including more than 400 individual renal function, and excessive vitamin A intake,
digestion trials in dogs and 156 in cats, it was especially in cats (see earlier).
revealed that true absorption for calcium in In the case of renal insufficiency, in both
adult dogs is 13% without significant differ- young and adult dogs, calcium is lost in the
ences between groups with a calcium-t o- urine whereas phosphorus is insufficiently
phosphorus ratio of 1–2 or >2, respectively, excreted, resulting in sequestration of calcium
and 25% for adult cats, with 26% for the same intracellularly as calcium phosphates and at
ratio of 1–2 and 19% when >2 (Mack different locations with increased pH values
et al. 2015). (lungs, stomach, and kidneys), thereby lower-
A true safe upper limit for vitamin D intake, ing the plasma calcium concentration even
supported by clear scientific evidence for further. This will lead to hyperparathyroidism
reproduction/growth and for adult mainte- (i.e. renal secondary hyperparathyroidism)
nance, is not currently known in dogs (Wedner with increased osteoclast activity causing dem-
and Verbrugghe 2016). In human nutrition, ineralization of the skeleton. An increase in
the 25OHvitD plasma level is used as a refer- calcitriol formation under the influence of
ence of adequate vitamin D intake. However in high PTH levels helps to increase intestina
--- pdf page 238 ---
210 NuitsisBo a M o gneoneoi BfdOtihBmnensl Dsone oneo
phosphorus level in the normal range until Implementation of Nutrition
renal function becomes inadequate. in Clinical Orthopedics
Due to the high turnover in cancellous bone,
bone pathology is often initially seen clinically
There are numerous foods available on the
as severe bone loss in the jaws. Loosening of
commercial market, making it impossible to
teeth and lowering of the arch can be noticed
comment on each food. It should be recog-
in adult dogs with chronic renal failure (i.e.
nized that the driving force of food intake in
hypostotic osteodystrophy), whereas hyperos-
each individual, especially growing dogs, is
totic osteodystrophy is characteristic for grow-
the need for energy. Together with energy
ing dogs with renal insufficiency (as is the case
come the essential nutrients for skeletal
with hydronephrosis or other birth defects)
growth, including calcium, phosphorus, and
(Figure 10.9). In these young dogs, their noses
vitamin D. In addition to the requirement per
are much broader than normal and the gingiva
kg body weight of growing dogs, the expres-
seems to be thickened, all due to compensatory
sion of these elements on an energy basis
growth of non- mineralized fibrous tissue, and
(kcal/kg diet) is also common, although more
the teeth are often loose. Clinical pathology
active dogs need more energy but not neces-
will reveal low to normal calcium; very high
sarily more minerals (i.e. calcium and phos-
phosphorus, urea, and creatinine levels; and
phorus). Owners feed their dogs more often
low 1,25(OH)2vitD levels. Radiographs will
3 on a weight or volume basis rather than calcu-
show a loss of the lamina dura dentis and a loss
lating the energy intake. When a diet is calcu-
of contrast in the skull compared to the teeth,
lated for a growing dog of a certain body
which do not lose their mineral content.
weight, the amount should be regularly
Mineral loss of the skeleton is often irreversi-
adjusted when the dog becomes heavier as it
ble together with the deteriorating general
matures. This can be done through consulta-
health of the patient.
tion with a veterinary nutritionist. One must
account for not only the chemical composi-
tion but also the availability and biological
value of the nutrients in the diet.
It is virtually impossible to judge the quality
of a diet from the label. A diet with a high grain
and phytate content may need a higher cal-
cium level to provide the required calcium for
absorption and a higher phosphate content,
since the phosphate in phytate is not absorba-
ble. This may explain why a meta-a nalysis
reported that at 2 months of age, 260–830 mg
Ca/kg BW/d appears to be safe for skeletal
growth; decreasing to 210–540 mg Ca/kg BW/d
at 5 months of age (Figure 10.1) (Hazewinkel
and Mott 2006).
To stay away from all these confusing fig-
ures, it is advised that young dogs be raised on
a diet formulated for the growth and special
hormonal typicalities of the breed. Small-
breed dogs undergo a slow growth rate and
Figure 10.9 A 5- month- old Rottweiler with poor
renal function and hydronephrosis and broadening therefore have a wide safety margin to deal
of the maxilla. with nutrient concentrations above or below
--- pdf page 239 ---
­ofauneolneBfdNuitsisBosodihneOlluttneolneBfdOtihBmnenslDsone oneo 211
the dog’s requirements. Giant- breed dogs, Influence of Nutrition in the
with their balanced, but vulnerable, equilib- Occurrence of Orthopedic Diseases
rium of hormonal regulators, do not reveal
this safety margin. Couple this with the inher- Elbow Dysplasias
ited developmental diseases such as hip and
elbow dysplasia with a large degree of envi- Elbow dysplasias (EDs) are a serious problem
ronmental influence, including nutrition, and for certain populations. EDs can be separated
one can understand the importance of edu- into different disease entities, including unu-
cating the breeder and new owner of young nited anconeal process (UAP), fragmented
large- breed dogs that the dogs should be fed a coronoid process (FCP), osteochondritis disse-
diet adapted to their special needs; that is, a cans (OCD) of the medial humeral condyle,
calcium content at the lower end of the safety and incongruities of the elbow joint (INC)
spectrum. In general, in foods with a protein (Figure 10.10a). EDs should be considered as
content of high biological value, the calcium different diseases, which may all cause lame-
content should be between 0.8% and 1.0% on a ness and may all cause osteoarthritis (OA) of
dry matter basis (for a food with 4200 ME the elbow joint (Figure 10.10b).
kcal/kg diet) (Nap et al. 2000). This range is Depending on the specific subpopulation and
present in the diets of the major dog food the method of investigation, EDs are seen in
manufacturers, but is still not seen in many 46–50% of Rottweilers, 36–70% of Bernese
smaller brands and in diets supplemented by mountain dogs, 12–14% of Labrador retrievers,
owners themselves. 15–20% of golden retrievers, 30% of
In summary, skeletal growth is limited to Newfoundlands, and 18–21% of German shep-
endochondral ossification, periosteal growth, herd dogs, and in many other breeds
and remodeling with a limited amount of cell (Temwichitr et al. 2010). The clinical investiga-
types. These cells are working under the tion starts with determination of the breed and
influence of different growth factors, of the age at which the first signs appeared, most
which they have the calciotropic hormones typically between 4 and 10 months. The elbow is
(PTH, vitamin D, CT) in common. Calcium often effused on palpation, the range of motion
as a vital mineral will be regulated in plasma can be decreased, and subtle crepitation can be
as tightly as possible under all circumstances, recognized. Diagnosis of EDs can be confirmed
including rapid growth and extreme calcium by radiographs in most cases by demonstrating
(and vitamin D) intakes. The adaptation the primary disease (UAP, OCD, INC, and in
mechanisms to maintain calcium homeosta- certain cases even FCP), or secondary changes
sis may have consequences for the maturing as part of OA development, taking into account
skeleton and thus for later life. A thorough the osteophytes and sclerosis of the semilunar
understanding of the pathophysiologic notch in making the diagnosis (Figure 10.10).
mechanisms and thus recognition of differ- Most instances of EDs occur bilaterally in
ent expressions of the same disturbance 30–70% of cases, and therefore both elbow joints
(greenstick and compression fractures, osteo- should be investigated, even in cases of unilat-
chondrosis, radius curvus syndrome, and eral lameness. In cases where there are no radi-
wobbler syndrome) will help give guidance og
--- pdf page 240 ---
212 NuitsisBo a M o gneoneoi BfdOtihBmnensl Dsone oneo
Figure 10.10 Radiograph and pathologic
(a) (b)
specimens revealing (a) incongruity (too
short radius) of the joint in a Great Dane
raised on food with increased calcium and
phosphorus content (Schoenmakers
et al. 2000); (b) osteoarthritis of the elbow
joint – notice the shortened radius and the
dislocated medial coronoid process; and
(c) osteoarthritis of the hip joint due to hip
dysplasia characterized by osteophyte
formation and cartilage breakdown.
(c)
Early surgical intervention provides the best is restored after the removal of the FCP or UAP
prognosis for the future status of the joint in at the same surgical intervention. The progno-
lame dogs, although some experts advocate a sis ranges from good in cases with minimal
more conservative approach. The UAP can be cartilage damage to poor in cases of severe OA
removed, or re-a ttached in instances of partial (Innes 2009).
or acute detachment. When cartilage of the
medial humeral condyle is unattached in cases Role of Nutrition in Elbow Dysplasias
of OCD, or when the apex of the coronoid A combination of FCP and OCD has been
process is fractured in cases of FCP, the loose described by Olsson (1993) as a disturbance of
bodies are removed. When fissures are present endochondral ossification and as such as
in the apex of the medial coronoid or cartilage expressions of the same disease. Although this
is weakened due to chondromalacia, the apex may still be true in cases of chondromalacia, in
should also be removed. INC due to a short the other forms of FCP (loose apex or fragmen-
radius is frequently seen in Bernese mountain tation) primary mechanical overload of
dogs and in dogs raised on food supplemented subchondral bone or joint cartilage is consid-
with excess minerals (Figure 10.10b). Congruity ered as the primary cause (Wolschrijn and
--- pdf page 241 ---
­ofauneolneBfdNuitsisBosodihneOlluttneolneBfdOtihBmnenslDsone oneo 213
Weijs 2004). OCD and FCP are seen more fre- ossification in the coronoid area or prevent the
quently in certain breeds and certain subpopu- development of MCD in these Labrador pup-
lations with a chi- square of less than 0.3, pies (Corbee et al. 2014b, 2015a).
suggesting a considerable influence of envi- In a study in Labrador retrievers, it has been
ronmental factors including nutrition. It has shown that OA in multiple joints (including
been demonstrated in well- controlled studies hips, elbows, and shoulders) developed in
that endochondral ossification can be dis- overweight dogs and less frequently in restric-
turbed by high food intake (Hedhammar tively fed, slim littermates (Huck et al. 2009;
et al. 1974; Lavelle 1989) and excessive cal- Kealy et al. 1992). The frequency and severity
cium intake (Hazewinkel 1985; Schoenmakers of the occurrence of disturbances in endo-
et al. 2000), as well as by oversupplementation chondral ossification as a common factor in
of a balanced diet with vitamin D (Tryfonidou EDs can be decreased in breeds at risk by die-
et al. 2003b). tary management, including the feeding of a
Protein-r ich rations have not been shown to diet with an appropriate calcium-t o- energy
have a disturbing influence on skeletal devel- ratio, a quantitative restriction of energy
opment (Nap et al. 1991). In a study in Great intake, and by not adding vitamin D to a bal-
Danes raised on food with an increased cal- anced diet.
cium and phosphorus intake (3.3 and 3.0%,
respectively, compared to controls on 1.1% and
Hip Dysplasia
0.9%, respectively) starting at the age of wean-
ing (i.e. 3 weeks of age) until 17 weeks, the Although much is known about the symptoms
dogs developed disturbances in endochondral and treatment modalities, little is known about
ossification in the growth plates of the distal the etiology of hip dysplasia (HD) in dogs.
radius and/or ulna. As a consequence, elbow Symptoms include laxity of both hip joints
incongruity developed, due either to a severe (Bardens and Hardwick 1968), with an
disturbance of growth in the length of the increased pressure load on the joint surface
radius or to a severe radius curvus syndrome causing cartilage disruption of the acetabulum
with disturbed growth in the length of the ulna and femoral head, and eventually deformity of
(Hazewinkel 1985; Schoenmakers et al. 2000). the joint and increased bone formation in the
The former may coincide with overloading and subchondral area (Figure 10.9). Pain is the
thus fracturing of the MCP, while the latter dominant clinical sign during the first phase of
may coincide with an UAP or the painful pres- HD with reluctance to play and walk, whereas
sure of the humeral condyle against the UAP, in the advanced stages OA symptoms domi-
all leading to OA of the elbow joint. Lau et al. nate (i.e. stiffness after rising, warming up,
(2013) demonstrated in immature Labradors inability to move the joint in a normal range).
that FCP development was due to a distur- Laxity of the hip joint is a constant feature in
bance of endochondral ossification, especially HD. The laxity can be controlled in the dog in
with delayed calcification in the calcifying lateral recumbency, without or with anesthe-
zone. Since vitamin D influences skeletal sia, by moving the femur in an upward direc-
development by stimulating the terminal dif- tion. Originally this was performed at 4 weeks
ferentiat
--- pdf page 242 ---
214 NuitsisBo a M o gneoneoi BfdOtihBmnensl Dsone oneo
clinically with the Ortolani and Bardens test, disturbed development of the os acetabulare
and radiologically by measuring the Norberg quatrum as a form of osteochondrosis causing
angle (Schawalder et al. 1998). Other radio- OA of the affected hip joint has been described
logic techniques may include enforced laterali- by Schawalder et al. (1998). Madsen et al.
zation of the femoral heads with the aid of a (1991) registered a delayed ossification of the
fulcrum between the thighs, as described by femoral head during the development of HD in
Smith (2004) and Vezzoni et al. (2005), or large- breed dogs. Late fusion of secondary
enforced craniodorsal pressure with abduction ossification centers, together with severe oste-
of the proximal femurs with the dog in dorsal ochondrosis, has been described in Great
recumbency, according to Fluckiger et al. (1999). Danes raised on food with increased calcium
In different studies the genetic influence of content (Voorhout and Hazewinkel 1987), sug-
HD has been proven, although the chi- square gesting a disturbance in endochondral ossifica-
indicates a strong environmental influence, tion of the fusion of the acetabular bones in
including nutrition, activity, and perhaps other case of HD. This, together with mechanical
factors. overloading, may explain why overnutrition
and thus fast growth are etiologic factors
Nutritional Influences Seen for the development of dysplastic hips
in Hip Dysplasia (Hedhammar et al. 1974; Kasström 1975; Kealy
The collodiaphyseal angle (the angle of incli- et al. 1992; Lust et al. 1985; Richardson
nation) is approximately 135°, but larger angles et al. 2010). In addition, it may explain the
(coxa valga) are seen in conjunction with involvement of multiple joints, as reported in
HD. In a longitudinal study in Great Danes overweight dogs (Kasström 1975; Kealy
raised on food provided ad libitum, the angle et al. 1992; Lust 1993). Interestingly, young
between the collum femoris and the femoral dogs under 12 weeks of age with joint laxity did
shaft was larger than in the control group not develop HD when raised on a low- caloric
raised on a calorie-r estricted, but similar, diet intake regime during growth (Richardson
(Hedhammar et al. 1974). The increased et al. 2010).
energy (and thus also mineral) intake may have The dorsal acetabular rim (DAR) is cartilagi-
caused hypercalcitoninism with decreased nous until 3–4 months of age, and is vulnera-
osteoclast activity and, as a consequence, ham- ble to deformity in cases of joint laxity. The
pered skeletal remodeling during maturation, dorsocranial rim can develop from a separate
with a more obtuse collodiaphyseal angle than ossification center by endochondral ossifica-
the control dogs (Hedhammar et al. 1974). tion (Morgan et al. 2000). This DAR can be
The acetabulum is formed out of four ossifi- visualized on radiographs with the X- ray beam
cation centers connected by cartilage fusions. parallel to the longitudinal axis of the pelvis.
During proportional growth of the femoral The line through the DAR should make an
head, these ossification centers can drift away, angle with the line horizontal through the pel-
thus remodeling during skeletal growth. vis (or perpendicular to the spinal processes)
Normally these ossification centers fuse at of <7.5° (Slocum and Devine 1990) or even –1
approximately 6 months of age. Asynchronous or –2° (Vezzoni et al. 2005). If the angle
mat

===== HOSPITAL pages 1-15 =====
--- pdf page 1 ---

--- pdf page 2 ---

--- pdf page 3 ---
Nutritional Management of
Hospitalized Small Animals
--- pdf page 4 ---
This title is also available as an e‐book.
For more details, please see
www.wiley.com/buy/9781444336474
or scan this QR code:
--- pdf page 5 ---
Nutritional
Management
of Hospitalized
Small Animals
EdiTEd by
Daniel L. Chan, DVM, DACVECC, DECVECC,
DACVN, FHEA, MRCVS
Professor of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
Clinical Nutritionist, Head of Nutritional Support Service
Section Head of Emergency and Critical Care
department of Veterinary Clinical Science and Services
The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
--- pdf page 6 ---
This edition first published 2015 © 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial Offices
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2dQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
1606 Golden Aspen drive, Suites 103 and 104, Ames, iowa 50010, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to
apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley‐blackwell.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the
UK Copyright, designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of
the publisher.
designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book. it is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
professional services. if professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a
competent professional should be sought.
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and discussion
only and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specific
method, diagnosis, or treatment by health science practitioners for any particular patient. The publisher
and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the ac
--- pdf page 7 ---
Contents
Contributors, vii
Preface, ix
Acknowledgements, xi
1 Nutritional assessment in small animals, 1
Kathryn E. Michel
2 Estimating energy requirements of small animal patients, 7
Daniel L. Chan
3 Routes of nutritional support in small animals, 14
Sally Perea
4 Nasoesophageal feeding tubes in dogs and cats, 21
Isuru Gajanayake
5 Esophagostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats, 29
Laura Eirmann
6 Gastrostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats, 41
Isuru Gajanayake and Daniel L. Chan
7 Jejunostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats, 54
F. A. (Tony) Mann and Robert C. Backus
8 Minimally invasive placement of postpyloric feeding tubes, 65
Matthew W. Beal
9 Tube feeding in small animals: diet selection and preparation, 80
Iveta Becvarova
10 Intravenous access for parenteral nutrition in small animals, 92
Sophie Adamantos
11 Parenteral nutrition in small animals, 100
Daniel L. Chan and Lisa M. Freeman
12 Pathophysiology and clinical approach to malnutrition in dogs
and cats, 117
Jason W. Gagne and Joseph J. Wakshlag
13 Appetite stimulants in dogs and cats, 128
Lisa P. Weeth
14 Adverse food reactions in small animals, 136
Cecilia Villaverde and Marta Hervera
v
--- pdf page 8 ---
vi Contents
15 Nutritional management of short bowel syndrome in dogs and cats, 152
Daniel L. Chan
16 Refeeding syndrome in small animals, 159
Daniel L. Chan
17 Feeding small animal patients with gastrointestinal motility disorders, 165
Karin Allenspach and Daniel L. Chan
18 Immune modulating nutrients in small animals, 172
Daniel L. Chan
19 Nutritional management of superficial necrolytic dermatitis in dogs, 183
Andrea V. Volk and Ross Bond
20 Nutritional support in acute kidney injury in dogs and cats, 193
Denise A. Elliott
21 Nutritional support in hepatic failure in dogs and cats, 199
Renee M. Streeter and Joseph J. Wakshlag
22 Nutritional management of the septic patient, 210
Daniel L. Chan
23 Nutritional support during acute pancreatitis, 219
Kristine B. Jensen and Daniel L. Chan
24 Nutritional support in the mechanically ventilated small
animal patient, 228
Daniel L. Chan
25 Nutritional support in exotic pet species, 234
Jeleen A. Briscoe, La’Toya Latney and Cailin R. Heinze
Index, 247
--- pdf page 9 ---
Contributors
Sophie Adamantos, BVSc, DACVECC, DECVECC, MRCVS, FHEA
Langford Veterinary Services, University of Bristol, UK
Karin Allenspach, Dr.med.vet., FVH, DECVIM‐CA, PhD, FHEA, MRCVS
Professor of Internal Medicine, Department of Clinical Science and Services, The Royal
Veterinary College, University of London, UK
Robert C. Backus, MS, DVM, PhD, DACVN
Associate Professor, Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, College of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Missouri, USA
Matthew W. Beal, DVM Diplomate ACVECC
Associate Professor, Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Director of Interventional
Radiology Services, College of Veterinary Medicine, Michigan State University, USA
Iveta Becvarova, DVM, MS, Diplomate ACVN
Director, Academic Affairs, Hill’s Pet Nutrition Manufacturing, Czech Republic
Ross Bond, BVMS, PhD, DVD, DECVD, MRCVS
Professor of Dermatology, Department of Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal
Veterinary College, University of London, UK
Jeleen A. Briscoe, VMD, DABVP (Avian)
Animal Care Program, United States Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health
Service, Riverdale, MD, USA
Daniel L. Chan, DVM, DACVECC, DECVECC, DACVN, FHEA, MRCVS
Professor, Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, Clinical Nutritionist, Department
of Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University
of London, UK
Laura Eirmann, DVM, DACVN
Oradell Animal Hospital; Nestle Purina PetCare, Ringwood, NJ, USA
Denise A. Elliott, BVSc (Hons) PhD, DACVIM, DACVN
Head of Research, Waltham Centre for Pet Nutrition, Waltham on the Wolds,
Leicestershire, UK
Lisa M. Freeman, PhD, DVM, DACVN
Professor of Nutrition, Department of Clinical Sciences, Tufts Cummings School of
Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, MA, USA
vii
--- pdf page 10 ---
viii Contributors
Jason W. Gagne, DVM, DACVN
Nestle Purina Incorporated, St Louis, MO, USA
Isuru Gajanayake, BVSc, CertSAM, DACVIM, MRCVS
Willows Veterinary Centre and Referral Service, Shirley, Solihull, West Midlands, UK
Cailin R. Heinze, VMD, MS, DACVN
Assistant Professor, Department of Clinical Sciences, Tufts Cummings School of
Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, MA, USA
Marta Hervera, BVSc, PhD, DECVCN
Servei de Dietètica i Nutrició, Fundació Hospital Clínic Veterinari, Universitat Autònoma
de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain
Kristine B. Jensen, DVM, MVetMed, DACVIM, MRCVS
Djursjukhuset Malmö, Cypressvägen Malmö, Sweden
La’Toya Latney, DVM
Exotic Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery, University of Pennsylvania School of
Veterinary Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA
F. A. (Tony) Mann, DVM, MS, DACVS, DACVECC
Professor, Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA
Kathryn E. Michel, DVM, MS, DACVN
Professor, Department of Clinical Studies, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Sally Perea, DVM, MS, DACVN
Mars Pet Care, Mason, OH, USA
Renee M. Streeter, DVM
Liverpool, NY, USA
Cecilia Villaverde, BVSc, PhD, DACVN, DECVCN
Servei de Dietètica i Nutrició, Fundació Hospital Clínic Veterinari, Universitat Autònoma
de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain
Andrea V. Volk, DVM, Dr med.vet, MVetMed, DipECVD, MRCVS
Dermatology Service, Department of Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal
Veterinary College, University of London, UK
Joseph J. Wakshlag, DVM, PhD, DACVN, DACVSMR
Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine, Ithaca, NY, USA
Lisa P. Weeth, DVM, DACVN
Weeth Nutrition Services, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
--- pdf page 11 ---
Preface
After many years of nutritional support in many veterinary hospitals amounting
to “too little and too late” there is finally concrete recognition that nutritional
support is a key aspect of successful patient recovery. The application, techniques
and strategies of nutritional support in small animals have gone through many
changes in the past several years and effective nutritional support is a hallmark
of high quality standard of care. Perhaps it is the close interface between nutri-
tion and all other aspects of care that ensures that the art and science of nutrition
remains dynamic as it evolves with advances in patient care. This is what makes
nutritional support a very exciting and challenging field in which to practice. In
the management of many ill animals, clinicians face numerous challenges of
providing optimal nutritional care. In formulating the best plans, clinicians must
not only possess a keen understanding of nutritional principles, techniques and
strategies, but also have a strong foundation in physiology, pathophysiology and
therapeutics.
It is worth emphasizing that no single nutritional therapeutic plan will be
applicable to all patient populations. Medical treatments and interventions,
including nutritional therapies, vary significantly among different patient popu-
lations and veterinary facilities. With various disease states, there may be signifi-
cant alterations in the physiologic and metabolic pathways that can impact the
nutritional plan. The goals of this book are to provide a comprehensive reference
on the principles and practice of nutritional support in small animals that require
hospitalization. The primary target for this book includes general practitioners,
advanced practitioners, specialists, veterinary nurses, technicians, support staff
and those studying and researching the science of nutritional support.
The first section of the book comprises chapters exploring techniques for
assessing the nutritional status and energy 
--- pdf page 12 ---
x Preface
Chapters have been written by a prominent group of authors, who have
committed their careers to their area of interest and in many cases currently
practise in the subject area about which they wrote. It is hoped that this should
allow them to share some greater insight of the nuances of the practice of
nutritional support for the hospitalized small animal patient. The vision for this
book is that it becomes an indispensable nutritional resource for small animal
practitioners and the reference book of choice as a practical and useful guide for
the nutritional support of hospitalized small animal patients.
It is also the intent of the book to describe clinically applicable techniques that
can be incorporated in most practice environments. The scientific evidence behind
these recommendations is briefly explored, providing the reader with references
for further reading if desired. Many of the contributors are practising nutritionists
who are providing practical solutions for their patients. Others contributors are
specialists in their fields and show how nutritional support can be effectively
used to manage problems they encounter in their practice. In summary, it is an
exciting time for the continued development of nutritional care in veterinary
patients and this book attempts to capture this excitement.
It is our sincere hope that this book becomes a valuable resource in a wide
range of practice settings from small practices to large multi‐disciplinary referral
centers and that optimal nutritional support becomes the standard of care for
every patient.
Daniel L. Chan
DVM, DACVECC, DECVECC, DACVN, MRCVS
--- pdf page 13 ---
Acknowledgements
Needless to say, a project such as this doesn’t just happen. It takes a tremendous
amount of work, dedication, perseverance and, perhaps most of all, patience.
I would first like to thank the team at Wiley for their total support of this project
and particularly for their patience. I would also like to thank a group of people
whose invaluable guidance has gotten me to where I am today – no one gets to
where they are alone. I have been extremely fortunate to have a number of
people who I am proud to call my mentors. Lisa Freeman, John Rush and Liz
Rozanski have had a great influence on my career and I hope I can impart
some of their wisdom to my residents, interns and students. There are many
people that can teach, but few that can inspire. Last but not least, I would espe-
cially like to thank my wife Liz and my family for all of their love and support
over the years, their sacrifice, endless patience, understanding and inspiration.
xi
--- pdf page 14 ---

--- pdf page 15 ---
Chapter 1
Nutritional assessment
in small animals
Kathryn E. Michel
Department of Clinical Studies, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Introduction
It is generally believed that hospitalized patients experiencing malnutrition are at
greater risk of morbidity and mortality. There is ample evidence in human patients
that this is the case, and while this association has not been clearly established in
small animal patients, caloric intake has been found to be positively associated
with hospital discharge (Mullen et al., 1979, Brunetto et al., 2010). Despite the
lack of a proven direct causal relationship between impaired nutritional status
and poor clinical outcome, the assumption is that the prevention or correction of
nutritional deficiencies should minimize or eliminate the risk of nutritionally
associated morbidity and mortality.
Inadequate food intake is a very common presenting complaint in small
animal practice and only a minority of dogs and cats achieve adequate volun­
tary food intake during hospitalization (Remillard et al., 2001). The task of
identifying and determining the magnitude of malnutrition in a patient and
deciding whether steps need to be taken to address the problem is complicated
by several factors. First, the degree of malnutrition and its impact on a patient’s
body composition, metabolism and functional status varies considerably with
the extent of insufficiency of calorie and nutrient intake, the patient’s illness
and other physiological demands (See Chapter 11). Furthermore, as many of
the parameters used to assess the nutritional status of patients are substantially
affected by illness and injury, it is therefore difficult, if not impossible, to gauge
the extent to which malnutrition, as opposed to the underlying disease, has
contributed to changes in any given parameter. Alterations in visceral proteins
(e.g., albumin, trans ferrin), markers of immune function (e.g., total lympho­
cyte counts,

HOSPITAL total pages: 269
