

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====


===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
1
NUTRIENT REQUIREMENTS OF
DOGS AND CATS
Ad Hoc Committee on Dog and Cat Nutrition
Committee on Animal Nutrition
Board on Agriculture and Natural Resources
Division on Earth and Life Studies
National Research Council
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
Washington, DC
www.nap.edu


===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
2
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS • 500 Fifth Street, N.W. • Washington,
DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the
Governing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of
Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee
responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard
for appropriate balance.
This study was supported by the National Institutes of Health under Agreement No.
IR24RR142238-01, the Food and Drug Administration under Agreement No. FD-
R001887-01, and the Pet Food Institute. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or
recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support
for the project.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
National Research Council (U.S.). Ad Hoc Committee on Dog and Cat Nutrition.
Nutrient requirements of dogs and cats / Ad Hoc Committee on Dog and Cat
Nutrition,
Committee on Animal Nutrition, Board on Agriculture and Natural Resources,
Division on
Earth and Life Studies, National Research Council.—[Rev. ed.].
    p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-309-08628-0 (hardcover)—ISBN 0-309-50733-2 (pdf)—ISBN 0-309-
48892-1 (paperback)
Epub ISBN: 978-0-309-48893-8
DOI: 10.17226/10668
1. Dogs—Nutrition. 2. Cats—Nutrition. 3. Dogs—Food. 4. Cats—Food. I. Title.
SF427.4N38 2006
636.7'0852—dc22
2005037411
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press,
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or
(202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2006 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America


===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
3
First Printing, May 2006
Second Printing, November 2006
Third Printing, September 2011
Fourth Printing, March 2014
Fifth Printing, November 2015
Sixth Printing, June 2017
Seventh Printing, January 2018


===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
4
The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society
of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to
the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.
Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy
has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and
technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy of
Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,
sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the
federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and
research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. Wulf is
president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the
examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts
under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its
congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own
initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V.
Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with
the Academy’s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in
providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Wm. Wulf are chairman and
vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org


===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
5
AD HOC COMMITTEE ON DOG AND CAT NUTRITION
DONALD C. BEITZ, Chair, Iowa State University, Ames
JOHN E. BAUER, Texas A & M University, College Station
KEITH C. BEHNKE, Kansas State University, Manhattan
DAVID A. DZANIS, Dzanis Consulting & Collaborations, Santa Clarita, California
GEORGE C. FAHEY, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
RICHARD C. HILL, University of Florida, Gainesville
FRANCIS A. KALLFELZ, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York
ELLEN KIENZLE, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany
JAMES G. MORRIS, University of California, Davis
QUINTON R. ROGERS, University of California, Davis
National Research Council Staff
JAMIE S. JONKER, Study Director
COMMITTEE ON ANIMAL NUTRITION
GARY L. CROMWELL, Chair, University of Kentucky, Lexington
C. ROSELINA ANGEL, University of Maryland, College Park
JESSE P. GOFF, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service,
Ames, Iowa
RONALD W. HARDY, University of Idaho, Hagerman
KRISTEN A. JOHNSON, Washington State University, Pullman
BRIAN W. MCBRIDE, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada
KEITH E. RINEHART, Perdue Farms, Inc., Salisbury, Maryland
L. LEE SOUTHERN, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge
DONALD R. TOPLIFF, West Texas A&M University, Canyon
National Research Council Staff
CHARLOTTE KIRK BAER, Director
JAMIE S. JONKER, Program Officer
STEPHANIE PADGHAM, Project Assistant
JOE ESPARZA, Project Assistant
MARINA PEUNOVA-CONNOR, Project Assistant
BOARD ON AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES


===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
6
MAY BERENBAUM, Chair, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
SANDRA BARTHOLMEY, University of Illinois, Chicago
ROGER N. BEACHY, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, Missouri
H.H. CHENG, University of Minnesota, St. Paul
W.R. GOMES, University of California, Oakland
ARTURO GOMEZ-POMPA, University of California, Riverside
PERRY R. HAGENSTEIN, Institute for Forest Analysis, Planning, and Policy,
Wayland, Massachusetts
JEAN HALLORAN, Consumer Policy Institute/Consumers Union, Yonkers, New
York
HANS R. HERREN, Millennium Institute, Arlington, Virginia
DANIEL P. LOUCKS, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York
WHITNEY MACMILLAN (Emeritus), Cargill, Incorporated, Minneapolis,
Minnesota
BRIAN W. MCBRIDE, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada
TERRY MEDLEY, E.I. duPont de Nemours and Company, Wilmington, Delaware
OLE NIELSEN (Emeritus), Ontario Veterinary College, Guelph, Canada
ROBERT PAARLBERG, Wellesley College, Watertown, Massachusetts
ALICE N. PELL, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York
BOBBY PHILLS, Florida A&M University, Tallahassee
SONYA SALAMON, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
PEDRO A. SANCHEZ, The Earth Institute at Columbia University, Palisades, New
York
B.L. TURNER II, Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts
JAW-KAI WANG, University of Hawaii, Manoa
TILAHUN D. YILMA, University of California, Davis
National Research Council Staff
CHARLOTTE KIRK BAER, Director (until October 2004)
ROBIN SCHOEN, Director (from November 2004)
KAREN IMHOF, Administrative Assistant
AUSTIN LEWIS, Program Officer
PEGGY TSAI, Research Associate


===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
7
Preface
In 2000, the National Research Council Committee on Animal Nutrition
convened the ad hoc Committee on Nutrient Requirements of Dogs and Cats to
revise the 1985 and 1986 publications on Nutrient Requirements of Dogs and
Nutrient Requirement of Cats, respectively. The task presented to the committee was
as follows:
An ad hoc committee of the Committee on Animal Nutrition will revise the 1985 and
1986 publications on Nutrient Requirements of Dogs and Nutrient Requirements of
Cats. These two publications, originally published as two separate documents, will be
revised into a single report. The new report will provide updated estimates of
requirements for all nutrients and will contain discussions of nutrient metabolism,
toxicity, deficiency, and nutritionally related disease in both dogs and cats.
Information on impacts of physiologic status, temperature, breed, age, and
environment on nutrient requirements will also be included. The revised report will
address unique biological characteristics affecting nutrient digestion and utilization.
General considerations regarding feed ingredients, diet formulation, and feed
processing and manufacturing will be presented. Principles of feeding pet and
laboratory animals will be addressed.
Throughout the study process, the committee sought input from various sources.
We held public meetings in conjunction with professional meetings and invited
experts to speak with us as we worked to complete our task. Over the course of 3
years, the committee held six meetings and four public sessions. We acquired data
and information from various public and private organizations. By combining a
thorough literature review with a critical analysis of scientific data and professional
experiences, the committee developed recommendations that are firmly grounded in
science.
The report is organized into 15 chapters, each addressing unique aspects of
nutrition for dogs and cats or providing summary tables of requirements and feed
ingredients. Each chapter examines literature published since the last editions of
Nutrient Requirements of Dogs (1985) and Nutrient Requirements of Cats (1986). As
the committee delved into this task, it became apparent that we needed to examine


===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
8
earlier research as well to formalize the boundaries of knowledge for each topic
explored in this report. In some instances—for example, digestive physiology and
physical activity—the chapters are essentially new additions requiring a thorough
review of literature through many decades.
The committee was also cognizant of the various audiences for this report. The
report will be used by professionals in industry and academia for formulating diets
and identifying new topics for research. Government officials may use the report as
guidance for regulations for pet food labeling. Students and teachers at universities
will use the report as a textbook for dog and cat nutrition. Finally, pet owners will
use the report in evaluating feeding decisions for their pets. With these varied
audiences, the committee chose to err on the side of caution and include adequate
detail from the literature cited to provide a clear road map for how the
recommendations were derived.
The reader should note that this published report reflects a number of changes
made to correct and update an unedited prepublication version of the report. Some
values, particularly in Chapter 15, have been revised or deleted based on the
availability of new information or to correct errors in calculation. These changes
were examined by four independent reviewers and have been approved by the
authoring committee and the institution.
Our assignment was a challenging one. We are pleased to provide what we
believe is a comprehensive document that will improve both the understanding of
dog and cat nutrition and its practical application in feeding dogs and cats.
DONALD C. BEITZ, Chair
Ad Hoc Committee on Nutrient
Requirements of Dogs and Cats


===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
9
Acknowledgments
This new volume represents the integrated efforts of many individuals. The
committee thanks everyone who provided input to this study. We thank all those who
provided opportunities for our public meetings and who participated in our public
sessions. The financial support provided by the National Institutes of Health, Food
and Drug Administration, and the Pet Food Institute is gratefully acknowledged.
During the course of its deliberations, the committee sought assistance from
several people who gave generously of their time to provide advice and information
that was considered in our deliberations. Special thanks are due to Gail Czarnecki-
Maulden for extraordinary contribution to the initiation of this study.
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their
diverse perspectives and technical expertise in accordance with procedures approved
by the National Research Council’s Report Review Committee. The purpose of this
independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the
institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the
report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to
protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to thank the following
individuals for their review of this report: Leonard S. Bull, North Carolina State
University; Wouter Hendriks, Massey University; Kenneth W. Hinchcliff, Ohio State
University; Bruce J. Holub, University of Guelph; Daniel T. Hopkins, Purina Mills,
Inc. (retired); Randall A. Johnson, Animal Nutrition Consulting; Neal Merchen,
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign; William Rumpler, U.S. Department of
Agriculture; L. Lee Southern, Louisiana State University; C. Edward Stevens, North
Carolina State University; Mark Subramanyam, Schering-Plough Animal Health
Corp.; Duane E. Ullrey, Michigan State University; and Thomas R. Zeigler, Zeigler
Bros., Inc.; and Jürgen Zentec, Veterinary University of Vienna. Four of the
reviewers listed above provided comments on changes made to the prepublication
draft. Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or
recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release. The


===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
10
review of this report was overseen by Joe Knapka, National Institutes of Health
(retired), appointed by the Division on Earth and Life Studies. This individual was
responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was
carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments
were carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests
entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
Finally, the committee wishes to thank Charlotte Kirk Baer, program director, and
Jamie Jonker, program officer, Committee on Animal Nutrition, for their
encouragement and cheerful guidance of this project to completion. Their
exceptional organizational skills contributed in a major way to the success of the
committee. Appreciation also is extended to Stephanie Padgham, Joe Esparza, and
Marina Peunova-Connor, project assistants for the study, for their regular
communications and helpful provision of supplementary materials. Thanks are also
due to Karen Imhof, administrative assistant, who incorporated edits into the final
version of the report, and to Robin Schoen, who took the committee through its final
deliberations.


===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
11
Contents
OVERVIEW
1 COMPARATIVE DIGESTIVE PHYSIOLOGY OF DOGS AND CATS
Introduction
Digestive Compartments and Functions
Mouth
Esophagus
Stomach
Gastric Emptying
Small Intestine, Pancreas, and Liver
Large Intestine
Hormonal Aspects of Digestion
Measurement of, and Factors Affecting, Digestibility
References
2 FEEDING BEHAVIOR OF DOGS AND CATS
Food Ingestion by Feral Dogs and Cats
Diurnal Rhythms, and Feeding and Drinking Patterns
Role of Imprinting and Social Factors on Feeding Behavior
Dietary Choice, Palatability, Learned Taste Aversions, and Preferences
Control of Food Intake
Feeding Recommendations
References
3 ENERGY
Introduction
Energy Evaluation and Requirements: Two Ways of Looking at the Issue
Energy Evaluation
Methods of Estimating Energy in Food
Prediction of Energy Content
Energy Requirements of Dogs


===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
12
Definitions
Basis for Establishing Energy Requirements
Basal Metabolic Rate
Diet-Induced Thermogenesis and Resting Fed Metabolic Rate
Adult Maintenance
Gestation
Lactation
Growth
Physical Activity
Energy Requirements of Cats
Basis for Establishing Energy Requirements
Basal Metabolic Rate and Dietary Thermogenesis
Adult Maintenance
Gestation
Lactation
Growth
Energy Deficiency and Excess in Dogs and Cats
Body Condition
References
4 CARBOHYDRATES AND FIBER
Definition, Classification, and Measurement
Absorbable Carbohydrates
Digestible Carbohydrates
Fermentable Carbohydrates
Nonfermentable Carbohydrates
Absorbable Carbohydrates (Monosaccharides and Sugar Alcohols)
Presence in Foodstuffs
Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization
Factors Affecting Digestibility, Absorption, and Utilization
Nutritive Value
Physicochemical Effects
Physiological Effects
Health-Related Characteristics
Digestible Carbohydrates (Disaccharides, Certain Oligosaccharides, and
Nonstructural Polysaccharides)
Presence in Foodstuffs
Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization
Factors Affecting Digestibility, Absorption, and Utilization
Nutritive Value
Physicochemical Effects
Physiological Effects
Health-Related Characteristics


===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
13
Fermentable Carbohydrates (Lactose, Certain Oligosaccharides, Dietary Fibers,
and Resistant Starch)
Presence in Foodstuffs
Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization
Factors Affecting Digestibility, Absorption, and Utilization
Nutritive Value
Physicochemical Effects
Physiological Effects
Health-Related Characteristics
Poorly Fermentable Carbohydrates (Cellulose and Wheat Bran)
Presence in Foodstuffs
Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization
Factors Affecting Digestibility, Absorption, and Utilization
Nutritive Value
Physicochemical Effects
Physiological Effects
Health-Related Characteristics
Carbohydrates in Dog and Cat Diet Formulations
References
5 FAT AND FATTY ACIDS
Importance of Dietary Fats and Fatty Acids
Types and Sources of Dietary Fats and Fatty Acids
Nomenclature
Sources
Trans Fatty Acids
Medium-Chain Triacylglycerols
Conjugated Linoleic Acid
Other Sources
Analytical Procedures
Acid Hydrolysis
Extraction and Saponification of Fatty Acids
Extraction for Total Lipid Analysis
Fat Energy and Nutrient Density
Digestion and Absorption
Preduodenal Lipase
Pancreatic Lipase
Other Lipases
Summary of Triacylglycerol Hydrolysis
Absorption
Digestibility
Biochemical Basis of Fatty Acid Essentiality
Biosynthesis


===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
14
Desaturation and Elongation
Fatty Acid Ratios
Essential Fatty Acid Utilization for Structure and Function
Comparative Studies
Membrane Composition and Integrity
Lipid-Protein Interactions
Eicosanoid Production
Growth and Development
Canine Studies
Signs of Deficiency or Excess
Skin and Hair Coat
Inflammatory and Immune Cell Structure and Function
Feline Studies
Signs of Deficiency or Excess
Evidence for Limited Δ6 Desaturase Activities
Dietary LCPUFA and Feline Life Stage
Immune, Inflammatory, and Platelet Cell Functions
Requirements, Recommendations, and Allowances
Essential Fatty Acids for Dogs and Cats
Dogs
Fat Content of Diets: Preferences, Minima, and Maxima
Growth
Adult Maintenance
Gestation and Lactation
Cats
Fat Content of Diets: Preferences, Minima, and Maxima
Growth
Adult Maintenance
Gestation and Lactation
References
6 PROTEIN AND AMINO ACIDS
Basic Concepts
Introduction
Structure and Function
Essentiality of Amino Acids
Digestibility and Bioavailability of Protein and Amino Acids
Assessing Protein and Amino Acid Status
Requirements, Allowances, and Tolerances of Protein and Amino Acids
Role of Metabolic Adaptation in Protein and Amino Acid Nutrition
Nitrogen (Crude Protein) Minimum Requirements, Recommended
Allowances, and Adequate Intakes


===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
15
Amino Acid Minimum Requirements, Recommended Allowances, Adequate
Intakes, and Safe Upper Limits
Dispensable Amino Acids
Amino Acid Imbalances and Antagonisms
References
7 MINERALS
Introduction
Minerals and Acid-Base Balance
Macrominerals
Calcium
Phosphorus
Magnesium
Sodium
Potassium
Chloride
Trace Minerals
Iron
Copper
Zinc
Manganese
Selenium
Iodine
Other Minerals
Arsenic
Boron
Chromium
Molybdenum
Silicon
Nickel
Vanadium
Miscellaneous Minerals
References
8 VITAMINS
Introduction
Vitamin A
Absorption, Transport, and Storage
Biological Function
Dogs
Cats
Vitamin D
Absorption, Transport, and Storage


===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
16
Biological Function
Dogs
Cats
Vitamin E
Absorption
Biological Function
Dogs
Cats
Vitamin K
Absorption, Metabolism, and Excretion
Biological Function
Dogs
Cats
Thiamin (Vitamin B1)
Absorption
Biological Function
Dogs
Cats
Riboflavin
Absorption
Biological Function
Dogs
Cats
Vitamin B6
Absorption, Transport, and Storage
Biological Function
Dogs
Cats
Niacin
Absorption
Biological Function
Dogs
Cats
Pantothenic Acid
Absorption, Transport, and Storage
Biological Function
Dogs
Cats
Cobalamin (Vitamin B12)
Absorption
Biological Function
Dogs


===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
17
Cats
Folic Acid
Absorption, Transport, and Storage
Biological Function
Dogs
Cats
Biotin
Absorption
Biological Function
Dogs
Cats
Choline
Absorption
Biological Function
Dogs
Cats
Ascorbic Acid
Biological Function
Dogs
Cats
Vitamin-Like Substances
Vitamin Losses During Processing and Storage of Dog and Cat Foods
References
9 WATER
General Principles
Function
Regulation of Intake by Dogs and Cats
Deficiency in Dogs and Cats
Requirements of Dogs
Requirements for Maintenance
Requirements for Other Life Stages
Requirements for Work and Environmental Stress
Requirements of Cats
Requirements for Maintenance and Other Life Stages
Water and Feline Lower Urinary Tract Health
Recommended Allowances
Toxicity in Dogs and Cats
References
10 SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR LABORATORY ANIMALS
Requirements
Energy


===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
18
Nutrients Other Than Energy
Food Selection
General
Certified Diets
Purified and Chemically Defined Diets
Foods for Specific Dietary Purposes (e.g., Medical Foods)
Feeding Management
Life-Stage Designation of Food
Form of Food
Amount Fed
Frequency of Feeding
Storage of Food
References
11 PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND ENVIRONMENT
Introduction
Calculations and Assumptions
How Much Exercise Do Dogs and Cats Undertake?
Dogs
Cats
Types of Exercise: Sprinting Versus Endurance
Sprint Exercise Over a Distance of Less Than One Kilometer
Endurance Exercise Over Distances Greater Than One Kilometer
Traditional Diets Fed to Racing Dogs
Sled Dogs
Greyhounds
Diet and Health During Exercise
Effect of Exercise on Intestinal Function
Exercise and Digestibility
When to Feed Exercising Dogs
Exercise and Body Condition
Effect of Confinement and Training
Energy Requirements
Minimal Metabolism
Anxiety
Circadian Rhythms
Cold-Induced Thermogenesis
Nutrients in a Warm Environment
Effect of Reduced Oxygen at High Altitude
Effect of Exercise on Energy Requirements
Effect of Exercise on Energy Required in the Absence of Exercise
Energy Required for Exercise: Dynamic Exercise (Short Runs) Versus Steady-
State Exercise (Long Runs)


===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
19
Maximal Oxygen Consumption
Intensity of Exercise
Field Metabolic Rate
Nutrient Requirements
How May Nutrient Requirements Change with Exercise or in the Cold?
Sources of Energy: Fat Versus Carbohydrate
Protein and Exercise
Studies That Have Altered Both Fat and Protein in the Diet of Exercising Dogs
Dietary Carbohydrate and Exercise
Importance of Water and Water Requirements at High Ambient Temperatures
Exercised-Induced Hyperthermia and the Importance of Water During
Exercise
Water Requirements at Rest and During Exercise
Sodium, Potassium, and Chloride
Fluids Containing Electrolytes
Calcium, Phosphorus, and Magnesium
Trace Minerals
Vitamins
Other Nutrients
References
12 DIET FORMULATION AND FEED PROCESSING
Petfood Processing
General Considerations
Dogs
Cats
Petfood Categories
Dry Petfoods
Semi-moist Petfoods
Soft-Expanded (Soft Dry) Petfoods
Baked Petfoods
Starch-Lipid Complexes
Snacks for Pets
Canned (Wet) Petfoods
Homemade Diets
Diet Formulation
Summary
References
13 NUTRIENT COMPOSITION OF INGREDIENTS USED IN DOG AND CAT
FOODS
References


===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
20
14 OTHER FOOD CONSTITUENTS
Constituents Intended for Nutritive Value
Introduction
Chondroprotective Agents
Antioxidants
Probiotics (Direct-Fed Microbials) and Enzymes
Herbs and Botanicals
Other
Constituents Intended for Technical or Nonnutritive Effects on Food
Introduction
Preservatives
Flavors and Extracts
Colors
Other Additives
References
15 NUTRIENT REQUIREMENTS AND DIETARY NUTRIENT
CONCENTRATIONS
Use of Nutrient Requirement Tables
Recommendations Relative to ME Compared with Requirements Relative to
DM
Requirements Relative to ME in the Food Compared with Requirements
Relative to BW
Note on Bioavailability
References
APPENDIXES
A ABOUT THE AUTHORS
B ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
INDEX


===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
21
Tables and Figures
TABLES
1-1     Gastrointestinal Hormone Characteristics of Dogs and Cats
3-1     Predictive Equations for Metabolizable Energy in Dog Food
3-2     Predictive Equations for Metabolizable Energy in Cat Food
3-3     Basal Metabolic Rate in Dogs
3-4     Reported Maintenance Energy Requirements of Dogs in Relation to Breed,
Age, Housing, and Activity
3-5     Recommendations for Growth of Large- and Giant-Breed Dogs
3-6     Reported Daily Maintenance Energy Requirements of Cats
3-7     Body Condition Scoring System
4-1     Summary of Physicochemical, Physiological, and Health-Related Effects of
Absorbable, Digestible, Fermentable, and Nonfermentable Carbohydrates in
Dog and Cat Nutrition
4-2     Starch Content of Some Starch-Rich Foodstuffs and By-products Used in Dog
and Cat Foods
4-3     Influence of Diet Type on Amylase Activity in Chyme of Adult Dogs
4-4     Average Activity of Disaccharidases in Small Intestinal Mucosa of Cats in
Relation to Age
4-5     Molecular Structure and Chemical Linkages of Oligosaccharides with
Bifidogenic Effects in Dog and Cat Foods
4-6     Characteristics of Selected Fibers and Their Effects on Intestinal Transit Time
and Fecal Characteristics of Dogs and/or Cats
4-7     Characteristics of Selected Fibers and Their Effects on Nutrient Digestibility
by Dogs and/or Cats
4-8     Characteristics of Selected Carbohydrates and Their Effects on
Gastrointestinal Health Characteristics of Dogs and/or Cats
4-9     Safe Upper Limits of Selected Carbohydrates for Adult Dog and Cat
Maintenance Diets
5-1     List of Abbreviations of Selected Fatty Acids and Fatty Acid Terminology
6-1     Plasma Amino Acid Concentrations of Kittens


===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
22
6-2A  Plasma Amino Acid Concentrations of Puppies
6-2B  Plasma Amino Acid Concentrations from Normal, Small-, and Large-Breed
Adult Dogs Fed a Variety of Commercial Diets Known to Be Adequate for
Maintenance
6-3     Endogenous Urinary Nitrogen Excretion of Animals Fed a Protein-Free Diet
7-1     Clinical Signs of Phosphorus Deficiency in Dogs in Relation to Physiological
Status and Dietary Phosphorus Concentration
8-1     Relative Vitamin E Activity of Various Tocopherols in Preventing Fetal
Resorption and Hemolysis
8-2     Estimated Minimal Requirement of Vitamin E Needed to Compensate for the
Elevated Vitamin Demand Caused by Some Common Unsaturated Fatty Acids
8-3     Recovery of Vitamins and Carotenoids Added to Extruded Petfoods and
Percentage Loss on Storage
11-1   Greyhound Race Distances and Approximate Fastest Times at Tracks in the
United States
11-2   Distances and Reported Times for Some Long-Distance Races
11-3   Analyses of Diets Fed to Working Sled Dogs in the Antarctic, Mid-Twentieth
Century
11-4   Effect of Changes in Ambient Temperature on Energy Utilization in
Acclimatized and Unacclimatized Cats
11-5   Rate of Energy Utilization in Greyhounds
11-6   Cost of Standing and Running During Steady-State Exercise on a Treadmill
for Dogs and Cats
11-7   Efficiency of Gaining and Losing Height When Running
11-8   Maximal Oxygen Consumption in Dogs
11-9   Field Metabolic Rate in Dogs
11-10 Recommendations for Metabolizable Energy Requirements of Exercising
Dogs
11-11 Adequate Intake of Amino Acids for Greyhounds
11-12 Daily Water Loss from Hydrated and Dehydrated Dogs and Cats as Affected
by Temperature
12-1   Nutrient Content of Dry, Semi-moist, and Canned Dog Foods
13-1   Proximate Analysis of Selected Feed Ingredients
13-2   Carbohydrate and Lignin Concentrations of Some Common Ingredients in
Canine and Feline Foods
13-3   Total Fat Concentration and Fatty Acid Composition of Selected Feed
Ingredients
13-4   Fatty Acid Composition of Selected Fats and Oils
13-5   Amino Acid Composition of Selected Feed Ingredients
13-6   Mineral Content of Selected Ingredients
13-7   Vitamin Content of Selected Ingredients
13-8   Composition of Selected Inorganic Macro-mineral Sources Used in Petfood
13-9   Composition of Selected Inorganic Micro-mineral Sources Used in Petfood


===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
23
15-1   Change in Requirements Relative to ME if Requirements Vary Directly with
BW
15-2   Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements for Growth of Puppies After
Weaning
15-3   Nutrient Requirements for Growth of Puppies After Weaning
15-4   Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements for Adult Dogs at Maintenance
15-5   Nutrient Requirements of Adult Dogs for Maintenance
15-6   Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements for Bitches in Late Gestation
15-7   Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements for Lactating Bitches Based on
Number of Puppies and Weeks of Lactation
15-8   Nutrient Requirements of Bitches for Late Gestation and Peak Lactation
15-9   Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements of Growth in Kittens After
Weaning
15-10 Nutrient Requirements for Growth of Kittens After Weaning
15-11 Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements for Adult Cats at Maintenance
15-12 Nutrient Requirements of Adult Cats for Maintenance
15-13 Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements for Lactating Queens
15-14 Nutrient Requirements of Queens in Late Gestation and Peak Lactation
FIGURES
1-1    Dog gastrointestinal tract
1-2    Cat gastrointestinal tract
3-1    Principles of bioavailability of energy in animals
3-2    Comparison of experimentally determined and predicted ME values in
prepared cat food
3-3    Comparison of experimentally determined and predicted ME values in
prepared cat food
3-4    Schematic comparison of body weight changes of queen and bitch during
gestation and lactation
5-1    Chemical structure of the n-3 and n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid families
5-2    Predominant pathways of essential fatty acid metabolism in mammals
5-3    Generalized pathways of eicosanoid formation from n-3 and n-6 PUFAs
6-1    Effect of dietary crude protein and ratio of essential amino acid nitrogen to
total amino acid nitrogen (E:T) on weight gain of kittens
11-1  Effect of environmental temperature (°C) on energy requirement
11-2  Changes in oxygen consumption before and after a short bout of submaximal
exercise
11-3  Cost of running on a treadmill


===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
24
Overview
The National Research Council has published several editions of Nutrient
Requirements of Dogs and of Nutrient Requirements of Cats, with the most recent
editions published in 1985 and 1986, respectively. This new volume represents a
revision of both of the previous reports.
Nutrient Requirements of Dogs and Cats has used the latest scientific information
to provide the requirements for individual nutrients and the scientific basis for the
requirements of healthy dogs and cats at several stages of growth and physiological
states. The specific nutrients required for normal growth and development and their
estimated daily needs have been elucidated in previous editions of the Nutrient
Requirements series. This edition contains the latest data on requirements that are
based on the utilization of nutrients in ingredients commonly produced and
commercially available in dog and cat foods rather than only on purified diets.
Because of overlapping use of feed ingredients, as a convenience to readers and for
efficient presentation of the scientific basis for nutrient requirements, the Committee
on Animal Nutrition recommended combining the dog and cat data that previously
had been published separately (National Research Council, 1985, 1986).
Nutrient requirement data presented in this report are derived from peer-reviewed
literature. An extensive amount of new research conducted since the previous
National Research Council publications on dogs and cats was available for this NRC
report, yet several gaps still exist in our knowledge of requirements for specific
nutrients. These gaps in our knowledge are noted in the text and by the absence of
data in the requirement tables. Tables of ingredient composition are provided so that
users can select the most common ingredients for the development of diets that
provide adequate intake of the required nutrients for optimal growth, maintenance,
gestation, and lactation of dogs and cats.
The report is organized into 15 chapters, each addressing unique aspects of
nutrition of dogs and cats, or providing summary tables of requirements and feed
ingredients. Each chapter utilizes older well-established literature as well as the new
literature published since the last editions of Nutrient Requirements of Dogs (1985)
and Nutrient Requirements of Cats (1986). As the committee delved into its task, it


===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
25
became apparent that the committee needed to examine earlier research as well to
formalize the boundaries of knowledge for each topic explored in this publication. In
some instances, such as digestive physiology and physical activity, the chapters are
essentially new additions requiring a thorough review of literature through many
decades.
The committee was also cognizant of the various audiences for this report. The
report will be used by professionals in industry and academia for formulating diets
and identifying new topics for research. Government officials may use the report as
guidance for regulations for pet food labeling. Students and teachers at universities
will use the report as a textbook for dog and cat nutrition. Finally, pet owners will
use the report in evaluating the feeding decisions for their pets. With these varied
audiences, the committee chose to err on the side of caution and include adequate
detail from the literature cited to provide a clear roadmap for how the
recommendations were derived.
MINIMAL REQUIREMENT, ADEQUATE INTAKE,
RECOMMENDED ALLOWANCE, AND SAFE UPPER LIMIT
Data on the daily provision of nutrients to dogs and cats are presented in tabular
form at the end of this publication. First, the Minimal Requirement is presented and
is defined as the minimal concentration or amount of a bioavailable nutrient that will
support a defined physiological state. Data on Adequate Intake follow. Adequate
Intake is defined as the concentration in the diet or amount required by the animal of
a nutrient that is presumed to sustain a given life stage when no Minimal
Requirement has been demonstrated. Next, the Recommended Allowance for each
nutrient is presented. The Recommended Allowance is defined as the concentration
or amount of a nutrient in a diet formulated to support a given physiological state.
The Recommended Allowance is based on the Minimal Requirement and, where
applicable, includes a bioavailability factor. If no Minimal Requirement is available,
the Recommended Allowance is based on the Adequate Intake. Last, data for Safe
Upper Limit, or the maximal concentration or amount of a nutrient that has not been
associated with adverse effects, are presented.
As noted in the footnotes to the requirement tables, the following assumptions
were made to standardize the tabulated data. The energy density of the diet for both
dogs and cats was assumed to be 4,000 kilocalories (kcal) of metabolizable energy
(ME) per kilogram (kg). Requirements for growth of puppies are based on a 5.5-kg
puppy that consumes 1,000 kcal of ME per day. Requirements for adult dogs at
maintenance are based on a 15-kg adult dog that consumes 1,000 kcal of ME per day.
Requirements for gestating and lactating dogs are based on a 22-kg bitch with eight
puppies in peak lactation consuming 5,000 kcal of ME per day. Requirements for
growth of kittens are based on an 800-g kitten consuming 180 kcal of ME per day,
and those for an adult cat at maintenance are based on a 4-kg adult cat consuming


===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
26
250 kcal of ME per day. Requirements for gestating and lactating cats are based on
4-kg queen with four kittens in peak lactation consuming 540 kcal of ME per day.
For each of the previously mentioned categories of daily nutrient requirement
data, units of expression are, in order, (1) amount of nutrient per kilogram of dietary
dry matter (DM), which is assumed to contain 4,000 kcal, (2) amount of nutrient per
1,000 kcal of ME, and (3) amount of nutrient per kilogram of body weight to the
0.75 power (BW0.75) for dogs, and per kilogram of body weight to the 0.67 power
(BW0.67) for cats. Expressing a requirement relative to DM or ME is most
convenient when formulating a diet, but expressing a requirement relative to
metabolic body weight may be more convenient when formulating a diet for an
individual dog or cat. Unfortunately, requirements expressed relative to DM change
with the energy density of the diet, and, in some instances, requirements expressed
relative to ME may change with body weight (BW). These changes are illustrated in
the introduction to the nutrient requirement tables in Chapter 15.
Energy requirements are expressed as kcal of ME per kilogram BW0.75 per day
for dogs at maintenance and for pregnant bitches. For lactating bitches, energy
requirements are a function of both BW0.75 and BW as well as number of suckling
puppies. Daily energy requirements for growing dogs are based on maintenance
requirements multiplied by a factor that is a function of the ratio between actual BW
and expected mature BW. The equations for energy requirements in dogs are based
on data of dogs between 4 and 60 kg of mature weight, except for female
reproduction where the majority of data were obtained from dogs between 5 and 25
kg BW. The equations for energy requirements in cats are based on data of domestic
cats between 2.5 and 7 kg of mature weight. Energy requirements for cats at
maintenance are expressed as kcal of ME per kilogram BW0.67 per day for cats with
body condition scores equal to or less than 5.0 (on a 9 point scale) and per kilogram
BW0.4 for cats with body scores greater than 5.0. Energy requirements for pregnant
queens are expressed as a function of BW0.67, whereas for lactating queens, energy
requirements are a function of both BW0.67 and BW as well as number of suckling
kittens. Daily energy requirements for growing cats are based on maintenance
requirements multiplied by a factor that is a function of the ratio between actual BW
and expected mature BW.
REPORT HIGHLIGHTS
Digestive physiology is examined in Chapter 1. The chapter, which was not
previously published in the dog and cat series, includes three components: (1)
digestive compartments and functions; (2) hormonal aspects of digestion; and (3)
measurement of, and factors affecting, digestibility. This description of each species
sets the stage for understanding digestive function and nutritional needs of dogs and
cats.


===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
27
Chapter 2 addresses feeding behavior of dogs and cats. This new chapter
examines intake and factors that affect food and water intake, including aspects of
feeding behavior and ingestion that are different in dogs and cats. The chapter
includes discussions of how diurnal rhythms, social behavior, dietary deficiencies,
and learned taste aversions are involved in feeding behavior such as quantity of food
eaten, palatability, and dietary choice.
A discussion of specific nutrients begins in Chapter 3 with energy. The chapter
examines ways to predict energy content of diets. The basis for energy requirement
recommendations is explored thoroughly through discussions on the basal metabolic
rate, diet-induced thermogenesis, and resting fed metabolic rate for both dogs and
cats, leading to energy requirement recommendations for maintenance, growth,
pregnancy, and lactation. The chapter concludes with a discussion of energy
deficiency and excess including body condition score evaluation.
The discussion of energy is followed by a detailed description of carbohydrates
and fiber in dog and cat nutrition (Chapter 4). This discussion is organized around
four types of carbohydrates: (1) absorbable, (2) digestible, (3) fermentable, and (4)
nonfermentable carbohydrates. Digestion, absorption, utilization, and nutritive value
are explored for each type of carbohydrate. The use of carbohydrates in dog and cat
diet formulations ends the chapter.
Chapter 5 addresses fat and fatty acid (lipid) nutrition with emphasis on the
metabolism of the various fatty acid types. This chapter has been updated and
expanded to include nomenclature, types and sources of dietary fats, analytical
procedures, digestion/absorption of fats, and their digestibility. It also examines the
biochemical basis of fatty acid essentiality, describes desaturation and chain
elongation pathways, and discusses both structural and functional aspects of dietary
lipids. In addition, summaries of studies specifically conducted in dogs and cats with
mention of important comparative studies common to other mammalian species also
are included. Based on this information, sufficient data are now available to better
address the essential nature of both n-6 and n-3 fatty acid types. The chapter
culminates with an up-to-date discussion of the requirements, recommendations, and
allowances for dogs and cats at their various recognized life stages.
Chapter 6 addresses protein and amino acid nutrition, with emphasis on
differences between dogs and cats in digestibility of protein, bioavailability of key
limiting amino acids, and control of protein and amino acid metabolism as it relates
to protein and amino acid requirements and dietary choice. A new section has been
introduced on the use of plasma amino acids to assess essential amino acid status of
the animal. Sufficient data were available to determine that the protein and amino
acid requirements of 4- to 14-week-old puppies are higher than those puppies over
14 weeks of age; so, separate requirements for these different age groups are given.
The section on taurine has been updated to include information on taurine
deficiency-induced dilated cardiomyopathy in the dog and the types of diet that
contribute to this problem. Finally, differences between dogs and cats in their
responses to amino acid excesses and imbalances are discussed.


===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
28
Mineral nutrition is covered and presented in terms of 12 essential macrominerals
and trace minerals in Chapter 7. Acid-base balance is explored for mineral
metabolism in dogs and cats. Absorption and bioavailability, deficiencies and
excesses, and nutrient recommendations are discussed thoroughly for each essential
mineral. Additionally, discussion of seven other minerals (arsenic, boron, chromium,
molybdenum, silicon, nickel, and vanadium) explores their potential essentiality,
although data on the dog and cat currently do not clearly establish them as essential.
The physiologic functions of 14 fat-soluble and water-soluble vitamins are
described in Chapter 8. This discussion includes sections on deficiencies and
toxicities for each vitamin. Additional vitamin-like substances, such as inositol, are
explored, although none have been demonstrated to be essential for dogs or cats.
Finally, vitamin losses in processing and storage of dog and cat foods are examined.
The physiological and biochemical importance of water is outlined in Chapter 9.
Regulation of intake, deficiency, and excess is explored for both dogs and cats. The
importance of water and feline urinary tract health is discussed. Special
considerations for the nutrition and feeding of dogs and cats as laboratory animals
are discussed in Chapter 10.
Entirely new to this combined revision are the effects of physical activity and the
environment on nutrient requirements of dogs and cats in Chapter 11. Starting with
dogs as athletes (sled and racing dogs), effects of sprinting and endurances activities
on nutrient requirements are explored. The effects of temperature (both high and
low) and high altitude (lower oxygen supply) are examined for energy requirements.
Nutrient requirements as a function of amount of exercise and ambient temperatures
are discussed for water, protein, fats, carbohydrates, minerals, and vitamins.
The committee presents concepts of diet formulation in Chapter 12. Even though
substantial differences in the nutrient requirements of dogs and cats exist, there are
many similarities in the techniques used to manufacture their foods. For that reason,
petfood processing is addressed in a generic manner and, when appropriate, issues
concerning individual species are addressed separately.
The information provided in Chapter 13 on food composition, food processing,
and other food constituents is expanded greatly in this volume. Data in Tables 13-1
through 13-8 were compiled from commercial food ingredient suppliers, published
literature, and unpublished data provided by university researchers. The tables
include means and, when available, the standard deviation and number (N) of
samples used to generate those statistics. Users should examine the standard
deviation and N when considering using the mean value as an estimate of the
nutritional content of a specific food ingredient. Obviously, means derived from a
large N will better reflect the total population. Means with a large standard deviation
may represent the total population but may be a poor estimate for a specific sample.
Chapter 14 presents an overview of other food constituents that may be used in
cat and dog diet formulation. These substances in the diet may affect the structure or
function of the body but their absence from the diet does not fit into classical models
of nutritional deficiency. Some play vital roles in the normal metabolism of the


===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
29
animal but cannot be deemed essential because the body is capable of synthesizing
them from other dietary components. Other substances that may play a role in the
normal function of the body must come from an exogenous source, but
determinations of essentiality have yet to be established. Chapter 14 also presents an
overview of other food constituents intended for technical purposes, such as
preservatives.
Nutrient requirements for growth, adult maintenance, gestation, and lactation for
dogs and cats are provided in Tables 15-2 through 15-14 (Chapter 15). Estimates are
listed for energy, protein and amino acids, fatty acids, macrominerals, trace minerals,
and vitamins.
REFERENCES
National Research Council (NRC). 1985. Nutrient Requirements of Dogs.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). 1986. Nutrient Requirements of Cats.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
The reader should take note that this document reflects a number of
changes made to correct and update an unedited prepublication version of
this report. Some values, particularly in Chapter 15, have been revised or
deleted based on the availability of new information or to correct errors in
calculation. These changes were examined by four independent reviewers
and have been approved by the authoring committee and the institution.
This final version of the report, therefore, supersedes the data contained in
the prepublication.


===== PDF PAGE 31 =====
30
1
Comparative Digestive
Physiology of Dogs and Cats
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview of the information available
on the digestive physiology of dogs and cats. The chapter is divided into three
sections: (1) digestive compartments and functions; (2) hormonal aspects of
digestion; and (3) measurement of, and factors affecting, digestibility. A number of
texts cover in some depth the features of the digestive tracts of dogs and cats.
Therefore, no attempt has been made in the first section of this chapter to cite
original references dealing with this topic. Rather, the review chapter entitled
“Digestion and Absorption” by Maskell and Johnson (1993) published in The
Waltham Book of Companion Animal Nutrition (I. H. Burger, editor) was used as a
guide for describing the digestive compartments of dogs and cats and their functions,
as was the textbook Comparative Physiology of the Vertebrate Digestive System
authored by Stevens and Hume (1995). Supplementing this information are
quantitative data reported in reviews by Smeets-Peeters et al. (1998) and Awati
(2000) regarding the digestive physiological responses to different types of dog and
cat foods. Enzyme activity values, electrolyte concentrations, gastric emptying and
intestinal transit times, pH values, secretion characteristics and composition of bile,
and absorption rates in different parts of the dog and cat gastrointestinal tracts were
compiled from original reference articles. Their reviews focused on research with
healthy, adult dogs weighing 10 to 20 kg and on adult cats, and the data related to the
oral cavity, stomach, and small intestine primarily. Much of the information cited in
the first section of this chapter has been taken from these reviews, and original
references are cited where appropriate.


===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
31
The next section is a compilation of original citations on gastrointestinal hormone
characteristics of dogs and cats. The information is in stand-alone tabular format
with the following headings: hormone, the cell type that produces the hormone, the
location of hormone action, the primary action of the hormone, the stimulus for
hormone secretion, the specific hormonal data that have been collected with dogs
and cats, and the references. For brevity, no further information beyond that
presented in tables is provided.
The final section deals with measurement of nutrient digestibility in dogs and cats
and factors affecting this process that are critical to optimal utilization of nutrients in
pet foods.
INTRODUCTION
Dogs (Figure 1-1) and cats (Figure 1-2) have a relatively similar digestive tract
except for its length. Dogs with a body length of 0.75 m have an intestinal length
averaging 4.5 m (small intestine = 3.9 m; large intestine = 0.6 m). Cats with a body
length of 0.5 m have an intestinal length of approximately 2.1 m (small intestine =
1.7 m; large intestine = 0.4 m). Intestinal length is one factor that influences the
amount of time food resides in the gut. That, in turn, influences the duration of
digestion (Maskell and Johnson, 1993).
The digestive tract of the dog or cat has a large absorptive surface area that serves
to increase the rate of nutrient digestion as a result of the presence of villi. The
surface area per centimeter of intestinal length is similar for the dog and the cat
(jejunum, 54 and 50 cm2; ileum, 38 and 36 cm2, respectively) (Maskell and Johnson,
1993).
A major difference in the gastrointestinal tracts of dogs and cats is the fact that
the dog proximal stomach has a thinner mucous membrane with distinct gastric
glands and the distal stomach has a thicker mucous membrane with less distinct
glands. The gastric mucosa of the dog and cat stomach is divided into a narrow band
of cardiac glandular mucosa and wide bands of proper gastric and pyloric glandular
mucosa (Stevens and Hume, 1995). The cardiac and pyloric glandular regions secrete
mucus and bicarbonate. The proper gastric glandular region secretes hydrochloric
acid and pepsinogen. The feline gastric mucosa is uniform in comparison to that of
the canine (Maskell and Johnson, 1993). In the dog, the cecum is a coiled appendage
located distal to the ileocecal valve, while in the cat the cecum is not as coiled
(Stevens and Hume, 1995).


===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
32
FIGURE 1-1 Dog gastrointestinal tract (Stevens and Hume, 1995).


===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
33
FIGURE 1-2 Cat gastrointestinal tract (Stevens and Hume, 1995).
As explained by Maskell and Johnson (1993)
Digestion involves a combination of mechanical, chemical, and microbial events, all
contributing to the sequential degradation of food components. Mastication and
alimentary muscular contractions mechanically diminish the size of ingested food
particles. Enzyme-rich digestive fluids secreted into digesta in the stomach and small
intestine instigate chemical degradation. Bacteria inhabiting the terminal section of
the alimentary canal also produce enzymes capable of chemical digestion of those
food components that have escaped hydrolytic digestion anterior in the tract. The
actions of the gastrointestinal tract are under both voluntary and involuntary control.
Ingestion, chewing, and swallowing are events consciously controlled by the
individual. Thereafter, the digestive functions that begin in the back of the mouth with


===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
34
the initiation of swallowing are all reflex events (i.e., not under voluntary control). As
food passes from the pharynx via the esophagus to the stomach, sphincters open and
close under involuntary nervous control emanating subconsciously from the brain. As
food enters the stomach, the reflex response of the gastric muscles is to relax in order
to counteract undue increases in intragastric pressure. All digestive secretions in the
stomach and intestines are controlled by nervous and hormonal interactions as is the
motility of the tract, which propels digesta in peristaltic waves towards the terminal
end of the gut.
Comparative studies have revealed a close relationship between intestinal
characteristics, the natural feral diet, and nutrient requirements (Buddington, 1996).
Cats originate from a family comprised only of strict carnivores (Felidae), whereas
dogs are omnivorous.
DIGESTIVE COMPARTMENTS AND FUNCTIONS
Mouth
The process of digestion begins in the mouth. Saliva is secreted during
mastication of food by four pairs of salivary glands—the parotids in front of each
ear, the mandibular (or submaxillary) gland on each side of the lower jaw, the
sublingual glands under the tongue, and the zygomatic gland located in the upper jaw
below the eye. The glands are located similarly in the cat (Maskell and Johnson,
1993). Saliva flow is increased by the sight and smell of food. The type of food
ingested and its moisture content affect saliva amount and composition. Chauncey et
al. (1963) quantified the amount of saliva produced by the parotid gland (0.14-1.40
mL·min–1; mean value = 0.55) and the submaxillary gland (0.20-3.84 mL·min–1;
mean value = 1.31) of the dog. The composition of saliva varies among the glands
and with the rate of salivary flow (Stevens and Hume, 1995). Sub-maxillary and
sublingual glands secrete large amounts of mucus. The parotid glands secrete a
serous fluid. The major inorganic ions in saliva are sodium, potassium, and chloride,
which are derived from the plasma, and bicarbonate secreted by glandular cells. At
high rates of flow, the saliva released into the mouth of the dog and cat has an
osmolarity and sodium:potassium ratio similar to blood plasma, but a higher
bicarbonate:chloride ratio and pH than plasma. However, at lower rates of flow, the
absorptive activities of salivary tubular cells reduce the osmolarity, the
sodium:potassium ratio, the chloride and bicarbonate concentrations, and the pH of
saliva reaching the mouth. The pH of dog saliva varies between 7.34 and 7.80
(Altman and Dittmer, 1968), whereas the average value for cat saliva is 7.5 (Awati,
2000). Like many species, dogs and cats lack the α-amylase enzyme that would
initiate the process of starch digestion.


===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
35
Average electrolyte concentrations (in millimoles per liter) in dog saliva are as
follows: calcium (1.85 in mixed saliva; 4.3 in parotid saliva); chloride (81.9 in
parotid saliva); potassium (20.2 in mixed saliva; 11.4 in parotid saliva); sodium (74.1
in mixed saliva; 108 in parotid saliva); and bicarbonate (55 in parotid saliva)
(Altman and Dittmer, 1968; Lamas and Scheinin, 1971). Values (millimoles per liter)
reported for cats are chloride (16.8-36.0); potassium (7.7-9.2); sodium (24-46); and
bicarbonate (11.6-13.6) (Altman and Dittmer, 1968).
A very important function of saliva in the dog is evaporative cooling. Upon
intense parasympathetic stimulation, the parotid gland of the dog secretes saliva at 10
times the rate of the human (per gram of gland weight) (Argenzio, 1989). Saliva is
hypotonic at low flow rates and becomes increasingly tonic with increasing flow
rates. It is nearly isotonic at maximal flow rates.
Esophagus
The esophagus is a short, muscular tube leading from the mouth to the stomach.
The esophagus of the dog contains only striated muscle that lends itself to more rapid
passage of peristaltic waves (Stevens and Hume, 1995). Esophageal cells produce
mucus to lubricate the process of peristalsis that propels food along the digestive
tract. These cells are stimulated by the presence of food. Transport of food from the
mouth to the stomach takes only a few seconds (Maskell and Johnson, 1993).
Stomach
Functionally, the stomach consists of proximal and distal sections. The proximal
stomach expands during the temporary storage of food, allowing consumption of
discrete meals rather than many small meals. Since dogs are meal feeders, in contrast
to cats who tend to eat small meals, this is of greater importance to the canine
(Maskell and Johnson, 1993).
The stomach stores food temporarily and controls the rate of entry of ingesta into
the small intestine. It participates in the initial stages of digestion by secreting
hydrochloric acid and pepsinogen. Circular muscles in the proximal half of the
stomach undergo stationary contractions that mix and macerate the gastric digesta. A
pacemaker near the center of the stomach generates waves of muscular contraction
over the distal segment of the stomach. These waves of peristaltic contraction aid in
passage of digesta through the stomach and, eventually, into the duodenum (Stevens
and Hume, 1995).
The concentrations of electrolytes in the gastric juice of dogs are as follows:
bicarbonate, 5-33; potassium, 7-28; sodium, 22-155; chloride, 123-173; calcium, 0.5-
4; phosphate, 0.026 to 12; and magnesium, 0.021 mmol·L–1. Comparable values for
cats are potassium, 12-14; sodium, 12-56; chloride, 156-166; calcium, 1-2.5;


===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
36
phosphorus, 0.06-0.19; and nitrogen, 7.1-29.3 mmol·L–1 (Altman and Dittmer,
1968).
The major enzymes present in the lumen of the dog stomach are pepsin and
lipase. At pH 4, gastric lipase is 13 times more active on long-chain than on short-
chain triacylglycerols (Carriere et al., 1991). The lipase is irreversibly inactivated
below pH 1.5; its activity also decreases significantly above pH 6.0, and it is
completely inactivated at pH 7.0. Lipase is secreted throughout the canine stomach
(Carriere et al., 1992). Compared to pancreatic lipase, the contribution of gastric
lipase to fat digestion is not great (see Chapter 5).
The activity of pepsin after sham feeding varies fourfold for dogs. Factors
responsible for the variability among animals are unknown (Villareal et al., 1955).
The amount of pepsin secreted can be influenced by hormones, such as
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), which causes an increase in activity. Pepsin
displays optimal activity at pH 2.0 maintained by gastric secretion of hydrochloric
acid. Its proteolytic activity decreases when chyme leaves the stomach, since it is
irreversibly inactivated at neutral pH (Smeets-Peeters et al., 1998). Because pepsin is
most active when the cat or dog has ingested collagen, its activity is more important
for initiating the digestion of meat rather than of vegetable protein (Maskell and
Johnson, 1993). As such, pepsin may be more important to the cat than the dog. For
the cat, the basal secretion rate is 2.7 ± 0.07 μg·min–1. After meal stimulation, the
value increases to 16 ± 4 μg·min–1 (Descroix-Vagne et al., 1993).
Gastric secretion is influenced by the amount of protein in a meal, by the volume
of the meal (Carpentier et al., 1977), and by hormones that indirectly affect the
acidity of the stomach contents (ACTH increases hydrochloric acid production
[Villareal et al., 1955] and secretin decreases hydrochloric acid production through
suppression of the release of gastrin [Jin et al., 1994]). The nervous system also
plays a role in the secretion of hydrochloric acid (Lawson et al., 1994). In the fasting
state, the gastric pH of the dog fluctuates little with time, whereas postprandially,
there are wavelike patterns (Youngberg et al., 1985). The gastric pH response varies
with the type of meal ingested and the buffering capacity of the food. After ingestion
of a complete liquid test meal, a pH drop below 4.0 was noticed within 10-20
minutes (Youngberg et al., 1985). With a meat-based diet, a drop in pH to less than
6.0 was found after 60 minutes (Banta et al., 1979; Carriere et al., 1993).
The average pH of the cat stomach is 2.5 ± 0.07 (Brosey et al., 2000).
Mechanisms controlling acid secretion occur at three sequential times during
digestion (cephalic phase, gastric phase, and intestinal phase) and are described in
detail in Argenzio (1989).
Bacterial populations have been isolated from the stomach contents of many
simple stomached species (Kearns et al., 1998). Numbers are variable
(approximately l03 bacteria per milliliter) and are influenced by both diet and
environment. Many of these microbes represent transient communities rather than a
population of microbes indigenous to this site. They originate from ingested material


===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
37
or from regions proximal to the stomach. Microbial types most often found are Gram
positive and aerobic, representing members of the lactic acid bacteria
(Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, and Streptococcus). Stomach contents of cats fed a
corn-poultry by-product meal or a soybean meal-based diet contained approximately
20 mmol·L–1 total short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) (Brosey et al., 2000).
Gastric Emptying
Smeets-Peeters et al. (1998) summarized the following as affecting the rate of
gastric emptying: stomach volume; energy content (Liddle et al., 1988), viscosity,
density, and particle size of gastric contents; temperature; body weight; amount of
acid in the duodenum; water intake; meal size; and diet type (Goggin et al., 1998).
Using duodenally cannulated dogs, the effect of the density of nondigestible solids
on gastric emptying was evaluated (Meyer et al., 1985). There was a trend for
higher-density particles to empty more slowly. The regulation of emptying by density
depends on the intraduodenal concentrations of products of digestion, either
monosaccharides, acting through their osmotic effect, or esters of fatty acids, acting
on duodenal receptors. Isocaloric concentrations of carbohydrates and triglycerides
induce similar gastric emptying patterns (Hunt and Stubbs, 1975).
Reduction of digestible solids to a smaller size accelerates gastric emptying.
Indigestible solids are retained in the stomach until digestion of other food
components is completed. They do not exit the stomach until powerful, propulsive,
gastric contractions in the fasting state take place (Hinder and Kelly, 1977). The
stomach appears to be the major site involved in regulation of particulate marker
passage through the gastrointestinal tract of dogs (Banta et al., 1979).
Literature values for average gastric half-emptying times for dogs range from 72
to 240 minutes (Burrows et al., 1985; reviewed in Smeets-Peeters et al., 1998).
Methodology (intubation with periodic sampling vs. scintigraphy vs. radiography),
diet type (dry kibble, canned diet, fresh food, liquid meal) and characteristics
(acidity, osmolarity, fat content, tryptophan content), variation among animals,
animal’s access to water, indicator used, meal size, and fed versus fasting state of the
animal are a few of the factors that impact the results obtained. For cats, gastric half-
emptying times (minutes) range from 22-25 (fasted state) to 449 for cats fed a
canned diet (Chandler et al., 1997). Intermediate values have been reported by
Arnbjerg (1992), Sparkes et al. (1997), Goggin et al. (1998), and Chandler et al.
(1999).
Small Intestine, Pancreas, and Liver
Most of the enzymatic digestion of food occurs in the small intestine. The
resulting monomeric units then are absorbed as they are released from the food along
with water, vitamins, and minerals. A 20-kg dog absorbs approximately 3 L of fluid


===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
38
daily. Of that volume, 50 percent is absorbed from the jejunum, 40 percent from the
ileum, and 10 percent from the large bowel (Maskell and Johnson, 1993).
Digesta passing from the stomach into the duodenum are neutralized rapidly.
Dogs fed cereal- and meat-based diets have an average pH in the proximal
duodenum of 6.2 (Banta et al., 1979). Ingestion of large volumes of water by the dog
appears to induce acid secretion in the stomach (by stimulation of gastrin release)
and to lower the pH to values as low as 1.5 in the lumen of the proximal duodenum.
For the cat, the average duodenal pH is 5.7 ± 0.5, while those of the jejunum and
ileum are 6.4 ± 0.5 and 6.6 ± 0.8, respectively (Brosey et al., 2000).
Secretion of pancreatic juice into the duodenum is stimulated by movement of
acid chyme from the stomach into the small intestine. The large amount of
bicarbonate in pancreatic juice and bile results in an increase in pH of digesta
passing from the stomach to the duodenum (Banta et al., 1979).
In the duodenum, chyme is mixed with enzymes. Certain enzymes originate from
the duodenal mucosa. Other enzymes originate from the pancreas, an organ with two
discrete functions: (1) exocrine—secreting enzymes into the gut in addition to
bicarbonate salts that optimize luminal pH for pancreatic and intestinal enzyme
function, and (2) endocrine—secreting hormones into the blood. Pancreatic enzymes
include inactive proteases, lipases, and amylases. Intestinal enzymes located in the
luminal brush border and contents of intestinal absorptive cells catalyze the final
stages of digestion (Maskell and Johnson, 1993).
Secretin and cholecystokinin, produced by cells of the intestinal mucosa, regulate
output of pancreatic juice. Secretin stimulates the pancreas to increase bicarbonate
secretion; its release is caused by the acidity of small intestinal contents. Bicarbonate
concentration and pH of pancreatic fluid also are dependent on rate of flow.
Cholecystokinin release results from the presence of partially digested food,
especially fat and phenylalanine-containing peptides, in the small intestine, and
stimulates the release of enzyme-rich juices (Maskell and Johnson, 1993). Key
characteristics of dog pancreatic juice are the following: pH, 7.1-8.2; secretion rate,
0.2-1.1 mL·min–1; water content, 98 percent; ash content, 8.4-9.7 g·L–1; total solids,
14-64 g·L–1; bicarbonate, 93-143 mmol·L–1; and total nitrogen, 71.4-671.4 mmol·L–
1 (Altman and Dittmer, 1968). More limited information is available for cats:
calcium, 2.3-2.55 mmol·L–1 (Altman and Dittmer, 1968); chloride, 67-93 mmol·L–1
(Altman and Dittmer, 1968); and amylase, 34.1 ± 6.4 units per 120 minutes (Layer et
al., 1985).
The pancreatic juice of dogs possesses antibacterial properties (Rubenstein et al.,
1985). The active component is a protein with a molecular weight of approximately
4,000 Da and an alkaline pH optimum. It retains activity until pancreatic juice is
diluted at least tenfold. It is resistant to degradation by pancreatic proteases and has
bactericidal activity against Escherichia coli, Shigella, Salmonella, and Klebsiella; it
is bacteriostatic for coagulase-positive and negative staphylococci and Pseudomonas.
It also inhibits growth of Candida albicans. Whether it affects groups of microbes


===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
39
considered to be beneficial (e.g., lactobacilli, bifidobacteria, and eubacteria) is not
known.
Bile is stored and concentrated in the gallbladder, then released into the intestine
in response to the presence of lipids or their digestive end products in the duodenum.
Bile from the gallbladder differs in concentration from bile secreted directly from the
liver (e.g., pH = 5.18-6.97 vs. 7.1-8.5; dry matter [grams per liter] = 114-246 vs. 23-
45; salts [grams per liter] = 79-150 vs. 5-24; cholesterol [grams per liter] = 0.8-1.4
vs. 0.04-0.15, respectively) (Smeets-Peeters et al., 1998). More than 99 percent of
bile acids normally are conjugated with taurine to form taurocholic acid,
taurodeoxycholic acid, and taurochenodeoxycholic acid in both dogs and cats. In
response to food ingestion, the gallbladder contracts, and its pressure and rate of
emptying increase. Emptying peaks are found 30 minutes after a meal, and the
emptying decreases 2 hours after food ingestion (Madrid et al., 1983; Traynor et al.,
1984). Food is an inducer of diurnal rhythms in the gallbladder. These contraction-
relaxation cycles are synchronized with periodic dilution-concentration processes
(Camello et al., 1991). The gallbladder empties only partially after a meal (5-65
percent). Half-emptying time has been reported to be approximately 47 minutes.
Periodic food ingestion plays a role in the daily rhythms of gallbladder bile
composition as does duodenal activity (Smeets-Peeters et al., 1998).
Washizu et al. (1990) compared the bile acid composition of the dog and the cat.
Values (in milligrams per milliliter) for the cat are taurocholic acid, 97 ± 38;
taurodihydroxycholic acid, 22 ± 7; tauroursodeoxycholic acid, 0.03 ± 0.04;
taurochenodeoxycholic acid, 3.3 ± 1.2; taurodeoxycholic acid, 4.4 ± 2.5;
taurolithocholic acid, 0.04 ± 0.01; glycoursodeoxycholic acid, 0.33 ± 0.38;
glycochenodeoxycholic acid, 0.12 ± 0.11; glycocholic acid, 1.5 ± 0.8; and cholic
acid, 0.09 ± 0.14. Only the concentration of taurodeoxycholic acid in the cat (4.4 ±
2.5 mg·mL–1) was different from that of the dog (10.3 ± 1.5 mg·mL–1). The cat
obligatorily conjugates bile acids with taurine. Thus, when it is taurine deficient, a
high percentage of free cholic acid is found in bile (Rentschler et al., 1986; Hickman
et al., 1992).
Small Intestinal Microbiology
The small intestine of the dog has a rather simple microbial population (Kearns et
al., 1998). Bacterial numbers rarely exceed 104 per milliliter, except for the distal
ileum where counts are approximately 106 mL–1. Streptococci and lactobacilli are
found predominantly in the duodenum and jejunum. In the ileum, the predominant
microbes are Escherichia coli and anaerobic bacteria. The relatively low number of
microbes is due primarily to the influence of gastric acidity and bile, as well as
intestinal motility, which allows nonadherent bacteria to pass through the gut. An
important function of the microflora of the small intestine is preventing the
colonization of pathogenic microorganisms. They accomplish this by competing for


===== PDF PAGE 41 =====
40
available nutrients, controlling oxygen concentrations, and producing antibacterial
substances.
In the cat, Johnston et al. (1993) found that total bacterial counts in duodenal
juice ranged from 2.2 × 105 to 1.6 × 108 colony forming units (CFU) per milliliter
with anaerobic counts between 7.5 × 104 and 1.1 × 108. The most commonly isolated
anaerobes were Bacteroides, Eubacteria, and Fusobacteria, while Pasteurella
species were the most common aerobic bacteria isolated. These findings showed that,
compared to the dog, clinically healthy cats fed a commercial canned diet can have
relatively high bacterial counts in undiluted juice obtained from the proximal small
intestine. Indeed, the numbers of bacteria in these cats fulfill the established criteria
for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in dogs. Species characteristics that may
influence the intestinal flora include gastric or pancreatic secretions, intestinal
motility, local immunity, and bile composition. These mechanisms have been
corroborated by the studies of Gruffydd-Jones et al. (1998). Brosey et al. (2000)
reported the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum of cats fed a corn-poultry by-product
meal or a soybean meal diet contained 30, 29, and 41 mmol·L–1 total SCFAs,
respectively.
Using a diet very similar to that of Brosey et al. (2000), Strickling et al. (2000)
found total SCFA concentrations in the dog ileum of 598 μmol·g–1 dry matter (79
μmol·g–1 as-is digesta). With regard to ileal microbes, they reported the following
concentrations (log CFU per gram of dry matter) of bacteria: Clostridium
perfringens, 4.8; bifidobacteria, 10.4; lactobacilli, 9.4; aerotolerant anaerobes, 10.5;
E. coli, 6.3; and coliforms, 6.7. These values are higher than those reported by
Kearns et al. (1998).
The influence of small intestinal microbes on nutrient requirements of the dog
and cat remains to be determined, as does the potential of diet to alter requirements
by modification of the intestinal flora. A case in point is taurine, which is impacted
by heat processing (120oC; 83 minutes) of a commercial diet, resulting in increased
amounts reaching the lower gut. Heat processing may affect taurine status of cats by
perhaps stimulating microbial overgrowth in the small intestine. Bacterial
overgrowth could occur if heat processing decreased digestibility of a portion of the
diet and increased available substrate for microorganisms (Hickman et al., 1990).
Small Intestinal Transit Time
Movement of digesta through the small intestine is influenced by physical and
nutritional characteristics of the diet (Clemens and Stevens, 1980). Motility of the
intestine can be influenced by factors such as food components, hormones, and the
nervous system. Digesta passage can be determined by administration of markers
that are not digested, secreted, absorbed, or adsorbed with subsequent measurement
of the rate of food or digesta fluid or particle passage through the gastrointestinal


===== PDF PAGE 42 =====
41
tract. Transit time is the time from the administration of a food or food marker to its
appearance in feces. Mean retention time is the time required for the average particle
or fluid marker to be excreted after administration of a pulse dose (Stevens and
Hume, 1995). Results of transit experiments can be misleading because a single
value in no way indicates how the bulk of material moved through the
gastrointestinal tract, nor does it consider the structure, volume, or length of the
gastrointestinal tract. Published values for small intestinal transit times vary widely.
For example, Miyabayashi et al. (1986), using five dogs orally dosed with a 60
percent w/v barium sulfate solution, reported a transit time of 73.0 ± 16.4 minutes
(range, 30-120 minutes) and a small intestinal emptying time of 214 ± 25.1 minutes
(range, 180-300 minutes). In their study, small intestinal transit time and emptying
time correlated positively with gastric emptying time.
In unfed dogs, radiolabeled saline reached the cecum in just 37 minutes (Quigley
and Thompson, 1993). Addition of macronutrients, however, slowed the movement
of intestinal contents (Schemann and Ehrlein, 1986). Johnson et al. (1997) found that
the mean rate of movement of chyme was 5 cm·min–1 in the jejunum and 13
cm·min–1 in the ileum. If the length of the small intestine in a 19-kg dog is 360 cm
as suggested by Quigley and Thompson (1993), transiting the small intestine should
take about 1 hour. This is in agreement with data of Hill et al. (2000) who
demonstrated that chyme first appeared at the ileocolic junction on average 1 hour
after a meal in dogs fed a canned diet once daily, and that 15, 50, and 95 percent of
chyme reached the terminal ileum after 2.5, 5.5, and 12 hours, respectively. In dogs
with midintestinal cannulas, however, transit times from duodenum to midintestine
after a small steak meal were 49, 62, and 78 minutes for polyethylene glycol, 0.5-
mm, and 2-mm liver particles, respectively (Williams et al., 1984). Other
methodologies suggest a longer mean or median orocecal transit time in fed dogs:
105-135 minutes using the breath hydrogen test; 180 minutes using the sulfasalazine,
sulfapyridine test; or 150 minutes using radiolabeled sulfacolloid (Papasouliotis et
al., 1993, 1995; Roussel et al., 1996). These times correspond to the time for
collection of 15 percent of total chyme in the study of Hill et al. (2000), suggesting
that a certain amount of chyme, equivalent to 15 percent of the total, may have to
accumulate in the colon before breath hydrogen or marker can be detected.
For the cat, a small intestinal transit time of between 135 and 183 minutes was
reported by Chandler et al. (1999).
Large Intestine
The primary role of the large intestine of dogs and cats is to absorb electrolytes
and water and to serve as an environment for microbial fermentation of nutrients that
escape digestion and absorption by the small intestine. In both species, the large
intestine is relatively short (0.6 m in dogs; 0.4 m in cats) (Maskell and Johnson,
1993). The large intestine consists of the cecum, colon, and rectum. The colon makes


===== PDF PAGE 43 =====
42
up the majority of the large intestine and consists of three sections—the ascending,
transverse, and descending colon. The large intestine has no villi, and its surface is
flat. Straight, tubular glands, the crypts of Lieberkuhn, extend from the serosal
surface through the mucosa. They contain mucus cells in their deepest portions and
both mucus and epithelial cells near the surface. The mucus is alkaline (from
bicarbonate) and its function is to protect the large intestinal mucosa from
mechanical and chemical injury. The mucus provides lubrication to facilitate passage
of feces, and the bicarbonate ions neutralize acids produced by bacterial fermentation
(Maskell and Johnson, 1993).
The residence time of undigested food in the large intestine of the dog and cat is
approximately 12 hours (Maskell and Johnson, 1993). Burrows and Merritt (1983)
studied the influence of α-cellulose additions to dog diets on myoelectric activity of
proximal canine colon. The proximal colon was chosen because most water
absorption occurs in this part of the organ, and the effects of fiber on activity
responsible for both mixing and propulsion are perhaps greatest at this location. The
major finding of this study was that increased intake of the α-cellulose (up to 9
percent by weight of a canned, commercial diet) decreased myoelectric spike activity
in the proximal colon of the dog through an effect on the migrating spike burst. A
variety of extrinsic neural and hormonal factors has been known to influence colonic
motility and to these must be added the effect of luminal bulk. Since dietary fiber
increases fecal bulk and weight, the proximal colon of the dog probably contracts
more effectively as luminal bulk increases.
Using colonic transit scintigraphy, Krevsky et al. (1988) found that the cecum and
ascending colon of cats emptied rapidly, with a half-emptying time of 1.68 ± 0.56
hours. These results suggest that the cecum and ascending colon may not be an
important region for storage in the cat. Also, it is possible that the relatively short
length of the cecum and ascending colon is responsible for its rapid emptying.
Unlike the cecum and ascending colon, significant storage occurred in the transverse
colon, suggesting that the transverse colon of the cat is the important region for
mixing, storage, and dehydration, and it is this region that appears to function as a
distal storage site prior to defecation. These findings are consistent with the
observation of retrograde peristaltic contractions originating in the transverse colon
that have been described repeatedly for many years.
Only about 8 percent of the total digestion of food occurs in the large intestine of
the dog (Drochner and Meyer, 1991), although this figure varies with diet. Using 25
diets fed to dogs cannulated in the terminal ileum, Meyer and Schunemann (1989)
reported that with highly digestible diets, colonic digestibility accounted for 1 to 4
percent of total digestibility, whereas with diets containing legumes and certain types
of starches (e.g., tapioca), colonic digestibility ranged from 12 to 24 percent of total
digestibility. The highest colonic digestibility values occurred when dogs were fed
diets containing raw potato starch and lactose.
The large intestine contains a complex microbial ecosystem comprised of many
genera and several hundred species of bacteria. Most of the bacteria in the healthy


===== PDF PAGE 44 =====
43
intestine are anaerobic, and the main bacterial genera present in a healthy dog or cat
are Streptococcus, Lactobacillus, Bacteroides, and Clostridium (Maskell and
Johnson, 1993). Dietary ingredients can affect the bacterial composition of the large
intestine.
Colonic bacteria ferment dietary nutrients and endogenous secretions that escape
digestion and absorption in the small intestine. Examples of these include resistant
starch, non-starch polysaccharides, unabsorbed sugars, oligosaccharides, dietary
protein, endogenous enzymes, and mucus. The proximal portion of the human colon
generally is rich in carbohydrate substrates, while protein fermentation prevails in
the distal colon (Macfarlane et al., 1992). This is probably the case for both dog and
cat. The primary end products of bacterial fermentation and metabolism are SCFAs
(acetate, propionate, butyrate), lactate, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen gas. Brosey et
al. (2000) reported total SCFA concentrations in the proximal and distal portions of
the colon of cats fed a corn-poultry by-product meal or soybean meal diet of 109 and
131 mmol·L–1, respectively. Although SCFA concentrations are relatively high, it
must be remembered that the volume of the large bowel of both dogs and cats is
small. Other fermentative end products include hydrogen sulfide, methane, ammonia,
branched-chain fatty acids, amines, phenols, and indoles. The relative proportion of
these compounds is influenced by colonic microflora composition, metabolic
interactions among bacteria, nutrients available for fermentation, intestinal transit
time, and a variety of host factors including age, immune status, and genetic makeup
(Cummings and Macfarlane, 1991). The pH of the colonic contents and the resulting
feces undoubtedly is affected by these factors, and a range of values from 5.5 to 7.5
might be expected, as reported in other species (Younes et al., 1995).
Short-chain fatty acids provide energy to the large intestinal cells. Roediger
(1980) found that butyrate not only was utilized by the human intestine but also was
the preferred energy source for colonocytes. These results were confirmed in dogs by
Drackley et al. (1998) who found that isolated canine colonocytes oxidized butyrate
at a rate 4.5 times greater than glucose. These studies implicate butyrate as a major
fuel for the intestinal epithelium. The absorption of ammonia aids in the conservation
of the endogenous nitrogen released into the digestive tract as a component of
digestive enzymes and urea (see Figure 8.5 in Stevens and Hume, 1995).
Resident bacteria also influence mucosal structure and function (Buddington et
al., 2000). The production of SCFAs as a result of fermentation of nutrients and
endogenous secretions stimulates the absorption of water and electrolytes and,
therefore, is involved with the osmoregulatory function of the gut. Absorption of
SCFAs also increases the rate of sodium absorption, and the combined absorption of
SCFAs and sodium from the large intestine accounts for much of the absorption of
water (Stevens and Hume, 1995).
Furthermore, SCFAs stimulate the proliferation of enterocytes and colonocytes.
The presence of SCFAs triggers the secretion of glucagon-like peptide 2, which
stimulates mucosal growth and the expression of genes coding for some nutrient
transporters in the ileum and, by so doing, enhances digestive function. Also,


===== PDF PAGE 45 =====
44
mucosal growth stimulated by SCFAs enhances barrier functions and decreases
bacterial translocation. Butyrate is considered to be the most important SCFA with
respect to the mucosa, whereas propionate is the least important. Therefore, the
impact of bacterial fermentation on the gut is dependent on the relative proportions
of different SCFAs produced.
A symbiotic relationship appears to exist between the adherent bacteria and the
mucosa (Buddington et al., 2000). Adherent bacteria influence the endocytic and
intracellular hydrolytic capacities of the mucosa and, by doing so, play a role in the
degradation of potential antigens present in the lumen of the gut. This is important
for regulation of the enteric immune system because it decreases the antigenicity of
numerous macromolecules present in the gut. As a result, there is less potential for
inflammation, which is counter to normal gut function. Adherent bacteria also act to
increase production of secretory immunoglobulin A.
HORMONAL ASPECTS OF DIGESTION
In addition to digestive functions, the intestine and associated organs represent
the largest endocrine organ in the body, and several endocrine cell types have been
identified in the intestines of dogs (Tange, 1983) and cats (Kitamura et al., 1982). In
other species, hormones originating from the gastrointestinal tract have proven to be
critical for regulating digestive processes and whole-body metabolism (Buddington,
1996). Gastrointestinal hormones important to mammalian metabolism are listed in
Table 1-1 along with information specifically related to dog and cat digestive
physiology. Further information can be found on this topic in Stevens and Hume
(1995). To date, very little is known about the impact of nutrition on the endocrine
and immune functions of the dog and cat intestine.
MEASUREMENT OF, AND FACTORS AFFECTING,
DIGESTIBILITY
Nutrient digestibility values provide information on the relative amounts of
nutrients in the diet that can be used for productive purposes and, additionally, serve
as an index of overall quality of the ingredients of dog and cat diets (Shields, 1993).
The Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) publishes protocols
for measuring dietary metabolizable energy content of dog and cat foods that have
become standards for nutrient digestibility measurement because stool collection and
protein digestibility measurement are necessary for both procedures (AAFCO, 2003).
Dry matter and protein digestibility values are used to ensure maintenance of
ingredient quality in the nutrition assurance programs developed separately by
petfood manufacturers in the United States and Canada to ensure petfood nutritional
quality through animal testing (Shields, 1993).


===== PDF PAGE 46 =====
45
Accurate quantification of the amount of nutrient consumed by the animal and
that excreted in the stool is needed for calculation of nutrient digestibility. The
difference between these two quantities, divided by the amount consumed, represents
the quantity digested. This is an “apparent” rather than a “true” figure because some
of the nutrients absorbed from the intestinal tract come back into the gut, and feces
contain a variable quantity of nutrients of nondietary origin (e.g., spent enzymes,
pancreatic and gallbladder secretions, sloughed intestinal mucosal cells, bacteria). To
quantify small intestinal digestibility, various methods involving surgical
modification of the ileum have been used for both dogs and cats. Ileal contents may
be collected before nutrients can be modified by large intestinal microbes. Ileal
digestibility coefficients should be considered apparent rather than true values since
endogenous secretions are part of the ileal chyme. Attempts have been made to
estimate endogenous secretions when animals have been food deprived for a time,
when a nitrogen-free diet (or a low amount of a highly digestible protein [e.g., 5
percent casein]) is fed (for “true” protein and amino acid digestibility
measurements), or when graded levels of a nutrient are fed with extrapolation to zero
intake (Young et al., 1991).
AAFCO (2003) protocols for dogs and cats recommend a 5-day diet adaptation
phase followed by a 5-day period of feces collection to ensure accurate digestibility
measurements. Nott et al. (1994) found that a 4-day collection period following a 3-
day adaptation was sufficient to measure apparent digestibilities in dogs. However, in
the cat, this shorter period of collection was insufficient for accurate determination of
digestibility. Cats exhibit more variable consumption and excretion patterns than do
dogs. In digestibility studies of cats, it is not unusual to have days in which
consumption drops or when no stool is voided. This can seriously impact
digestibility measurements (Shields, 1993).
Shields (1993) identified a number of factors that affect nutrient digestibility.
First, although it is well understood that ingredient sources and absolute nutrient
concentrations can influence digestibility measurements, effects of food processing
often are overlooked. Ingredient particle size reduction generally will improve
digestibility, and therefore food utilization, but will result in lower throughput of
food in the manufacturing process, higher production costs, and reduced flowability.
Processing conditions in the preconditioning chamber, the pellet mill-extruder-retort
process, or the drying oven could impact diet nutritive value. In addition, feeding
management practices such as previous diet fed and amount of food offered also
could influence digestibility values.
Second, animal factors must be considered when evaluating digestibility. These
include breed, age, gender, activity level, and physiological state. With regard to
effects of breed, Meyer et al. (1999) conducted digestion experiments for 10 different
canine breeds with body weights ranging from 4.2 to 52.5 kg (four to nine dogs per
breed). Dogs were fed a canned or dry commercial diet with a constant dry matter
intake of 13 g per kilogram of body weight per day, except for Irish wolfhounds
which ingested only 10 g of dry matter per kilogram of body weight per day of the


===== PDF PAGE 47 =====
46
canned diet. The larger breeds tended to have higher fecal moisture content, less
favorable fecal quality, and increased numbers of defecations. Irish wolfhounds, the
largest breed tested, had feces with less moisture content than Labrador retrievers,
indicating that body weight was not the only factor that should be considered. There
were only small differences in apparent nutrient digestibilities among breeds. James
and McCay (1950) and Kendall et al. (1983) found similar digestibility coefficients
in medium-sized (Saluki, German shepherd, basset hound) and small dogs
(dachshund, Cairn terrier, beagle). In both studies, the body weights of the
experimental breeds may have been too similar to demonstrate small differences in
digestive capacity. This is a critical point since Kirkwood (1985) and Meyer et al.
(1993) found a relative decrease in weight of the gastrointestinal tract with
increasing body weight of the dog. The weight of the empty intestinal tract in small
breeds is 6 to 7 percent of their body weight, and it decreases to 3 to 4 percent in
large and giant breed dogs. Weber et al. (2003) evaluated the effects of age and body
size on the apparent digestibility of a dry expanded diet. Breeds of dogs used were
miniature poodles, medium schnauzers, giant schnauzers, and Great Danes.
Digestibility experiments were conducted at 11, 21, 35, and 60 weeks of age.
Nutrient digestibilities were significantly higher in large dogs at all ages studied,
even though these dogs had lower fecal scores and increased fecal moisture
concentrations.
TABLE 1-1 Gastrointestinal Hormone Characteristics of Dogs and Cats


===== PDF PAGE 48 =====
47
Age, too, is a factor impacting nutrient digestibility. In the study of Weber et al.
(2003) cited above, macronutrient digestibilities increased significantly with age
(from 11 to 60 weeks) for all four dog breeds used in their study. Shields (1993)
reported on a study conducted with Brittany spaniel puppies, which suggested that
digestibility values obtained using 11-week-old puppies for dry matter, protein, and
energy were 1, 5, and 3 percent lower, respectively, than those obtained with adult
dogs ranging from 2 to 4 years of age. Between 6 months and 2 years of age,
however, no differences were found. Whether the lower digestibility values for
puppies resulted solely from increased food consumption (relative to body weight or
intestinal length) or whether digestive efficiency is lower for this age group is
unclear.
Buffington et al. (1989) compared digestive efficiency in beagles from 2 to 17
years of age, and results suggested that at least up to 10 years of age, no digestibility
reductions were noted. At 15 to 17 years of age, minor reductions in digestibility
measurements were observed. Harper and Turner (2000) conducted a 24-week study
to evaluate the effect of age on apparent digestibility in weaned, growing kittens fed
two diets (one wet, the other dry), both capable of maintaining kitten growth. Mean
apparent digestibilities of dry matter, organic matter, protein, and carbohydrate were


===== PDF PAGE 49 =====
48
lower in kittens younger than 19 weeks of age, suggesting that more immature
kittens are less able to digest solid food. There were no significant interactions
between diet and age. Also, there were no significant differences between the growth
rates supported by the two diets despite differences in their carbohydrate and fat
contents. Fat was the only nutrient whose mean apparent digestibility increased with
age up to 24 weeks. Bile salt-activated lipase is a component of cat milk, and
evidence suggests that it plays a role in the fat digestion process in the suckling
kitten. There are no reports of pancreatic lipase development in the cat, but the
presence of bile salt-activated lipase in cat milk and reports of low fat digestibility in
the kitten at weaning indicate that lipase development may be slow in the cat.
Alternatively, the cat may display a similar type of lipolytic enzyme development to
the pig, a nonparallel pattern suggested to reflect the importance of the different
enzymes at the suckling and postweaning phases (Jensen et al., 1997). Other
enzymes impacted by age include lactase and amylase. Lactase activity was highest
in the intestine of young dogs (5 days old) and decreased to levels found in adults by
29-61 days of life (Welsh and Walker, 1965). Kienzle (1988) found amylase activity
in pancreatic tissue of puppies to be lower (7.1 ± 4.3; 251.5 ± 108.2; 2,098.0 ± 1,073;
and 1,623.0 ± 1,431 U·g–1 wet weight at 4, 8, and 12-16 weeks of age, and 8-10
months of age, respectively) than for dogs over 2 years old (4,665.0 ± 781 U·g–1 wet
weight). This indicates an age-related ability of the dog to digest starch.
Little research exists with regard to gender effects on digestibility. The limited
information available suggests that food intake and fecal output are higher, and
nutrient digestibility lower, for males of both species compared to females, with a
suggestion that gender differences are greater for cats than for dogs (Shields, 1993).
Third, housing and environmental factors could impact nutrient digestibility, but
research with dogs housed in metabolism cages or covered kennel runs indicated that
digestibility values were similar, regardless of housing system used (Shields, 1993).
“Effective” environmental temperature, which comprises air temperature, humidity,
air velocity, flooring material, wall-ceiling insulation, and temperature acclimation
and their interactive effects, also might have an effect on nutrient digestibility values.
Temperature can exert its effect through either compensatory metabolic mechanisms
to maintain body temperature or absolute amount of food consumed. Other
environmental factors such as the caretaker-animal relationship and photoperiod
likely influence nutrient digestibility, although these effects are difficult to quantify
(Shields, 1993).
REFERENCES
Altman, P. L., and D. S. Dittmer. 1968. Digestion and absorption. Pp. 237-306 in
Metabolism. Bethesda, Md.: Federation of American Societies for Experimental
Biology.


===== PDF PAGE 50 =====
49
Argenzio, R. A. 1989. Secretory functions of the gastrointestinal tract. Pp. 290-300
in Dukes’ Physiology of Domestic Animals (10th edition), M. J. Swenson, ed.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Arnbjerg, J. 1992. Gastric emptying time in the dog and cat. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
Assoc. 28:77-81.
Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). 2003. Official
Publication. Oxford, Ind.
Awati, A. 2000. A review of the physiology of the feline digestive tract related to the
development of in vitro systems. Pp. 10-15 in TNO Report No. V3441. Zeist, the
Netherlands: TNO Nutrition and Food Research Institute.
Backus, R. C., Q. R. Rogers, G. L. Rosenquist, J. Calam, and J. G. Morris. 1995a.
Diets causing taurine depletion in cats substantially elevate postprandial plasma
cholecystokinin concentration. J. Nutr. 125:2650-2657.
Backus, R. C., G. L. Rosenquist, Q. R. Rogers, J. Calam, and J. G. Morris. 1995b.
Elevation of plasma cholecystokinin (CCK) immunoreactivity by fat, protein, and
amino acids in the cat, a carnivore. Reg. Peptides 57:123-131.
Backus, R. C., K. A. Howard, and Q. R. Rogers. 1997. The potency of dietary amino
acids in elevating plasma cholecystokinin immunoreactivity in cats is related to
amino acid hydrophobicity. Reg. Peptides 72:31-40.
Bado, A., M. J. M. Lewin, and M. Dubrazquet. 1989. Effects of bombesin on food
intake and gastric acid secretion in cats. Am. J. Physiol. 256:R181-R186.
Banta, C. A., E. T. Clemens, M. M. Krinsky, and B. E. Sheffy. 1979. Sites of organic
acid production and patterns of digesta movement in the gastrointestinal tract of
dogs. J. Nutr. 109:1592-1600.
Barber, D. L., A. M. J. Buchan, J. H. Walsh, and A. H. Soll. 1986. Isolated canine
ileal mucosal cells in short-term culture: A model for study of neurotensin release.
Am. J. Physiol. 250:G374-G384.
Barbezat, G. O., and M. I. Grossman. 1971. Intestinal secretion: Stimulation by
peptides. Science 174:422-424.
Beinborn, M., Y. M. Lee, E. E. McBride, S. S. Quinn, and A. S. Kopin. 1993. A
single amino acid of the cholecystokinin-B/gastrin receptor determines specificity
for non-peptide antagonists. Nature (London) 362:348-350.
Brosey, B. P., R. C. Hill, and K. C. Scott. 2000. Gastrointestinal volatile fatty acid
concentrations and pH in cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. 61:359-361.
Buddington, R. K. 1996. Structure and functions of the dog and cat intestine. Pp. 61-
77 in Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutritional Research: Proceedings of
the 1996 Iams International Nutrition Symposium, D. P. Carey, S. A. Norton, and
S. M. Bolser, eds. Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Buddington, R. K., K. K. Buddington, and G. D. Sunvold. 2000. The use of
fermentable fibers to manage the gastrointestinal tract. Pp. 169-179 in Recent
Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition. Vol. III. Iams Nutrition Symposium
Proceedings, G. A. Reinhart and D. P. Carey, eds. Wilmington, Ohio: Orange
Frazer Press.


===== PDF PAGE 51 =====
50
Buffington, C. A., J. E. Branam, and G. C. Dunn. 1989. Lack of effect of age on
digestibility of protein, fat and dry matter in beagle dogs. P. 397 in Nutrition of the
Dog and Cat, H. Burger and J. P. W. Rivers, eds. New York: Cambridge University
Press (abstr.).
Burrows, C. F., and A. M. Merritt. 1983. Influence of alpha-cellulose on myoelectric
activity of proximal canine colon. Am. J. Physiol. 245:G301-G306.
Burrows, C. F., R. M. Bright, and C. P. Spencer. 1985. Influence of dietary
composition on gastric emptying and motility in dogs: Potential involvement in
acute gastric dilatation. Am. J. Vet. Res. 46:2609-2612.
Camello, P. J., M. J. Pozo, and J. A. Madrid. 1991. Ultradian rhythms in canine
gallbaldder bile composition. J. Interdiscipl. Cycle Res. 22:281-291.
Carpentier, Y., M. C. Woussen-Colle, and J. de Graef. 1977. Gastric secretion from
denervated pouches and serum gastrin levels after meals of different sizes and
meat concentrations in dogs. Gastroenterol. Clin. Biol. 1:29-37.
Carriere, F., H. Moreau, V. Raphel, R. Laugier, C. Benicourt, J. Junien, and R.
Verger. 1991. Purification and biochemical characterization of dog gastric lipase.
Eur. J. Biochem. 202:75-83.
Carriere, F., V. Raphel, H. Moreau, A. Bernadac, M. Devaux, R. Grimaud, J. A.
Barrowman, C. Benicourt, J. Junien, R. Laugier, and R. Verger. 1992. Dog gastric
lipase: Stimulation of its secretion in vivo and cytolocalization in mucous pit cells.
Gastroenterol. 102:1535-1545.
Carriere, F., R. Laugier, J. A. Barrowman, N. Priymenko, and R. Verger. 1993.
Gastric and pancreatic lipase levels during a test meal in dogs. Scand. J.
Gastroenterol. 28:443-454.
Castresana, M., K. L. Lee, W. Y. Chey, and H. Yajima. 1978. Effects of motilin and
octapeptide of cholecystokinin on antral and duodenal myoelectric activity in the
interdigestive state and during inhibition by secretin and gastric inhibitory
polypeptide. Digestion 17:300-308.
Chandler, M. L., G. Guilford, and C. R. O. Lawoko. 1997. Radiopaque markers to
evaluate gastric emptying and small intestinal transit time in healthy cats. J. Vet.
Int. Med. 11:361-364.
Chandler, M. L., W. G. Guilford, C. R. O. Lawoko, and T. Whittem. 1999. Gastric
emptying and intestinal transit times of radiopaque markers in cats fed a high fiber
diet with and without low-dose intravenous diazepam. Vet. Radio. Ultrasound
40:3-8.
Chauncey, H. H., B. L. Henriques, and J. M. Tanzer. 1963. Comparative enzyme
activity of saliva from the sheep, hog, dog, rabbit, rat and human. Arch. Oral Biol.
8:615-627.
Chey, W. Y., D. H. Coy, S. J. Konturek, A. V. Schally, and J. Tasler. 1980.
Enkephalin inhibits the release and action of secretin on pancreatic secretion in the
dog. J. Physiol. (London) 298:429-436.
Chiba, T., G. M. Thomforde, L. J. Kost, R. G. Allen, and S. F. Phillips. 2000.
Motilides accelerate regional gastrointestinal transit in the dog. Aliment.


===== PDF PAGE 52 =====
51
Pharmacol. Ther. 14:955-960.
Clemens, E. T., and C. E. Stevens. 1980. A comparison of gastrointestinal transit
time in ten species of mammals. J. Agric. Sci. 94:735-737.
Cummings, J. H., and G. T. Macfarlane. 1991. The control and consequences of
bacterial fermentation in the human colon: A review. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 70:443-
459.
Damholt, A. B., H. Kofod, and A. M. J. Buchan. 1999. Immunocytochemical
evidence for a paracrine interaction between GIP and GLP-1-producing cells in
canine small intestine. Cell Tissue Res. 298:287-293.
Depoortere, I., T. L. Peeters, A. Vandermeers, M. C. Vandermeers-Piret, J.
Christophe, and G. Vantrappen. 1993a. Purification and amino acid sequence of
motilin from cat small intestine. Reg. Peptides 19:25-32.
Depoortere, I., T. L. Peeters, and G. Vantrappen. 1993b. Distribution and
characterization of motilin receptors in the cat. Peptides 14:1153-1157.
Descroix-Vagne, M., J. P. Perret, M. Daoud-el-Baba, I. Gros, and H. Rakotomalala.
1993. Interaction between pepsin and acid secretion during fundic perfusion in cat
and rabbit. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. Comp. Physiol. 104:283-286.
Drackley, J. K., A. D. Beaulieu, and G. D. Sunvold. 1998. Energetic substrates for
intestinal cells. Pp. 463-472 in Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition.
Vol. II. Iams Nutrition Symposium Proceedings, G. A. Reinhart and D. P. Carey,
eds. Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Drochner, W., and H. Meyer. 1991. Digestion of organic matter in the large intestine
of ruminants, horses, pigs and dogs. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 65:18-40.
Eysselein, V. E., W. H. Hesse, G. A. Eberlein, C. Koelbel, W. Niebel, and H.
Goebell. 1990. Action of neurotensin on meal-stimulated gastric acid secretion in
the dog. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 25:29-39.
Fernstrom, M., S. Emas, T. J. McDonald, and V. Mutt. 1986. Gastric acid response to
pentagastrin and gastrin-releasing peptide in conscious cats. Digestion 35:115-119.
Fernstrom, M., K. Uvnas-Moberg, and S. Emas. 1987. Gastric acid, plasma gastrin,
and somatostatin responses to feeding and exogenous gastrin alone and in
combination in conscious cats. Dig. Dis. Sci. 32:177-183.
Fox-Threkeld, J. E. T., H. Manaka, Y. Manaka, S. Cipris, Z. Woskowska, and E. E.
Daniel. 1991. Mechanism of noncholinergic excitation of canine ileal circular
muscle by motilin. Peptides 12:1047-1050.
Fung, L. C., C. Chisholm, and G. R. Greenberg. 1998. Glucagon-like peptide-1-(7-
36) amide and peptide YY mediate intraduodenal fat-induced inhibition of acid
secretion in dogs. Endocrinology 139:189-194.
Gerber, J. G., and N. A. Payne. 1996. Secretin inhibits canine gastric acid secretion
in response to pentagastrin by modulating gastric histamine release. J. Pharmacol.
Exp. Ther. 279:718-723.
Goggin, J. M., J. J. Hoskinson, M. D. Butine, L. A. Foster, and N. C. Myers. 1998.
Scintigraphic assessment of gastric emptying of canned and dry diets in healthy
cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. 159:388-392.


===== PDF PAGE 53 =====
52
Gomez, G., L. Padilla, V. Udupi, N. Tarasova, F. Sundler, C. M. Townsend, Jr., J. C.
Thompson, and G. H. Greeley, Jr. 1996. Regulation of peptide YY homeostasis by
gastric acid and gastrin. Endocrinology 137:1365-1369.
Gomez, G., V. Udupi, and G. H. Greeley, Jr. 1997. Comparison of somatostatin and
pancreastatin on secretion of gastrin, pancreatic polypeptide, and peptide YY.
Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 215:165-167.
Grønstad, K., L. DeMagistris, A. Dahlström, O. Nilsson, B. Price, M. J. Zinner, B.
M. Jaffe, and H. Ahlman. 1985. The effects of vagal nerve stimulation on
endoluminal release of serotonin and substance P into the feline small intestine.
Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 20:163-169.
Grønstad, K., A. Dahlström, L. Florence, M. J. Zinner, J. Ahlman, and B. M. Jaffe.
1987. Regulatory mechanisms in endoluminal release of serotonin and substance P
from feline jejunum. Dig. Dis. Sci. 32:393-400.
Gruffydd-Jones, T. J., K. Papasouliotis, and A. H. Sparkes. 1998. Characterization of
the intestinal flora of the cat and its potential for modification. Pp. 473-482 in
Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition. Vol. II. Iams Nutrition
Symposium Proceedings, G. A. Reinhart and D. P. Carey, eds. Wilmington, Ohio:
Orange Frazer Press.
Harper, E. J., and C. L. Turner. 2000. Age-related changes in apparent digestibility in
growing kittens. Reprod. Nutr. Dev. 40:249-260.
Hickman, M. A., Q. R. Rogers, and J. E. Morris. 1990. Effect of processing on fate
of dietary carbon-14 taurine in cats. J. Nutr. 120:995-1000.
Hickman, M. A., M. L. Bruss, J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1992. Dietary protein
source (soybean vs. casein) and taurine status affect kinetics of enterohepatic
circulation of taurocholic acid in cats. J. Nutr. 122:1019-1028.
Hill, R. C., C. F. Burrows, G. W. Ellison, and J. E. Bauer. 2000. The effect of
texturized vegetable protein containing soy carbohydrate on oroileal transit of
chromic oxide in cannulated dogs. J. Anim. Sci. 78:2633-2638.
Hinder, R. A., and K. A. Kelly. 1977. Canine gastric emptying of solids and liquids.
Am. J. Physiol. 233:E335-E340.
Holzer, P., A. Bucsics, A. Saria, and F. Lembeck. 1982. A study of the concentrations
of substance P and neurotensin in the gastrointestinal tract of various mammals.
Neuroscience 7:2919-2924.
Hunt, J. N., and D. F. Stubbs. 1975. The volume and energy content of meals as
determinants of gastric emptying. J. Physiol. 245:209-225.
Iwai, N., H. Kaneda, T. Tsuto, J. Yanagihara, and T. Takahashi. 1985. The effect of
gastrin, secretin, and prostaglandin F2 alpha on the lower esophageal sphincter of
dogs after Nissen fundoplication. Gastroenterol. Jpn. 20:425-430.
James, W. T., and C. M. McCay. 1950. A study of food intake, activity, and digestive
efficiency in different type dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 11:412-413.
Jansen, J. B. M. J., A. J. L. DeLong, M. V. Singer, W. Niebel, L. C. Rovati, and C. B.
H. W. Lamers. 1990. Role of cholecystokinin in bombesin- and meal-stimulated
pancreatic polypeptide secretion in dogs. Dig. Dis. Sci. 35:1073-1077.


===== PDF PAGE 54 =====
53
Jansson, R., G. Steen, and J. Svanvik. 1978a. A comparison of glucagon, gastric
inhibitory peptide, and secretin on gallbladder function, formation of bile, and
pancreatic secretion in the cat. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 13:919-925.
Jansson, R., G. Steen, and J. Svanvik. 1978b. Effects of intravenous vasoactive
intestinal peptide (VIP) on gallbladder function in the cat. Gastroenterol. 75:47-
50.
Jensen, M. S., S. K. Jensen, and K. Jakobsen. 1997. Development of digestive
enzymes in pigs with emphasis on lipolytic activity in the stomach and pancreas.
J. Anim. Sci. 75:437-445.
Jin, H. O., K. Y. Lee, T. M. Chang, W. Y. Chey, and A. Dubois. 1994. Physiological
role of cholecystokinin on gastric emptying and acid output in dogs. Digest. Dis.
Sci. 39:2306-2314.
Johnson, C. D., M. J. Treffot, M. A. Devaux, and H. Sarles. 1987. Pancreatic
responses to endogenous and exogenous gastrin in the dog. Pancreas 2:312-319.
Johnson, C. P., S. K. Sarna, R. Baytiyeh, Y.-R. Zhu, V. E. Cowles, G. L. Telford, A.
M. Roza, and M. A. Adams. 1997. Postprandial motor activity and its relationship
to transit in the canine ileum. Surgery 121:182-189.
Johnston, K., A. Lamport, and R. M. Batt. 1993. An unexpected bacterial flora in the
proximal small intestine of normal cats. Vet. Rec. 132:362-363.
Kearns, R. J., M. G. Hayek, and G. D. Sunvold. 1998. Microbial changes in aged
dogs. Pp. 337-351 in Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutritional Research.
Vol. II. Iams Nutrition Symposium Proceedings, G. A. Reinhart and D. P. Carey,
eds. Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Kellum, J. M., R. J. Maxwell, J. Potter, and J. F. Kummerle. 1986. Motilin’s
induction of phasic contractility in canine jejunum is mediated by the luminal
release of serotonin. Surgery 100:445-453.
Kendall, P. T., S. E. Blaza, and P. M. Smith. 1983. Influence of level of intake and
dog size on apparent digestibility of dog foods. Br. Vet. J. 139:361-362.
Kienzle, E. 1988. Enzymeaktivitaet in pancreas, darmwand und chymus des hundes
in abhangigkeit von alter und futterart. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 60:276-288.
Kimura, H., S. Ito, T. Ohta, T. Asano, and Y. Nakazato. 1994. Vasoactive intestinal
peptide released by acetylcholine in the dog ileum. J. Auton. Nerv. Syst. 48:167-
174.
Kirkwood, J. K. 1985. The influence of size on the biology of the dog. J. Small
Anim. Pract. 26:97-110.
Kitamura, N., J. Yamada, T. Yamashita, and N. Yanaihara. 1982. Endocrine cells in
the gastrointestinal tract of the cat. Biomed. Res. 3:612-622.
Konturek, S. J., J. Bilski, M. Hladij, E. Krzyzek, R. Z. Cai, and A. V. Schally. 1991.
Role of cholecystokinin, gastrin, and gastrin-releasing peptide in the regulation of
pancreatic secretion in cats. Digestion 49:97-105.
Konturek, S. J., J. Bilski, J. Tasler, and M. Cieszkowski. 1992. Role of
cholecystokinin in the inhibition of gastric acid secretion in dogs. J. Physiol.
451:477-489.


===== PDF PAGE 55 =====
54
Kortezova, N., Z. Mizhorkova, E. Milusheva, D. H. Coy, E. S. Vizi, and G. Varga.
1994. GRP-preferring bombesin receptor subtype mediates contractile activity in
cat terminal ileum. Peptides 15:1331-1333.
Kovacs, T. O., J. H. Walsh, V. Maxwell, H. C. Wong, T. Azuma, and E. Katt. 1989.
Gastrin is a major mediator of the gastric phase of acid secretion in dogs: Proof by
monoclonal antibody neutralization. Gastroenterol. 97:1406-1413.
Krevsky, B., M. B. Somers, A. H. Maurer, L. S. Malmud, L. C. Knight, and R. S.
Fisher. 1988. Quantitative measurement of feline colonic transit. Am. J. Physiol.
255:G529-G534.
Lamas, M., and A. Scheinin. 1971. Studies on dog saliva. I. Some physicochemical
characteristics. Acta Odontology Scandinavia 29:205-214.
Lawson, D., C. R. Manthyn, and T. N. Pappas. 1994. Effect of CGRP antagonist,
alpha-CGRP 8-37, on acid secretion in the dog. Dig. Dis. Sci. 39:1405-1408.
Layer, P., J. Hotz, V. E. Eysselein, J. B. M. J. Jansen, C. B. H. W. Lamers, H. P.
Schmitz-Moormann, and H. Goebell. 1985. Effects of acute hypercalcemia on
exocrine pancreatic secretion in the cat. Gastroenterol. 88:1168-1174.
Liddle, R. A., R. J. Rushakoff, E. T. Morita, L. Beccaria, J. D. Carter, and I. D.
Goldfine. 1988. Physiological role of cholecystokinin in reducing postprandial
hyperglycemia in humans. J. Clin. Investig. 81:1675-1681.
Lin, H. C., X.-T. Zhao, L. Wang, and H. Wong. 1996. Fat-induced ileal brake in the
dog depends on peptide YY. Gastroenterol. 110:1491-1495.
Lluis, F., G. Gomez, M. Fujimara, G. H. Greeley, Jr., and J. C. Thompson. 1988.
Peptide YY inhibits pancreatic secretion by inhibiting cholecystokinin release in
the dog. Gastroenterol. 94:137-144.
Macfarlane, G. T., G. R. Gibson, and J. H. Cummings. 1992. Comparison of
fermentation reactions in different regions of the human colon. J. Appl. Bacteriol.
72:57-64.
Madrid, J. A., G. M. Salido, M. Manas, E. Martinez-Victoria, and F. J. Mataix. 1983.
Use of a bidirectional cannula to study biliary secretion in conscious dogs. Lab.
Anim. 17:307-310.
Manaka, H., Y. Manaka, F. Kostolanska, J. E. T. Fox, and E. E. Daniel. 1989.
Release of VIP and substance P from isolated perfused canine ileum. Am. J.
Physiol. 257:G182-G190.
Maskell, I. E., and J. V. Johnson. 1993. Digestion and absorption. Pp. 25-44 in The
Waltham Book of Companion Animal Nutrition, I. Burger, ed. Oxford, UK:
Pergamon Press.
Merlo, A., and S. Cohen. 1989. Vasoactive intestinal peptide: An inhibitor of feline
gastric smooth muscle in vitro. Dig. Dis. Sci. 34:1365-1368.
Meyer, H., and C. Schunemann. 1989. Rationsgestaltung und praecaecale bzw.
postileale Verdaulichkeit der organischen Substanz. Pp. 14-23 in Beitrage zur
Verdauungsphysiologie des Hundes, H. Meyer, ed. Hamburg and Berlin: Verlag
Paul Parey.


===== PDF PAGE 56 =====
55
Meyer, H., E. Kienzle, and J. Zentek. 1993. Body size and relative weights of
gastrointestinal tract and liver in dogs. J. Vet. Nutr. 2:31-35.
Meyer, H., J. Zentek, H. Habernoll, and I. Maskell. 1999. Digestibility and
compatibility of mixed diets and faecal consistency in different breeds of dog. J.
Vet. Med. 46:155-165.
Meyer, J. H., J. Dressman, A. Fink, and G. Amidon. 1985. Effect of size and density
on canine gastric emptying of nondigestible solids. Gastroenterol. 89:805-813.
Milenov, K., M. Vassileva, D. Marinova, and R. Kalfin. 1993. Effect of neurotensin
on the canine gallbladder motility: In vivo and in vitro experiments.
Neuropeptides 25:233-239.
Milusheva, E. A., N. I. Kortezova, Z. N. Mizhorkova, M. Papasova, D. H. Coy, A.
Balint, E. S. Vizi, and G. Varga. 1998. Role of different bombesin receptor
subtypes mediating contractile activity in cat upper gastrointestinal tract. Peptides
19:549-556.
Miyabayashi, T., J. P. Morgan, M. A. O. Atitola, and L. Muhumuza. 1986. Small
intestinal emptying time in normal beagle dogs. A contrast radiographic study.
Vet. Radiol. 27:164-168.
Nakajima, M., S. Naruse, M. Kitagawa, H. Ishiguro, C. Jin, O. Ito, and T. Hayakawa.
2001. Role of cholecystokinin in the intestinal phase of pancreatic circulation in
dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 280:G614-G620.
Nott, H. M. R., S. I. Rigby, J. V. Johnson, S. J. Bailey, and I. H. Burger. 1994. Design
of digestibility trials for dogs and cats. J. Nutr. 124:2582S-2583S.
Ouyang, A., and S. Cohen. 1983. Multiple 5-hydroxytryptamine receptors on feline
ileum and ileocecal sphincter. Am. J. Physiol. 244:G426-G434.
Papasouliotis, K., T. J. Gruffydd-Jones, P. J. Cripps, and A. C. Blaxter. 1993. The
effect of short-term dietary fibre administration on oro-cecal transit time.
Diabetologia 36:207-211.
Papasouliotis, K., T. J. Gruffydd-Jones, A. H. Sparkes, and P. J. Cripps. 1995. A
comparison of orocaecal transit times assessed by the breath hydrogen test and the
sulphasalazine/sulphapyridine method in healthy beagle dogs. Res. Vet. Sci.
58:263-267.
Parkman, H. P., and J. C. Reynolds. 1990. Somatostatin selectively inhibits
excitatory contractile pathways of the feline lower esophageal sphincter. Reg.
Peptides 27:325-334.
Poitras, P., J. R. Reeve, Jr., M. W. Hunkapiller, L. E. Hood, and J. H. Walsh. 1983.
Purification and characterization of canine intestinal motilin. Reg. Peptides 5:197-
208.
Poitras, P., A. Dumont, J. C. Cuber, and L. Trudel. 1993. Cholinergic regulation of
motilin release from isolated canine intestinal cells. Peptides 14:207-213.
Quigley, E. M. M., and J. S. Thompson. 1993. The motor response to intestinal
resection: Motor activity in the canine small intestine following distal resection.
Gastroenterol. 105:791-798.


===== PDF PAGE 57 =====
56
Rehfield, J. F., and K. Uvnas-Wallensten. 1978. Gastrins in cat and dog: Evidence for
a biosynthetic relationship between the large molecular forms of gastrin and
heptadecapeptide gastrin. J. Physiol. 283:379-396.
Rentschler, L. A., L. L. Hirschberger, and M. H. Stipanuk. 1986. Response of the
kitten to dietary taurine depletion: Effects on renal reabsorption, bile acid
conjugation and activities of enzymes involved in taurine synthesis. Comp.
Biochem. Physiol. 84B:319-325.
Reynolds, J. C., M. R. Dukehart, A. Ouyang, and S. Cohen. 1986. Interactions of
bombesin and substance P at the feline lower esophageal sphincter. J. Clin. Invest.
77:436-440.
Roediger, W. E. W. 1980. Role of anaerobic bacteria in the metabolic welfare of the
colonic mucosa in man. Gut 21:793-798.
Rothstein, R. D., and A. Ouyang. 1989. Mechanism of action on neurotensin at the
ileocecal sphincter region. Life Sci. 45:1475-1482.
Roussel, A. J., S. Keele, M. D. Willard, and D. P. Laflamme. 1996. Type and amount
of fiber affects gastric emptying and small intestinal transit time in dogs. Dig. Dis.
Sci. 41:1882 (Abstr.).
Rubenstein, E., Z. Mark, J. Haspel, G. Ben-Ari, Z. Dreznik, D. Mirelman, and A.
Tadmor. 1985. Antibacterial activity of the pancreatic fluid. Gastroenterol. 88:927-
932.
Schemann, M., and H.-J. Ehrlein. 1986. Postprandial patterns of canine jejunal
motility and transit of luminal content. Gastroenterol. 90:991-1000.
Shields, R. G. 1993. Digestibility and metabolizable energy measurement in dogs
and cats. Pp. 21-35 in Proc. Petfood Forum ’93. Mt. Morris, Ill.: Watt Publishing
Co.
Sinar, D. R., T. M. O’Dorisio, E. L. Mazzaferri, H. S. Mekhjian, J. H. Caldwell, and
F. B. Thomas. 1978. Effect of gastrin inhibitory polypeptide on lower esophageal
sphincter pressure in cats. Gastroenterol. 75:263-267.
Smeets-Peeters, M., T. Watson, M. Minekus, and R. Havenaar. 1998. A review of the
physiology of the canine digestive tract related to the development of in vitro
systems. Nutr. Res. Rev. 11:45-69.
Sparkes, A. H., K. Papasouliotis, F. J. Barr, and T. J. Gruffydd-Jones. 1997.
Reference ranges for gastrointestinal transit of barium-impregnated polyethylene
spheres in healthy cats. J. Sm. Anim. Prac. 38:340-343.
Stevens, C. E., and I. D. Hume. 1995. Comparative Physiology of the Vertebrate
Digestive System. 2nd edition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Strickling, J. A., D. L. Harmon, K. A. Dawson, and K. L. Gross. Evaluation2000.
Evaluation of oligosaccharide addition to dog diets: Influences on nutrient
digestion and microbial populations. Anim. Feed Sci. Technol. 86:205-219.
Suzuki, H., E. Mochiki, N. Haga, M. Satoh, A. Mizumoto, and Z. Itoh. 1998. Motilin
controls cyclic release of insulin through vagal cholinergic muscarinic pathways in
fasted dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 274:G87-G95.


===== PDF PAGE 58 =====
57
Tange, A. 1983. Distribution of peptide containing endocrine cells and neurons in the
gastrointestinal tract of the dog: Immunohistochemical studies using antisera to
somatostatin, substance P vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, methionine
enkephalin, and neurotensin. Biomed. Res. 4:9-24.
Traynor, O. J., R. R. Dozois, and E. P. DiMagno. 1984. Canine interdigestive and
postprandial gallbladder motility and emptying. Am. J. Physiol. 246:G426-G432.
van der Burg, M. P. M., O. R. Guicherit, M. Frölich, and H. G. Gooszen. 1995.
Insulinotropic effects of cholecystokinin, gastric inhibitory polypeptide, and
glucagon-like peptide-1 during perfusion of short-term cultured canine isolated
islets. Reg. Peptides 60:61-67.
Vergara, P., Z. Woskowska, S. Cipris, J. E. T. Fox-Threlkeld, and E. E. Daniel. 1996.
Mechanisms of action of cholecystokinin in the canine gastrointestinal tract: Role
of vasoactive intestinal peptide and nitric oxide. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 279:306-
316.
Vigna, S. R., C. R. Mantyh, A. H. Soll, J. E. Maggio, and P. W. Mantyh. 1989.
Substance P receptors on canine chief cells: Localization, characterization, and
function. J. Neuroscience 9:2878-2886.
Villareal, R., W. F. Ganong, and S. J. Gray. 1955. Effect of adrenocorticotrophic
hormone upon the gastric secretion of hydrochloric acid, pepsin and electrolytes in
dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 183:485-494.
Washizu, T., H. Ikenaga, M. Washizu, T. Ishida, I. Tomoda, and J. J. Kaneko. 1990.
Bile acid composition of dog and cat gall-bladder bile. Jpn. J. Vet. Sci. 52:423-
425.
Weber, M., L. Martin, V. Biourge, P. Nguyen, and H. Dumon. 2003. Influence of age
and body size on the digestibility of a dry expanded diet in dogs. J. Anim. Physiol.
Anim. Nutr. 87:21-31.
Welsh, J. D., and A. Walker. 1965. Intestinal disaccharidase and alkaline phosphatase
activity in the dog. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 120:525-527.
Wen, J., S. F. Phillips, M. G. Sarr, L. J. Kost, and J. J. Holst. 1995. PYY and GLP-1
contribute to feedback inhibition from the canine ileum and colon. Am. J. Physiol.
269:G945-G952.
Williams, N. S., J. H. Meyer, D. Jehn, J. Miller, and A. S. Fink. 1984. Canine
intestinal transit and digestion of radiolabelled liver particles. Gastroenterol.
86:1451-1459.
Younes, H., C. Demigne, S. Behr, and C. Remesy. 1995. Resistant starch exerts a
lowering effect on plasma urea by enhancing urea N transfer into the large
intestine. Nutr. Res. 15:1199-1210.
Young, L. G., A. G. Low, and W. H. Close. 1991. Digestion and metabolism
techniques in pigs. Pp. 623-630 in Swine Nutrition, E. R. Miller, D. E. Ullrey, and
A. J. Lewis, eds. Boston, Mass.: Butterworth-Heineman.
Youngberg, C. A., J. Wlodyga, S. Schmaltz, and J. B. Dressman. 1985.
Radiotelemetric determination of gastrointestinal pH in four healthy beagles. Am.
J. Vet. Res. 46:1516-1521.


===== PDF PAGE 59 =====
58
Zaki, M., L. Harrington, R. McCuen, D. H. Coy, A. Arimura, and M. L. Schubert.
1996. Somatostatin receptor subtype 2 mediates inhibition of gastrin and
histamine secretion from human, dog, and rat antrum. Gastroenterol. 111:919-924.
Zhao, X.-T., J. H. Walsh, H. Wong, L. Wang, and H. C. Lin. 1999. Intestinal fat-
induced inhibition of meal-stimulated gastric acid secretion depends on CCK but
not peptide YY. Am. J. Physiol. 276:G550-G555.


===== PDF PAGE 60 =====
59
2
Feeding Behavior of Dogs and
Cats
FOOD INGESTION BY FERAL DOGS AND CATS
At the present stage in the domestication of dogs and cats, it is difficult to assess
with certainty a complete description of the normal feeding behavior of either. In
different ways, both have become dependent on humans for their food supply. Some
information can be gained by observing feral dogs and cats or other Canids and
Felids; however, much of our information still comes from the laboratory setting.
From field studies, it is apparent that there are many differences in feeding behavior
between dogs and cats. Canids in general, including dogs, hunt in packs, but have
broad feeding habits, which include berries, other fruit, and various parts of plants as
well as both small and large prey. On the other hand, Felids in general (except the
lion), including the domestic cat, are solitary hunters, showing no omnivorous
feeding behavior whether feral or simply house cats allowed outside; thus, felids are
considered strict carnivores (Ewer, 1973). When out hunting, domestic cats seek
small prey such as mice, birds, lizards and insects such as grasshoppers (McMurry
and Sperry, 1941; Eberhard, 1954; Coman and Brunner, 1972; Fitzgerald, 1988;
Robertson, 1998) and limit the size of their prey to occasionally killing and eating
adult rabbits. It is interesting that house cats search out wild prey more often when
meat is not in their diet (Robertson, 1998). Feral dogs, on the other hand, prefer
hunting in packs and hunt medium-sized to large prey, including deer, caribou, and
even humans (Avis, 1999).


===== PDF PAGE 61 =====
60
Since a mouse or small bird provides about 30 kcal of metabolizable energy
(ME), a cat must catch 8-12 of these animals every 24 hours to provide its energy
need. Any dog owner, on the other hand, knows that his or her dog can eat its 24-
hour energy need in just a few minutes in a single meal. It has been reported that a
male Labrador once ate 10 percent of its body weight of a canned dog food
(Mugford, 1977) and a wolf deprived of food for 7 days is known to have eaten 17
percent of it body weight of meat (Young, 1944).
DIURNAL RHYTHMS, AND FEEDING AND DRINKING
PATTERNS
Free-feeding patterns of dogs and cats in the laboratory where food is available
continuously confirm that dogs eat fewer, larger, and more variable-sized meals than
cats (Mugford, 1977; Mugford and Thorne, 1980). Cats voluntarily eat 12-20 meals
per day evenly spread between the light and dark periods (Mugford and Thorne,
1980; Kane et al., 1981b), whereas dogs, depending upon breed, will eat four to eight
or even more meals (Mugford and Thorne, 1980), generally eaten during the light
period, with some breeds also eating during the dark period. Kane et al. (1981b)
reported that, after adaptation to each diet for a week or more, adult cats ate the same
size (in kilocalories of ME) and number of meals whether they were fed commercial
dry or canned or laboratory-prepared amino acid or protein purified diets. In their
studies, the mean meal size was about 15-30 kcal ME, with the cats eating about 12-
20 meals per day (means, 15.7-17.4).
Although fresh water is always recommended for both dogs and cats, the amount
required varies greatly with type of diet and environmental conditions. Dogs will
spontaneously drink more water per kilogram of body weight than cats (Anderson,
1981), which is thought to be the result of the cat evolving as a desert animal (Chew,
1965). Cats can concentrate urine more than either dogs or humans and can rehydrate
drinking seawater (Wolf, 1959). Cats are slower to initiate drinking or to drink
enough for complete rehydration than dogs who, when dehydrated, will drink
enough to replenish 6 percent of their body weight in an hour compared to the 24
hours that it takes for cats (Adolph, 1947). This weak thirst drive of cats results in an
intake of only about 2 mL of water for every gram of dry food ingested and an
increased risk of urolith formation as compared to cats fed food containing more
water, such as a canned food containing 78-82 percent water. Nevertheless, both
dogs and cats are able to maintain water balance when fed meat or fish containing
67-73 percent water, without drinking any water (Caldwell, 1931; Danowski et al.,
1944; Prentiss et al., 1959). However, even cats could not maintain water balance
with meat desiccated to a moisture content of 61 percent (Prentiss et al., 1959),
possibly because of the volume of urine required to excrete urea. The ratio of 2 mL
water per gram of dry matter (DM) is similar to that of prey, and it is interesting that
when water intake has been measured in the laboratory setting in cats fed canned


===== PDF PAGE 62 =====
61
food (Kane et al., 1981b), within 2 days the cats stop drinking; indeed, it could be
considered that the water ingested by cats eating canned foods causes diuresis in
cats. Diuresis, as in other animals, can be caused by additional sodium in the diet,
but it takes 2-4 percent sodium chloride to increase water intake in cats (Anderson,
1982). Thus, because of possible adverse effects of high sodium intake, addition of
water to food is the most common way to increase water intake (Anderson, 1982),
even to help prevent uroliths (Hamar, 1976). Dogs drink primarily during the day
unless they are dehydrated, whereas cats drink during both the light and the dark
periods (Kane et al., 1981b). Unless dogs and cats were meal-fed (one to two meals
per day), there were no correlations between eating and drinking patterns (Kanarek,
1975; Kane et al., 1981b), despite the fact that the number of drinking bouts
approached the number of meals.
All animals live with diurnal cycles caused by the earth’s rotation once each day.
The most common diurnal cycle is the sleep-wake cycle, which contributes to a
variety of biological rhythms. Circadian rhythms are free-running rhythms of about
24 hours that are synchronized by the light-dark cycles of day and night but, even in
constant light or constant darkness, continue as a result of an innate circadian
oscillator present in most mammals in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). Thus, in
most animals, the sleep-wake cycle is a circadian rhythm. In this sense, it was
reported long ago that cats do not have clear-cut circadian rhythms (Szymanski,
1919, as cited by Randall et al., 1985). For example, core body temperature is
normally circadian in most mammals, but not in cats (Sterman et al., 1965). Neither
dogs nor cats have clearly defined circadian rhythms (Hawking et al., 1971); both
have irregular patterns throughout the day and night. The effect of this on the
behavior of cats is readily apparent when we realize that cats, for example, as
compared to chickens or rats, are both diurnal and nocturnal, hunting rodents at night
and song birds during the day, sleeping in the day and sleeping at night, whining to
come in and out of the house in both the daytime and the nighttime. Randall et al.
(1985) reported a comprehensive study on the feeding behavior of cats and
concluded that food intake at night was influenced (increased) by dim light
(starlight) and by the presence of humans. They observed a wide range of individual
activity and feeding patterns, with no circadian rhythms apparent in constant light;
however, they did observe free-running circadian rhythms in constant darkness.
Studies of farm cats (Macdonald and Apps, 1978) provide evidence that some cats
are nocturnal—that is resting in the barns during the day and traveling out
considerable distances at night. Minor disturbances, such as routine noises by
humans, easily modify any existing rhythm. Kane et al. (1981b, 1987) examined
feeding patterns in an undisturbed animal laboratory, using electronic balances and
interrupting the cats only once a day during the light period. They found that the cats
ate at random, during both the light and the dark cycles and that there was a trend
toward eating a bit more during the light period, apparently because that is when they
were disturbed and provided with fresh food. Although there were clear differences
in palatabilities among the various diets used (commercial canned, commercial dry,


===== PDF PAGE 63 =====
62
purified amino acid diet, purified protein diet, high-fat diet, low-fat diet), after
adaptation to each diet for a few days, cats ate from 12 to 20 meals per day
consisting of 15-30 kcal ME per meal. Mugford and Thorne (1980), studying a
variety of commercial pet foods, also found that the cats ate many meals during both
the light and the dark periods. Although not entirely uncommon, it appears against
the natural feeding behavior of cats to be forced to eat only once a day, whereas most
dogs thrive on a regimen of eating once a day.
ROLE OF IMPRINTING AND SOCIAL FACTORS ON
FEEDING BEHAVIOR
When feeding dogs and cats, it is important to remember that both early feeding
experiences and recent experiences can influence their dietary choice. In a number of
species, including dogs and cats, exposure to specific dietary flavors and textures
early in life can enhance preferences later in life. The classic work of Kuo (1967)
shows that pups, when fed only a single, unique-flavored diet (e.g., soybean-based
diet) for 6 months, would eat no novel foods, whereas pups fed a mixed diet would
eat any new food that was presented. Cats are notorious for getting “fixed” on one
particular flavor if fed only that flavor for a long period of time, whereas, if the diet
is varied, they never seem to select only one type or one flavor of diet. However,
Mugford (1977) has reported that well-adjusted normal adult dogs and cats will
select new flavors rather than the one they were fed (normal commercial foods) as
puppies or kittens. Dogs and cats fed a variety of diets are known to be normally
neophilic; that is, after feeding on only one flavor for a time, they will select a new
flavor. This rejection of the familiar flavor has often been referred to as the diet
becoming “monotonous,” or as flavor “fatigue,” and is common in any species that is
well socialized and comfortable in its surroundings. If the same dogs and cats are
placed in a strange environment or stressed in some other way, then the animals
become neophobic—that is, they avoid any new flavor and select one that is familiar
(Bradshaw and Thorne, 1992). The degree of these responses is not hard and fast but
is modified by the palatability of the foods. Therefore, the palatability and novelty of
any particular food and the level of hunger and stress for dogs and cats are all
important in acceptance and choice of any particular food at any particular time.
Naive cats offered new diets will generally select gel (moist) diets over dry diets;
however, some animals will select familiar dry commercial diets over unfamiliar
canned diets. Cats prefer warm food to cold or hot food (Bradshaw and Thorne,
1992). Thus, it is important to warm food that is kept in a refrigerator and, when
changing diets, to do so gradually by mixing part of the familiar diet with the new
diet a few times before switching completely.


===== PDF PAGE 64 =====
63
DIETARY CHOICE, PALATABILITY, LEARNED TASTE
AVERSIONS, AND PREFERENCES
According to Webster’s dictionary, palatability is being agreeable to the taste and
hence, savory and pleasing—that is, a hedonic response of an organism to a
foodstuff. This is a very general definition and is not sufficiently analytical to use in
a scientific way involving both pre-absorptive and post-absorptive behavioral
responses to food in situations that involve learned taste aversions or sensory-
specific satiety. In observing animals, they select, avoid, or have no preference when
given a choice between two diets, and although there are indications of joy or
happiness by dogs and cats, hedonic feeding responses cannot be evaluated readily.
As indicated in an extensive discussion by nutritional biochemists, physiological
psychologists, and sensory physiologists (Appetite, 1990), the meaning of the term
palatability has become confused. For example, a given flavor (odor, taste, texture,
temperature) that is highly acceptable when offered to naive dogs or cats may be
completely rejected when used with a diet that has previously caused a learned taste
aversion. Therefore, although the term palatability is used extensively in describing
the eagerness of dogs and cats to ingest various foods—especially by the petfood
industry—it is not very useful and probably should be avoided in scientific articles.
One definition of palatability is that it “refers to the physical and chemical properties
of the diet which are associated with promoting or suppressing feeding behavior
during the pre-absorptive or immediate postabsorptive period, i.e., an unconditioned
response, before a metabolic and any subsequent conditioning effect on food intake
occur” (McArthur et al., 1993). Although quite precise and useful for experimental
purposes, this definition of palatability requires the use of naive animals in a specific
feeding situation, which is not always feasible. Nevertheless, this definition of
palatability is used in this chapter.
Rats are the species “par excellence” when it comes to studying the effect of
nutrient deficiency and excess on dietary choice; thus, comparisons with the rat are
made in describing the dietary choice of dogs and cats. For example, rats, when
deficient in threonine or lysine, will avoid the diet that has the lesser content by only
0.01 g per 100 g diet; that is, rats will choose a diet that contains 0.200 g of threonine
per 100 g of diet over one that contains 0.191 g of threonine per 100 g (Hrupka et al.,
1997). Also, in choosing between two diets, rats will also avoid the diet that has less
lysine, even if no difference in weight gain is apparent between the two dietary levels
of lysine (Hrupka et al., 1999). Equivalent dietary choice studies have not been done
in dogs and cats. It is clear, however, that dogs are more like rats than cats are. When
offered various levels of dietary protein choices, both rats (Musten et al., 1974;
Leung and Rogers, 1981; Peters and Harper, 1984) and dogs (Romsos and Ferguson,
1983; Torres et al., 2003) will choose about 25-30 percent of their calories as protein,
depending on the type of protein, quantity of sugar in each diet, and level of protein
previously fed, whereas cats will not avoid protein-free diets in favor of low-protein
or adequate-protein diets (Cook et al., 1985, 1996). Thus, compared to nutritional


===== PDF PAGE 65 =====
64
adequacy, positive palatability factors such as amino acids, peptides, and texture
have a greater effect on cats than on dogs. More than 30 years ago, Rozin and Kalat
(1971) reviewed the nature of the learning process that is now called “learned taste
aversion” and distinguished it from cognitive learning. It is clear now that many of
the earlier choices for adequate over inadequate diets were the result of learned taste
aversions. This has led to the concept that most animals learn what not to eat (via
learned taste aversions) rather than what to eat (learned taste preferences). Most of
these early studies, and those in the current literature, were done on omnivores or
herbivores. Omnivores or herbivores avoid a wide variety of deficiencies including
deficiencies of protein (Musten et al., 1974; Leung et al., 1981); essential amino
acids (Leung and Rogers, 1987) (e.g., threonine); many, but not all, B vitamins (e.g.,
thiamin, riboflavin; Scott and Verney, 1947; Rozin, 1965); several macrominerals
(e.g., calcium, phosphate, sodium, potassium; Scott et al., 1950; Nachman, 1962;
Holcombe et al., 1976; Taher et al., 1984) and at least one micromineral (zinc;
Christensen et al., 1974). Both dogs and cats have been shown to develop learned
taste aversions (Mugford, 1977); however, so little work has been done with feeding
behavior and nutrient deficiencies in either dogs or cats that their responses cannot
be generalized.
It appears that arginine deficiency-induced hyperammonemia results in learned
taste aversions in most species, including dogs and cats (Morris and Rogers, 1978;
Burns et al., 1981; Rogers, 1994), whereas, as mentioned earlier, cats do not appear
to develop a learned taste aversion to a protein-free or low-protein diet (Cook et al.,
1985, 1996), nor do they select sodium even if they are sodium deficient (Yu et al.,
1997). Although the dog is “anatomically” a carnivore, metabolically it has many
characteristics of omnivores such as the conversion of carotene to vitamin A,
tryptophan to niacin, cysteine to taurine, linoleate to arachidonate, and other
metabolic differences, which result in different nutrient requirements for dogs and
cats both qualitatively and quantitatively. It would appear that most of the differences
in dietary choice between rats and cats are the result of the lack of metabolic pressure
during evolution for selection by cats since cats are strict carnivores and, if eating
animal tissue, would never have had to make such a choice to maintain homeostasis.
Dogs, however, exhibit some of the metabolic characteristics of both omnivores and
strict carnivores. As mentioned above, dogs clearly select for protein whereas cats do
not. No work has reported whether dogs or cats exhibit learned taste aversions to the
various vitamins and mineral deficiencies. As mentioned earlier, dogs appear to be
more similar to rats than cats are; thus, metabolically and by nutrient choice, dogs
should be considered omnivores. It is interesting that cats develop a learned taste
aversion to a diet that causes metabolic acidosis, even if it results from the protein
component of the diet (Cook et al., 1996). Thus, cats will avoid lower-sodium diets
to avoid metabolic acidosis but not to prevent a sodium deficiency when metabolic
acidosis is not present (Yu et al., 1997).
As noted earlier, cats will become fixed on a single food if allowed to eat only
one food for a long period of time (Kuo, 1967; Mugford, 1977; Mugford and Thorne,


===== PDF PAGE 66 =====
65
1980; Kane, 1989). This has the appearance of a learned taste aversion, but there is
no evidence that this phenomenon is caused by any nutrient deficiency. In fact, cats
are normally neophilic (selecting a new food or new food flavor) if fed a variety of
foods and flavors throughout their lives (Mugford and Thorne, 1980). It is known to
be easier to get young kittens than older cats to eat poorly palatable foods (e.g.,
purified diets). Texture and moisture content, although important to both dogs and
cats, are clearly more important for cats (Kane, 1989). Cats normally select a moist
diet (meat or canned diet) over a dry pelleted or expanded diet; however, some cats
that have had a dry commercial diet for a long period of time will select the dry
expanded diet. However in contrast to dogs, cats will not eat a powdered (ground
expanded commercial or powdered purified) diet but will eat the same diet if it is
pelleted or provided as a mash or gel form. Generally, the gel form is the type most
often selected. Flavors that enhance the acceptance of diets by both dogs and cats
include animal fat (Kane, 1981a), peptides, and certain amino acids (White and
Boudreau, 1975; Beauchamp et al, 1977). Sugar enhances the acceptance of diets by
dogs (Torres et al., 2003) but not by cats (Beauchamp et al., 1977). Medium-chain
fatty acids per se or in triglycerides have a negative palatability for cats (MacDonald
et al., 1985). As little as 5 percent medium-chain triglycerides or 0.1 percent caprylic
acid resulted in an immediate avoidance the first time cats had an opportunity to
select between these diets and a diet containing hydrogenated beef tallow as the fat
source. Cats would not eat enough diet to maintain their weight when hydrogenated
coconut oil was provided at 25 percent of the diet (MacDonald et al., 1985). Dogs,
on the other hand, readily eat meat and other foods that are rather rancid. It is known
that cats are more sensitive to bitter taste than several other species (Carpenter,
1956); for example, cats first avoid a quinine solution at 5 μmol·L–1 whereas rabbits
and hamsters first avoid quinine solution at 2,000 μmol·L–1. Dogs appear to be
intermediate, strongly rejecting a quinine solution at about 300 μmol·L–1 (Grace and
Russek, 1969). Saccharin (0.1 percent) is avoided by both dogs and cats (from
electrophysiological evidence, because of the bitter taste). Nevertheless, even though
dogs select 10 percent sucrose solution, cats will not select for or against any
concentration of sucrose (Carpenter, 1956; Grace and Russek, 1969; Kitchell, 1978;
Castonguay et al., 1987).
Dogs and cats especially like the flavor components in meat and peptides (protein
hydrolysates or enzymatic digests) and free amino acids such as alanine, proline,
lysine, histidine, and leucine (White and Boudreau, 1975; Beauchamp et al., 1977;
Hargrove et al., 1994). Dogs appear to also respond very positively to the flavor of
umami (monosodium glutamate plus 5′-nucleotides; Kumazawa and Kurihara, 1990).
CONTROL OF FOOD INTAKE
Although there are reports that cats do not regulate body weight, for example, by
increasing food intake when a diet is diluted with celluflour or kaolin (Kanarek,


===== PDF PAGE 67 =====
66
1975; Hirsch et al., 1978) or when additional calories are provided in water
(Castonguay et al., 1987), it would appear that palatability and energy loss in the
urine are the probable reasons for the lack of adjustment in these studies (Goggin et
al., 1993). Most cats can be changed from canned to dry to purified diets without
marked changes in energy intake or body weight (Kane et al., 1981b). It has long
been known that dogs adjust their energy intake as the energy density of the diet is
increased or decreased (Janowitz and Grossman, 1949); however, there is a
limitation, even in dogs, as to how much cellulose (<10 percent) can be added
without causing a decrease in energy intake (Jewell and Toll, 1996). As mentioned
above, suppressing activity (keeping dogs or cats in small places) and feeding highly
palatable, energy-dense diets for long periods of time contribute to obesity in dogs
and cats just as in humans. Behaviorally, it is interesting that in cats (Adamec, 1976),
predatory behavior takes precedence over eating since cats will stop eating a highly
palatable diet to go kill a rat and then return to their food without eating the rat. This
type of behavior probably contributes to the survival of strict carnivores.
FEEDING RECOMMENDATIONS
Clean, fresh water should be provided for both dogs and cats at all times. They
should be fed a complete and balanced diet that fulfills their requirements as
described in Chapter 15. There is generally much flexibility in deciding upon a
feeding schedule. Many dogs and cats can be fed free-choice, and they will maintain
their proper weight. About 30-40 percent of dogs and cats will overeat and be
overweight or even obese if allowed to eat as much as they want at all times during
the day. Although growing puppies should be fed either free-choice or two or three
times a day, normal adult dogs will maintain optimal health if fed only one meal a
day. Cats, however, normally eat many meals a day; thus, it is not normal for them to
eat only one meal a day, and most cats cannot adapt to such a dietary regimen. If the
dog or cat is too heavy, it should be fed less food. This can be accomplished with any
animal in a number of ways. The most obvious is to simply feed less using the same
feeding regimen. Thus, for the dog, that could be one meal a day or feed the correct
amount in two feedings, one in the morning and one in the evening. For the cat, it
would be putting the right amount of food in the food bowl and allowing the cat all
the time it wants to eat that amount. There are other approaches, such as feeding a
less energy-dense diet, feeding a less palatable diet, allowing less time for feeding,
and other regimens. Some of these regimens work for some animals, but not for all.
Often, an even greater problem is preventing the animal from eating at the
neighbors’ or keeping the family from feeding treats or table scraps indiscriminately.
If, on the other hand, a dog or cat is not eating enough (unusual unless it is sick) to
maintain a normal weight, warming the food and adding water in the form of meat
broth often helps.


===== PDF PAGE 68 =====
67
REFERENCES
Adamec, R. E. 1976. The interaction of hunger and preying in the domestic cat (Felis
catus): An adaptive hierarchy? Behav. Biol. 18:263-272.
Adolph, E. S. 1947. Tolerance to heat and dehydration in several species of
mammals. Am. J. Physiol. 151:564-575.
Anderson, R. S. 1981. Water content in the diet of the dog. Vet. Ann. 21:171-178.
Anderson, R. S. 1982. Water balance in the dog and cat. J. Sm. Anim. Pract. 23:588-
598.
Appetite. 1990. Palatability. 14:159-180.
Avis, S. P. 1999. Dog pack attack: Hunting humans. Am. J. Forensic Med Pathol.
20:243-246.
Beauchamp, G. K., O. Maller, and J. G. Rogers, Jr. 1977. Flavor preferences in cats
(Felis catus and Panthera sp.). J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 91:1118-1127.
Bradshaw, J., and C. Thorne. 1992. Feeding behaviour. Pp. 115-129 in The Waltham
Book of Dog and Cat Behaviour, C. Thorne, ed. New York: Pergamon Press.
Burns, R. A., J. A. Milner, and J. E. Corbin. 1981. Arginine: An indispensable amino
acid for mature dogs. J. Nutr. 111:1020-1024.
Caldwell, G. T. 1931. Studies in water metabolism of the cat. Physiol. Zool. 4:324-
355.
Carpenter, J. A. 1956. Species differences in taste preferences. J. Comp. Physiol.
Psychol. 49:139-144.
Castonguay, T. W., T. C. Giles, J. E. Harrison, and Q. R. Rogers. 1987. Variations in
sucrose concentration and its effect on food intake in the domestic cat. Society for
Neuroscience Abstracts 13:464.
Chew, R. M. 1965. Water metabolism of mammals. Pp. 43-178 in Physiological
Mammalogy, Vol. 2, W. V. Mayer and R. G. VanGelder, eds. New York: Academic
Press.
Christensen, C. M., D. F. Caldwell, and D. Oberleas. 1974. Establishment of a
learned preference for a zinc-containing solution by zinc-deficient rats. J. Comp.
Physiol. Psychol. 87:415-421.
Coman, B., and H. Brunner. 1972. Food habits of the feral house cat in Victoria. J.
Wildl. Mgmt. 36:848-852.
Cook, N. E., E. Kane, Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1985. Self-selection of dietary
casein and soy-protein by the cat. Physiol. Behav. 34:583-594.
Cook, N. E., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1996. Acid-base balance affects dietary
choice in cats. Appetite 26:175-192.
Danowski, T. S., J. R. Elkinton, and A. W. Winkler. 1944. The deleterious effect in
dogs of a dry protein ration. J. Clin. Invest. 23:816-823.
Eberhard, T. 1954. Food habits of Pennsylvania house cats. J. Wildl. Mgt. 18:2284-
2286.
Ewer, R. F. 1973. Food and Food Finding. Pp. 139-229 in The Carnivores. Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press.


===== PDF PAGE 69 =====
68
Fitzgerald, B. M. 1988. Diet of domestic cats and their impact on prey populations.
Pp. 123-146 in The Domestic Cat: The Biology of Its Behaviour, D. C. Turner and
P. Bateson, eds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Goggin, J. M., H. F. Schryver, and H. F. Hintz. 1993. The effects of ad libitum
feeding and caloric dilution on the domestic cat’s ability to maintain energy
balance. Feline Pract. 21:7-11.
Grace, J., and M. Russek. 1969. The influence of previous experience on taste
behavior of dogs toward sucrose and saccharin. Physiol. Behav. 4:553-558.
Hamar, D., F. H. C. Chow, M. I. Dysart, and L. J. Rich. 1976. Effect of sodium
chloride in prevention of experimentally produced phosphate uroliths in male cats.
J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 12:514-517.
Hargrove, D. M., J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1994. Kittens choose a high leucine
diet even when isoleucine and valine are the limiting amino acids. J. Nutr.
124:689-693
Hawking, F., M. C. Lobban, K. Gamage, and M. J. Worms. 1971. Circadian rhythms
(activity, temperature, urine and microfilariae) in dog, cat, hen, duck, Thamnomys
and Gerbillus. J. Interdiscipl. Cycle Res. 2:455-473.
Hirsch, E., C. Dubose, and H. J. Jacobs. 1978. Dietary control of food intake in cats.
Physiol Behav. 20:287-295.
Holcombe, D. J., D. A. Roland, Sr., and R. H. Harms. 1976. The ability of hens to
regulate phosphorus intake when offered diets containing different levels of
phosphorus. Poult. Sci. 55:308-317.
Hrupka, B. J., Y. M. Lin, D. E. Gietzen, and Q. R. Rogers. 1997. Small changes in
essential amino acid concentrations alter diet selection in amino acid-deficient
rats. J. Nutr. 127:777-784.
Hrupka, B. J., Y. M. Lin, D. E. Gietzen, and Q. R. Rogers. 1999. Lysine deficiency
alters diet selection without depressing food intake in rats. J. Nutr. 129:424-230.
Janowitz, H. D., and M. I. Grossman. 1949. Effect of variations in nutritive density
on intake of food of dogs and rats. Am. J. Physiol. 158:184-193.
Jewell, D. E., and P. W. Toll. 1996. Effects of fiber on food intake in dogs. Vet. Clin.
Nutr. 3:115-118.
Kanarek, R. B. 1975. Availability and caloric density of the diet as determinants of
meal patterns in cats. Physiol. Behav. 15:611-618.
Kane, E. 1989. Feeding behavior of the cat. Pp. 147-158 in Waltham Symposium 7
Nutrition of the Dog and Cat, I. H. Burger, and J. P. W. Rivers. eds. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Kane, E., J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1981a. Acceptability and digestibility by
adult cats of diets made with various sources and levels of fat. J. Ani. Sci.
53:1516-1523.
Kane, E., Q. R. Rogers, J. G. Morris, and P. M. B. Leung. 1981b. Feeding behavior
of the cat fed laboratory and commercial diets. Nutr. Res. 1:499-507.
Kane, E., P. M. B. Leung, Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1987. Diurnal feeding and
drinking patterns of adults cats as affected by changes in the level of fat in the diet.


===== PDF PAGE 70 =====
69
Appetite 9:89-98.
Kitchell, R. L. 1978. Taste perception and discrimination by the dog. Adv. Vet. Sci
Comp. Med. 22:287-314.
Kumazawa, T., and K. Kurihara. 1990. Large synergism between monosodium
glutamate and 5′-nucleotides in canine taste nerve responses. Am. J. Physiol.
259:R420-R426.
Kuo, Z. Y. 1967. The Dynamics of Behaviour Development: An Epigenetic View.
New York: Random House.
Leung, P. M. B., and Q. R. Rogers. 1987. The effect of amino acids and protein on
dietary choice. Pp. 565-609 in Umami: A Basi Taste, Y. Kawamura and M. R.
Kare, eds. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Leung, P. M. B., M. A. Gamble, and Q. R. Rogers. 1981. Effect of prior protein
ingestions on dietary choice of protein and energy in the rats. Nutr. Rep. Internatl.
24:257-266.
Macdonald, E., and P. Apps. 1978. The social behaviour of a group of semi-
dependent farm cats, Felis catus: A progress report. Carnivore Genetics
Newsletter 3:256-268.
MacDonald, M. L., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1985. Aversion of the cat to
dietary medium-chain triglycerides and caprylic acid. Physiol. Behav. 35:371-375.
McArthur, L. H., W. F. Kelly, D. W. Gietzen, and Q. R. Rogers. 1993. The role of
palatability in the food intake response of rats fed high-protein diets. Appetite
20:181-196
McMurry, F. B., and C. C. Sperry. 1941. Food of feral house cats in Oklahoma, a
progress report. J. Mammal. 22:185-190.
Morris, J. G., and Q. R. Rogers. 1978. Arginine: An essential amino acid for the cat.
J. Nutr. 108:1944-1953.
Mugford, R. A. 1977. External influences on feeding of carnivores. Pp. 25-50 in The
Chemical Senses and Nutrition. M. R. Kare, and O. Maller. eds. New York:
Academic Press.
Mugford, R. A., and C. Thorne. 1980. Comparative studies of meal patterns in pet
and laboratory housed dogs and cats. Pp. 3-14 in Nutrition of the Dog and Cat. R.
S. Anderson, ed. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Musten, B., D. Peace, and G. H. Anderson. 1974. Food intake regulation in the
weanling rat: Self-selection of protein and energy. J. Nutr. 104:563-572.
Nachman, M. 1962. Taste preferences for sodium salts by adrenalectomized rats. J.
Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 55:1124-1129.
Peters, J. C., and A. E. Harper. 1984. Influence of dietary protein level on protein
self-selection and plasma and brain amino acid concentrations. Physiol. Behav.
33:783-790.
Prentiss, P. G., A. V. Wolf, and H. E. Eddy. 1959. Hydropenia in cat and dog. Ability
of the cat to meet its water requirements solely from a diet of fish or meat. Am. J.
Physiol. 196:625-632.


===== PDF PAGE 71 =====
70
Randall, W., R. F. Johnson, S. Randall, and J. T. Cunningham. 1985. Circadian
rhythms in food intake and activity in domestic cats. Behav. Neursci. 99:1162-
1175.
Robertson, I. D. 1998. Survey of predation by domestic cats. Aust. Vet. J. 76:551-
554.
Rogers, Q. R. 1994. Species variation in arginine requirements. Pp. 9-21 in
Proceeding Symp. Honoring Willard J. Visek: From Ammonia to Cancer and
Gene Expression. Special Publication 86, Agr. Exp. Station. Urbana: University of
Illinois
Romsos, D. R., and D. Ferguson. 1983. Regulation of protein intake in adult dogs. J.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 182:41-43.
Rozin, P. 1965. Specific hunger for thiamine: Recovery from deficiency and
thiamine preference. J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 59:98-101.
Rozin, P., and J. W. Kalat. 1971. Specific hungers and poison avoidance as adaptive
specializations of learning. Psychol. Rev. 78:459-486.
Scott, E. M., and E. L. Verney. 1947. Self selection of diet. VI. The nature of
appetites for B vitamins. J. Nutr. 34:471-480.
Scott, E. M., E. L. Verney and P. D. Morissey. 1950. Self selection of diet. XI.
Appetites for calcium, magnesium and potassium. J. Nutr. 41:187-201.
Sterman, M. B., T. Knauss, D. Lehmann, and C. D. Clemente. 1965. Circadian sleep
and waking patterns in the laboratory cat. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol.
19:509-517.
Szymanski, J. 1919. Aktivitat und Ruhe bei Tieren un menschen. Zeitshrift fur
Allgemeine Physiologie 18:105-162.
Taher, A. I., E. W. Gleaves, and M. Beck. 1984. Special calcium appetite in laying
hens. Poult. Sci. 63:2261-2267.
Torres, C. L., S. J. Hickenbottom and Q. R. Rogers. 2003. Palatability affects the
percentage of metabolizable energy as protein selected by adult beagles. J. Nutr.
133:3516-3522.
White, T. D., and J. C. Boudreau. 1975. Taste preferences of the cat for
neurophysiologically active compounds. Physiol. Psychol. 3:405-410.
Wolf, A. V. 1959. Potability of sea water with special reference to the cat. Am. J.
Physiol. 196:633-641.
Young, S. P. 1944. The wolves of North America. Part I. Washington, D.C.:
American Wildlife Institute.
Yu, S., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1997. Absence of a salt (NaCl) preference or
appetite in sodium-replete or depleted kittens. Appetite 29:1-10.


===== PDF PAGE 72 =====
71
3
Energy
INTRODUCTION
Energy Evaluation and Requirements: Two Ways of Looking at the Issue
Energy is not itself a nutrient but is rather a property contributed to diets by the three
nutrients: fats (lipids), carbohydrates, and proteins. Energy is expressed in either
kilocalories (kcal) or kilojoules (kJ):1 kcal is equivalent to 4.184 kJ. In this report, kcal
are used as this is the common expression for energy units used in the United States.
Dogs and cats require energy for support of metabolism during maintenance, growth,
reproduction, lactation, and physical activity. In the absence of adequate energy, animal
performance will be suboptimal, and there will be depletion of energy and nutrient
stores.
The gross energy (GE) in a food is defined as the total chemical energy arising from
complete combustion of a food in a bomb calorimeter. The heat of combustion of a food
can be predicted from chemical analysis using standard values for the nutrients. For
crude fat, a range of 8.7-9.5 kcal·g–1 organic matter has been reported; a value of 9.4
kcal·g–1 fat is appropriate for petfoods. Heat of combustion increases with increasing
chain length and decreases with increasing degree of desaturation. For fat in petfoods,
which is often relatively long chained and partially desaturated, a GE in the upper part
of this range seems justified (Kienzle et al., 2002). For crude protein, a range of 5.3-5.8
kcal·g–1 is described in the literature (Kienzle et al., 1999); in petfoods, 5.7 kcal·g–1
organic matter appears to be appropriate. Heat of combustion of carbohydrates,
including non-starch polysaccharides (NSPs), ranges between 3.3 and 4.3 kcal·g–1
organic matter, and GE of lignin between 4.1 and 7.0 kcal·g–1 organic matter. Lignin is


===== PDF PAGE 73 =====
72
not a major compound of fiber in petfoods; therefore, the contribution of NFE (nitrogen-
free extract; represents starch, sugar, and NSPs that become soluble when cooked in
diluted alkalies and acids) and crude fiber can be assessed together sharing a GE of 4.1
kcal·g–1 organic matter (Kienzle et al., 2002).
The transformation of GE into net energy (NE) for maintenance, growth,
reproduction, or activity can be described by three steps (Figure 3-1). The first step is
digestibility of energy, and the second metabolizability of digestible energy (DE).
Energy losses by urine and by fermentation gases are subtracted from DE to determine
metabolizable energy (ME). Finally, in a third step, the heat loss during transformation
of ME into NE is taken into account. The percentage of ME obtained as NE is defined
as the efficiency of utilization.
Availability of energy is approached in two different ways: by energy evaluation of
food or by energy requirement calculations for the animal. In energy evaluation of food,
each step of energy transformation is considered individually for each food, whereas in
requirement calculations, mean factors for respective steps of transformation (such as
the utilization of ME for milk production) for the average food are used. The approach
of energy evaluation that considers all steps of transformation for each food (NE) is
more precise; however, to establish a system of NE requires much more knowledge and
experimental data. At present, only energy evaluation systems of DE and ME have been
used in dogs and cats.
ENERGY EVALUATION
Methods of Estimating Energy in Food
Determination of Energy Content
Digestible energy or ME can be determined only by animal experiments. To
determine DE, it is sufficient to collect feces; for ME, in theory, calorimetric methods
are required. However, in dogs and cats, fermentation losses by gases can be neglected
(Kleiber, 1961; Zentek, 1993), therefore the collection of feces and urine gives results
that come very close to ME. A short-cut that combines animal experiments with
predictive equations is the correction of experimentally determined DE by predicted
energy losses in urine, to estimate ME.


===== PDF PAGE 74 =====
73
FIGURE 3-1 Principles of bioavailability of energy in animals.
Urine energy losses are predicted by the content of digestible protein. A subtraction
is made of 1.25 kcal·g–1 digestible crude protein for dogs and 0.9 kcal·g–1 digestible
crude protein for cats. The factor for cats of 0.9 kcal·g–1 digestible crude protein
expresses the energy lost by the renal excretion of urea when digested protein is
metabolized completely. This factor has been verified experimentally to some extent for
cats (National Research Council, 1986); however, Hashimoto et al. (1995) determined
an even lower factor for protein correction of DE in cats. For dogs, the correction factor
of 1.25 kcal·g–1 digestible crude protein has a long tradition tracing back to historic
research on energy evaluation by Rubner (1901) and Atwater (1902). Ohshima et al.
(1993) investigated the urinary energy losses, but their results were not unequivocal. At
present, it is not justified to change the protein correction factors. From a quantitative
point of view, the protein correction factor does not matter very much; however, there
may be scientific interest to investigate whether a true species difference exists between
dogs and cats.
Prediction of Energy Content


===== PDF PAGE 75 =====
74
Data from Tables
For diets that consist of usual ingredients, data on digestibility of nutrients or ME
from tabular values may be used (see Meyer and Zentek, 2001). Either the energy
content of digestible nutrients (i.e., heat of combustion of nutrient × digestibility) is
summed with the aforementioned subtraction for digestible protein, or ME is taken
directly from the table for each ingredient and summed. Data from dogs are often used
for cats, which may lead to a slight overestimate of energy digestibility (Kendall et al.,
1982a; Figge, 1989. While this approach does not take into account interactions among
nutrients and effects of processing, it has been used successfully for homemade and
semi-purified experimental diets (Kienzle, 1995). The method cannot be recommended
for prepared petfoods for several reasons: for example, the formulation is known only to
the manufacturer and the effects of processing on digestibility cannot be taken into
account.
Predictive Equations
Factors for nutrients in predictive equations for ME usually reflect the heat of
combustion, the digestibility, and a correction for predicted energy losses for protein in
urine. Such an equation can predict ME with reasonable precision only if the
digestibility of the diets to which it is applied is close to the digestibility of the diets that
were used to obtain the equations. The first predictive equation was obtained by Rubner
in 1901 for dogs using meat and offal as a food. The factors were later modified by
Atwater (1902). The resulting Atwater factors of 4 for protein, 9 for fat, and 4 kcal·g–1
for carbohydrate (nitrogen-free extract; NFE) still work amazingly well for ingredients
in homemade diets for dogs: meat, offal (except bones and bone meal), poultry, fish,
highly purified starch products, milk products, and even chocolate. In these foods, NFE
consists mostly of sugar or starch. Atwater factors are also useful for products that must
have a high digestibility, such as milk substitutes and liquids for enteral nutrition.
Given the GE values of 4.1 kcal·g–1 carbohydrate, 9.4 kcal·g–1 fat, and 5.7 kcal·g–1
protein and renal energy losses of 1.25 kcal·g–1 digestible protein, Atwater factors
include a digestibility of 98 percent for carbohydrate, 96 percent for fat, and 90 percent
for protein. Consequently, discrepancies occur when the equation is applied to foods
with a higher NSP content such as legumes, salad, fruit, or high-fiber cereal products.
For dogs, Atwater factors are still recommended for use for table food if no other data
are available, as well as for milk substitutes and liquids for enteral nutrition (Table 3-1).
Atwater factors do not work as well for cats because the digestibility of fat is usually
somewhat lower in cats than in dogs (Kendall et al., 1982a; Figge, 1989). Provided
starchy food is cooked, the factors for carbohydrate (4 kcal·g–1) and protein (4 kcal·g–1)
are appropriate for the cat, whereas 8.5 kcal·g–1 is recommended to estimate ME for fats
in table food (Table 3-2).
When Atwater factors were applied to processed standard diets for dogs, they
overestimated the ME content (Kendall et al., 1982b). Therefore, these factors were
modified according to the digestibilities of the diets to which they were applied. The


===== PDF PAGE 76 =====
75
modified Atwater factors1 for dogs and cats (3.5 kcal·g–1 protein, 8.5 kcal·g–1 fat, 3.5
kcal·g–1 carbohydrate) were mostly derived from standard petfoods typically on the
market in the 1970s and early 1980s, but they may under- or overestimate the energy
content of many products on the market today (Laflamme, 2001; Figure 3-2). The same
is true for the equations suggested in 1985 for dry and semimoist food (Laflamme,
2001).
At present, the enormous variability of prepared petfoods on the market with
digestibilities of energy ranging from less than 70 percent to more than 90 percent does
not allow the use of just one equation with factors for the macronutrients. The variability
of digestibilities is not less within product types (dry, moist, semimoist); therefore, the
use of different equations for each product type does not solve the problem. Equations
have been derived that use the content of either GE or fiber (crude fiber, total dietary
fiber, or total fiber) to predict the digestibility of energy (Kendall et al., 1985; Kuhlman
et al., 1993; Kienzle et al., 1998a; Schoenmeier, 2003). The use of crude fiber content in
equations for prediction of energy digestibility (Tables 3-1 and 3-2) covers a wide range
of prepared dog and cat foods (Figure 3-3). However, dog foods with a crude fiber
content above 8 percent dry matter and with a high percentage of fermentable NSPs in
their crude fiber fraction are systematically underestimated.
Fermentable NSPs will partly or completely disappear during passage through the
gastrointestinal tract. Even though they are not digestible by enzymes of the animal,
their apparent digestibility will be comparatively high. Consequently, use of the
equation to predict energy digestibility, which is based on crude fiber with rather small
percentages of fermentable NSPs, will lead to an underestimation of the energy
digestibility of high-fiber products with a large percentage of fermentable NSPs in the
crude fiber fraction. Fermentable fiber is more likely to be found in the soluble fiber
fraction of total dietary fiber and less likely to occur in the insoluble fraction or to be
analyzed as crude fiber or acid detergent fiber (see Chapter 4). However, this rule has
many exceptions. At present, it is not possible to predict fermentability of fiber by
chemical fiber analysis. However, in vitro fermentation may be helpful.
Another simpler explanation for a high apparent digestibility of crude fiber may be
that certain proteins from connective tissue may appear analytically as crude fiber. In
general, these proteins have a higher apparent digestibility than other compounds
determined as crude fiber. In addition, they are not likely to affect the digestibility of
other nutrients to the same extent as non-starch polysaccharides or lignin. Whether or
not protein appears as crude fiber can be verified by analyzing the residue for nitrogen
after boiling in acid and lye. Both the potential use and the adaptation of in vitro
digestion and fermentation methods, as well as the potential role of proteins appearing
as fiber, need to be investigated further to increase the accuracy of prediction of ME by
fiber. However, these points are relevant only for diets with more than 8 percent crude
fiber in dry matter; thus, special analyses or in vitro testing can be limited to a few
rather special types of diets. For all other diets, the prediction of ME based on fiber
produces few outliers. At present, some remaining sources of error such as the above-
mentioned differences in apparent fiber digestibility or large differences in food


===== PDF PAGE 77 =====
76
processing are unlikely to be eliminated completely by any equation based on chemical
analysis.
In cat food, the variation of fiber content is smaller and the fermentation of fiber also
has a smaller role in nutrition of the cat than of the dog. In addition the percentage of the
above-mentioned proteins that may be analyzed as fiber may be smaller in cat foods
explaining why the accuracy of prediction of ME based on crude fiber content is higher
for cat foods than for dog foods, even though the equation is based on fewer
observations. Another point is that fiber has a lower impact on fat digestibility than on
NFE digestibility. Kienzle et al. (2001) suggested different equations for the estimation
of energy digestibility as a function of fiber for high- and low-NFE diets for dogs. The
smaller decrease of digestibility per percentage of fiber in dry matter in the equation for
cat food than in the equation for dog food is unlikely to be a species difference. It
probably reflects a smaller range of NFE content in cat food than in dog food.
TABLE 3-1 Predictive Equations for Metabolizable Energy in Dog Food
Application Equation
Unprocessed food or human food such
as meat, offal, milk products, cooked
starch sources; highly digestible
special products such as milk
substitutes or diets for enteral
nutritiona
ME (kcal) = (4 × g protein) + (9 × g fat) + (4 ×
g NFE)
Prepared dog foodsb Step 1:
Determine GE by bomb calorimetry or
calculate GE by the following equation:
GE (kcal) = (5.7 × g protein) + (9.4 × g fat) +
[4.1 × (g NFE + g fiber)]
Step 2c:
Percentage energy digestibility = 91.2 – (1.43
× percentage crude fiber in dry matter)
Step 3:
DE (kcal) = (GE × percentage energy
digestibility/100)
Step 4:
ME (kcal) = DE – (1.04 × g protein)
 
Example:
Food composition: 80% moisture, 7% protein,
4% fat, 3% ash, 1% crude fiber, 5% NFE
Step 1:


===== PDF PAGE 78 =====
77
Application Equation
GE (kcal·g–1) = 5.7 × 0.07 + 9.4 × 0.04 + 4.1 ×
(0.01+ 0.05) = 1.02
Step 2:
Percentage energy digestibility = 91.2 – (1.43
× 1/20 × 100) = 84.05%
Step 3:
DE (kcal·g–1) = 1.02 × 84.05/100 = 0.86
Step 4:
ME (kcal·g–1) = 0.86 – 0.07 × 1.04 = 0.79
aThis equation is valid only for food with a digestibility of energy >90%. It must be applied only
to prepared dog foods with an exceptionally high digestibility such as milk substitutes or liquid
preparations for enteral nutrition, which must be highly digestible to fulfill their function.
bNot including milk substitutes and liquid preparations for enteral nutrition. May be inaccurate if
crude fiber is >8% dry matter.
cAlternative equation using total dietary fiber (American Organization of Analytical Chemists):
percentage energy digestibility = 96.6 – (0.95 × percentage total dietary fiber in dry matter).
TABLE 3-2 Predictive Equations for Metabolizable Energy in Cat Food
Application Equation
Unprocessed food or human food such
as meat, offal, milk products, cooked
starch sources; highly digestible
special products such as milk
substitutes or diets for enteral
nutritiona
ME (kcal) = (4 × g protein) + (8.5 × g fat) + (4
× g NFE)
Prepared cat foodsb Step 1:
Determine GE by bomb calorimetry or
calculate GE by the following equation:
GE (kcal) = (5.7 × g protein) + (9.4 × g fat) +
4.1 × (g NFE + g fiber)
Step 2c:
Percentage energy digestibility = 87.9 – (0.88
× percentage crude fiber in dry matter)
Step 3:
DE (kcal) = (GE × percentage energy
digestibility/100)
Step 4:


===== PDF PAGE 79 =====
78
Application Equation
ME (kcal) = DE – (0.77 × g protein)
 
Example:
Food composition: 80% moisture, 7% protein,
4% fat, 3% ash, 1% crude fiber, 5% NFE
Step 1:
GE (kcal·g–1) = 5.7 × 0.07 + 9.4 × 0.04 + 4.1 ×
(0.01 + 0.05) = 1.02
Step 2:
Percentage energy digestibility = 87.9 – (0.88
× 1/20 × 100) = 83.5%
Step 3:
DE (kcal·g–1) = 1.02 × 83.5/100 = 0.85
Step 4:
ME (kcal·g–1) = 0.85 – 0.07 × 0.77 = 0.80
aThis equation is valid only for food with a digestibility of energy >90%. It must be applied only
to prepared cat foods with an exceptionally high digestibility such as milk substitutes or liquid
preparations for enteral nutrition, which must be highly digestible to fulfill their function.
bNot including milk substitutes and liquid preparations for enteral nutrition.
cAlternative equation using total dietary fiber (American Organization of Analytical Chemists:
Percentage energy digestibility = 95.6 – (0.89 × percentage total dietary fiber in dry matter)).


===== PDF PAGE 80 =====
79
FIGURE 3-2 Comparison of experimentally determined and predicted ME values in
prepared cat food. y axis = ME predicted by modified Atwater factors: 3.5 kcal·g–1 for
protein and carbohydrate, 8.5 kcal·g–1 for fat; x axis = ME determined by digestion trials,
with ME = DE – 0.9 kcal·g–1 digestible protein (data from Kienzle, 2002). Ideally, all points
should be on the line x = y.


===== PDF PAGE 81 =====
80
FIGURE 3-3 Comparison of experimentally determined and predicted ME values in
prepared cat food. y axis = ME predicted by equations based on GE and crude fiber: GE by
bomb calorimetry; percentage energy digestibility = 87.9 – (0.88 × percentage crude fiber in
dry matter); ME (kcal) = (GE × percentage energy digestibility/100) – (0.77 × g protein). x
axis = ME determined by digestion trials, with ME = DE – 0.9 kcal·g–1 digestible protein
(data from Kienzle, 2002). Ideally, all points should be on the line x = y.
Thus far, equations to estimate energy digestibility as a function of fiber have been
based mainly on crude fiber analysis for practical reasons. Crude fiber is most often
used for labeling petfoods; consequently, there are much more data on crude fiber and
energy digestibility than on any other fiber analysis. Kienzle et al. (1998b) demonstrated
that it is possible to predict energy digestibility as a function of fiber with other methods
of fiber analysis as long as the major percentage of cellulose is determined. Recently,
Schoenmeier (2003) developed a prediction equation for energy digestibility as a
function of total dietary fiber (American Organization of Analytical Chemists [AOAC]
method). To predict ME with either of these regression equations, GE (determined or
calculated) is multiplied by the digestion coefficient to calculate DE. A subtraction is
made from DE for urinary energy losses using a mean digestibility of protein of 83.5
percent in dogs and 86 percent in cats and a mean loss of energy in urine per gram of
digestible crude protein of 1.25 kcal for dog foods and 0.9 kcal for cat foods.
There is no universal predictive equation that fits any food a dog or cat may eat;
therefore, an important consideration before using any equation is its validity for the


===== PDF PAGE 82 =====
81
food in question. In general, the use of unmodified Atwater factors for commercial
products will overestimate ME. However, for casein-based milk substitutes with an
appropriate digestibility, unmodified Atwater factors may be the predictive equation of
choice, whereas modified Atwater factors will grossly underestimate energy and
prediction of energy digestibility by fiber content will also lead to errors.
ENERGY REQUIREMENTS OF DOGS
Definitions
A minimal amount of energy—the basal metabolic rate—is required each day to
maintain body weight even in the absence of factors that increase energy consumption
such as physical activity, food consumption, or a low environmental temperature.
Basal metabolic rate (BMR) is defined as the energy required to maintain
homeostasis in an animal in a postabsorptive state (ideally after an overnight fast) that is
lying down but awake in a thermoneutral environment to which it has been acclimatized
(Blaxter, 1989). As an alternative, the resting fed metabolic rate (RFMR), is measured in
animals that are not in a post-absorptive state, but otherwise meet the criteria for basal
metabolism. Heat production increases when food is consumed. This dietary
thermogenesis or thermic effect of food represents the difference between RFMR and
BMR. Dietary thermogenesis has two components: an obligatory component associated
with the ingestion, digestion, absorption, and assimilation of food (the heat increment or
specific dynamic effect of food); and a facultative component associated with activation
of the autonomic nervous system.
The maintenance energy requirement (MER) is the energy required to support energy
equilibrium, (where ME intake equals heat production), over a long period of time
(Blaxter, 1989). Thus, MER may vary with any factor that affects heat production. It
includes energy required for thermoregulation, spontaneous activity, and moderate
exercise. The term MER is, therefore, qualified in the following discussion by the
conditions to which it refers. Effects of environmental temperature and strenuous
exercise on energy requirements are described in detail in Chapter 11.
Basis for Establishing Energy Requirements
Allometric considerations of metabolic body weight are of paramount importance in
dogs, a species in which mature body weights may range from 1 to 90 kg or more. From
a physiological viewpoint, energy requirements of animals with widely differing
weights are not related directly to body weight but are more closely related to body
weight raised to some power, Wb, where W equals weight in kilograms and b is an
exponent calculated from experimental data. Brody et al. (1934) found that the basal
heat production for mature, warm-blooded animals, ranging in size from mice to
elephants, could be described by the expression Y = 70.5 × W0.73, where Y equals
kilocalories per 24 hours and W equals body weight in kilograms. Before calculators and


===== PDF PAGE 83 =====
82
computers were readily available, Kleiber (1961) argued that over such a range in body
size, results using the expression Y = 70 × W0.75 would not differ significantly from
those of Brody, and would be simpler to use.
Heusner (1982) argued that the interspecific mass exponent in Kleiber’s equation is a
statistical artifact. He suggested that the theoretical exponent should be 0.67 to predict
the intraspecies relationship of energy to mass. This theoretical exponent describes the
relationship between mass and body surface in bodies that are geometrically similar.
However, dogs of varying breeds and body sizes are not geometrically similar
(Kirkwood, 1985). For instance, with increasing size, dogs become relatively taller at
the shoulder and relatively narrower at the hip. Brain and several visceral organs
including liver and gastrointestinal tract become relatively smaller with increasing
mature weight (Meyer et al., 1993), a trend that also occurs among species even if not at
the same rates (Kirkwood, 1985). Blood volume and heart mass, even heart rate, change
with size among dogs at rates similar to those seen in a variety of species (Kirkwood,
1985). All these findings suggest that the interspecies mass exponent from Kleiber’s
equation (0.75) may be more suitable to describe the relation between mass and energy
in dogs than the intraspecies mass exponent suggested by Heusner (1982).
Variation of the energy requirements of breeds may be superimposed on the
relationship between body mass and energy. Breeds of similar size and weight can differ
greatly in energy requirements. Blaza (1981) reported that the energy requirements of
Great Danes expressed on a metabolic body weight basis (mass exponent 0.75) are
higher than those of other dogs. She also postulated higher requirements for
Newfoundlands. However, later work of Kienzle and Rainbird (1991) demonstrated in a
larger group of dogs that the energy requirements of Newfoundlands are 20 percent
below average but confirmed that Great Danes are up to 60 percent above average.
Other factors that influence energy requirements, such as age, may not be equally
distributed among weight groups and thus can create statistical artifacts for the optimal
mass exponent. Rainbird and Kienzle (1990) considered only middle-aged dogs of
breeds without known peculiarities in energy requirements under similar housing
conditions to calculate the mass exponent and came up with a value that was very close
to the interspecies exponent of Brody’s equation. Therefore, varying the mass exponent
does not increase the accuracy of prediction of energy requirements of dogs. The goal
must be to identify or more clearly describe factors affecting individual energy
requirements such as breed, age, housing, and their interactions.
A very important point that cannot be addressed by body weight, but is, however,
affected by feeding, breed, age, and activity, is the percentage of lean body mass.
Adipose tissue is metabolically less active than lean body mass. Therefore, dogs with a
smaller percentage of lean body mass (e.g., overweight dogs) have below-average
energy requirements for their body weight (BW). Beagles with normal weight (25
percent fat in total body) had an energy expenditure measured by the doubly labeled
water method of 130 ± 6 kcal·kg BW–0.75. The same dogs were overfed for a period of
time until their body fat content was 38 percent, decreasing their energy expenditure to
107 ± 7 kcal·kg BW–0.75. The energy requirement per unit of lean body weight (157
kcal·kg BW–0.75) did not differ significantly according to body condition (Pouteau et


===== PDF PAGE 84 =====
83
al., 2000). It is likely that these findings also apply to other reasons for decreases in lean
body mass, such as lack of exercise for a prolonged period or old age. At present, the
energy requirements of an individual dog cannot be more than an educated guess and
can easily miss the true requirements by 50 percent.
Basal Metabolic Rate
Many authors have attempted to measure BMR in dogs using indirect calorimetry in
conscious and anesthetized dogs (see Table 3-3). Kunde and Steinhaus (1926) suggested
that higher values for BMR obtained by Rubner and Boothby and Sandiford were not
necessarily basal, but others (Kitchen, 1924; DeBeer and Hjoort, 1938) have also
reported high values for BMR. The parabolic relationship between body weight and
BMR in anesthetized dogs reported by Udall et al. (1953), when converted to an
exponential relationship, also suggested a higher value for BMR (91 kcal·kg BW–0.75)
in dogs. These authors did not report individual data. Data from individual dogs (Table
3-3) provided by several authors give a BMR of 76 ± 23 kcal·kg BW–0.75. This
approximates Kleiber’s interspecies estimate of 70 kcal·kg BW–0.75 for minimal
metabolism, but individual values vary widely from 48 to 114 kcal·kg BW–0.75. Okarma
and Koteja (1987) reported the mean BMR of gray wolves (purportedly the ancestor of
the domestic dog) was similar (68 kcal·kg BW–0.75).
TABLE 3-3 Basal Metabolic Rate in Dogs
NOTE: SD = standard deviation.
aM = male, F = female, NA = not available.
bCited in Kunde and Steinhaus (1926).
Diet-Induced Thermogenesis and Resting Fed Metabolic Rate
The ingestion, digestion, absorption, and assimilation of food requires energy and
increases heat production. Thus, RFMR is slightly higher than BMR, and this difference
is termed dietary thermogenesis, the specific dynamic effect of food, or diet-induced


===== PDF PAGE 85 =====
84
thermogenesis. Dietary thermogenesis is not considered useful to the animal except at
low ambient temperatures where it may contribute to maintenance of body temperature.
Thus, the proportion of ME retained by the animal represents the efficiency of
utilization of ME (Blaxter, 1989).
The heat increment is measured by dividing the change in heat produced by the
change in ME intake when animals are fed two different amounts of ME (Blaxter,
1989). This heat increment is usually expressed as a percentage of ME and varies with
the amount and composition of food consumed. For example, the thermic effect of
glucose is less if glucose is used immediately after ingestion, but efficiency is lower if
glucose is first stored as glycogen or fat. In simple-stomached animals, Blaxter (1989)
estimated that the heat increment for protein, fat, and carbohydrate was 23, 2, and 6
percent, respectively, below maintenance, and 36, 15, and 22 percent, respectively,
above maintenance. In dogs consuming an average diet, Blaxter (1989) estimated the
heat increment to be 15 percent below maintenance and 30 percent above maintenance.
This would suggest that RFMR is 15 percent above BMR in normal adults and that the
difference would be greater in growing, pregnant, and lactating animals. Nevertheless,
measurements of heat increment tend to give high estimates of the thermic effect of food
because voluntary activity increases with the amount of food that animals are fed and it
is impossible to limit activity during the long periods required for measurements to be
made (Blaxter, 1989).
In humans, the specific dynamic effect of food is commonly measured as the total
increase in heat production over time after a single meal (Blaxter, 1989). A similar
methodology has also been used to measure dietary thermogenesis in other simple
stomached species. In gray wolves, for example, Okarma and Koteja (1987) reported
that metabolic rate increased by 47 percent after a high protein meal but did not report
the duration of this effect. In mongrel dogs, Diamond et al. (1985) reported that dietary
thermogenesis after a meal had two phases. There was an immediate cephalic phase
when catecholamines were released into the circulation and when metabolic rate
increased in response to the taste and smell of food (Diamond and Leblanc, 1987). This
phase lasted 40-50 minutes and was present even in sham fed animals (Diamond et al.,
1985; Leblanc and Diamond, 1986). After the cephalic phase, there was a post-
absorptive phase that lasted up to 6 hours after a meal and was not associated with an
increase in circulating catecholamines (Diamond et al., 1985; Leblanc and Diamond,
1986).
After a mixed meal of unstated composition, the metabolic rate increased during the
50 minutes of the cephalic phase to a peak that was 75 percent above the fasting rate
irrespective of the size of the meal (Leblanc and Diamond, 1986). This cephalic phase
occurred four times in dogs fed four meals daily but only once in dogs fed the same
amount of food daily. Dietary thermogenesis was greater in dogs fed four meals daily
than in dogs fed once daily (Leblanc and Diamond, 1986). The postprandial phase was
of smaller amplitude but of longer duration and varied in size in proportion to the size of
each meal. Over 11 hours, taking both phases into account, the metabolic rate increased
by an average of 13 percent in dogs fed a single 85 kcal·kg BW–0.75 meal but increased
an average of 25 percent in dogs given the same amount of food as four smaller meals


===== PDF PAGE 86 =====
85
(Leblanc and Diamond, 1986). Over the whole day, this would represent an increase of 6
percent and 11 percent, respectively, when dogs were daily consuming slightly more
food than was sufficient to maintain body weight. Nevertheless, dietary thermogenesis
measured in this way may give low estimates of the thermic effect of food because it
may not take account of the cost of maintaining the metabolic machinery needed at any
given level of intake. In dogs, therefore, this suggests that dietary thermogenesis
represents approximately 10 percent of daily energy expenditure and RFMR is probably
10 percent higher than BMR. This difference will be slightly less in dogs fed once daily
and slightly more in dogs fed several times daily.
Dietary thermogenesis could be greater if the diet is high in protein, but the effect is
likely to be very small. Protein would only affect the obligatory component and would
be less likely to affect the increment caused by anticipation of a meal. Anxiety, exercise,
and cold-induced thermogenesis all have a much larger effect on heat production.
Overconsumption of food in rats may cause catecholamines to be released into the
circulation, causing an additional increase in heat production above the obligatory heat
increment. This diet-induced thermogenesis has a regulatory effect on body weight
because it minimizes the increase in body weight associated with overeating. There
appears to be no similar diet-induced thermogenic response to overeating in dogs,
however (Crist and Romsos, 1987).
Adult Maintenance
From a relatively small number of observations (Cowgill, 1928; Abrams, 1962)
based partly on calculations of Arnold and Elvehjem (1939) from the prediction
equation of Brody et al. (1934), the National Research Council (1974) suggested
calculating the maintenance energy requirements of dogs by the equation 132 kcal ×
BW0.75. This has been questioned after the above-mentioned observations on Great
Danes by Blaza (1981) and because of lower values for energy requirements reported in
direct or indirect calorimetric studies (Burger and Johnson, 1991; Maenner, 1991;
Walters et al., 1993). However, a large number of relatively new data (Rainbird and
Kienzle, 1990; Kienzle and Rainbird, 1991; Finke, 1991, 1994; Ballevre et al., 1994;
Table 3-4) demonstrate that the equation 132 kcal × BW0.75 is valid for lively younger
experimental dogs kept in kennels.2 The point, however, should be stressed that there is
considerable individual variation, even between dogs kept under the same conditions.
Ninety-five percent of the individuals within the population are within the range of the
mean plus or minus the double standard deviation. The recommendations in Table 15-4
(Chapter 15 Nutrient Requirement Tables) should be considered as the place to start.
Newfoundlands, Great Danes, and terriers living in kennels have been identified as
breeds with energy requirements outlying the predictive range (Table 3-4). Young adult
dogs have above-average energy requirements and old dogs have decreased energy
requirements. The time of the respective changes in energy requirements appears to be
dependent somewhat on breed (Kienzle and Rainbird, 1991; Finke, 1994). It is probable
that larger breeds that age early will also show a decrease in energy requirements at a
comparatively earlier age. Age effects are thought to be due partly to differences in


===== PDF PAGE 87 =====
86
activity and their consequences (Donoghue et al., 1991). This is in good agreement with
reports on the energy requirements of pet dogs (Burger, 1994; Wichert et al., 1999;
Connor et al., 2000; Patil and Bisby, 2001). Pet dogs without opportunity and stimulus
to exercise need between 10 and 20 percent less energy than experimental dogs; Patil
and Bisby (2001) strongly suggested a link to activity in pet dogs. The lowest
maintenance energy requirements described for pet dogs come rather close to the RFMR
of about 90 kcal·kg BW–0.75 measured by Walters et al. (1993) in client-owned dogs
after adaptation to indirect calorimetry.
The effects of breed, age, and environment on energy requirements are likely not
entirely additive. A large part of these effects is the result of differences in activity level
as well as differences in lean body mass. Consequently, the energy requirements of an
inactive kennel dog are not much different from those of an inactive in-home pet if
similar environmental temperature, stress level, and lean body mass are assumed. The
latter may differ, however, between a pet dog that has been inactive for a considerable
period of time and a kennel dog that is only temporarily restricted in physical activity.
Other effects on energy requirements, such as differences in digestive capacity among
breeds (Zentek and Meyer, 1993), appear to be additive. For “bedside calculations” of
energy requirements in clinical practice, linear equations may be useful. From the data
mentioned above the equation for energy requirements in kilocalories = 358 + 39 × BW
was derived giving similar results to the powered equation for dogs between 8 and 20 kg
BW. Age, breed, and other factors affecting energy requirements can be considered by
reducing or increasing the calculated value by the appropriate percentages, for example
by decreasing the result by 20 percent for an old dog. There are no unequivocal effects
of gender on energy requirements of dogs. The effect of neutering is probably an
indirect one since neutering often leads to a relative decrease of lean body mass. Illness
and trauma can affect energy requirements dramatically. Severe illness or trauma may
even double the energy requirements (Donoghue, 1991). However, most quantitative
data are transferred from human patients. There may be species differences. A recent
study that found higher content of body fat in female dogs with mammary tumors
compared to controls (Lawler and Ballam, 2001) invites some speculation.
Gestation
Weight increase in bitches during pregnancy of 20 to 25 percent occurs mainly after
the 28th day of gestation (Siedler and Schweigert, 1954; Romsos et al., 1981). The total
weight of the litter averages about 13.5 percent of the bitch weight after parturition
(Meyer et al., 1985a). Smaller breeds in general have smaller litters; however, the
relative birth weight of puppies is higher; therefore, differences in litter weight related to
body size are small. In total, about two-thirds of the weight gain of the bitch is
accounted for by the weight of the puppies, placentas (about 22 percent of puppy
weight), and intraplacental fluid. The rest is water and extrauterine increase of body
mass. It is a notable allometric feature that total litter mass as well as increase of body
weight during pregnancy are directly related to body weight. The intrauterine growth of
puppies is not a linear function of time (Evans, 1974).


===== PDF PAGE 88 =====
87
Considerable weight gain of fetuses occurs only after the 40th day of pregnancy.
Additional energy for building fetal tissue is assumed to be required mainly during this
period. However, bitches often tend to eat less during the last days of pregnancy. In
addition, extrauterine tissue of the bitch may start increasing before the 40th day of
pregnancy. Therefore, it is recommended that feeding extra energy for pregnancy start 4
weeks after mating. Meyer et al. (1985a) estimated—factorial calculations from litter
weight and puppy body composition; placental weight and composition; and by
estimation for extrauterine tissue of the bitch—that the requirements for later gestation
(4 weeks after mating until parturition) would be 26 kcal·kg BW–1·d–1. Using the mean
energy requirements of a kennel dog (130 kcal·kg BW–0.75) as a starting point, the
energy requirements of a pregnant bitch amount to 130 percent of maintenance in a 5-kg
bitch and 160 percent of maintenance in a 60-kg bitch (Table 15-6). The factors
affecting fluctuation in maintenance energy requirements appear to continue during
pregnancy. Zentek and Meyer (1992) reported that Great Danes consumed somewhat
less energy during the second half of pregnancy, when they were housed indoors and
were less active, than during the first half, when they were outdoors and more active.
These factors are, however, unlikely to affect the requirements for building fetal and
extrauterine tissue during pregnancy. Therefore, it is recommended that the energy
requirements of individual pregnant bitches be calculated starting from their individual
maintenance requirements per kilogram of BW0.75 and adding 26 kcal·kg BW–1 rather
than calculating as percentages of maintenance.
TABLE 3-4 Reported Maintenance Energy Requirements of Dogs in Relation to Breed,
Age, Housing, and Activity


===== PDF PAGE 89 =====
88
a95 percent of the population are within this range.
Lactation
Bitches suckle their puppies in general for at least 6 weeks. Offering food to puppies
may be started at 2½ weeks of age at the earliest but should begin by week 4 of lactation
at the latest. At that age, the quantity and nutrient content of the milk are no longer
appropriate. It is possible to wean puppies at that stage of lactation; however, this is not
recommended because it may have undesirable effects on imprinting of puppies, which
could induce behavior problems later on (Feddersen-Petersen and Ohl, 1995).
Milk yield and energy content in milk are important factors in estimating the energy
requirements for milk production. Ruesse (1961) investigated these variables in several
bitches from various breeds for a few days and in one German Shepherd bitch during the
length of lactation. Oftedal (1984) determined milk yield and milk composition of
beagles. Meyer et al. (1985b) investigated these variables as well as food intake and
weight changes in several breeds ranging in size from 4 to 24 kg. Zentek and Meyer
(1992) described the food intake and weight changes of Great Danes during lactation.
Scantlebury et al. (2000) investigated the energetics of lactation in Labrador retrievers
and miniature schnauzers.
From the nutrient content of bitch milk, the gross energy content is estimated to
amount to about 1.45 kcal·g–1 wet weight. The energy content of canine milk shows
little variation except for the colostral period (Meyer et al., 1985b). Milk yield has been
estimated to amount up to 8 percent of body weight (Ruesse, 1961; Oftedal, 1984;
Meyer et al., 1985b; Scantlebury et al., 2000). These studies agree that peak lactation in
the bitch occurs in the 4th week. The lactation curve during the first 4 weeks is based on
a considerable amount of data (Meyer et al., 1985b); however, thereafter information is
scarce. This results from methodological problems in determining milk yield at that
stage, when puppies need to be given additional food. Ruesse (1961) investigated the
complete lactation of a German Shepherd bitch. A rather rapid decrease of milk yield
after puppies were given additional food was observed. However, after the 4th week of
lactation the suckling behavior of bitches may differ considerably, some tolerating
sucking by their puppies for a considerable time, others not. Therefore after 4 weeks of
lactation milk yield will show a considerable individual variation. At present, a
reasonable estimate is only possible for the first 4 weeks of lactation. Expressed as a
percentage of the mean daily milk yield during the first 4 weeks of lactation, milk
production is as follows: 75 percent in week 1, 95 percent in week 2, 110 percent in
week 3, and 120 percent in week 4.
An important determinant of milk yield appears to be the number of sucking puppies
(Meyer et al., 1985b). With one to four puppies in the litter, daily milk yield increases
nearly linearly by about 1 percent of bitch body weight per puppy. Thereafter, the
increase is no longer linear. With five to eight puppies, the increase in daily milk yield
per puppy is about 0.5 percent of bitch body weight. When there are more than eight
puppies in the litter, there is no further notable increase of daily milk yield per puppy.


===== PDF PAGE 90 =====
89
The energy requirements for milk production can be calculated factorially from these
figures. As a first step, the milk energy output can be calculated from milk yield and GE
in milk as follows: milk yield (g·kg BW–1) × 1.45 kcal. The result would represent net
metabolic energy need for milk production. The utilization of ME for milk production is
assumed to be 60 percent, an assumption that is based mainly on the work of
Scantlebury et al. (2000) and analogous to other species. Therefore, the ME requirement
for milk production is calculated as follows: ME = milk yield (g·kg BW–1) × 1.45
kcal/60 × 100 = milk yield (g·kg BW–1) × 2.42 kcal. Daily milk yield can be estimated
by the number of puppies per litter. For one to four puppies, it is 1 percent of bitch
weight per puppy, (i.e., the ME requirement for milk production per puppy is 10 × 2.42
kcal·kg BW–1 of bitch = 24 kcal·kg BW–1 of bitch per puppy). With five to eight
puppies, daily milk yield is only 0.5 percent of bitch weight. Daily ME requirements for
milk production per puppy are therefore 5 × 2.42 kcal·kg BW–1 = 12 kcal·kg BW–1 of
bitch per puppy. To calculate requirements for milk yield, the number of puppies
between one and four is multiplied by 24 kcal·kg BW–1 of bitch and the number of
puppies between five and eight is multiplied by 12 kcal·kg BW–1 of bitch and the results
summed.
The maintenance requirement must be considered separately. A bitch rearing a litter
can be considered to be quite active. Meyer et al. (1985b) calculated a linear regression
between the milk yield of bitches as an independent variable and the energy intake
(corrected for variations in body weight) as the dependent variable extrapolated for zero
milk production. The intercept of the regression equation can be considered to represent
maintenance requirements, 145 kcal·kg BW–0.75. No studies have investigated whether
maintenance energy requirements during lactation differ according to breed,
environmental temperature, and other individual or environmental factors. For bitches
having large litters, variation of maintenance energy requirements is not likely to be
very important because maintenance requirements represent a relatively small
percentage of their total energy requirements. In bitches with small litters, individual
differences in maintenance energy requirements are more likely to affect total energy
requirements during lactation to an extent that is of practical significance. Maintenance
energy requirements for lactation of 145 kcal·kg BW–0.75 should be considered as an
appropriate starting point (the basis for total requirements in Table 15-7). This equation
is suitable for computer programs and agrees very well with results from feeding
experiments (Meyer et al., 1985b; Scantlebury et al., 2000).
For bitches with large litters the capacity for food intake can limit energy intake. This
is especially true in large and giant breeds because the relative size of the
gastrointestinal tract decreases with increasing body size. Small- and medium-sized
breeds can increase their dry matter intake during lactation to around 4.5 percent of their
body weight; some individuals may even reach an intake of up to 9 percent of body
weight. Meyer and Zentek (1992) demonstrated that Great Danes do not eat more dry
matter than 2.5-3.2 percent of their body weight even if they suckle a large litter. Energy
requirement and the capacity for food intake determine the minimal energy density of
the food that should be used. In Great Danes—and possibly other giant breeds as well—


===== PDF PAGE 91 =====
90
it may be necessary, even if high-energy diets are fed to the bitch, to give additional
food to the puppies at a very early age.
Growth
Newborn puppies need about 25 kcal/100 g BW (Kienzle et al., 1985). Growing
puppies require about two times as much energy per unit of body weight as adult dogs of
the same breed (Arnold and Elvehjem, 1939). The newly weaned dog can readily adapt
to this level of feeding, particularly when the food is offered in multiple, judiciously
spaced meals. However, an arbitrary decrease to 1.6 times maintenance is recommended
when 50 percent of adult body weight has been reached and 1.2 times maintenance at 80
percent of adult weight. This reduction compensates for the decline in energy required
from weaning to adult age. Especially in large and giant breeds, optimal—not maximal
—growth is an important factor for proper skeletal development. Hedhammar et al.
(1974) were the first to demonstrate that overfeeding can result in growth disorders;
however, in that experiment, excess energy and several other nutrients including protein
and calcium were fed. Feeding too much energy in combination with a well-balanced
intake of all other nutrients will induce growth disorders in predisposed breeds such as
Great Danes (Meyer and Zentek, 1992). Recommendations for the weight development
of large and giant breeds are given in Table 3-5. The individual large- or giant-breed
puppy should be fed to meet these recommendations rather than being fed according to
energy requirement figures.
TABLE 3-5 Recommendations for Growth of Large- and Giant-Breed Dogs
Factorial approaches have been used to calculate energy requirements from data on
puppy growth and body composition for different stages of growth and different mature
body weights (Society of Nutrition Physiology, 1989). Meyer and Zentek (1992) carried
out feeding experiments with Great Danes and arrived at somewhat higher figures for
large breeds than the Society of Nutrition Physiology. Meyer and Zentek (1998)
published recommendations based on the data of the Society of Nutrition Physiology
and their own experiments. Blanchard et al. (1998) proposed an equation to calculate
energy requirements for growing puppies after weaning (Table 15-2) that was based


===== PDF PAGE 92 =====
91
mainly on recommendations from the National Research Council (1985). This equation
agrees well with those of Meyer and Zentek (1998) provided the puppies grow
according to the growth recommendations in Table 3-4. Such an equation (Table 15-2) is
well suited for computer programs and also has the advantage of providing requirements
for puppies that do not grow according to recommendations, a situation that is
encountered in nutrition consultation.
The question arises as to whether breed differences and other factors affecting
maintenance energy requirements should be considered during growth. The existing data
do not provide a definite answer. However, results are available indicating that the
activity level has a similar effect during growth as during maintenance. Rainbird and
Kienzle (1990) demonstrated that Great Danes ate more during growth than
Newfoundlands. As the Great Danes grew more rapidly than the Newfoundlands, it is
difficult to differentiate between effects of activity level (the Newfoundlands were less
active) and growth rate. In the last months of the observation period (8th to 12th month
of life), the differences in growth rate were considerably smaller, and the differences
between energy intake were even larger than during the beginning of the growth period.
Wichert et al. (1999) observed lower energy intake in pet puppies (assumed lower
activity than kennel puppies) growing according to recommendations. The energy intake
was about 10 to 20 percent lower than values calculated by the equation of Blanchard et
al. (1998) using a maintenance energy requirement of 132 kcal·kg BW–0.75. It appears
prudent and justified to consider possible differences in maintenance energy
requirements as a result of differences in activity level at least during the second half of
the growth period.
Physical Activity
Effects of physical activity on energy requirements are discussed in Chapter 11.
ENERGY REQUIREMENTS OF CATS
Basis for Establishing Energy Requirements
The mature body weight of domestic cats (Felis catus) ranges from less than 2 to
more than 7 kg. Mass exponents suggested for the calculation of metabolic body weight
of domestic cats range from 0.4 to 1, the latter exponent for the practical reason that
weights of cats do not differ very much. Therefore, it is argued that a linear relationship
between body weight and energy requirements leads only to a rather insignificant
overestimate of the requirements of heavier cats. However, Earle and Smith (1991)
showed that the heavier a cat is, the greater is the overestimate of energy requirements
calculated on a body weight basis with an exponent of 1 and suggested a very low mass
exponent of 0.404 based on 62 observations on DE intake. The assumption that this was
not a species-specific feature of the cat but simply due to the heavier cats being fatter
was made. More recent work has confirmed a lower mass exponent (Nguyen et al.,


===== PDF PAGE 93 =====
92
2001; Edtstadtler-Pietsch, 2003). Nguyen et al. (2001) compared ME intake, total
energy expenditure, basal metabolic rate, and fat-free body mass (gas exchange
monitoring and doubly labeled water method).
When only ME intake was considered, an exponent for body weight of 0.4 was
obtained (Nguyen et al., 2001). When total energy expenditure was determined by the
doubly labeled water method, it was related to BW0.64 (Nguyen et al., 2001). The
relationship between resting energy expenditure (gas exchange monitoring) and body
weight was best described by an exponent of 0.65. The allometric coefficient for lean
body mass and total energy expenditure amounted to 0.89. These results are close to the
mass exponent proposed by Brody et al. (1934) for interspecific and by Heusner (1991)
for intraspecific extrapolation of energy requirements. Given the results of Nguyen et al.
(2001) and the relatively uniform body shape of cats of different sizes the cat might be a
species for which the theoretical intraspecific allometric coefficient of 0.67 is justified.
For larger felids such as lions and tigers, it is unclear whether the intra- or
interspecific mass exponent (0.67 or 0.75) should be used. McNab (1989) reported the
metabolic rate of 58 kcal·kg BW–0.79 daily for seven species of non-domestic cat
ranging in size from 4 to 138 kg, but great variability was observed between species.
The Margay (3.6-kg BW) required 32 kcal·kg BW-1 whereas the bobcat (7.9-kg BW)
required 54 kcal·kg BW-1. McNab (1989) attributed this variation to differences in food
and climate, with carnivores from warm environments such as domestic cats having a
lower metabolic rate. Considering the diversity of energy requirements of larger felids of
similar body weight (Allen et al., 1995), the question of the optimal exponent to
calculate metabolic body weight is of academic rather than practical interest.
Basal Metabolic Rate and Dietary Thermogenesis
Starting with Pflueger in 1899, several authors have measured metabolic rate in
domestic cats using indirect calorimetry at room temperature (Table 3-6), but the
thermoneutral zone for domestic cats appears to lie between 35 and 38°C (Chapter 11).
Cold-induced thermogenesis must comprise an important part of the metabolic rate at
room temperature. Failure to standardize conditions provides a good explanation for
much of the variation in metabolic rate observed among these studies. Most of these
studies have also used cats with a narrow range of body weights, which precludes any
determination of the relationship of metabolic rate to body weight or surface area. There
has also been no consistency among studies that have measured metabolic rate at high
temperatures (Table 11-4). Currently, therefore, the BMR of domestic cats and its
relationship to body weight or surface area are unknown, but the lowest measured
values may provide a close approximation.
There appear to have been no studies of dietary thermogenesis in cats. Dietary
thermogenesis is probably similar to that in dogs and humans (approximately 10 percent
of ME). However it may be slightly higher because protein comprises a larger part of the
diet and cats eat many small meals, both of which increase dietary thermogenesis in
dogs (see earlier discussion).


===== PDF PAGE 94 =====
93
Adult Maintenance
Attempts to determine the energy requirements of cats go back well into the middle
of the nineteenth century. Siewert (2003) reviewed historical research in cats. The oldest
experiment on feline energy requirements was carried out in 1852 by Bidder and
Schmidt who fed ox meat to cats. They analyzed protein and fat, so that ME in the meat
could be calculated. The energy intake during periods of weight constancy in a cat of
about 3 kg body weight amounted to 180 kcal ME.
Data in the literature are mostly given on a body weight basis and not for metabolic
body weight. The figures suggested range from 31 to 100 kcal·kg BW–1 (Table 3-6).
There may be several explanations for the high variation. An important point is the
energy evaluation used in the studies. The use of unmodified Atwater factors for
processed food may lead to overestimation of ME intake. Increased awareness of animal
welfare is likely to have improved in general the living conditions of laboratory cats and
may thus have considerably reduced stress. Understanding of the nutritional needs of
cats has improved over the last 30 years, and thus there are fewer subclinical
deficiencies in laboratory cats. Palatability of cat foods has even improved over the last
decades, and in consequence it is likely that the frequency of overweight in laboratory
cats may have increased.
However, even if only the newer data are compared and allowances are made for
possible differences as a result of the methods employed (such as confinement during
gas exchange measurements), the variation in estimated energy requirements is rather
high. The reasons for this are somewhat obscure. Whereas in dogs, factors such as
activity level, breed, or age have clear-cut effects on energy requirements, the effects of
such factors are much less obvious in cats. There is, however, a trend toward higher
energy requirements in young adult males and in all cats with a body weight
considerably lower than 4 kg. It can be assumed that these cats were lean, whereas it
appears likely that at least some of the heavier cats were overweight. This suggests that
lean body mass may play an important role. In addition, the energy requirements are
given on a body weight basis, which enhances the effects of overweight on energy
requirements.
The effect of neutering on energy requirements is equivocal. Some authors observed
a decrease, but others did not (Table 3-6). Neutering may decrease the percentage of
lean body mass, and this indirect effect may be responsible in part for changes of energy
metabolism (Laeuger, 2001). Martin et al. (2001) demonstrated lower energy
expenditure in neutered cats per kilogram of body weight. The energy expenditure per
kilogram of lean body mass, however, did not differ between neutered and intact cats. It
is likely that depending on diet, time after neutering, and physical activity, the effect of
neutering on lean body mass and thus indirectly on energy requirements may be more or
less marked. On the other hand, Hoenig and Ferguson (2002) observed changes in
hormonal concentrations and energy requirements in cats that were fed to maintain their
weight after neutering.
Taylor et al. (1995) did not observe a decrease of maintenance energy requirements
with age in cats, postulating a decreased fat digestibility as one reason. This could not be


===== PDF PAGE 95 =====
94
reproduced in another study (Waldrou, 2002). In contrast, Laflamme and Ballam (2001)
describe a decrease of maintenance energy requirements with age. The reason for this
discrepancy may be that the effect of age on maintenance requirements may be
superimposed by the effect of being overweight. Old cats are less often overweight than
are middle-aged cats (Scarlett et al., 1994). Edtstadtler-Pietsch (2003) saw no effect of
age on maintenance energy requirements in a population of 138 laboratory cats. When
the data were divided into heavy and light cats, there was a decline of energy
requirements with age in both groups.
TABLE 3-6 Reported Daily Maintenance Energy Requirements of Cats


===== PDF PAGE 96 =====
95
NOTES: Includes lean as well as overweight cats. SD = standard deviation.


===== PDF PAGE 97 =====
96
a95% of the population is within this range. Figures may be taken from graphs, SD may be
estimated from variation of energy requirements per cat per day.
bME of food predicted or determined by digestion trials and nitrogen correction.
cNeutered females were about 300 g heavier than intact females, and neutered males were 400 g
heavier than intact males.
For lean cats, the energy requirements are estimated to be around 100 kcal ME·kg
BW–0.67 (Table 15-11). This translates to 70 kcal·kg BW–1. This recommendation is
valid only for lean cats with a body condition score (BCS) of 5 or lower on a scale of 1
to 9 (see Table 3-7). In overweight cats (BCS > 5), use of the exponent 0.4 may be
justified for actual body mass (requirements 130 kcal·kg BW–0.4). At present, the
individual energy requirements of a cat cannot be more than an educated guess.
On the basis of metabolic body weight (regardless of the mass exponent), the energy
requirements of exotic cats (Table 15-11) may be considerably higher. They varied
enormously among feline species even if the enclosures did not permit high levels of
activity (Allen et al., 1995). The range of energy intake as well as its variation are
confirmed by recent unpublished data of the Wildlife Conservation Society (personal
communication).
Illness and trauma can affect energy requirements dramatically. Severe illness or
trauma may even double the energy requirements (Donoghue, 1991). However, these
data are primarily from human patients. The experiments of Skultety et al. (1969),
which were carried out to determine the effects of hypothalamic and midbrain lesions on
caloric intake in cats, showed that cats with such experimentally induced lesions not
only eat more food than before surgery but also maintain their weight. The intake of
energy increased by 50 to 100 percent, which matches the figure given by Donoghue
(1991) for severe head trauma. Watanabe et al. (1998) described a 20 percent increase of
oxygen consumption in kittens after pyrogen administration.
Gestation
The pattern of weight changes during gestation and lactation appears to differ
considerably between bitches and queens. Queens tend to lose body weight during
lactation regardless of their diet (Scott, 1968; Loveridge, 1986; Loveridge and Rivers,
1989; Zottmann, 1997; Hendriks and Wamberg, 2000). For satisfactory reproductive
performance, body weight gain in pregnancy should include net tissue accretion in
preparation for lactation, rather than gain only in fetal, placental, and associated tissue
weight. Figure 3-4 shows a comparison of the weight development during pregnancy
and lactation in queens and bitches. Based on the results of Loveridge (1986), feeding
for a 40 to 50 percent weight increase during pregnancy is recommended.
Recommendations for energy intake during pregnancy based on Atwater ME intake of
pregnant cats range around 140 kcal·kg BW–0.67 (Scott, 1968; Smith, 1974; Loveridge,
1986). Since Atwater ME overestimates the ME content of prepared cat foods (NRC,


===== PDF PAGE 98 =====
97
1986), it is likely that the recommendations for pregnant cats based on the above-
mentioned investigations should include a considerable safety margin. Queens with a
below-average maintenance energy requirement may eat less and achieve a satisfactory
weight gain to prepare them for weight losses during lactation
Lactation
Queens suckle their kittens in general for 7-9 weeks, depending on litter size.
Additional feeding of kittens may be started at 2½ weeks of age at the earliest and
should begin during week 4 of lactation at the latest. At that age, the quantity and
nutrient content of the milk are no longer sufficient for normal development (Hendriks
and Wamberg, 2000).
TABLE 3-7 Body Condition Scoring Systema
BCS Dogs Cats
1 Ribs, lumbar vertebrae, pelvic bones,
and all bony prominences evident
from a distance. No discernible body
fat. Obvious loss of muscle mass
Ribs visible on shorthaired cats; no
palpable fat; severe abdominal tuck;
lumbar vertebrae and wing of ilia
obvious and easily palpable
2 Ribs, lumbar vertebrae, and pelvic
bones easily visible. No palpable fat.
Some evidence of other bony
prominence. Minimal loss of muscle
mass
Shared characteristics of BCS 1 and 3
3 Ribs easily palpated and may be
visible with no palpable fat. Tops of
lumbar vertebrae visible. Pelvic bones
becoming prominent. Obvious waist
and abdominal tuck
Ribs easily palpable with minimal fat
covering; lumbar vertebrae obvious;
obvious waist behind ribs; minimal
abdominal fat
4 Ideal: Ribs easily palpable, with
minimal fat covering. Waist easily
noted, viewed from above. Abdominal
tuck evident
Shared characteristics of BCS 3 and 5
5 Ideal: Ribs palpable without excess
fat covering. Waist observed behind
ribs when viewed from above.
Abdomen tucked up when viewed
from side
Ideal: Well proportioned; waist
observed behind ribs; ribs palpable
with slight fat covering; abdominal fat
pad minimal


===== PDF PAGE 99 =====
98
BCS Dogs Cats
6 Ribs palpable with slight excess fat
covering. Waist is discernible viewed
from above but is not prominent.
Abdominal tuck apparent
Shared characteristics of BCS 5 and 7
7 Ribs palpable with difficulty, heavy
fat cover. Noticeable fat deposits over
lumbar area and base of tail. Waist
absent or barely visible. Abdominal
tuck may be absent
Ribs not easily palpable with
moderate fat covering; waist poorly
discernible; obvious rounding of
abdomen; moderate abdominal fat pad
8 Ribs not palpable under very heavy
fat cover or palpable only with
significant pressure. Heavy fat
deposits over lumbar area and base of
tail. Waist absent. No abdominal tuck.
Obvious abdominal distension may be
present
Shared characteristics of BCS 7 and 9
9 Massive fat deposits over thorax,
spine, and base of tail. Waist and
abdominal tuck absent. Fat deposits
on neck and limbs. Obvious
abdominal distension
Ribs not palpable under heavy fat
cover; heavy fat deposits over lumbar
area, face, and limbs; distension of
abdomen with no waist; extensive
abdominal fat deposits
aBased on Laflamme, 1997a,b.


===== PDF PAGE 100 =====
99
FIGURE 3-4 Schematic comparison of body weight changes of queen and bitch during
gestation and lactation (data from Meyer et al., 1985a,b; Loveridge, 1986).
Milk yield and energy content in milk are important factors in estimating the energy
requirements for milk production. Compared to dogs, data on milk yield for queens are
rather scarce. Milk yield of queens depended strongly on the number of kittens and the
stage of lactation (Dobenecker et al., 1998). Milk yield increased after parturition until
the third or fourth week of lactation and decreased again thereafter. Dobenecker et al.
(1998) used the method of weighing kittens before and after suckling, a method that
tends to underestimate milk yield. They did not determine milk intake of the kittens
every day but gave them breaks in between. They compared the weight gain of kittens
on those days when they remained with their queen all the time and were only weighed
once and on other days when they were parted from the queen and weighed before and
after suckling. Based on the differences in weight development of kittens, the extent of
the error was estimated to amount to about 20 percent. The milk yield of cats was
corrected accordingly and was estimated to range between 1.5 and 8 percent of body
weight at the peak of lactation. The milk yield of queens with one or two kittens
remained below 2 percent of body weight. Queens with three or four kittens had a milk
yield of 5-6 percent, and a maximum of 8 percent was observed in a queen with six


===== PDF PAGE 101 =====
100
kittens. The estimate of Dobenecker et al. (1998) agrees very well with newer results of
Hendriks and Wamberg (2000) who used isotope dilution techniques. In five queens
with three or four kittens each, milk yield averaged 5.1, 5.5, 6.1, and 6.0 percent of body
weight during the first 4 weeks of lactation, respectively. In the first week of lactation,
however, the milk yield measured by Dobenecker et al. (1998) was lower than the milk
yield determined by Hendriks and Wamberg (2000) who used isotope dilution
technique. It is likely that the frequent interference with the kittens when estimating
milk yield by weighing before and after suckling had more marked effects in the first
week of life than later. Both studies agree that peak lactation is in the third or fourth
week of lactation. It can be estimated from these studies that in the 1st week of lactation
milk yield is about 85 percent of peak lactation, in the 2nd week it is 95 percent in the
third and fourth 100 percent, and thereafter decreases to 85, 75, and 60 percent in weeks
5, 6, and 7, respectively.
Energy content of queens’ milk increases gradually during lactation from about 1 to
1.3 kcal·g–1 milk (Keen et al., 1982; Zottmann, 1997). Consequently, the energy losses
in milk increase more during the first 4 weeks and decrease less rapidly later on than the
milk yield does. For factorial calculation of net metabolic need for milk production,
weekly changes of milk energy content and milk yield, as well as the effect of litter size
on milk yield, were taken into account. Energy losses in milk were calculated separately
for small (one to two kittens), medium (three to four kittens), and large (more than four
kittens) litters for each week of lactation. Then the mean was calculated, and each week
was compared to the mean. The resulting factors for the stage of lactation in the
equation for calculating the requirements of lactating cats take into account both milk
yield and changes in energy content of the milk.
For a factorial calculation of energy requirements for milk production from the
energy output in milk (Kienzle, 1998), an estimate of utilization of ME for milk
production is needed. However, there are no data for cats. Based on information from
other species, utilization can be assumed to range around 60 to 70 percent. The dog is
likely to be the best model because the diet of cats is more similar to that of dogs than to
diets of other domestic species. The work of Scantlebury et al. (2000) demonstrates the
lower range of utilization of energy for milk production in dogs. Therefore, energy
output by milk was divided by 60 and multiplied by 100 to calculate energy
requirements for milk yield in cats.
Maintenance requirements are added to the requirements for milk yield. A queen
rearing a litter can be assumed to be rather active and will become lean with progressing
lactation. Therefore, the equation for maintenance requirements of lean cats was chosen
to calculate this part of the requirements (100 kcal·kg BW–0.67).
By adding the maintenance energy requirements and the energy requirements for
milk production, figures for total requirements are obtained that are much higher than
the energy intake in feedings experiments (Loveridge, 1986; Zottmann, 1997; Hendriks
and Wamberg, 2000). As mentioned above, after parturition, cats are heavier than before
mating and they normally lose weight during lactation. These weight losses (i.e., the
energy available from extra genital tissues gained during gestation) have to be
considered for factorial calculations. The average weight loss during lactation amounts


===== PDF PAGE 102 =====
101
to 700 to 800 g (Loveridge and Rivers, 1989; Zottmann, 1997; Hendriks and Wamberg,
2000). Allowing for considerable individual variation, a daily weight loss of 5 g (small
litters) to 20 g (medium and large litters) was assumed for factorial calculations. It was
further assumed that the majority of the lost tissue was fat and that this was utilized very
efficiently. One gram of weight loss would yield 7-8 kcal ME. In a cat with a 3-kg body
weight, a weight loss of 20 g would then translate to 50 kcal ME·kg BW–1·d–1 from
using body stores (and a weight loss of 5 g, to about 12 kcal·kg BW–1, respectively).
For queens nursing litters with more than four kittens, 50 kcal·kg BW–1 was subtracted
from the factorially calculated requirements; for queens with three to four kittens, only
40 kcal·kg BW–1 was substracted; and for queens with less than three kittens, an even
smaller subtraction was made because they are likely to lose less weight during lactation
than queens with larger litters. The results of these calculations are given in Table 15-13.
Individual differences in tissue breakdown during lactation are likely to occur but cannot
be taken into account. This makes the above calculations appear rather academic. As a
rule of thumb, the energy requirement of a lactating queen with more than two kittens
amounts to between 2 and 2.5 times the maintenance requirements of the queen at
mating. Lactating queens should be fed a highly palatable food with at least 4 kcal
ME·g–1 dry matter, and they should have free access to their food.
Growth
The publications available on energy intake of growing kittens were reviewed
(Allison et al., 1956; Miller and Allison, 1958; Waterhouse and Carver, 1962; Greaves,
1965; Loveridge, 1987; Kienzle 1989; Munday et al., 1991; Iben and Sadila, 1993;
Zottmann, 1997; Hendriks and Wamberg, 2000). In addition, a factorial calculation of
requirements for growth was carried out using the data from Stratmann (1988). For
newborn suckling kittens, an energy requirement of about 20-25 kcal per 100 g of body
weight was estimated. For calculation of requirements after weaning, the data were
pooled and an equation was derived to estimate energy requirements for growth from
actual body weight and expected mature weight (Table 15-9). The data used for the
calculations include a number of errors. For example, older publications used Atwater
ME and consequently tended to overestimate ME intake. When milk intake of kittens
was determined by weighing before and after suckling or when diets were fed that were
not very palatable, there could be an underestimate. A systematic deviation of a majority
of data into either over- or underestimation, however, is unlikely. Nevertheless, the
equation was checked against data on growth and energy intake (week 10 to week 19;
Edtstadtler-Pietsch, 2003) and the agreement was satisfactory.
ENERGY DEFICIENCY AND EXCESS IN DOGS AND CATS
Signs of energy deficiency are frequently nonspecific, and diagnosis may be
complicated by a simultaneous shortage of several nutrients. The most conspicuous and
reliable sign of uncomplicated energy deficiency is a generalized loss of body weight.


===== PDF PAGE 103 =====
102
Under conditions of partial or complete starvation, most internal organs exhibit some
atrophy. A loss of subcutaneous, mesenteric, perirenal, uterine, testicular, and
retroperitoneal fat is an early sign. Low fat content of the marrow in the long bones is a
good indicator of prolonged inanition. Brain size is least affected, but the size of gonads
may be greatly decreased. Hypoplasia of lymph nodes, spleen, and thymus leads to a
marked reduction in their size. The adrenal glands are usually enlarged. The young
skeleton is extremely sensitive to energy deficiency, and growth may be slowed or
stopped completely. In the adult, the skeleton may become osteoporotic. Lactation and
the ability to perform work are also impaired. As muscle proteins are catabolized for
energy, endogenous nitrogen losses increase. Parasitism and bacterial infections
frequently occur under such circumstances and may superimpose other clinical signs.
Excess energy leads to overweight or even obesity. All body fat stores increase in
size. Obesity is statistically or causally linked to a number of diseases such as diabetes
mellitus (Lutz and Rand, 1993). It may enhance the severity of other diseases such as
skeletal or heart problems as well as the risk of hyperlipidemia in cats. In growing
animals, excess energy intake may induce excessive growth rates. In puppies from large
breeds, this has been repeatedly associated with the onset or enhancement of
developmental skeletal disease (Hedhammar et al., 1974; Kealy et al., 1992; Meyer and
Zentek, 1992). A recent study in dogs demonstrated that overfeeding from weaning to
old age considerably impairs health and longevity (Kealy et al., 2002). In this study,
osteoarthritis was a special problem in overfed dogs (Kealy et al., 1997, 2000).
Body Condition
Ideally, body condition can be assessed by determining body fat content by various
indirect methods. The results may differ somewhat from direct measurement in the body
as carried out by Stadtfeld (1978) for dogs and by Stratmann (1988) and Hendriks et al.
(1997) for cats. In adult dogs, mean body fat content (acid-ether extract) was 23 percent
(Stadtfeld, 1978) and water content was 56 percent. In relatively lean cats, fat content
was somewhat lower (11-12 percent) and water content higher (62 percent; Hendriks et
al., 1997; Stratmann, 1988). A simple and practical way to assess body condition is the
use of body condition scoring systems (Table 3-7), which rely mainly on the palpation
of subcutaneous fat deposits. There are two systems with scores between 1 (emaciated)
and 5 (obese) and between 1 (emaciated) and 9 (obese). The advantage of a system
using 9 scores (Table 3-7) is that there is no need for “half” points. It is recommended to
keep BCS (system with 9 scores) within the range of 4 to 5 in dogs. In cats, 5 is assumed
to be ideal.
REFERENCES
Abrams, J. T. 1962. The feeding of dogs. Edinburgh: W. Green and Sons.
Allen, M. E., O. T. Oftedal, K. E. Earle, J. Seidensticker, and L. Vilarin. 1995. Do
maintenance energy requirements of Felids reflect their feeding strategies? First
Annual Conference of the Nutrition Advisory Group. Toronto, Canada


===== PDF PAGE 104 =====
103
Allison, J. B., S. A. Miller, J. R. McCoy, and M. K. Brush. 1956. Studies on the nutrition
of the cat. N. Am. Vet. 37:38.
Arnold, A., and C. A. Elvehjem. 1939. Nutritional requirements of dogs. J. Am. Vet.
Med. Assoc. 95:187-194.
Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). 2003. Atlanta, Ga.: AAFCO
Official Publication.
Atwater, W. O. 1902. Principles of nutrition and nutrive value of food. Farmer’s Bulletin
No. 142.
Aub, J. C., J. Foremann, and E. E. Bright. 1922. The effect of adrenalectomy upon the
total metabolism of the cat. Am. J. Physiol. 61:326-348.
Ballevre, O., G. Anantharaman-Barr, P. Gicquello, C. Piguet-Welsch, A.-L. Thielin, and
E. Fern. 1994. Use of the doubly-labeled water method to assess energy expenditure
in free living cats and dogs. J. Nutr. 124:2594S-2600S.
Benedict, F. G. 1938. Vital Energetics. Publ. No. 513. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie
Institution of Washington.
Bidder, F., and C. Schmidt. 1852. Die Verdauungssäfte und der Stoffwechsel (Digestive
juices and metabolism). Mitau und Leipzig: Verlag Reyer.
Blanchard, G., D. Grandjean, and B.-M. Paragon. 1998. Calculation of a dietary plan for
puppies. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 80:54-59.
Blaxter, K. 1989. Energy Metabolism in Animals and Man. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Blaza, S. E. 1981. The nutrition of giant breeds of dogs. Pedigree Dig. 8(3):8-9
Brody, S., R. C. Proctor, and U. S. Ashworth. 1934. Growth and Development with
Special Reference to Domestic Animals. XXXIV. Basal Metabolism, Endogenous
Nitrogen. Creatinine and Neutral Sulphur Excretions as Functions of Body Weight.
Agric. Exp. Stn. Res. Bull. No. 220. Columbia: University of Missouri.
Burger, I. H. 1994. Energy needs of companion animals: Matching food intakes to
requirements throughout the life cycle. J. Nutr. 2584S-2593S.
Burger, I. H., and J. V. Johnson. 1991. Dogs large and small: The allometry of energy
requirements within a single species. J. Nutr. 121:S18-S21.
Burger, I. H., S. E. Blaza, P. T. Kendall, and P. M. Smith. 1984. The protein requirement
of adult cats for maintenance. Fel. Prac. 14(2):8-14.
Caldwell, G. T. 1931. Studies in water metabolism of the cat. Physiol. Zool. 4:324-355.
Carpenter, T. M. 1944. The effect of sugars on the respiratory exchange of cats. J. Nutr.
28:315-323.
Connor, M., M. A. Labato, and D. P. Laflamme. 2000. Variation in maintenance energy
requirements of pet dogs. Purina Nutrition Forum Proceedings Supplement to
Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian 23(9A):84.
Cowgill, G. R. 1928. The energy factor in the relation to food intake: Experiments on
the dog. Am. J. Physiol. 85:45-64.
Crist, K. A., and D. R. Romsos. 1987. Evidence for cold-induced but not for diet-
induced thermogenesis in adult dogs. J. Nutr. 117:1280-1286.
DeBeer, E. J., and A. M. Hjort. 1938. An analysis of the basal metabolism, body
temperature, pulse rate and respiratory rate of a group of purebred dogs. Am. J.
Physiol. 124:517-523.


===== PDF PAGE 105 =====
104
Diamond, P., and J. Leblanc. 1987. Hormonal control of postprandial thermogenesis in
dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 253:E521-E529.
Diamond, P., L. Brondel, and J. Leblanc. 1985. Palatability and postprandial
thermogenesis in dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 248:E75-E79.
Dobenecker, B., B. Zottmann, E. Kienzle, P. Wolf, and J. Zentek. 1998. Milk yield and
milk composition of lactating queens. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 80:173-178.
Donoghue, S. 1991. A quantitative summary of nutrition support services in a veterinary
teaching hospital. Cornell Vet. 8:109-128.
Donoghue, S., L. Khoo, T. Lawrence, L. T. Glickman, and D. S. Kronfeld. 1991. Body
condition and diet of relatively healthy older dogs. J. Nutr. 121:S58-S59.
Earle, K. E., and P. M. Smith. 1991. Digestible Energy requirements of adult cats at
maintenance. J. Nutr. 121:S45-S46.
Edtstadtler-Pietsch, G. 2003. Untersuchungen zum Energiebedarf von Katzen
(Investigations on energy requirements of cats). Doctoral thesis. Veterinary Faculty,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich.
Evans, H. E. 1974. Prenatal development of the dog. In Basic Guide to Canine
Nutrition. White Plains, N.Y.: Gaines Dog Research Center.
Feddersen-Petersen, D., and F. Ohl. 1995. Ausdrucksverhalten beim Hund. (Expressive
behaviour in dogs), Stuttgart:Gustav Fischer.
Figge, S. 1989. Untersuchungen ueber Akzeptanz, Vertraeglichkeit und Verdaulichkeit
von Eiweißfuttermitteln bei Katzen (Investigations on palatability, tolerance and
digestibility of high protein food in cats). Doctoral thesis, Tieraerztliche Hochschule,
Hanover.
Finke, M. D. 1991. Evaluation of the energy requirements of adult kennel dogs. J. Nutr.
121:S22-S28.
Finke, M. D. 1994. Energy requirements of adult female beagles. J. Nutr. 124:2604S-
2608S
Flynn M. F., E. M. Hardie, and P. J. Armstrong. 1996. Effect of ovariohysterectomy on
maintenance energy requirement in cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Ass. 209:1572-1577.
Galvao. P. E. 1947. Heat production in relation to body weight and body surface.
Inapplicability of the surface law on dogs of the tropical zone. Am. J. Physiol.
148:478-489.
Greaves, J. P. 1965. Protein and calorie requirements of the feline. Pp. 33-45 in Canine
and Feline Nutritional Requirements, O. Graham-Jones, ed. London: Pergamon Press.
Hammel, H. T., C. H. Wyndham, and J. D. Hardy. 1958. Heat production and heat loss
in the dog at 8-36oC environmental temperature. Am. J. Physiol. 194(1):99-108.
Hashimoto, M., M. Funaba, S. Ohshima, and M. Abe. 1995. Characteristic relation
between dietary metabolizable energy content and digestible energy content in
laboratory cats. Exp. Anim. 44(3):23-28.
Hauschild, C. 1993. Energetische Untersuchungen zum Erhaltungsbedarf von adulten
Katzen. (Investigations on maintenance energy requirements of cats). Doctor thesis,
Freie Universitaet, Berlin.
Hedhammar, Å., F. M. Wu, L. Krook, H. F. Schryver, A. de Lahunta, J. P. Whalen, F. A.
Kallfelz, E. A. Nunez, H. F. Hintz, B. E. Sheffy, and G. D. Ryan. 1974. Overnutrition


===== PDF PAGE 106 =====
105
and skeletal disease. Cornell Vet. 64(Suppl. 5):9-150.
Hendriks, W. H., and S. Wamberg. 2000. Milk intake of suckling kittens remains
relatively constant from one to four weeks of age. J. Nutr. 130:77-82.
Hendriks, W. H., P. J. Moughan, and M. F. Tarttelin. 1997. Body composition of the
adult domestic cat (Felis catus). J. Anim. Physiol. Animal Nutr. 77:16-23.
Heusner, A. A. 1982. Energy metabolism and body size. I. Is the mass exponent of
Kleiber’s equation a statistical artifact? Resp. Physiol. 48: 1-12.
Heusner, A. A. 1991. Body mass, maintenance and basal metabolism in dogs. J. Nutr.
121:S8-S17.
Hoenig, M., and C. Ferguson. 2002. Effects of neutering on hormonal concentrations
and energy requirements in male and female cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. 63:634-639.
Iben, C., and E. Sadila. 1993. Mutterlose Aufzucht von Hunde- und Katzenwelpen
(Artificial rearing of puppies and kittens). Wiener Tieraerztliche Monatsschrift
80:376-381.
Kealy, R. D., S. E. Olsson, K. L. Monti, D. F. Lawler, D. N. Biery, R. W. Helms, G.
Lust, and G. K. Smith. 1992. Effects of limited food consumption on the incidence of
hip dysplasia in growing dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 201:857-863.
Kealy, R. D., D. F. Lawler, J. M. Ballam, G. Lust, G. K. Smith, D. N. Biery, and S. E.
Olsson. 1997. Five-year longitudinal study on limited food consumption and
development of osteoarthritis in coxofemoral joints of dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
210:222-225.
Kealy, R. D., D. F. Lawler, J. M. Ballam, G. Lust, D. N. Biery, G. K. Smith, and S. L.
Mantz. 2000. Evaluation of the effect of limited food consumption on radiographic
evidence of osteoarthritis in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 217:1678-1680.
Kealy, R. D., D. F. Lawler, J. M. Ballam, S. L. Mantz, D. N. Biery, E. H. Greeley, G.
Lust, M. Segre, G. K. Smith, and H. D. Stove. 2002. Effects of diet restriction on life
span and age-related changes in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 220:1315-1320.
Keen, C. L., B. Lönnerdal, M. S. Clegg, L. S. Hurley, J. G. Morris, Q. R. Rogers, and R.
B. Rucker. 1982. Developmental changes in composition of cats’ milk: Trace
elements, minerals, protein, carbohydrate and fat. J. Nutr. 112:1763-1769.
Kendall, P. T., D. W. Holme, and P. M. Smith. 1982a. Comparative evaluation of net
digestive and absorptive efficiency in dogs and cats fed a variety of contrasting diet
types. J. Small Anim. Pract. 23:577-587.
Kendall, P. T., D. W. Holme, and P. M. Smith. 1982b. Methods of prediction of the
digestible energy content of dog foods from gross energy value proximate analysis
and digestive nutrient content. J. Sci. Food Agric. 33(9):823-831.
Kendall, P. T., S. E. Blaza, and P. M. Smith. 1983. Comparative digestible energy
requirements of adult beagles and domestic cats for body weight maintenance. J. Nutr.
113:1946-1955.
Kendall, P. T., I. H. Burger, and P. M. Smith. 1985. Methods of estimation of the
metabolizable energy content of cat foods. Feline-Practice 15(2): 38-44.
Kienzle, E. 1989. Untersuchungen zum Intestinal- und Intermediaerstoffwechsel von
Kohlenhydraten (Staerke verschiedener Herkunft und Aufbereitung, Mono- und
Disaccharide) bei der Hauskatze (Felis catus) (Investigations on intestinal and
intermediary metabolism of carbohydrates (starch from different sources and of


===== PDF PAGE 107 =====
106
different processing, mono- and disaccharides) in the domestic cat (Felis catus).
Habilitation thesis, Tieraerztliche Hochschule, Hanover.
Kienzle, E. 1995. Home made diets in clinical nutrition. Proceedings World Veterinary
Congress 1995, Yokohama, Japan. WSAVA Scientific Pro-gramme: 97-101.
Kienzle, E. 1998. Factorial calculation of nutrient requirements in lactating queens. J.
Nutr. Suppl. 12S:2609S-2614S.
Kienzle, E. 2002. Further developments in the prediction of metabolizable energy (ME)
in petfood. J. Nutr. 132:1796S-1798S.
Kienzle, E., and A. Rainbird. 1991. The maintenance energy requirement of dogs—
What is the correct figure for the calculation of the metabolic body weight in dogs? J.
Nutr. 121:39-40.
Kienzle, E., H. Meyer, C. Dammers, and H. Lohrie. 1985. Milchaufnahme,
Gewichtsentwicklung, Futterverdaulichkeit sowie Energie- and Nährstoffretention bei
Saugwelpen (Milk intake, weight development, feed digestibility as well as energy
and nutrient retention in suckling puppies). Pp. 26-50 in Untersuchungen zum
Energie- und Nährstoffbedarf von Zuchthündinnen und Saugwelpen (Investigations
on Nutrient Requirements in Breeding Bitches and Suckling Pups), H. Meyer, ed.
Volume 16 in Advances in Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition. Hamburg,
Germany: Paul Parey.
Kienzle, E., B. Opitz, K. E. Earle, P. M. Smith, I. E. Maskell, and C. Iben. 1998a. The
development of an improved method of predicting the energy content in prepared dog
and cat food. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 79:69-79.
Kienzle, E., B. Opitz, K. E. Earle, P. M. Smith, and I. E. Maskell. 1998b. The influence
of dietary fibre components on the apparent digestibility of organic matter and energy
in prepared dog and cat foods. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 79:46-56.
Kienzle, E., B. Opitz, and I. Schrag. 1999. Energiebewertung von Futtermitteln fuer
Hunde und Katzen (Energy evaluation of dog and cat food). Uebersichten zur
Tierernaehrung 27:191-220.
Kienzle, E., B. Dobenecker, and S. Eber. 2001. Effect of cellulose on the digestibility of
high starch versus high fat diets in dogs. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 85:51-72.
Kienzle, E., I. Schrag, R. Butterwick, and B. Opitz. 2002. Calculation of gross energy in
pet foods: Do we have the right values for heat of combustion. J. Nutr. 132:1799S-
1800S.
Kirkwood, J. K. 1985. The influence of size on the biology of the dog. J. Small Anim.
Pract. 26:97-110.
Kitchen, H. D. 1924. Determination of the heat production in dogs by the gasometer
method. Am. J. Physiol. 67:487-497.
Kleiber, M. 1961. The Fire of Life. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Krehl, W. A., G. R. Cowgill, and D. Whedon. 1955. Non-deleterious effects of
polyoxyethylene esters in the nutrition of rats and cats. J. Nutr. 55:35-61.
Kuhlman, G., D. P. Laflamme, and J. M. Ballam. 1993. A simple method for estimating
the metabolizable energy content of dry cat foods. Fel. Prac. 21:16-20.
Kunde, M. M., and A. H. Steinhaus. 1926. Studies on metabolism IV. The basal
metabolic rate of normal dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 78:127-135.


===== PDF PAGE 108 =====
107
Laeuger, S. 2001. Der Energieumsatz von Katern vor und nach der Kastration (The
energy expenditure of male cats before and after neutering). Doctoral thesis,
University of Zurich.
Laflamme, D. P. 1997a. Development and validation of a body condition score system
for dogs. Can. Prac. 22(4):10-15.
Laflamme, D. P. 1997b. Development and validation of a body condition score system
for cats: A clinical tool. Fel. Prac. 25(5-6):13-18.
Laflamme, D. P. 2001. Determining metabolizable energy content in commercial
petfoods. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 85:222-230.
Laflamme, D. P., and J. M. Ballam. 2001. Effect of age on maintenance energy
requirements of adult cats. The Purina Nutrition Forum, St. Louis, Mo.
Lawler, F., and J. M. Ballam. 2001. Evaluation of body composition in female dogs with
mammary tumors. The Purina Nutrition Forum, St. Louis, Mo.
Leblanc, J., and P. Diamond. 1986. Effect of meal size and frequency on postprandial
thermogenesis in dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 250:E144-E147.
Loveridge, G. G. 1986. Body weight changes and energy intakes of cats during gestation
and lactation. Animal Technology 37:7-15.
Loveridge, G. G. 1987. Some factors affecting kitten growth. Anim. Technol. 38:9-18.
Loveridge, G. G., and J. P. W. Rivers. 1989. Body weight changes and energy intakes of
cats during pregnancy and lactation. In Nutrition of the Dog and Cat, I. H. Burger,
and J. P. W. Rivers, eds. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lutz, T. A., and J. S. Rand. 1993. A review of new developments in type 2 diabetes
mellitus in human beings and cats. Brit. Vet. J. 149:527-536.
Maenner, K. 1991. Energy requirement for maintenance of adult dogs. J. Nutr. 121:S37-
S38.
Martin, L., B. Siliart, H. Dumon, R. Backus, V. Biourge, and P. Nguyen. 2001. Leptin,
body fat content and energy expenditure in intact and gonadectomized adult cats: A
preliminary study. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 85:195-199
McNab, B. K. 1989. Basal rate of metabolism, body size and food habits in the order
Carnivora. Pp.335-354 in Carnivore Behavior, Ecology and Evolution, J. L.
Gittleman, ed. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Meyer, H., and J. Zentek. 1992. Ueber den Einfluß einer unterschiedlichen
Energieversorgung wachsender Doggen auf Wachstumsintensitaet und
Skelettentwicklung. 1. Mitteilung: Koerpermasseentwicklung und Energiebedarf
(Influence of various levels of energy intake in growing Great Danes on growth
intensity and skeletal development. 1. Communication: Body weight development
and energy requirements). J. Vet. Med. A 39:130-141.
Meyer, H., and J. Zentek. 1998, 2001. Ernaehrung des Hundes. (Nutrition of the dog).
3rd and 4th editions. Stuttgart: Verlag Eugen Ulmer.
Meyer, H., C. Dammers, and E. Kienzle. 1985a. Koerperzusammensetzung,
neugeborener Welpen und Naehrstoffbedarf tragender Huendinnen (Body
composition of newborn puppies and nutrient requirements of pregnant bitches).
Advances in Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition 16:7-25.
Meyer, H., E. Kienzle, and C. Dammers. 1985b. Milchmenge und
Milchzusammensetzung bei der Huendin sowie Futteraufnahme und


===== PDF PAGE 109 =====
108
Gewichtsentwicklung ante und post partum (Milk yield, milk composition, feed
intake and weight development in bitches before and after birth). Advances in Animal
Physiology and Animal Nutrition 16:51-72.
Meyer, H., E. Kienzle, and J. Zentek. 1993. Body size and relative weights of
gastrointestinal tract and liver in dogs. J. Vet. Nutr. 2:31-35.
Miller, S. A., and J. B. Allison. 1958. The dietary nitrogen requirements of the cat. J.
Nutr. 64:493-501.
Munday, H. S., K. E. Earle, and P. Anderson. 1991. Changes in the body composition of
the domestic shorthaired cat during growth and development. J. Nutr. 124:2622S-
2623S.
National Research Council (NRC). 1974. Nutrient Requirements of Dogs. Washington
D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). 1985. Nutrient Requirements of Dogs. Washington
D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). 1986. Nutrient Requirements of Cats. Washington
D.C.: National Academy Press.
Nguyen, P., S. Mariot, L. Martin, H. Dumon, V. Biourge, D. Darmaun, R. Robins, and
N. Naulet. 2000. Assessment of energy expenditure with doubly labeled water in
adult cats. Supplement to Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing
Veterinarian 22(9a):96.
Nguyen, P., H. Dumon, R. Frenais, B. Siliart, L. Martin, P. Blewis, and T. Frégier. 2001.
Energy expenditure and requirement assessed using three different methods in adult
cats. Supplement to Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing
Veterinarian 23(9A):86.
Oftedal, O. T. 1984. Lactation in the dog: Milk composition and intake by puppies. J.
Nutr. 114:803-812.
Ohshima, S., Y. Fukuma, T. Suziki, and M. Abe. 1993. Estimation of nitrogen-corrected
ME-value of laboratory canine diets. Exp. Anim. 43(4):571-577.
Okarma, H., and P. Koteja. 1987. Basal metabolic rate in the gray wolf in Poland. J.
Wildlife Management 51:800-801.
Parkman, A. L., K. E. Michel, K. E. Erswell, K. Saker, and D. P. Laflamme. 2000. How
many calories do pet cats really need? Purina Nutrition Forum Proceedings
23(9A):85.
Patil, A. R., and T. M. Bisby. 2001. Comparison of maintenance energy requirement of
client-owned dogs and kennel dogs. Purina Nutrition Forum, St. Louis, Mo.
Pflueger, E. 1899. Ueber den Einfluss, welchen Mengen und Art der Nahrung auf die
Grœsse des Stoffwechsels und der Leistungsfaehigkeit ausueben. (On the effect of
amount and composition of food on the power of metabolism and the ability to
perform). Pflueger’s Arch. Ges. Physiol. 77:425-482.
Pouteau, E., S. Mariot, L. Martin, H. Dumon, R. Robins, D. Darmaun, N. Naulet, and P.
Nguyen. 2000. Effect of weight variations on energy expenditure in dogs. J. Vet. Int.
Med. 14:390, abstract 252.
Radicke, B. 1995. Der Einfluß unterschiedlicher Naehrstoffgehalte in Alleinfuttermitteln
fuer Katzen auf den energetischen Erhaltungsbedarf, auf die Teilwirkungsgrade fuer
den energetischen Ansatz und auf den Rohproteinbedarf von adulten Katzen (Effect


===== PDF PAGE 110 =====
109
of nutrient composition of complete diets on maintenance energy requirements,
energy accretion and energy utilization for accretion and crude protein requirements
of adult cats). Doctoral thesis, Freie Universitaet, Berlin.
Rainbird, A., and E. Kienzle. 1990. Untersuchungen zum Energiebedarf des Hundes in
Abhaengigkeit von Rassezugehoerigkeit und Alter (Investigations on energy
requirements of dogs in relation to breed and age). Kleintierpraxis 35:145-158.
Romsos, D. R., H. J. Palmer, K. L. Muiruri, and M. R. Bennink. 1981. Influence of a
low carbohydrate diet on performance of pregnant and lactating dogs. J. Nutr.
111:678.
Rubner, M. 1901. Der Energiewert der Kost des Menschen (The energy value of human
food). Z. Biol. 42:261-308.
Ruesse, I. 1961. Die Laktation der Huendin (The lactation of the bitch). Zentralblatt fuer
Veterinaermedizin 7(3):251-281.
Scantlebury, M., R. Butterwick, and J. R. Speakman. 2000. Energetics of lactation in
domestic dog (Canis familiaris) breeds of two sizes. Comparative Biochemistry and
Physiology Part A:197-210.
Scarlett, J. M., S. Donoghue, J. Saidla, and J. Wills. 1994. Overweight cats: Prevalence
and risk factors. Int. J. Obesity 18(Suppl. 1):S22-S28.
Schoenmeier, A. 2003. Ein Beitrag zur Entwicklung von Schätzgleichungen für die
umsetzbare Energie in Hunde- und katzenalleinfuttern (A contribution to the
development of predictive equations for metabolizable energy in complete dog and
cat food). Doctoral thesis. Veterinary Faculty, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich.
Scott, P. P. 1968. The special features of nutrition of cats, with observations on wild
Felidae nutrition in the London Zoo. Pp. 21-39 in Comparative Nutrition of Wild
Animals, M. A. Crawford, ed. New York: Academic Press.
Siedler, A. J., and B. S. Schweigert. 1954. Effect of the level of animal fat in the diet on
the maintenance, reproduction and lactation performance of dogs. J. Nutr. 53:187-
194.
Siewert, F. 2003. Entwicklung der Ernaehrungsforschung bei der Katze (Development
of nutrition research in the cat). Doctoral thesis, Tieraerztliche Hochschule, Hanover.
Skultety, F. M. 1969. Alterations of caloric intake in cats following lesions of the
hypothalamus and mid brain. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 157:867-874.
Smith, B. A. 1974. Effects of early under-nutrition in the kitten: Behavior,
electroencephalography and brain composition. Ph. D. thesis. Fort Collins: Colorado
State University.
Society of Nutrition Physiology, Committee on Requirement Figures (Ausschuss fuer
Bedarfsnormen der Gesellschaft fuer Ernaehrungsphysiologie). 1989. Energie- und
Naehrstoffbedarf (Energy and nutrient requirements). Nr. 5 Hunde (No. 5 Dogs).
Frankfurt: DLG.
Stadtfeld, G. 1978. Untersuchungen ueber die Koerperzusammensetzung des Hundes
(Investigations on body composition of dogs). Doctoral thesis, Tieraerztliche
Hochschule, Hanover.
Stiefel, M. 1999. Einfluss dreier unterschiedlicher Diaeten auf den Energieund
Proteinstoffwechsel adulter Katzen unter spezieller Beruecksichtigung der physischen


===== PDF PAGE 111 =====
110
Aktivitaet (Effect of three different diets on energy and protein metabolism of adult
cats with special consideration of physical activity). Doctoral thesis, University of
Zurich.
Stratmann, B. 1988. Untersuchungen zur Koerperzusammensetzung von Katzen
(Investigations on body composition of cats). Doctoral thesis, Tieraerztliche
Hochschule, Hanover.
Taylor, E. J., C. Adams, and R. Neville. 1995. Some nutritional aspects of ageing in
dogs and cats. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 54:645-656.
Tennant, B. 1998. Assessment of energy expenditure in cats using indirect calorimetry.
J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 80:60-62.
Udall, R. H., A. D. Rankin, and L. C. Moss. 1953. Energy requirements of dogs.
Veterinary Medicine 48:111-114.
Walters, L. M., G. K. Ogilvie, M. D. Salman, L. Joy, M. J. Fettman, M. S. Hand, and S.
L. Wheeler. 1993. Repeatability of energy expenditure measurements in clinically
normal dogs by use of indirect calorimetry. Am. J. Vet. Res. 54:1881-1885.
Watanabe, T., P. Kumar, and M. A. Hanson. 1998. Elevation of metabolic rate by
pyrogen administration does not affect the gain of respiratory peripheral
chemoreflexes in unanesthetized kittens. Ped. Res. 44:357-362.
Waterhouse, N. H., and D. S. Carver. 1962. Growth rate, food and calorie consumption
of laboratory cats. Proc. Anim. Care Panel 12:271.
Wichert, B., B. Opitz, U. Wehr, and E. Kienzle. 1999. Energy requirements of pet dogs.
P. 80 in Proceedings, 26th World Veterinary Association (WVA), 24th World Small
Animal Veterinary Association (WSAVA), 3rd Conference of the European Society of
Veterinary and Comparative Nutrition (ESVCN), Lyon.
Zentek, J. 1993. Untersuchungen zum Einfluß der Fuetterung auf den mikrobiellen
Stoffwechsel im Intestinaltrakt des Hundes (Studies on the effect of feeding on the
microbial metabolism in the intestinal tract of dogs). Habilitation thesis,
Tieraerztliche Hochschule, Hanover.
Zentek, J., and H. Meyer. 1992. Energieaufnahme adulter Deutscher Doggen (Energy
intake of adult Great Danes). Berliner und Muenchener Tieraerztliche Wochenschrift
105(10):325-327.
Zentek, J., and H. Meyer. 1993. Verdaulichkeit und faekale Wasserausscheidung—ein
Vergleich zwischen Doggen und Beagles (Digestibility and faecal excretion of water
—a comparison between Great Danes and Beagles). Kleintierpraxis 38:311-318.
Zottmann, B. 1997. Untersuchungen zur Milchleistung und Milchzusammensetzung der
Katze (Felis catus) (Investigations on milk yield and milk composition of the
domestic cat (Felis catus)). Doctoral thesis. Veterinary Faculty, Ludwig-Maximilians-
University, Munich.
__________________
1 Under model regulations of the Association of American Feed Control Officials,
metabolizable energy content statements may be made voluntarily on any commercial dog or cat
food label, they are mandatory if the label also bears a calorie-related claim such as “lite” or “less
calories” (AAFCO, 2003). The predictive equation for energy content relies on the “modified
Atwater” values of 3.5, 8.5, and 3.5 kcal ME·g–1 for protein, fat, and NFE, respectively. The same


===== PDF PAGE 112 =====
111
formula is used for both dog and cat foods, irrespective of relative fiber content or presumed
digestibility. Hence, it may tend to underestimate energy content of highly digestible foods and
overestimate those of less digestibility. Depending on the intended use of the product and the
manufacturer’s marketing strategy, the predictive equation may not be suitably accurate in its
determination of ME content. Thus, manufacturers are also given the option of determining
energy content on the basis of results of a feeding trial (see Chapter 2).
2 Stress level, activity, and energy requirements of dogs in kennels might also differ in relation
to the type of kennel in which the dogs are housed.


===== PDF PAGE 113 =====
112
4
Carbohydrates and Fiber
DEFINITION, CLASSIFICATION, AND MEASUREMENT
Dietary carbohydrates include low and high molecular weight sugars, starches, and
various cell wall and storage non-starch polysaccharides (NSPs) or dietary fibers
(DFs) (Bach-Knudsen, 1997) produced by plants during photosynthesis (Hassid,
1970). Carbohydrates [Cn(H2O)n] have hydroxyl groups and are markedly
hydrophilic (Lichtenthaler, 1998). They are the primary energy source for omnivorous
animals (Guilbot and Mercier, 1985) and can be separated into distinct groups
depending on their degree of polymerization (DP) and digestibility (Nantel, 1999).
The four carbohydrate groups, from a functional perspective, are absorbable
(monosaccharides), digestible (disaccharides, certain oligosaccharides, and
nonstructural polysaccharides), fermentable (lactose, certain oligosaccharides, DF,
and resistant starch), and nonfermentable (certain DFs). Carbohydrates may fall into
two or more different groups depending on animal species and age, food processing
characteristics, or amount of feed ingested.
Absorbable Carbohydrates
Absorbable carbohydrates include monosaccharides (glucose, fructose, and
galactose; Hassid, 1970) and sugar alcohols (sorbitol, mannitol, and xylitol; BeMiller
and Whistler, 1996). These compounds can be absorbed directly and, therefore, do not
require hydrolysis by gastric enzymes.
The measurement of monosaccharides and sugar alcohols is achieved by
extracting the simple sugars from a feed or food sample with 80 percent ethanol and


===== PDF PAGE 114 =====
113
quantifying the low molecular weight sugars in the supernatant by gas-liquid
chromatography (GLC), high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with
either pulsed amperometric detection (PAD) or pulsed electrochemical detection
(PED), or capillary electrophoresis (CE). The total monosaccharides of a sample
reflect the carbohydrate concentration, which complements assays for
oligosaccharides, starch, and NSPs (Harris et al., 1988; Piccaglia and Galletti, 1988).
Digestible Carbohydrates
Disaccharides have two monomeric residues and include lactose, sucrose, maltose,
and trehalose. These low molecular weight sugars are readily hydrolyzable by
gastrointestinal tract enzymes. It is important to note, however, that under certain
conditions, lactose absorption in the small intestine is reduced. Unabsorbed lactose is
readily fermented in the colon.
Starch is a nonstructural plant storage polysaccharide (α-glucan) (Englyst, 1989)
and is the main carbohydrate in cereal grains (Bach-Knudsen, 1997). Dietary starch is
composed of amylose (linear glucose chain with α-1,4-glucosidic linkages) and
amylopectin (branched glucose polymer containing both α-1,4- and α-1,6-linkages).
The primary method of starch quantification (McCleary et al., 1994) is an
enzymatic, colorimetric total starch determination. Other methods for the
classification and measurement of starch also have been described (Thivend et al.,
1972; Aman and Hesselman, 1984; Karkalas, 1985; Holm et al., 1986; Englyst et al.,
1992a, b).
Fermentable Carbohydrates
Oligosaccharides are polymeric carbohydrates consisting of three to ten
monosaccharide residues joined through glycosidic bonds (Pazur, 1970). Lee and
Prosky (1994, 1995, 1999) classified oligosaccharides that were not digested by
endogenous digestive enzymes as resistant oligosaccharides. Some nondigestible
oligosaccharides include inulin-type fructans, galactooligosaccharides, lactulose,
isomaltooligosaccharides, xylooligosaccharides, fructooligosaccharides, raffinose,
and stachyose. Certain oligosaccharides can be classified as prebiotics. Prebiotics are
nondigested food ingredients that beneficially affect the host by stimulating the
growth and activity of one or a limited number of bacterial species already residing in
the colon (Gibson and Roberfroid, 1995; Grizard and Barthomeuf, 1999), and also are
defined as functional foods (Van Loo et al., 1999). Oligosaccharides are extracted and
quantified using several methods such as GLC, HPLC-PAD, or HPLC-PED (Quigley
and Englyst, 1992; Englyst et al., 1994; Campbell et al., 1997) and computer-assisted
spectrum evaluation of polysaccharides (CASPER) (Stenutz et al., 1998).
The activity of lactase in the small intestine of adult dogs and cats is much lower
than in juvenile animals, while sucrase levels are low in both species throughout life
and are influenced by diet composition (Welsh and Walker, l965; Kienzle, 1993d).


===== PDF PAGE 115 =====
114
Therefore, lactose and sucrose may escape digestion by endogenous enzymes and be
fermented in the large intestine. These then can be considered resistant disaccharides,
as well as fermentable carbohydrates (Kienzle, 1989).
Starch and products of starch degradation that escape digestion and absorption in
the small intestine are termed resistant starch (RS) (Englyst, 1989; Muir and O’Dea,
1993) and may be fermented by hindgut bacteria to varying extents (Gee et al., 1992;
Murray et al., 1998, 2001). Resistant starch can be classified into four categories:
physically inaccessible, resistant starch granules, retrograded starch, or chemically
modified starch (Lineback, 1999; Bird et al., 2000). If RS is included in the
measurement of NSP, the proportion of NSP-glucose in heat-processed starchy foods
becomes inflated (Englyst, 1989) because processing starchy foods can result in the
production of RS (Englyst and Cummings, 1987). Methods to measure RS (Bjorck et
al., 1986; Champ, 1992; Englyst et al., 1992a; Muir and O’Dea, 1993; Faisant et al.,
1995; Champ et al., 1999a,b) are not without their problems. The definition of RS
relies on solubility of starch as a major criterion, so there is lack of a clear definition
of RS from an analytical perspective (Lineback, 1999). This problem was resolved by
McCleary et al. (2002) where 37 laboratories tested eight pairs of blind duplicate
starch or plant material samples for RS content. The range of applicability of the test
was for samples testing between 2 and 64 percent RS. The recommendation was
approved by the Methods Committee on Food Nutrition as First Action (AOAC).
The definition of dietary fiber has been the subject of much debate. Trowell (1972)
defined DF as the skeletal remains of plant cells resistant to digestion by human
gastrointestinal tract enzymes, and then redefined it (Trowell et al., 1976) as the
remnants of edible plant cell wall polysaccharides, lignin, and associated substances
resistant to hydrolysis by human alimentary tract enzymes.
Dietary fiber is composed of cell wall polysaccharides, noncellulose
polysaccharides, and structural nonpolysaccharides (lignin) (Englyst, 1989; Report of
the British Nutrition Foundation Task Force, 1990; Eastwood, 1992; Theander et al.,
1994). These structural polysaccharides include cellulose, hemicelluloses, and some
pectins, while noncellulosic polysaccharides include pectins, gums, and mucilages.
Chemically, the building blocks of cell wall polysaccharides are pentoses (arabinose,
xylose), hexoses (glucose, galactose, mannose), 6-deoxyhexoses (rhamnose, fucose),
and uronic acids (glucuronic and galacturonic acids) (Bach-Knudsen, 1997). The
main polysaccharides of plant cell walls include arabinoxylans and mixed linked
β(1→3:1→4)-D-glucans (β-glucans), xyloglucans, xylans, rhamnogalacturonans, and
arabinogalactans (Stephan, 1983; Selvendran, 1984; Theander et al., 1989).
The fiber in animal feeds and petfoods is determined by the crude fiber method
(Henneberg and Strohman, 1859), total fiber method (Englyst and Cummings, 1988),
neutral detergent fiber (NDF) method (Roberston and Van Soest, 1981; Van Soest,
1963; Van Soest et al., 1991), total dietary fiber (TDF) method (Prosky et al., 1984),
nonstructural polysaccharide method (Englyst et al., 1992b), and several other
methods (Asp et al., 1983; Englyst and Hudson, 1987; James and Theander, 1981;
Prosky et al., 1984; Roberston and Van Soest, 1981; Southgate, 1981; Theander and


===== PDF PAGE 116 =====
115
Westerlund, 1986; Prosky, 1991). These methods can be categorized as gravimetric or
chemical analyses (Marlett, 1989). Gravimetric methods do not provide information
about the nature and composition of the fiber or NSP, and tend to omit the analysis of
certain DF components. For example, the TDF procedure (Prosky et al., 1984) fails to
recover and measure lower molecular weight saccharides such as
fructooligosaccharides (Gordon, 1999). The crude fiber method accounts for only 5 to
20 percent of the total fiber in a food and, as such, underestimates the true DF
concentration (Bartges and Anderson, 1997). In contrast, chemical analysis methods
determine the sugar constituents by HPLC, GLC, or CE, and uronic acids
colorimetrically. Chemical analyses estimate DF as the sum of monosaccharides
released by the hydrolysis of NSP, leading to a more thorough assessment of DF
content (Englyst and Cummings, 1984; Englyst et al., 1982, 1987; Englyst and
Hudson, 1987; Englyst, 1989; Marlett, 1989). Uronic acid constituents of NSP can be
determined by HPLC-PAD (Quigley and Englyst, 1994). High-performance anion
exchange chromatography (HPAEC) with either PAD or PED is increasingly being
advocated as a suitable method to analyze DF and complex carbohydrates in foods
and feeds (Piccaglia and Galletti, 1988; Henshall, 1999) but is more costly and time-
consuming than gravimetric analytical methods.
Novel analytical procedures enable more exact and accurate characterization of
fibrous carbohydrate constituents and lignin and provide impetus for in-depth study
and better understanding of nutritional, physiological, health, and immunological
implications of carbohydrates in petfoods. Therefore, crude fiber analysis of petfoods
should be replaced by a more physiologically relevant method. Methods such as TDF
or HPAEC accurately isolate and quantify dietary fiber, and are capable of separating
soluble and insoluble fiber fractions.
Nonfermentable Carbohydrates
Certain dietary fibers are not extensively fermented by microbiota present in the
gastrointestinal tract of dogs and cats. Cellulose and wheat bran are examples of
nonfermented carbohydrates. Although lignin is a polyphenolic compound, it
generally is grouped with the carbohydrate components of nonfermentable DF. These
compounds contribute directly to fecal bulking and reduce intestinal transit time.
Lignin can be determined via the acid detergent lignin or Klason lignin methods
(Van Soest, 1963; Van Soest and Wine, 1967; Theander and Westerlund, 1986).
Cellulose can be determined indirectly by calculating the difference between acid
detergent fiber (ADF) (cellulose and lignin) and acid detergent lignin residues (Van
Soest, 1963), or directly by using the method of Crampton and Maynard (1938).
ABSORBABLE CARBOHYDRATES (MONOSACCHARIDES
AND SUGAR ALCOHOLS)


===== PDF PAGE 117 =====
116
Presence in Foodstuffs
Glucose and fructose are the predominant free-occurring monosaccharides in dog
and cat foods. Cereal and legume grains, their by-products, and other plant
components are the main sources of monosaccharides in petfoods. Table 13-1
(Chapter 13) lists carbohydrate fraction (including monosaccharide) concentrations in
plant ingredients commonly used in the preparation of dog and cat foods.
Sugar alcohols (also known as polyols) also are present in nature but are more
commonly synthesized by hydrogenating a reducing monosaccharide (Lichtenthaler,
1998). Sorbitol is produced from glucose, mannitol from mannose, and xylitol from
xylose (BeMiller and Whistler, 1996).
Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization
Free monosaccharides and sugar alcohols are absorbed directly and, therefore, do
not require digestive enzymes. Only monosaccharides present as constituents of
carbohydrate polymers require hydrolytic enzymes in order to be absorbed in the
small intestine.
In both dogs and cats (similar to many other species), absorption of glucose and
galactose across the brush border membrane occurs mainly by an active Na+-
dependent transport mechanism in addition to uptake by Na+-independent simple
diffusion (Washabau et al., 1986; Wolfram et al., 1989). Fructose is an exception,
being absorbed by a Na+independent glucose transporter system (GLUT-5) in humans
(Levin, 1994) and likely in companion animals as well.
Using the breath hydrogen test in dogs, Washabuau et al. (1986) found dietary
glucose to be completely absorbed. Levinson and Englert (1970) measured in vivo
transport of D-glucose, D-galactose, and D-xylose in cat jejunum. With increasing
sugar concentration (from 1 to 40 mM/L), there was increased transport of D-glucose
(from 3.2 ± 1.6 to 37.0 ± 8.6 μM·h–1·g–1 wet tissue weight), D-galactose (from 3.0 ±
0.6 to 40.0 ± 10.5 μM·h–1·g–1 wet tissue weight), and D-xylose (from 1.1 ± 0.6 to
19.5 ± 4.8 μM·h–1·g–1 wet tissue weight). Both Kienzle (1994) and Morris et al.
(1977) reported that glucose and galactose in cat foods are nearly 100 percent
absorbable. Galactitol was found in the urine of cats fed a diet containing 39 percent
galactose (Kienzle, l989).
In humans, glucose is the main metabolite of carbohydrate digestion that enters
intermediary metabolism (Jequier, 1994) and is disposed of by direct oxidation or
utilization in various tissues (Flatt, 1988), including glycogen synthesis in the liver
and muscles (Ebiner et al., 1979) and lipid synthesis (Flatt et al., 1985). Glucose
provides energy and supplies carbon skeletons for biosynthesis of other compounds in
the dog as well (Hilton, 1990). As in humans, there is probably an obligatory
requirement for glucose in organs such as the brain of the dog. In the absence of


===== PDF PAGE 118 =====
117
dietary glucose, dogs synthesize glucose from amino acids and glycerol by way of
gluconeogenesis (Belo et al., 1976; Romsos et al., 1976).
The fact that cats are in a constant state of gluconeogenesis (Kienzle, 1993b,c)
implies that glucose is important for normal metabolism in the feline species.
However, they do not appear to utilize carbohydrates as rapidly as do dogs. Cats have
comparatively longer blood glucose elimination times (Mansfield et al., 1986;
Kienzle, 1994). Furthermore, Kienzle (1994) observed galactosemia and galactosuria
in healthy adult cats fed diets containing 39 percent galactose (dry matter [DM]
basis).
Sugar alcohols are absorbed via passive diffusion in the human small intestine
(Finley and Leveille, 1996) and, therefore, are absorbed to a much lesser extent than
their monosaccharide counterparts. Sorbitol is 50 percent absorbed, while mannitol
and xylitol are approximately 25 percent absorbed (Finley and Leveille, 1996). Dogs
fed diets containing 20 percent sorbitol or xylitol grew similarly to dogs fed diets
containing 20 percent sucrose. However, dogs fed diets containing 20 percent sorbose
lost weight (Keller, 1980). Unabsorbed sugar alcohols are fermented by colonic
microflora. No data are available on the specific utilization of sugar alcohols by
companion animals.
Factors Affecting Digestibility, Absorption, and Utilization
Digestibility or absorption of monosaccharides is influenced by carbohydrate
source and fraction (Bach-Knudsen and Hansen, 1991), processing conditions
(Marsman et al., 1997), interactions of monosaccharides with other dietary
components, and physiological state of the animal.
Quantities of monosaccharides in companion animal diets also influence their
digestibility or absorption. Levinson and Englert (1970) determined that increasing
concentrations of monosaccharides infused into the cat small intestine resulted in
increasing rates of absorption. However, Buddington et al. (1991) reported that cats
are unable to upregulate intestinal glucose or fructose transporter activity in response
to changes in dietary carbohydrate level. Presumably, very high doses of
monosaccharides may exceed the absorptive capacity of the small intestine. This is
especially true for xylose, which is absorbed via passive diffusion, and is poorly
absorbed by dogs (Washabau et al., 1986). These unabsorbed monosaccharides would
be available for fermentation in the large intestine. As a result of colonic
fermentation, total tract digestibilities of monosaccharides by the dog are always
close to 100 percent. However, even acute doses of 0.5 g glucose·kg BW–1 resulted in
negligible breath hydrogen gas production in dogs (Washabau et al., 1986),
suggesting efficient glucose absorption.
Glucose utilization may be impacted by diet macronutrient composition. Belo et
al. (1976) found that dogs fed 62 percent carbohydrate-25 percent protein diets
exhibited higher rates of glucose utilization (131 g·d–1) per dog than those consuming


===== PDF PAGE 119 =====
118
a 27 percent carbohydrate-46 percent protein diet (84 g·d–1 per dog). This closely
matched the amount of carbohydrate consumed per dog (137 g·d–1 for the former
group and 56 g·d–1 for the latter group). Dogs consuming carbohydrate-free diets
exhibited the lowest rates (60 to 80 g·d–1 per dog) of glucose utilization. This
suggests that dogs can alter their metabolic fuel sources depending on nutrient
availability but possess a certain minimal metabolic requirement for glucose,
regardless of diet composition. Cats likely have lower rates of glucose utilization,
since they have lower levels of glucokinase activity, a hepatic enzyme that in other
species is adaptive to diet and blood glucose levels (Ballard, 1965). Drochner and
Muller-Schlosser (1980) and Kienzle (1989) reported glucosuria in cats consuming a
25 percent glucose diet. Thus, even though cats may absorb dietary carbohydrates
well, the rate of utilization of the resulting glucose likely is much less efficient.
Nutritive Value
The nutritive value of monosaccharides in dog diets is a product of digestibility,
absorption rate, and quantity present. Dietary monosaccharides are oxidized to
provide tissue energy. The heat of combustion (gross energy) of glucose is 3.75
kcal·g–1 (15.7 kJ·g–1) (Jequier, 1994). One mole of glucose is anaerobically
metabolized through the glycolytic pathway to 2 moles of adenosine triphosphate
(ATP). However, complete aerobic oxidation of 1 mole of glucose yields 38 moles of
ATP in humans. Since dogs and cats utilize similar metabolic pathways to humans,
similar energy values likely exist. Sugar alcohols have much lower energy values than
monosaccharides. Sorbitol contains 1.80 to 3.30 kcal·g–1 (7.53 to 13.81 kJ·g–1) of
metabolizable energy, while mannitol provides approximately 1.60 kcal·g–1 (6.70
kJ·g–1) and xylitol contains approximately 2.40 kcal·g–1 (10.05 kJ·g–1) metabolizable
energy (Finley and Leveille, 1996).
Physicochemical Effects
Table 4-1 summarizes information available on physicochemical and physiological
effects of the four carbohydrate groups, as well as health-related characteristics that
may be attributed to them as a result of their consumption by dogs and cats. Each is
discussed briefly in subsequent sections.
Osmotic Effects
Monosaccharides increase osmolality more than disaccharides such as lactose, and
their presence in high concentrations may result in diarrhea in newborn animals
(Debraekeleer, 1998). Unabsorbed monosaccharides induce fluid secretion into the
small intestinal lumen via osmosis. This, in combination with the rapid colonic


===== PDF PAGE 120 =====
119
fermentation of unabsorbed sugars, results in reduced transit time (Washabau et al.,
1986). Although monosaccharides have a more potent influence on osmosis, osmotic
effects of disaccharides are more commonly observed under practical conditions
because of their ability to escape digestion and absorption in the small intestine. For
diets containing lactose and sucrose, higher water content has been observed in the
chyme of the small and large intestine, as well as in feces (Kienzle, l989; Meyer et al.,
1989). In addition, Meyer et al. (1989) described a higher ileocecal water flow.
Physiological Effects
Effects on Food Intake, Transit Time, and Fecal Excretion
Few data are available evaluating the effects of absorbable carbohydrates on food
intake. Kienzle et al. (1993c) reported that acceptance of meat-based diets
supplemented with 38.7 percent glucose was similar to the carbohydrate-free control
diet. However, the 38.7 percent galactose diet resulted in only one-third the food
intake compared to the glucose diet. Similarly, Morris et al. (1977) reported that
meat-based cat diets supplemented with glucose (7:1 w/w) were consumed at a level
similar to the basal meat-based diet.
In the cat, Kienzle (1993c) found that dietary disaccharides altered fecal pH, but
fecal pH was unaffected by dietary glucose (7.15), galactose (6.96), or a
carbohydrate-free diet (7.22), and that dietary sugars altered fecal concentrations
(millimoles per kilogram of feces, wet weight) of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs)
(124 ± 35, n = 11, for a 38.7 percent galactose diet; 95 ± 27, n = 9, for a 38.7 percent
glucose diet; 307 ± 139, n = 20, for a carbohydrate-free diet containing 21.8 percent
fish oil). Furthermore, fecal dry matter percentage was increased in cats consuming
glucose- or galactose-containing diets compared to those consuming a carbohydrate-
free diet (61.4 and 60.7 vs. 52.5 percent fecal dry matter for glucose, galactose, and
carbohydrate-free diets, respectively).
TABLE 4-1 Summary of Physicochemical, Physiological, and Health-Related Effects
of Absorbable, Digestible, Fermentable, and Nonfermentable Carbohydrates in Dog
and Cat Nutrition


===== PDF PAGE 121 =====
120
Abbreviations used: ✓  = published information available; NI = no information available.
Effects on Reproductive Performance
The need for carbohydrates in pregnant and lactating bitches appears to depend on
the protein concentration in the diet. Romsos et al. (1981) reported that a
carbohydrate-free diet resulted in a smaller litter size in beagles than when bitches
were fed a diet containing corn starch. In the carbohydrate-free diet, 26 percent of the
calories came from protein and 74 percent from fat. Kienzle et al. (1985) fed
carbohydrate-free diets with different concentrations of protein to pregnant and
lactating bitches. In bitches fed the high-protein, carbohydrate-free diet (42 percent of
calories from protein), litter size, birth weight, and puppy survival rate were
comparable to those when bitches were fed a carbohydrate-containing control diet. In
contrast, in bitches fed the low-protein, carbohydrate-free diet (20 percent of calories
from protein), a reduction in birth weight (30 to 40 percent) and an increase in
perinatal mortality rate (75 percent) were observed, which was more severe than was
reported in the study of Romsos et al. (1981). These data indicate that, although
pregnant and lactating bitches do not require a dietary source of carbohydrate, they
have increased protein requirements when fed a carbohydrate-free diet.
Effects in Geriatric Nutrition


===== PDF PAGE 122 =====
121
Although the terms “old,” “senior,” and “geriatric” often are used interchangeably,
they do have distinct definitions. The term “senior” refers to the functionality of an
animal. An animal is considered to be senior when it decreases activity, gains weight,
and develops other age-related physical and behavioral changes (Markham and
Hodgkins, 1989). Conversely, the term “geriatric” refers to the chronological age of
the animal. Generally, giant- and large-breed animals are considered geriatric at 5
years of age, whereas medium- or small-breed dogs and all cats are not considered
geriatric until 7 or more years of age (Markham and Hodgkins, 1989).
Geriatric nutrition of dogs and cats should aim at prolonging the length and quality
of life and delaying the onset of geriatric dysfunction and disease states (Burkholder,
1999). With increasing age, intestinal transit slows and basal metabolism also
decreases (Barrette, 1990). Decreasing organ reserves, alterations in enzyme activity,
impaired circulation, and lowered rate of absorption and excretion of nutrients are
other manifestations of gastrointestinal dysfunction. Prolonged gastric emptying times
also can occur as a result of decreased intestinal blood flow (Mosier, 1989). The
decrease in physical activity and metabolism of aging dogs and cats (Mosier, 1989)
results in a reduction of about 20 percent in maintenance energy requirements
compared to young adult animals (Harper, 1998), along with a decreased glucose
tolerance (Sheffy and Williams, 1981; Mosier, 1989). The age-related decline in
glucose tolerance appears to result from tissue unresponsiveness to insulin (Strasser et
al., 1993). Regardless of diet, old dogs require a longer period for blood glucose
concentrations to attain baseline than do young dogs (Mosier, 1989; Sheffy et al.,
1985).
Adult maintenance diets for dogs contain 10 to 13.4 g per 100 kcal ME (37 to 53
percent of kilocalories per day from carbohydrate), whereas senior dog diets have
11.8 to 17.6 g per 100 kcal ME from carbohydrate, or 29 to 62 percent of kilocalories
from carbohydrates (Burkholder, 1999). Conversely, adult and maintenance diets for
cats contain 4.5 to 10.9 g per 100 kcal ME from carbohydrate (16 to 37 percent of
kilocalories), whereas senior cat diets have 6.4 to 11.3 g per 100 kcal ME from
carbohydrate, or 22 to 40 percent of total energy from carbohydrates (Burkholder,
1999).
There is a lack of scientific agreement on how aging affects glucose tolerance in
companion animals. Strasser et al. (1993) found that old dogs have increased plasma
glucose concentrations (97.00 ± 2.32 mg·dL–1) as opposed to young dogs (91.13 ±
2.39 mg·dL–1), and a decreased glucose tolerance as indicated by reduced glucose
clearance rates (–1.92 ± 0.54 mg·L–1·min–1) compared to young dogs (–2.94 ± 0.36
mg·L–1·min–1). On the contrary, Fukuda et al. (1989) found no age-related change in
plasma glucose concentrations of beagle dogs. Lowseth et al. (1990) reported no
significant changes in blood glucose concentrations in beagle dogs aged 3 to 14 years,
with the exception of significantly reduced blood glucose concentrations in 12-year-
old beagles. Sheffy et al. (1985) concluded that the ability of 10- to 12-year-old dogs
to utilize nutrients was no different from that of young adult dogs.


===== PDF PAGE 123 =====
122
Health-Related Characteristics
Glycemic Response
Absorbed carbohydrates result in physiological responses that depend on the rate
of glucose entry into intermediary metabolism and are central in the concept of the
glycemic index of foods (Jenkins et al., 1981). If glucose entry into the bloodstream
exceeds its removal, a postprandial rise in plasma glucose concentration ensues. The
normal range of plasma glucose in dogs and cats is 70 to 120 mg·dL–1 (Swenson,
1989).
Dietary glucose results in a large increase in blood sugar level (glycemic index =
140), whereas fructose, which is metabolized without insulin, results in little increase
(glycemic index = 30) in humans (Jenkins et al., 1981). Zentek et al. (1998) found
that dogs tolerated a total parenteral nutrition (TPN) formula in which glucose
provided 62.3 percent of the total dietary energy. However, they recommended
intensive monitoring of glucose in dogs with disturbed glucose homeostasis.
DIGESTIBLE CARBOHYDRATES (DISACCHARIDES,
CERTAIN OLIGOSACCHARIDES, AND NONSTRUCTURAL
POLYSACCHARIDES)
Presence in Foodstuffs
Table 13-1 lists carbohydrate fraction concentrations in plant ingredients
commonly used in the preparation of dog and cat foods. Lactose, maltose, and sucrose
are the common disaccharides present in dog and cat foods. The major natural sources
of oligosaccharides in dog and cat foods are cereals, legumes, and other plant
ingredients.
Cereals, legumes, other plant foodstuffs, and plant byproducts used in formulating
dog and cat foods have different starch contents (Table 4-2). Foods low in starch (e.g.,
corn gluten feed, 190 g·kg–1 DM) generally contain more fiber or non-starch
polysaccharides, whereas starch-rich foods (corn starch, 630 g·kg–1 DM) generally
contain less fiber.
Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization
Disaccharides are degraded to their monomers (e.g., lactose to glucose and
galactose; sucrose to glucose and fructose; maltose to two glucose units) before
absorption. The jejunum is the main site of disaccharide digestion. Hore and Messer
(l968) found that maltase, sucrase, and lactase activities were present in the small
intestine of both cat and dog, although activities found in the dog were only 21, 31,


===== PDF PAGE 124 =====
123
and 37 percent, respectively, of those found in the cat. Specific activity of sucrase in
the small intestinal mucosa of milk-fed puppies was 16 U·g–1 protein, similar to that
of adult dogs fed carbohydrate-free diets (30 U·g–1 protein). However, sucrase
activity was higher in adult dogs if the diet contained soy (38 U·g–1 protein), lactose
(59 U·g–1 protein), and sucrose (66 U·g–1 protein) (Kienzle, 1988). In cats, sucrase
activity does not differ between kittens and adult cats (15 vs. 17 U·g–1 protein,
respectively) even when carbohydrates are included in the diet (Kienzle, 1993d).
Maltase activity follows a similar pattern with regard to species and age, but overall
activity is higher than that of sucrase (Kienzle, 1988, 1993d). Lactase activity is
highest in weanling puppies and kittens, and decreases as the animal matures
(Kienzle, 1988, 1993d). This decrease can occur rapidly. Lactase activity was highest
in the intestine of young dogs (5 days old) and decreased to levels found in adults by
29 to 61 days of life (Welsh and Walker, l965).
TABLE 4-2 Starch Content of Some Starch-Rich Foodstuffs and By-products Used in
Dog and Cat Foods
Product
Starch Content
(g·kg–1 DM)
Barley 500-516
Oats 400
Milocorn (grain sorghum) 620-741
Corn 630-728
Rye 520
Wheat 580-621
Peas 410
Horse beans 350
Pearl barley product (2% crude fiber) 530
Pearl barley product (7.5% crude fiber) 350
Pearl barley product (10.5% crude fiber) 300
Hominy feed 370
Corn bran 260
Rice bran (<3% husks) 270
Rice bran (3-10% husks) 230
Rice 810
Wheat feed flour 500
Wheat middlings 220
Wheat bran 140
Wheat germ meal 280


===== PDF PAGE 125 =====
124
Product
Starch Content
(g·kg–1 DM)
Dried potatoes 650
Dried potato pulp 280
Corn gluten feed 190
SOURCE: Borggreve et al., 1975; Murray et al., 2001.
Kienzle (1993d) reported the presence of two types of lactase in cat intestinal
mucosa, one with a pH optimum of 4 or below. It is likely that this form of lactase is a
lysosomal enzyme that does not take part in lactose digestion (Kienzle, l993d). Welsh
and Walker (1965) found that the optimal pH for lactase activity in the dog was 5.0,
while the optimal pH for sucrase and maltase activities was 6.0.
Kienzle (1993d) found no sucrase or lactase in pancreatic tissue of cats. However,
in the intestinal mucosa, average maltase, isomaltase, and sucrase enzyme activities
tended to increase from the duodenum to the jejunum and ileum (73 ± 45, 111 ± 58,
and 120 ± 58 U of maltase per gram of protein; 31 ± 30, 33 ± 27, and 40 ± 26 U of
isomaltase per gram of protein; 12 ± 12, 18 ± 20, and 23 ± 30 U of sucrase per gram
of protein, respectively), while maximal activity of lactase occurred in the jejunum
(4.9 ± 3.5, 11.4 ± 11.2, and 4.3 ± 3.9 U of lactase per gram of protein). These findings
are in agreement with Hietanen (l973) who also found very low maltase and trehalase
activities in the small intestinal mucosa of the cat compared to that of the rat, mouse,
guinea pig, and rabbit.
α-Amylases are major enzymes involved in degrading the α-1,4-bonds of amylose,
amylopectin, and maltodextrins (Colonna et al., 1992). Starch is cleaved in the
duodenal cavity by secreted pancreatic α-amylase to disaccharides (maltose),
trisaccharides (maltotriose), and branched α-dextrins (Gray, l992). Amylase activity is
higher in dogs than in cats, and dog amylase activity is more sensitive to dietary
levels of starch (Kienzle, 1988, 1993a). Glucose, maltose, and higher
oligosaccharides are the main soluble products of starch digestion (Sreenath, 1992).
Nonresistant starch is completely hydrolyzed in the small intestine and its rate of
digestion is influenced by source (van der Meulen et al., l997).
Although differences due to source exist, ileal and total tract digestibilities of
starch in extruded flour (barley, corn, potato, rice, sorghum, and wheat) diets were all
greater than 99 percent when fed to ileally cannulated dogs (Murray et al., l999). The
digestibility of raw starch is more variable. Ileal and total tract digestibilities of raw
rice or corn starch when fed to ileally cannulated dogs are greater than 90 percent, but
ileal digestibilities of raw tapioca and potato starches are only 65 percent and 0
percent, respectively (Schünemann et al., 1989).
Murray et al. (2001) evaluated the ability of small intestinal bacteria of dogs to
ferment native and extruded cereal grains, potato starch, and flours using an in vitro
model. Average organic matter disappearance was higher for extruded potato starch
and cereal grains and for unextruded flours than for their native counterparts, with the


===== PDF PAGE 126 =====
125
exception of wheat flour. These results demonstrated that in vitro microbial
fermentation of starches by ileal bacteria can be affected by differences in starch
source, fraction, and processed form. These results are supported by Bednar et al.
(2001) who also showed a relationship between processing, which reduced total
dietary fiber and resistant starch concentrations, and increased starch digestibility.
The extent to which carbohydrates are digested by the cat is controversial.
Numerous researchers have reported that the cat has a limited capacity to digest
higher molecular weight carbohydrates (Hore and Messer, 1968; Kienzle,
1993a,b,c,d), but Morris et al. (1977) measured high apparent digestibilities by cats of
dextrin (97.6 percent) and starch (94.2 percent). These values are quite similar to
apparent (total tract) starch digestibility values obtained with extruded grains fed to
dogs (Murray et al., 1999). The highest intestinal mucosal amylase activity in cats
(26.4 ± 29.4 U·g–1 protein) is in the jejunum; amylase activity decreases in the ileum
(16.2 ± 14.0 U·g–1 protein) and colon (13.0 ± 12.2 U·g–1 protein), and is lowest (8.7
± 6.8 U·g–1 protein) in the duodenum (Kienzle, 1993a).
Factors Affecting Digestibility, Absorption, and Utilization
Kienzle (1988) found the activity of the disaccharidases maltase, isomaltase, and
sucrase in intestinal mucosa of puppies to be similar to that of adult dogs on
carbohydrate-free diets. Maltase activity in the small intestine was 164 ± 40, 407 ±
95, and 162 ± 8 U·g–1 protein in 4-week-old milk-fed puppies, 8- to 16-week-old
puppies fed a carbohydrate-rich diet, and 12- to 14-week-old puppies fed a low-
carbohydrate food, respectively. For the same diets and puppy ages as above, small
intestinal isomaltase activity was 50 ± 24, 159 ± 77, and 32 ± 2 U·g–1 protein while
sucrase activity was 16 ± 9, 61 ± 20, and 13 ± 1 U·g–1 protein, respectively.
Similarly, Kienzle (1988) found that enzyme activities in adult dogs increased in
the following order: sucrase > isomaltase > maltase. Jejunal enzyme activities were
high in dogs fed sucrose-containing diets—maltase, 363 ± 23; isomaltase, 119 ± 11;
and sucrase, 66 ± 8 U·g–1 protein, and were low in dogs fed a carbohydrate-free diet
—maltase, 226 ± 120; isomaltase, 80 ± 35; and sucrase, 30 ± 13 U·g–1 protein,
respectively.
Enzymatic hydrolysis of starch in the small intestine depends on the starch
fraction, the quantity in the food, interactions with other food components, and transit
time from mouth to terminal ileum (Englyst et al., 1992a). Extrusion cooking (the
major method of petfood manufacture) promotes depolymerization, decreases
molecular weight, and improves hydrolyzability of starch by digestive enzymes
(Colonna et al., 1992).
Processing improves the digestibility of starch in cat foods. Grinding increased
digestion of wheat starch (from 92 to 97 percent) and corn starch (from 79 to 94
percent) by cats (Morris et al., 1977). Cooking improved corn starch digestibility by
cats from 79 to 88 percent (Morris et al., 1977). Cooked corn starch had an apparent


===== PDF PAGE 127 =====
126
prececal digestibility (72.3 ± 16.7 percent; n = 3) higher than that of raw corn starch
(46.4 ± 36.3 percent; n = 4), which demonstrates the beneficial effects of cooking on
utilization of starch by the cat (Kienzle, 1993b). Murray et al. (2001) found that high-
temperature extrusion of cereal grains (corn, potato, rice, and sorghum) with high
total starch content (>80 percent) increased the percentage of rapidly digestible starch
and decreased the amount of resistant starch.
Starch digestibility is affected not only by processing but also by plant species.
Raw potato and corn starch are poorly digested (19 and 47 percent, respectively)
compared to cooked potato starch and corn starch (84 and 84 percent, respectively)
(Hilton, l990). Kienzle (1993b) also found that raw potato starch had a very low
apparent prececal digestibility (0.5 ± 38.5 percent; n = 4) thought to be due to the
structure of potato starch granules, which do not allow easy access of amylase to the
substrate.
In plants, starch is stored in crystalline intracellular bodies or starch granules
(Englyst et al., l992a). The shape and crystalline structure of these granules can be
one of three types depending on the density and orientation of amylopectin helices of
the starch molecules: A (densely packed in an orthogonal pattern), B (less densely
pack in a hexagonal pattern), or C (containing both patterns). Cereal starch granules
are predominantly A type and are easily degraded by α-amylase and hydrolyzed in the
gastrointestinal tract. B-type starches of tubers (potato) and C-type legume starches
are more resistant to enzymatic hydrolysis (Englyst et al., 1992a).
Susceptibility of starch granules to α-amylase hydrolysis depends on starch source
and starch macromolecular alterations during food processing (Theander and
Westerlund, 1987). Activity inhibitors (proteins and glycoproteins) that reduce the
action of amylase (Wilcox and Whitaker, 1984) influence starch digestion. Using
pigs, Van der Meulen (1997) found higher (1,759 mmol over a 12-hour period) net
portal glucose flux for corn starch than for pea starch (1,265 mmol·12 h–1) and
concluded that corn starch was digested faster than pea starch.
The surface area-to-volume ratio of starch in the solid phase increases during
milling and grinding, which removes parietal (from cotyledons) polysaccharides
(Wuersch et al., 1986) and improves the accessibility of enzymes to starch granules.
Therefore, processes that disrupt cereal and legume grains increase the proportion of
starch that is digestible. Also, heating (>50°C) starch in an excess of water and at
lower moisture conditions with higher temperatures (100 to 150°C) irreversibly
gelatinizes the granular structure of starch and improves its solubilization (Colonna et
al., 1989). Gelatinized starch molecules recrystallize, or retrograde, upon cooling, and
retrograded amylose is poorly digested (Berry, 1986). Factors such as degree of
retrogradation, granular structure, and inaccessibility of starch in food can limit ileal
starch digestibility to less than 100 percent (Annison and Topping, 1994).
Kienzle (1988) found amylase activity in pancreatic tissue of puppies to be lower
(7.1 ± 4.3; 251.5 ± 108.2; 2,098.0 ± 1073; 1,623.0 ± 1431 U·g–1 wet weight at 4, 8,
12 and 16 weeks of age, and 8-10 months of age, respectively) than for dogs more
than 2 years old (4,665.0 ± 781 U·g–1 wet weight). This indicates an age-related


===== PDF PAGE 128 =====
127
ability of the dog to digest starch. In addition, Kienzle (1988) showed that amylase
activity in duodenal chyme of adult dogs depends on diet type (Table 4-3).
Since starch digestibility coefficients for cooked or raw rice, oats, and corn in dog
diets were higher than 90 percent, Kendall and Holme (1982) concluded that dogs
digest cereals and low-fiber cereal by-products efficiently. Washabau et al. (1986)
reported that dogs digested rice flour starch optimally, whereas malabsorption of
wheat and corn flour occurred. Undigested starch and RS enter the colon and are
fermented by hindgut bacteria (Dreher et al., 1984; Washabau et al., 1986).
Kienzle (1993a) measured an average amylase activity of 74.6 ± 42.4 U·g–1 wet
weight in pancreatic tissue of 25 adult cats fed diets with different starch sources (29
to 37 percent starch, DM basis, from raw corn starch, raw potato starch, or cooked
corn starch), and carbohydrate-free diets (two high-fat diets and a high-protein diet).
She found that the amylase activity in chyme from the small intestine of adult cats
depended on diet type and adaptation period. Values ranged from 11.5 ± 5.5 U·g–1
(wet weight) for raw potato starch diets to 53.4 ± 47.3 U·g–1 (wet weight) for the
cooked corn starch diet.
Meyer and Kienzle (1991) found that cats developed diarrhea after intake of 7 g
sucrose·kg–1 of body weight (BW) per day, which is in line with the low intestinal
activity of sucrase (17 ± 23 U·g–1 protein) in cat intestinal mucosa, suggesting a
limited capacity to digest this disaccharide. Legrand-Defretin (1994) concluded that
the cat is unable to cope with high concentrations of dietary carbohydrate. It also may
have no fructokinase (Kienzle, 1994) and may be in a constant state of
gluconeogenesis (Legrand-Defretin, 1994).
TABLE 4-3 Influence of Diet Type on Amylase Activity (U·g–1 wet weight) in
Chyme of Adult Dogs
NOTE: MM + Su = meat meal with sucrose; MM + La = meat meal with lactose; SBM + TaS =
soybean meal with tapioca starch; SBM + Fat = soybean meal with fat.
Source: Kienzle, 1988.
Morris et al. (1977) found that intestinal β-galactosidase activity decreased with
age in kittens (71 to 109 days) but was not affected by addition of sucrose and lactose


===== PDF PAGE 129 =====
128
to an all-meat diet. Kienzle (1993d) also found an age-dependent small intestinal
mucosal activity for maltase, which varied from 66 ± 77 U·g–1 protein in kittens less
than 1 week of age to 102 ± 58 U·g–1 protein in adult cats, and an inverse relationship
of lactase activity to age varying from 96 ± 66 U·g–1 protein in kittens less than 1
week of age to 7 U·g–1 protein in adult cats (Table 4-4).
Nutritive Value
The nutritive value of starch depends on degradation of the starch
macromolecules, amylose and amylopectin, to glucose, which is absorbed and
metabolized to provide energy (Colonna et al., 1992). Therefore, factors that
influence starch digestion also affect its nutritive value. Starch has a heat of
combustion of 4.18 kcal·g–1 (17.5 kJ·g–1), and 1 g starch yields 1.11 g glucose
(Jequier, 1994). While the heat of combustion for different starches may be similar,
starch classification into digestible versus resistant starch suggests different
metabolizable energy (ME) values for different starch fractions. Although the net
energy value of starch has not been determined in companion animal diets, Borggreve
et al. (1975) reported the net energy content of starch in growing pig feed to be 0.34
kcal·g–1 (1.42 kJ·g–1).
Physicochemical Effects
Osmotic Effects
Unabsorbed disaccharides induce fluid secretion into the small intestinal lumen via
osmosis. This, in combination with the rapid colonic fermentation of unabsorbed
sugars, results in reduced transit time (Washabau et al., l986). Kienzle (1993c)
reported that disaccharides altered fecal pH and increased fecal water content in cats.
Similar results were reported for dogs that consumed diets rich in lactose (Meyer et
al., 1989).
Viscosity Properties
Starch granules are not water soluble but hydrate easily in aqueous suspension,
swelling about 10 percent in volume. When an aqueous suspension of granules is
heated, additional swelling occurs (gelatinization) and a viscous suspension is
produced. The suspension forms a gel upon cooling (Lineback, 1999).
TABLE 4-4 Average Activity of Disaccharidases (U·g–1 protein) in Small Intestinal
Mucosa of Cats in Relation to Age


===== PDF PAGE 130 =====
129
a,bDifferent superscripts within a column indicate statistical differences (P < 0.05).
c26 cats, three different parts of the small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, ileum), all diets.
SOURCE: Kienzle 1993d.
Physiological Effects
Effects on Food Intake, Transit Time, and Fecal Excretion
Houpt et al. (l979) reported that both female and male dogs preferred diets
containing sucrose (1 to 20 percent dietary concentration) to a diet containing no
sucrose. In addition, female dogs had a greater (P < 0.05) preference for 1 percent
sucrose-containing diets than did males. No differences between sexes were observed
at higher concentrations. These results are supported by Ferrell (l984) who found that
puppies (2 to 4 months of age) accepted lactose-, fructose-, and sucrose-containing
diets well.
In experiments with pregnant beagle bitches, Romsos et al. (1981) fed two diets,
one containing 44 percent metabolizable energy from carbohydrate (corn starch) and
the other containing 0 percent metabolizable energy from carbohydrate (the primary
energy source was fat). These researchers found that although the gross energy
content of the low-carbohydrate diet was similar to that of the high-carbohydrate diet,
bitches fed the low-carbohydrate diet consumed slightly less energy (154 kcal ME·kg
BW–0.75) than dogs fed the high-carbohydrate diet (171 kcal ME·kg BW–0.75).
Effects on Availability of Other Nutrients
Disaccharides or starch not completely digested by endogenous enzymes may
affect the apparent digestibility of other nutrients in both dogs and cats (Muehlum,
1987). As early as 1914, Ristert reported enhanced calcium absorption due to
inclusion of lactose in cat diets. Beynen et al. (2001) also reported an increase in
apparent calcium and magnesium absorption by healthy dogs fed diets containing
lactulose. However, Kienzle (1994) found no difference in the apparent digestibility
of calcium by cats fed diets containing starch (37 percent raw potato starch, 35
percent raw corn starch, or 29 percent cooked corn starch), 36 percent sucrose, or 28
percent lactose compared to cats fed a carbohydrate-free (high-fat) diet. Cats fed the
diet containing 36 percent sucrose had a higher apparent digestibility of magnesium


===== PDF PAGE 131 =====
130
(52.6 ± 21.2 percent) and phosphorus (61.2 ± 23.2 percent) compared to cats fed the
carbohydrate-free diet (17.8 ± 7.1 and 23.1 ± 9.2 percent, respectively). In this same
study, cats fed the raw corn starch diet had a lower apparent protein digestibility (77.1
± 3.2 percent) compared to cats fed the carbohydrate-free diet (86.9 ± 1.9 percent).
Schultz and Grande (l968) observed no effects of either starch or sucrose
supplementation of a low-fat commercial dog food on serum total cholesterol,
phospholipids, or triglycerides. The authors suggested that the lack of dietary
response may have been related to the low-fat, low-cholesterol dog food used.
Effects on Growth Performance
Inclusion of starch in companion animal diets can impact growth performance. No
differences were detected in body weight gain (40.3 vs. 43.1 g·d–1, respectively) of
growing male dogs fed diets containing either rice (779 g·kg–1) or cassava (700 g·kg–
1) (Kamalu, 1991), although consumption of a 58 percent corn starch diet by 2-
month-old female beagles for 8 months resulted in a significant reduction in weight
gain compared to beagles fed a carbohydrate-free (26 percent lard) diet (Romsos et
al., l976).
Effects on Reproductive Performance
Although lactose is the predominant sugar in bitch milk, it provides a relatively
small amount of the energy in milk. Only 15 percent of the energy in milk from
bitches fed a high-carbohydrate diet and 9 percent of the energy in milk from bitches
fed a carbohydrate-free diet is accounted for by lactose (Romsos et al., l981).
Queen’s milk has a lactose content of about 3 to 4 percent (Adkins et al., 1997;
Dobenecker et al., 1998). Keen et al. (1982) found that the carbohydrate
concentration in queen’s milk remained constant at approximately 4 percent
throughout a 43-day lactation period. Adkins et al. (1997) found a difference in
lactose content of colostrum (29.9 g·L–1) vs. mature milk (39 to 42 g·L–1). Similar
results were reported by Kienzle et al. (1985).
Kittens utilize lactose, but the ability to degrade lactose declines after weaning.
Newborn kittens have high lactase activity values (96 U·g–1 protein) that enable them
to digest lactose efficiently (Kienzle, 1993d). There are no data on the effects of
disaccharides on the reproductive performance of cats during gestation and lactation.
Romsos et al. (1981) fed pregnant beagle bitches diets containing either 0 percent
or 44 percent of metabolizable energy from carbohydrate, 30 percent or 74 percent of
metabolizable energy from fat, and a constant 26 percent of metabolizable energy
from protein. They found that plasma glucose concentrations were similar between
groups except during the week before whelping, when blood glucose concentrations
in bitches fed the carbohydrate-free diets were as low as 15 to 20 mg·dL–1. None of
the bitches on the carbohydrate-containing diet had a significant depression in blood


===== PDF PAGE 132 =====
131
glucose concentration. Blood lactate concentration was 40 percent lower in bitches on
a carbohydrate-free diet than in those on a high-carbohydrate diet, although this
difference between treatments was not statistically significant.
Romsos et al. (1981) found that fewer puppies from bitches on a carbohydrate-free
diet were alive at birth (63 percent) compared to litters from bitches fed the
carbohydrate-containing diet (96 percent). Thirty-five percent of the total puppies
whelped by bitches on a carbohydrate-free diet were alive at 3 days of age, compared
to 93 percent of puppies from bitches on the carbohydrate-containing diet. Romsos et
al. (1981) concluded that pregnant bitches require dietary carbohydrates for optimal
reproductive performance and survivability of pups. In addition, although the protein
intake (10-12 g protein·kg BW–0.75) of pregnant bitches in this experiment exceeded
that recommended (5.7 g protein·kg BW–0.75), the authors concluded that even higher
protein intake may have benefited bitches fed the low-carbohydrate diet by providing
additional glycogenic precursors.
Additional data from Romsos et al. (1981) indicate the requirement for glucose by
pregnant bitches. Bitches fed a carbohydrate-free diet (Romsos et al., 1981) exhibited
ketosis, which is associated with hypoglycemia (Felig and Lynch, 1970). This
occurred in spite of the fact that dogs are relatively resistant to the development of
ketosis (Romsos et al., 1981). Glucose turnover was 20 to 30 percent lower in bitches
fed the carbohydrate-free diet compared to those on a carbohydrate-containing diet
(Romsos et al., 1981). In addition, Romsos et al. (1981) found depressed (20 percent)
body mass of glucose in pregnant bitches fed the carbohydrate-free compared to those
on the carbohydrate-containing diet.
Effects on Weight Control and Nutrition of the Obese Animal
Romsos et al. (1976) fed diets with 0 to 62 percent of energy from carbohydrate
(corn starch) and a constant amount of energy from protein (approximately 23
percent) (isolated soybean protein; lean beef) to female beagle dogs for 8 months.
Dogs fed the high-carbohydrate (62 percent of energy) diet contained less body fat
(21.0 ± 2.1 percent) than dogs on the carbohydrate-free diet (27.1 ± 1.8 percent). In
contrast, Romsos et al. (l978) found that dogs fed a high-fat diet (51, 20, and 29
percent of energy from fat, protein, and carbohydrate, respectively) had increased
body weights compared to dogs fed a high-carbohydrate diet (23, 18, and 59 percent
of energy from fat, protein, and carbohydrate, respectively), although energy intake
by the two groups of dogs was not significantly different. These results may have
implications for obesity management.
Effects on the Geriatric Animal
Dogs and cats become increasingly less able to regulate their blood sugar
concentrations as they age (Sheffy et al., 1985; Mosier, 1989), and this disrupted


===== PDF PAGE 133 =====
132
carbohydrate metabolism at times leads to diabetes. Advanced age generally does not
reduce the apparent digestion coefficients of carbohydrates by dogs. Zimmer (1983)
concluded that there was no advantage to feeding a diet with reduced fiber to the
older dog.
Health-Related Characteristics
Gastrointestinal Tract Health
Incomplete digestion of some disaccharides, as in the case of lactose intolerance,
results in malabsorption of simple carbohydrates and may cause diarrhea, abdominal
pain, and cramps. Holtug et al. (1992) ascribed these symptoms in humans to the
accumulation of carbohydrates in the hindgut in too great a quantity for microbial
fermentation, resulting in osmotic diarrhea. Zentek (1995) found that in vitro
incubation of dog ileal chyme with glucose or galactose resulted in a reduction of pH
to 5.18 and 5.15, respectively. In comparison, incubation with lactose or starch (corn
starch or potato starch) resulted in less severe reductions in pH (5.85, 6.48, and 7.13,
respectively).
Glycemic Response
The rate and extent to which starch is digested and absorbed, and the resulting
glucose and insulin responses, vary considerably depending on starch source and
degree of food processing (Englyst et al., l999). Large variations in postprandial
glucose concentrations and insulin secretory responses to ingestion of different foods
have been observed in dogs (Nguyen et al., l994). For example, Bennett and Coon
(1966) reported that adult dogs fed diets containing 59 percent carbohydrate as
lactose exhibited a flattened blood glucose curve compared to dogs fed a glucose-
containing diet. They surmised that lactose was poorly absorbed by dogs. It is
possible that foods resulting in a lower glycemic response would be beneficial for
diabetic or obese dogs. Nguyen et al. (1998) concluded that the amount of starch
consumed is the major determinant of the glycemic response of adult healthy dogs.
Once among-subject variation is accounted for, 70 percent of the remaining variance
in glycemic response is explained by differences in rapidly available glucose content
of test meals (Englyst et al., l999).
Postprandial hyperglycemia and insulin secretion depend on the ratio of amylose
to amylopectin consumed (Nguyen et al., l998). Nguyen et al. (1998) found a positive
linear correlation between the starch content of foods and postprandial plasma
glucose and insulin response curves, demonstrating that the amount of starch
consumed from different complete diets also is a major determinant of the glycemic
response of healthy adult dogs.


===== PDF PAGE 134 =====
133
Sunvold and Bouchard (1998) fed adult dogs dry, extruded diets formulated to
contain 30 percent starch from either corn, wheat, barley, rice, or sorghum. Dogs
consuming the rice diet exhibited the highest (P < 0.05) average blood glucose values
and greatest (P < 0.05) area-under-the-curve postprandial glucose values, as well as
the highest (P < 0.05) blood insulin values and the greatest (P < 0.05) area-under-the-
curve insulin values. Diets containing sorghum resulted in the lowest blood glucose
and area-under-the-curve glucose values (P < 0.05), while diets containing barley
resulted in the lowest blood insulin and area-under-the-curve insulin values (P <
0.05). Diets containing corn or wheat resulted in intermediate blood glucose and
insulin values, as well as intermediate glucose and area-under-the-curve insulin
values. These data indicate that the source of starch influences the postprandial
glucose and insulin responses in adult dogs.
FERMENTABLE CARBOHYDRATES (LACTOSE, CERTAIN
OLIGOSACCHARIDES, DIETARY FIBERS [DF], AND
RESISTANT STARCH [RS])
Presence in Foodstuffs
Fermentable carbohydrates include certain oligosaccharides, fermentable fibers,
RS, and under certain conditions, lactose. These carbohydrates resist hydrolytic
digestion in the small intestine but are fermented by microbes indigenous to the lower
gastrointestinal tract of dogs and cats.
The major sources of fermentable carbohydrates in dog and cat foods are cereals,
legumes, and other plant ingredients. Table 13-1 presents NSP concentrations of
cereal grains and legumes and plant by-products used in dog and cat foods.
Oligosaccharides can be produced synthetically (Crittenden and Playne, 1996) in
addition to being found in nature. Wheat, barley, and other dietary ingredients of plant
origin are important sources of fructooligosaccharides and inulin (Monsan and Paul,
1995; Campbell et al., 1997). Soybean is a major source of raffinose, stachyose, and
verbascose. Table 4-5 lists the nondigestible oligosaccharides that may be found in
dog and cat foods.
Hemicelluloses are a type of DF well fermented by nonruminants (Keys and
DeBarthe, 1974; Stanogias and Pearce, 1985). Hemicelluloses (quantified as
arabinoxylans) are commonly found in wheat and rye (4 to 8 percent), while β-
glucans are more prominent in oats and barley (2 to 9 percent; Prosky and DeVries,
1992; Cho et al., 1997). Pectin-rich foods include apple pomace, citrus peel, and
sugarbeet pulp (Prosky and DeVries, 1992).
TABLE 4-5 Molecular Structure and Chemical Linkages of Oligosaccharides with
Bifidogenic Effects in Dog and Cat Foodsa


===== PDF PAGE 135 =====
134
Name
Molecular
Structureb Linkages Between
MonomersName
Molecular
Structureb Linkages Between
Monomers
Lactosucrose Ga-Gu-Fr β
Raffinose Ga-Gu-Fr α-1,6
Galactooligosaccharides (Ga)n-Gu β-1,4, β-1,6
Fructooligosaccharides (Fr)n-Gu β-1,2
Soybean oligosaccharides (Ga)n-Gu-Fr α-1,6
Isomaltooligosaccharides (Gu)n α-1,6
Xylooligosaccharides (Xy)n β-1,4
Palatinoseoligosaccharides (Gu-Fr)n α-1,6
Glycosylsucrose (Gu)n-Fr α-1,4
Maltooligosaccharides (Gu)n α-1,4
Cyclodextrins (Gu)n α-1,4 cyclic
structure
Gentiooligosaccharides (Gu)n β-1,6
NOTE: Fr = fructose; Ga = galactose; Gu = glucose; Xy = xylose.
aSako et al., 1999.
Resistant starch is a variable component of virtually all starchy food ingredients
and is higher in foods of larger particle size, in undercooked ingredients, in cooked
and cooled foods, and in chemically modified starches (Brown et al., 2001). Common
sources of RS include high-amylose corn starch, raw potato starch, most legumes, and
commercially available, chemically modified starches.
In addition to dietary fiber naturally present in food ingredients, pure fiber sources
can be added to petfoods. Carrageenann and other gums (added at <5 percent of diet
dry matter) are used as gelling agents in canned dog and cat foods (Brown, 1989) and,
therefore, are a source of fermentable carbohydrates.
Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization
Dietary fibers, RS, and most oligosaccharides resist hydrolysis by endogenous
enzymes. They pass through the small intestine undigested and are fermented by
microbes in the colon to gases (carbon dioxide, hydrogen, methane) that are excreted
and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) (mainly acetate, propionate, butyrate) and lactate
(Roediger, 1980; Roberfroid, 1993) are produced. Short-chain fatty acids are absorbed
through the intestinal wall primarily via passive diffusion (Argenzio, 1989; Fleming
et al., 1991). Herschel et al. (1981) determined that SCFAs and Na+ were absorbed


===== PDF PAGE 136 =====
135
rapidly, and at the same rate, in the colonic mucosa of dogs, and reported SCFAs to be
the major anions accountable for osmotic absorption of water from the colon.
Portal concentrations of SCFAs exceed arterial concentrations, indicating that
most SCFAs are cleared by the liver (Rerat et al., 1987). However, some acetate is
found in the systemic blood circulation (Buckley and Williamson, 1997) and can be
oxidized by muscle tissue for energy (Pouteau et al., 1998a,b; Remesy et al., 1992).
Propionate is taken up by the liver from the portal blood and is converted to succinyl
coenzyme A. Butyrate, on the other hand, is oxidized by the intestinal mucosa and
serves as the preferred energy substrate of colonocytes (Roediger, 1980; Firmansyah
et al., 1989; Drackley and Beaulieu, 1998). Lactate is a precursor for gluconeogenesis
(Delzenne and Roberfroid, 1994).
The carnivorous nature of cats, their relatively small colon (<20 percent of the
total gastrointestinal tract length), and their lack of a functional cecum suggest that
they may not utilize DF as extensively as do other nonruminants (Kienzle, 1993d;
Maskell and Johnson, 1993). However, Kienzle (1993b) noted reduced pH values of
large bowel digesta and feces after cats ingested raw corn starch. This effect was
ameliorated by the administration of oral antibiotics. This undoubtedly is a result of
SCFAs from increased microbial hindgut fermentation of starch.
Sunvold et al. (1995b) fed domestic, short-hair cats diets containing 0 or 9.5
percent supplemental TDF from either beet pulp (a moderately fermentable fiber),
cellulose (a relatively unfermentable fiber), a 3:1 cellulose:gum arabic mixture, or
two different blends of fibers (35 percent citrus pectin + 30 percent locust bean gum +
20 percent carob bean gum + 15 percent guar gum or 60 percent beet pulp + 22
percent rice bran + 10 percent citrus pectin + 8 percent carob bean gum). While cats
consuming the 0 percent supplemental fiber diet (control; 1.7 percent TDF) had the
highest (P < 0.05) apparent dry matter and organic matter digestibility values, TDF
digestibility was increased (P < 0.05) by consumption of beet pulp (38.2 percent) or
the two fiber blends (50.6 and 41.1 percent, respectively) compared to the control diet
(5.3 percent). Total dietary fiber digestibilities of cellulose (8.9 percent) and the 3:1
cellulose:gum arabic mixture (5.7 percent) were similar to the control diet.
Sunvold et al. (1995b,c) showed that using either dog or cat fecal inoculum, guar
gum, and citrus pectin were highly fermentable in vitro in comparison to pure
cellulose, while oat fiber, xanthan gum, gum talha, gum karaya, gum arabic, carob
bean gum, locust bean gum, rice bran, and beet pulp were intermediate. Furthermore,
incubation with fecal inoculum from cats resulted in a greater (P < 0.05) quantity of
SCFAs and a higher (P < 0.05) proportion of acetate from in vitro fermentation with
either cellulose, beet pulp, citrus pulp, or citrus pectin when compared to fecal
inoculum from dogs, pigs, cattle, horses, or humans (Sunvold et al., 1995d). These
data refute the assumption that cats are incapable of significant fiber fermentability.
Dogs are capable of utilizing plant sources of fermentable carbohydrates.
Lignocellulose, hemicelluloses, and cellulose were reported to have digestibility
values of approximately 33, 47, and 18 percent, respectively (Visek and Robertson,
1973). Kendall and Holme (1982) evaluated the digestibility of 21 plant materials by


===== PDF PAGE 137 =====
136
dogs. They reported that ground wheat, barley meal, flaked corn, oat meal, and wheat
germ meal were well digested (72 to 96 percent apparent energy digestibility
coefficients). Wheat feed, distiller’s by-products, walnut meal, almond meal, dried
molasses sugar beet pulp, and locust bean meal were less digestible, probably because
of their higher fiber content (39 to 59 percent apparent energy digestibility
coefficients).
Swanson et al. (2001) investigated alternative fiber sources using an in vitro
fermentation technique to evaluate their usefulness for incorporation in companion
animal diets. On a dry matter (DM) basis, substrates contained between 55 and 86
percent TDF and had varying ratios of insoluble to soluble fiber. Accordingly,
fermentation characteristics also varied greatly. Apple pomace, carrot pomace, and
flaxseed had the greatest fermentability, while grape pomace, pistachio, and a blend
of fruits (peach, almond, nectarine, and plum) were poorly fermented. Pea hulls and
tomato pomace had an intermediate level of fermentability.
Silvio et al. (2000) fed dogs diets containing 10 percent DF from cellulose (100
percent), pectin (100 percent), or a mixture of the two (66 percent cellulose + 33
percent pectin or 66 percent pectin + 33 percent cellulose). They reported that total
tract digestibility by dogs increased linearly for dry matter (from 81.3 to 88.3
percent), ADF (from 48.8 to 94.1 percent), and TDF (from 37.7 to 69.0 percent) with
increases in dietary pectin concentration. They attributed the increased digestibility to
the extensive fermentation of pectin compared to the slow fermentation of cellulose.
Lactose is a unique disaccharide in that it is not rapidly digested by adult animals.
Its digestibility depends on the animal’s individual enzymatic capacity (Muehlum et
al., 1989). Unabsorbed lactose is readily fermented by colonic microflora (Cummings
et al., 1997; Rerat, 1978). When Bennett and Coon (1966) fed adult dogs diets
containing 59 percent carbohydrate from either sucrose or lactose, they observed
diarrhea and a flattened blood glucose curve after feeding the lactose-containing diet.
They surmised that lactose was poorly digested by dogs.
Factors Affecting Digestibility, Absorption, and Utilization
The molecular structures and linkages between monomeric subunits influence the
resistance of fermentable carbohydrates to hydrolytic digestion (Roberfroid, 1993).
Furthermore, the presence of small intestinal bacteria suggests that certain
nondigestible carbohydrates may be fermented anterior to the colon (Willard et al.,
1994; Sparkes et al., 1998a). Such fermentation is likely to be influenced by the type
of carbohydrate and quantity consumed.
The source and solubility of fermentable carbohydrates are the most important
factors in determining fermentability. Soluble fibers generally are better energy
substrates (due to their increased rate and extent of fermentation) for gastrointestinal
microorganisms than insoluble fibers. Zentek (1996) compared the effects of cellulose
(insoluble fiber source) and pectin and guar (soluble fiber sources) at 10 percent of
the diet on apparent nutrient digestibility by dogs. He determined the apparent


===== PDF PAGE 138 =====
137
digestibility of dry matter for the cellulose diet (80.3 ± 2.0 percent) to be lower (P ≤
0.05) than for the pectin (89.6 ± 1.7 percent) or guar (88.1 ± 1.3 percent) diets.
Similarly, ADF digestibility was lower (P ≤ 0.05) for the cellulose-containing diet
(20.2 ± 11.8 percent) than for diets containing guar (47.1 ± 6.3 percent) or pectin
(75.0 ± 5.9 percent). These results are supported by Muir et al. (1996) who fed dogs
diets containing varying ratios of pectin (soluble fiber; SF) and cellulose (insoluble
fiber) (2.5 percent cellulose and 5 percent pectin [low-cellulose mixture; LCM], 5
percent cellulose and 2.5 percent pectin [high-cellulose mixture; HCM], or 7.5
percent cellulose [CEL]). Increasing dietary cellulose concentrations linearly
decreased (P < 0.05) TDF digestibility values (LCM, 47.8 percent; HCM, 5.0 percent;
SF, –12.5 percent).
Fahey et al. (1990a) reported that dogs fed meat-based diets containing 12.5
percent TDF from primarily insoluble fiber sources (beet pulp, tomato pomace,
peanut hulls, wheat bran, and alkaline hydrogen peroxide-treated wheat straw)
digested between 29 and 37 percent TDF. In a subsequent study, Fahey and coworkers
(1992) determined that dogs fed diets containing 7.5 percent beet pulp had higher (P
< 0.05) TDF digestibility values than dogs fed diets containing 7.5 percent oat fiber
(61.1 vs. 39.7 percent, respectively).
The concentration of fermentable carbohydrates in the diet also influences their
utilization. Fahey et al. (1990b) demonstrated that increasing concentrations of beet
pulp (0, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, or 12.5 percent) in a meat-based dog diet linearly (P < 0.05)
decreased dry matter and organic matter digestibility coefficients. Total dietary fiber
digestibility exhibited a cubic response (P < 0.05), with the 2.5 percent beet pulp diet
having the highest TDF digestibility (63 percent) and the 10 percent beet pulp diet
having the lowest TDF digestibility (49 percent). Conversely, Allen et al. (1981)
found no effect on apparent dry matter or starch digestibilities for adult dogs fed corn-
based diets supplemented with distillers dried grains with solubles (DDGS) at 0, 4, 6,
or 8 percent of the diet. However, higher concentrations of DDGS (15.7 percent)
depressed the apparent digestibility of DM (79.9 percent) compared to 0 or 8.9
percent DDGS (84.8 and 83.6 percent, respectively).
Normal extrusion conditions reduce the average molecular weight of native
starches and may facilitate redistribution of the ratio of insoluble to soluble fiber
(Camire et al., 1990). Camire et al. (1990) reported that extrusion reduced the
molecular weight of amylopectin and attributed this change to the shear force
generated by the extruder. Using an in vitro canine model, Bednar et al. (2001)
determined that the processing of cereal into flour markedly reduced RS and TDF
concentrations, increased solubility of the substrates, and decreased SCFA production
(because more disappeared during ileal in vitro digestion, decreasing the quantity of
potentially fermentable substrate). Depending on type, RS is moderately to
extensively fermented (Murray et al., 1998; Brown et al., 2001). Apparent
carbohydrate digestibility was lower (P < 0.05) for diets containing RS from high-
amylose corn (42.6 percent) compared to a V-complex-type (fat-carbohydrate
complex) RS (76.1 percent) (Murray et al., 1998).


===== PDF PAGE 139 =====
138
Nutritive Value
Non-starch polysaccharides are fermented to SCFAs by hindgut microflora, and
these are used as an energy source by dogs (Banta et al., 1979). Von Engelhardt et al.
(1989) reported that 95 to 99 percent of SCFAs produced in the hindgut of mammals
are absorbed. Stevens et al. (1980) reported that the amount of SCFA absorbed per
kilogram body weight varied among species and was 7.5 mmol·d–1 in the canine large
intestine.
Due to energy losses (gases and heat) during fermentation and production of ATP
from oxidation of SCFAs, digestible energy from NSPs is not all used for metabolism
by the host animal (Wisker et al., 1997) and is, therefore, less efficiently used than
energy from glucose oxidation. Depending on the extent of fermentation, NSPs have
an energy value of 0 to 2.4 kcal·g–1 (0 to 10.08 kJ·g–1) (Schneeman, 1994; Molis et
al., 1996). Roberfroid et al. (1993) estimated the caloric value of a fructosyl unit from
oligofructose to be between 1 and 1.5 kcal·g–1 (4.18 and 6.28 kJ·g–1), which is
approximately 30 to 40 percent of the value of a digested fructose molecule. The
energy value of RS has been estimated at 2 kcal·g–1 (8.37 kJ·g–1) (Brown et al.,
2001). In the absence of any specific literature on the caloric value of fermentable
carbohydrates for companion animals, the values listed above are presumed to be
applicable to the dog and cat. It is probable that the dog and cat would gain similar
amounts of digestible energy from NSPs, since in vitro fermentation of fibrous
substrates resulted in similar amounts of SCFA production when either dog or cat
fecal inoculum was used (Sunvold et al., 1995a).
There are no data on digestible energy or energy values from NSP fermentation
specifically related to dog or cat microflora. Significant differences among species in
the efficiency of NSP energy utilization (Wisker et al., 1997) make it important to
generate data on net energy values of NSP for dog and cat foods. Herschel et al.
(1981) concluded that although the total energetic contribution of SCFAs absorbed in
the dog colon (approximately 7 percent) may be relatively small, their absorption is
significant to normal colonic absorptive processes.
The digestible energy of 21 plant materials used in dog diets was estimated to
range from 72 to 96 percent for whole ground wheat, barley meal, flaked maize,
refined flour, vital gluten, feeding oat meal, and wheat germ meal (Kendall and
Holme, 1982). However, low apparent digestible energy values of 34 to 62 percent
were measured for other plant-based feed ingredients (wheat feed, walnut meal,
almond meal, dried molasses sugar beet pulp, locust bean meal, and two distillers by-
products). The wide variation in digestible energy content of these plant materials can
be attributed to the higher fiber content of the less digestible products.
Physicochemical Effects
Osmotic Effects


===== PDF PAGE 140 =====
139
Because SCFAs are weak anions, they may exert osmotic pressure in the colon and
increase fecal water content (Schneeman, 1987; Roberfroid, 1993). However, the
rapid and extensive absorption of SCFAs (Herschel et al., 1981; Von Engelhardt et al.,
1989) likely compensates for any net osmotic action. In fact, SCFAs are thought to be
responsible for promoting water reabsorption from the colonic lumen in both dogs
and humans (Herschel et al., 1981; Bowling et al., 1993). Therefore, the osmotic and
reabsorptive properties of SCFAs appear to be dose dependent. At extremely low or
high concentrations, SCFAs can be expected to increase fecal water content.
However, moderate SCFA concentrations generally decrease fecal water content.
Water-Binding Capacity
Viscous polysaccharides (e.g., pectins, gums) generally possess a high water-
holding capacity. Resistant starches have a low capacity for water absorption
compared to other fibers. As the water-binding capacity of a fiber increases, it
becomes more susceptible to microbial degradation (Schneeman, 1987).
Bourquin et al. (1993) reported that the water-holding capacity of in vitro-
fermented fiber residues was greatest for carboxymethylcellulose and gum arabic and
lowest for oat and soy fibers. Similarly, the disappearance of organic matter was
greatest for gum arabic and lowest for oat fiber. Although carboxymethylcellulose
had a high water-holding capacity, it was not extensively fermented by human fecal
bacteria. McBurney (1991) measured the in vitro water-holding capacity (a predictor
of the stool bulking effect of a fiber) of purified fiber sources (psyllium hydrocolloid,
yeast cell walls, and mixed fiber (pea fiber, oat fiber, sugar beet fiber). Water-holding
capacity of unfermented substrates differed (P < 0.05), with psyllium having the
greatest capacity.
Using a diet containing 10 percent (as-fed basis) of cellulose, guar gum, and pectin
for dogs fed 18 to 21 g DM·kg BW–1·d–1, Zentek (1996) reported that the soluble
fibers (pectin, guar gum) had higher hydratability than the less soluble cellulose and
suggested that DF exerted effects on intestinal digestive physiology that depended on
chemical composition and the amount of DF present.
Viscosity Properties
Certain NSPs thicken when mixed with liquid, creating a viscous solution. Viscous
NSPs include gums, pectins, and β-glucans. Oat and barley β-glucans and pectin form
gels in aqueous solutions (Meyer and Tungland, 2001; Wood, 2001). Increased
viscosity is associated with prolonged gastric emptying, increased intestinal transit
time, and slowed nutrient absorption (Schneeman, 1987).
Murray et al. (1999) tested an induced viscosity fiber (IVF; alginate with added
calcium and citrate) in an enteral diet fed to ileal-cannulated dogs. Compared to a
control enteral formula, dogs fed the IVF diet had similar nutrient digestibilities at the
ileum but higher (P < 0.05) total tract digestibilities of dry matter, organic matter, and


===== PDF PAGE 141 =====
140
crude protein. Apparent fat digestibility was lower (P < 0.05) for dogs consuming the
IVF diet, while apparent starch digestibility was similar between the two groups.
Mean serum glucose response was lower (P < 0.05) for dogs consuming the IVF
formula compared to the controls. The authors attributed these differences to a
probable increase in viscosity of the digesta, thereby reducing starch digestion and/or
glucose absorption.
Physiological Effects
Effects on Food Intake, Transit Time, and Fecal Excretion
Table 4-6 summarizes the effects of nondigestible carbohydrates on intestinal
transit time and fecal excretion. The diverse physical properties of fermentable
carbohydrates, as well as their concentration in the diet, determine their specific
physiological effects. These effects embody food intake, intestinal transit time,
nutrient absorption, fecal volume, and intestinal microflora (Kritchevsky, 1988;
Zentek, 1996). Carbohydrates entering the large bowel (DF, RS, and nondigestible
oligosaccharides) exert effects through either their physical presence, their
fermentation products (i.e., SCFAs), or modification of the colonic microflora.
Inclusion of dietary fiber in dog foods may impact food intake. Proposed causes of
depressed intake include decreased palatability of the diet, digestive upset (i.e.,
flatulence, diarrhea), and mechanical satiation.
In tests with dry dog foods containing either 1.5 percent crude fiber and 387 kcal
per 100 g (1,619 kJ per 100 g) or 12.3 percent crude fiber and 278 kcal per 100 g
(1,163 kJ per 100 g) (as-fed basis), dogs consumed less (P < 0.05) metabolizable
energy from the higher-fiber diet although the weight of food consumed by each
group was similar (Jewell and Toll, 1996). These results were supported by Jewell et
al. (2000) who determined that dogs fed a diet containing 19.4 percent crude fiber and
235 kcal per 100 g (983 kJ per 100 g) (as-fed basis) consumed a similar quantity of
food, but 27 percent fewer calories (P < 0.05), than dogs consuming a 1.7 percent
crude fiber, 365 kcal per 100 g (1,527 kJ per 100 g) diet (as-fed basis). In a
subsequent experiment using dry diets containing either 1.5 percent crude fiber and
365 kcal per 100 g (1,527 kJ per 100 g) or 20.6 percent crude fiber and 235 kcal per
100 g (983 kJ per 100 g) (as-fed basis), Jewell and Toll (1996) again reported that
dogs fed the higher-fiber diet voluntarily consumed less metabolizable energy (P <
0.05). However, in this study, dogs also consumed a lower quantity (P < 0.05) of the
diet containing 20.6 percent crude fiber as compared to the low-fiber diet.
Supplementation of a low-energy diet with moderate concentrations of insoluble fiber
had no effect on satiety when fed to dogs at an energy intake corresponding to
allowances for weight reduction, indicating that mechanical satiation is not a
mechanism by which insoluble fiber decreases food intake (Butterwick et al., 1994).


===== PDF PAGE 142 =====
141
TABLE 4-6 Characteristics of Selected Fibers and Their Effects on Intestinal Transit
Time and Fecal Characteristics of Dogs and/or Catsa
aAbbreviations used: Y = yes; N = no; ↑ = increase; ↓ = decrease; ↔ = no effect; NI = no
information available.
bThe dietary fiber characteristics of fermentability and viscosity were chosen based on the
recommendations of the Institute of Medicine (2001) as meaningful alternative labels for the
terms soluble and insoluble fiber.
Fermentable carbohydrates also affect intestinal transit time. In general, diets with
high concentrations of viscous polysaccharides result in more bulk in the digesta,
prolonged gastric emptying, and slowed transit through the small intestine of humans
and dogs (Eastwood, 1992; Lewis et al., 1994).
Russell and Bass (1985) reported that the time to empty one-half of the stomach
contents was longer (P < 0.05) in dogs dosed with either 3 percent psyllium or 1.5
percent guar gum solutions compared to dogs consuming 0 to 1.0 percent psyllium or
guar gum solutions. The authors concluded that gastric emptying slowed as fiber
content and viscosity of the meal increased.
Dogs fed a diet containing 4.8 percent pectin (highly fermentable fiber) exhibited
a lower (P < 0.05) ingestion-to-excretion time than dogs fed a control (starch) diet
(Lewis et al., 1994). Inclusion (4.4 percent) of either corn fiber or coarse or fine
cellulose (lowly fermentable fibers) in the diet did not significantly alter
gastrointestinal transit time in dogs (Lewis et al., 1994). Fahey et al. (1990b) also
reported that increasing the dietary concentrations of beet pulp (a moderately
fermentable fiber) was associated with a linear decrease (P < 0.06) in mean retention
time of digesta.
The most established effect of dietary fiber is its impact on stool weight
(Cummings et al., 1992). Fecal dry matter consists primarily of bacterial cells (40 to
55 percent; Cummings and Macfarlane, 1991), with the remainder being composed of
unfermented dietary fiber and undigested compounds (Kritchevsky, 1988; Tetens et
al., 1996). Fahey et al. (1990a) reported that dogs fed diets containing approximately
12.5 percent TDF from either beet pulp, tomato pomace, peanut hulls, or wheat bran
excreted a greater (P < 0.05) quantity of wet feces than dogs consuming a fiber-free


===== PDF PAGE 143 =====
142
control diet. Fecal dry matter content was reduced (P < 0.05) only for dogs
consuming beet pulp.
Zentek (1996) measured increased fecal moisture percentage for dogs consuming
pectin (70.5 ± 3.6 percent) or guar gum (74.1 ± 2.9 percent) compared to cellulose
(61.1 ± 1.8 percent). The author noted that feces from dogs fed pectin or guar gum
were softer than those from dogs fed cellulose and concluded that dogs tolerate
soluble complex carbohydrates such as pectin and guar gum only in limited amounts
before negative influences on fecal quality occur.
Sunvold et al. (1995b) reported increased (P < 0.05) fecal output and fecal
moisture for cats fed a diet containing 9.5 percent supplemental fiber from beet pulp
(34 g wet feces per day, 75 percent fecal moisture) compared to cats consuming a
control diet with no added fiber (12 g·d–1, 58 percent). However, a diet with 9.5
percent added fiber from cellulose did not affect wet fecal output (18 g·d–1) or fecal
moisture (53 percent). Fecal consistency and number of defecations per day were not
significantly affected by either of these fibers. In the same study, cats consuming a
diet with 9.5 percent added fiber from a blend of rapidly fermentable fibers (35
percent citrus pectin, 30 percent locust bean gum, 20 percent carob bean gum, and 15
percent guar gum) exhibited watery stools, increased wet fecal output, increased fecal
moisture content, and increased number of defecations per day (P < 0.05). The
divergent effects of these three diets can be attributed to the fermentation
characteristics of their respective fibers: citrus pectin and gums are rapidly
fermentable, beet pulp is moderately fermentable, and cellulose is poorly fermented.
Diez et al. (1998) studied the effects of supplementing dog diets (20.8 percent beef
minced meat, 69.2 percent flaked corn, 6.7 percent corn oil, and 3.3 percent vitamin-
mineral mix, DM basis) with 7 percent inulin, guar gum, or sugar beet fiber (SBF).
Compared to the other dietary fibers, inulin resulted in the numerically lowest (P >
0.05) increase in wet fecal volume (65.6, 96.0, 119.1, and 128.4 g·d–1 for control,
inulin, guar gum, and SBF, respectively), indicating a mild bulking effect. Inulin did
not increase dry fecal output but did increase (P < 0.05) fecal moisture from 65.6
percent (control) to 73.0 percent. Guar gum supplementation resulted in 76.5 percent
fecal moisture (greater [P < 0.05] than the control and inulin treatments), while SBF
supplementation resulted in 75.3 percent fecal moisture, which was not different from
inulin or guar gum treatments.
Effects on Availability of Other Nutrients
Table 4-7 summarizes the effects of nondigestible carbohydrates on nutrient
digestibility. Dietary fibers that form gels in the gastrointestinal tract act as a steric
hindrance to enzymatic hydrolysis (Colonna et al., 1992). Other mechanisms by
which fermentable carbohydrates may impact nutrient availability include altering
transit time and forming complexes between the hydroxyl groups of fibrous
compounds and other nutrients (Fernandez and Phillips, 1982; Eastwood, 1992).


===== PDF PAGE 144 =====
143
TABLE 4-7 Characteristics of Selected Fibers and Their Effects on Nutrient
Digestibility by Dogs and/or Catsa
aAbbreviations used: Y = yes; N = no; ↑ = increase; ↓ = decrease; ↔ = no effect; NI = no
information available.
bThe dietary fiber characteristics of fermentability and viscosity were chosen based on the
recommendations of the Institute of Medicine (2001) as meaningful alternative labels for the
terms soluble and insoluble fiber.
cCrude protein.
dGlucooligosaccharides.
eFructooligosaccharides.
fXylooligosaccharides.
gMannanoligosaccharides.
Silvio et al. (2000) reported that replacing dietary cellulose with pectin in dog diets
containing 10 percent added fiber (DM basis) led to an increase (P < 0.05) in total
tract dry matter and gross energy digestibility, but a decrease (P < 0.05) in crude
protein digestibility. However, since ileal crude protein digestibility was unaffected by
fiber type, the authors concluded that the decrease in apparent crude protein
digestibility likely was due to increased fermentation in the colon, leading to
increased microbial nitrogen in the feces. These results are supported by Flickinger et
al. (2000) who determined that 6 percent dietary inclusion of two different types of
glucooligosaccharides reduced (P < 0.05) total tract, but not ileal, crude protein
digestibility by adult dogs.
Harmon et al. (1999) demonstrated that addition of 7.5 percent cellulose, beet
pulp, or soy fiber to canned dog diets reduced (P < 0.05) total tract dry matter
digestibility and tended (P = 0.09) to reduce crude protein digestibility compared to a
diet with no added fiber. Notably, dogs fed the cellulose diet had a greater total tract
crude protein digestibility than did dogs consuming either the beet pulp or the soy
fiber diets. Ileal digestibilities of dry matter and crude protein were similar for dogs in
all groups. The authors noted that fiber fermentability can impact estimates of nutrient


===== PDF PAGE 145 =====
144
digestibility, and increased microbial fermentation inversely affects crude protein
digestibility as a result of greater microbial protein excretion in feces.
Incorporation of a blend of fructooligosaccharides (rapidly fermentable) and sugar
beet fiber (moderately fermentable) in a 4:1 ratio at 0, 5, or 10 percent (DM basis)
into a corn-based diet did not significantly alter the digestibility of dry matter, organic
matter, or ether extract by healthy dogs (Diez et al., 1997a). Apparent crude protein
digestibility was lower (P < 0.05) for dogs consuming the highest concentration of
the fiber blend. Similarly, Strickling et al. (2000) reported no significant effects of
dietary supplementation (0.5 percent) of fructooligosaccharides,
xylooligosaccharides, or mannanoligosaccharides on ileal or total tract digestibility of
dry matter or crude protein. However, Zentek et al. (2002) reported decreased
digestibility of dry matter, crude protein, and nitrogen-free extract for dogs fed diets
supplemented with 5.9 percent mannanoligosaccharides. The difference between the
findings of these two studies likely is due to the level of supplementation employed
(0.5 vs. 5.9 percent).
Zuo et al. (1996) investigated the effects of galactooligosaccharides (raffinose,
stachyose, and verbascose) on nutrient digestion by dogs. Low-oligosaccharide
soybean meal did not improve nutrient digestibility. Furthermore, total tract digestion
of all oligosaccharides was >100 percent, leading the authors to conclude that low-
oligosaccharide soybean meal is digested similarly to conventional soybean meal.
These data are supported by Muehlum et al. (1989) who reported total tract
digestibility values of 97 to 99 percent for dogs. Furthermore, Zentek et al. (2002)
reported no reduction in nutrient digestibility for dogs fed 5.9 percent dietary
transgalactooligosaccharides.
Sunvold et al. (1995b) found that supplementing cat diets with 9.5 percent TDF
from either beet pulp or cellulose reduced (P < 0.05) the apparent digestibility of dry
matter and organic matter compared to diets with no added fiber. Contrary to the dog
studies presented above, neither fiber type significantly affected total tract crude
protein digestibility. However, when a combination of citrus pectin, locust bean gum,
carob bean gum, and guar gum (9.5 percent added fiber) was fed, dry matter, organic
matter, crude protein, and lipid digestibilities were depressed markedly (P < 0.05).
Sunvold et al. (1995b) attributed this to the rapid fermentability of the fiber
combination, possibly causing small intestinal bacterial overgrowth or resulting in
increased luminal viscosity and interference with the action of pancreatic enzymes
and bile acids.
Fernandez and Phillips (1982) found that when the upper small intestine of healthy
dogs was perfused with a solution containing iron (ferrous sulfate) and psyllium, they
exhibited reduced (P < 0.05) iron uptake (32.0 μg·h–1) as compared to iron alone
(71.9 μg·h–1). Furthermore, iron + pectin reduced (P < 0.05) iron uptake (28.5 μg·h–
1) as compared to iron alone. They speculated that the hydroxyl groups of the fibers
were responsible for binding iron by forming iron-lignin complexes that impaired
intestinal absorption of iron.


===== PDF PAGE 146 =====
145
Effects on Growth Performance
Dietary fiber reduces energy intake through nutrient dilution, and high levels of
incorporation may decrease growth rate of dogs (Delorme et al., 1985). Five-month-
old puppies fed diets containing 14.1 percent DDGS exhibited lower (P < 0.05) total
tract digestibility of dry matter and gross energy compared to control animals
consuming no DDGS (Allen et al., 1981). Although daily nitrogen excretion was
greater (P < 0.05) for dogs consuming DDGS, nitrogen retention was similar between
groups. This suggests that, even at a young age, dogs have the intestinal microbiota
necessary to efficiently ferment the fiber in DDGS.
Monsan and Paul (1995) reported that the addition of small quantities (<1 percent)
of nondigestible oligosaccharides to animal feeds can result in improvements in
weight gain, feed intake, and health status of rabbits, pigs, and poultry. However,
these effects varied greatly depending on the type of oligosaccharide, animal species
and age, and rearing conditions. No data are available on how the growth of puppies
or kittens specifically is affected by fermentable carbohydrates.
Effects on Reproductive Performance
Few data are available on the effects of fermentable carbohydrates on the
reproductive performance of companion animals. Visek and Robertson (1973) fed
gestating bitches a corn-soybean meal diet supplemented with 0, 20, or 40 percent
dried brewer’s grain (DBG), resulting in dietary NDF concentrations of 23.8, 29.2,
and 31.9 percent, respectively. Numbers of puppies per litter and puppies born dead
were similar among treatments. More females required assistance at whelping in the
group consuming 20 percent DBG. This effect was not duplicated in the 40 percent
DBG group, and the authors concluded that DBG is a satisfactory ingredient for
gestating dogs.
Effects on Weight Control and Nutrition of the Obese Animal
Obesity is estimated to occur in 25 percent of dogs and cats in westernized
societies (Burkholder and Toll, 2000). The incidence of obesity increases with age
and is more frequent in neutered than intact animals (Sloth, 1992). In addition, cats
are affected by obesity at an earlier age than are dogs (Scarlett et al., 1994). Both
insoluble and soluble fibers have been used as a means of restricting energy intake for
weight control in companion animal nutrition. Fiber dilutes the caloric content of food
and offers an attractive solution for preventing weight gain in dogs and cats (Jewell et
al., 2000). Dietary fiber was thought to encourage proper weight maintenance through
regulation of appetite (Butterwick and Markwell, 1997; Jackson et al., 1997), simple
mechanical interference and other physical effects, and complex hormonal
interactions (Rossner, 1992) determined by the nature and type of fiber (Blundell and


===== PDF PAGE 147 =====
146
Burley, 1987). Pappas et al. (1989) demonstrated that gastric distension was a
physiologic satiety signal in dogs.
Jewell and Toll (1996) found that a dog diet containing 21 percent crude fiber (as-
fed basis) depressed dry matter and caloric intake compared to a diet containing <2
percent crude fiber. A subsequent study determined that dogs fed high-fiber food
(19.4 percent crude fiber, as-fed basis) decreased energy consumption by 27 percent
(implying satiety) and lost more than five times the fat mass of dogs fed low-fiber
(1.7 percent, as-fed basis) food (Jewell et al., 2000). Dogs on the high-fiber diet lost
0.77 percent body fat per week, which falls in the accepted range of weight loss for
dogs and cats on a weight loss program (0.5 to 2 percent of initial body weight per
week) (Burkholder and Toll, 1999).
Jackson et al. (1997) fed low-fiber (14 percent TDF; 12 percent insoluble and 1.2
percent soluble fiber, as-fed basis) and high-fiber (29 percent TDF; 26 percent
insoluble and 2.3 percent soluble fiber, as-fed basis) diets to dogs (n = 30) and found
no differences in total daily food intake. However, total daily calorie intake was lower
(P < 0.05) for dogs fed the high-fiber diet compared to dogs on the low-fiber diet
(65.3 vs. 79.4 kcal·kg BW–1·d–1, respectively). Conversely, Butterwick et al. (1994)
did not detect any beneficial effects on food intake of dogs by including soluble or
insoluble fiber in diets, since dogs had similar energy intakes.
Effects on the Geriatric Animal
The process of aging results in a progressive decline in organ function and
adaptability. For example, dogs and cats become increasingly less able to regulate
blood sugar concentrations as they age (Mosier, 1989; Sheffy et al., 1985). Banks
(1981) found that older dogs required a longer period for postprandial blood glucose
concentrations to return to baseline values compared to young dogs. Fiber
fermentation results in a blunted postprandial glucose response and enhances the
action of insulin in the blood. While the underlying mechanism for this action is not
fully understood, dietary fiber may nonetheless be useful in the management of dogs
and cats diagnosed with mild hyperglycemia (Nelson, 1989).
Health-Related Characteristics
Gastrointestinal Tract Health
Table 4-8 summarizes the effects of nondigestible carbohydrates on
gastrointestinal tract health. Sunvold (1996) reviewed the importance of carbohydrate
fermentation in the colon for gut health in companion animals. Fermentative end
products are dependent on the chemical composition of the starting substrate (Vickers
et al., 2001). For example, fermentation of RS, fructooligosaccharides, or inulin
results in an increased proportion of butyrate (Topping, 1999; Vickers et al., 2001).


===== PDF PAGE 148 =====
147
Kripke et al. (1989) postulated a trophic effect of SCFAs on intestinal function and
metabolism, especially for butyrate. Butyrate is the preferred energy substrate for
canine colonocytes (Drackley and Beaulieu, 1998) and likely plays a key role in
normal colonocyte function, including cell proliferation, differentiation, and
metabolism (Sakata, 1987; Scheppach et al., 1992).
Massimino et al. (1998) reported that dogs had longer (P < 0.05) jejunal villi
(1,517 vs. 1,343 μm) and a higher (P < 0.05) uptake affinity (Vmax) of D-glucose
(182 vs. 133 nmol·mg–1 tissue per minute) when they were fed an isonitrogenous,
isoenergetic diet containing 9.5 percent (as-fed basis) of a blend of fermentable fibers
(6 percent sugar beet pulp, 2 percent gum arabic, and 1.5 percent
fructooligosaccharide) than when they were fed a diet with a poorly fermented fiber
(7 percent wood cellulose, as-fed basis). The putative beneficial health effects of fiber
on the small intestine were attributed to the anaerobic fermentation of fiber in the
lower gut resulting in SCFA production. Short-chain fatty acids are thought to
mediate beneficial trophic effects on intestinal tissues proximal to the site of
fermentation via hormonal or other signaling pathways (Sakata, 1987; Tappenden et
al., 1997), although the exact mechanisms are poorly understood.
Hallman et al. (1995) supplemented dog diets with approximately 8.7 percent TDF
supplied by divergent fiber sources (cellulose, beet pulp, or pectin + gum arabic) and
found that dogs fed cellulose had lighter-weight (P < 0.05) colons (6.09 g·kg BW–1)
than did those fed beet pulp (6.52 g·kg BW–1) or pectin + gum arabic (6.62 g·kg BW–
1). Dogs fed cellulose also had the highest incidence of colonic crypt mucus
distension (71.4 percent) and cryptitis (41.4 percent) when compared to those fed beet
pulp (46.7 percent and 20.0 percent, respectively) or pectin + gum arabic (53.3
percent and 20.0 percent, respectively). Further, dogs fed pectin + gum arabic had the
highest incidence of exfoliation (46.7 percent) compared to those fed beet pulp (6.7
percent) or cellulose (7.1 percent). These data support the role of SCFAs from
fermentable fibers in supporting normal colonic growth and metabolism.
In a study conducted by Buddington et al. (1999), adult beagles were fed diets
containing 36 g·kg–1 cellulose or 42 g·kg–1 beet pulp + 10 g·kg–1
fructooligosaccharides as the fiber sources. Dogs fed beet pulp +
fructooligosaccharides had longer (372 vs. 306 cm; P < 0.05) and heavier (430 vs.
318 g wet weight; P < 0.05) small intestines, with greater absorptive surface area
(1,582 vs. 1,240 cm2; P < 0.05). Furthermore, beet pulp + fructooligosaccharide
supplementation increased (P < 0.05) proximal small intestinal total glucose uptake
capacity by approximately 133 percent and numerically enhanced total proline uptake
(10 percent). The researchers suggested that the increased small intestine size,
absorptive area, and absorptive capacity of dogs consuming fructooligosaccharides
was partially due to colonic fermentation of the fibers to SCFA and subsequent
signaling of beneficial trophic mechanisms proximally in the intestine.


===== PDF PAGE 149 =====
148
TABLE 4-8 Characteristics of Selected Carbohydrates and Their Effects on
Gastrointestinal Health Characteristics of Dogs and/or Catsa
aAbbreviations used: Y = yes; N = no; ↑ = increase; ↓ = decrease; ↔ = no effect; NI = no
information available.
bThe dietary fiber characteristics of fermentability and viscosity were chosen based on the
recommendations of the Institute of Medicine (2001) as meaningful alternative labels for the
terms soluble and insoluble fiber.
cStructure denotes changes in intestinal muscosa thickness, villus height, or crypt depth.
dFunction denotes changes in intestinal nutrient transporters or nutrient absorption.
eFructooligosaccharides.
One possible mechanism underlying SCFA-mediated colonocyte proliferation is
increased colonic blood flow. Howard et al. (1999) fed dogs meat-based diets
supplemented with either cellulose (60 g·kg–1), fructooligosaccharides (15 g·kg–1),
beet pulp (60 g·kg–1), or a fiber blend (60 g·kg–1 beet pulp, 20 g·kg–1 gum talha, 15
g·kg–1 fructooligosaccharides) to investigate the effect of SCFAs produced from fiber
fermentation on intestinal blood flow. Dogs fed fructooligosaccharides had greater (P
< 0.10) blood flow via the left colic artery than dogs fed cellulose or beet pulp.
Additionally, fructooligosaccharide supplementation resulted in decreased cell
proliferation and increased cell differentiation as assessed by shorter (P < 0.10)
leading edges and smaller (P < 0.05) proliferation zones in the proximal colon. This
suggests a role for fructooligosaccharides in maintaining normal colonic mucosal
development, since neoplastic colonocytes exhibit rapid proliferation and decreased
differentiation.
Intestinal transit time, which is affected by fermentable carbohydrates, plays a
major role in determining the composition of colonic microflora. Cummings and
Macfarlane (1991) reported that increased transit time is correlated with increased
concentrations of protein fermentation end products (e.g., ammonia, phenols). Gibson
and Roberfroid (1995) stated that most intestinal bacteria can be divided into species
that exert detrimental effects (staphylococci, clostridia, and veillonella) or species that
benefit the host (bifidobacteria, lactobacilli, and eubacteria). Diarrhea, infection,
digesta putrefaction, and promotion of carcinogenesis are examples of pathogenic
effects, while defense against pathogens, prevention of infection, and reduction of


===== PDF PAGE 150 =====
149
serum cholesterol are examples of beneficial effects (Gibson and Wang, 1994; Araya-
Kojima et al., 1995).
The most adaptable method for altering colonic bacterial populations is the type of
fermentative substrate supplied. Prebiotics are nondigestible oligosaccharides that
selectively stimulate the growth and/or activity of a limited number of resident
colonic beneficial bacteria (Gibson and Roberfroid, 1995). Prebiotic oligosaccharides
include fructooligosaccharides, mannanoligosaccharides, glucooligosaccharides,
galactooligosaccharides, and xylooligosaccharides.
Terada et al. (1992) supplemented 1.5 g lactosucrose per day to dogs, which
increased (P < 0.05) the number of bifidobacteria and decreased (P < 0.05) the
concentration of Clostridium perfringens in fecal samples. Lactosucrose
supplementation also reduced (P < 0.05) concentrations of putrefactive compounds in
feces (ammonia, phenol, indole, skatole, and ethylphenol). Similarly, Terada et al.
(1993) reported that supplementing cats with 175 mg lactosucrose per day decreased
(P < 0.05) fecal concentrations of Clostridium perfringens but increased (P < 0.05)
concentrations of lactobacilli and incidence (P < 0.05) of bifidobacteria, indicating an
improvement in colonic microflora.
Sparkes and coworkers (1998b) reported positive effects of fructooligosaccharide
supplementation on cats. Dietary fructooligosaccharides (0.75 percent, DM basis)
increased fecal concentrations of lactobacilli (164-fold; P < 0.05) and bacteroides
(13.2-fold; P < 0.05) and decreased fecal concentrations of Escherichia coli (75
percent; P < 0.05) and Clostridium perfringens (98 percent; P = 0.08). However,
when fructooligosaccharides, xylooligosaccharides, or mannanoligosaccharides were
supplemented (0.5 percent of the diet) to dogs, fecal concentrations of Escherichia
coli and lactobacilli were unaffected (Strickling et al., 2000). Clostridium perfringens
tended (P = 0.09) to be lower in the feces of dogs supplemented with
mannanoligosaccharides.
In addition to improving colonic microbial populations, prebiotic oligosaccharides
also may positively affect small intestinal bacteria. Feeding 1 percent
fructooligosaccharides (as-fed basis) decreased (P < 0.05) the number of aerobic and
facultative anaerobic bacteria in the small intestine of German shepherd dogs
susceptible to small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (Willard et al., 1994). However,
0.75 percent dietary fructooligosaccharides (DM basis) did not affect duodenal
bacteria concentrations in healthy cats (Sparkes et al., 1998a).
Glycemic Control
In the small intestine, viscous NSPs act as a barrier to the release of nutrients and
slow their absorption (Eastwood, 1992; Annison and Topping, 1994), which is
important in the control of glucose and insulin metabolism (Crapo et al., 1976).
Blunted glycemia may occur by prolonging gastric emptying and intestinal transit
time, slowing starch hydrolysis, and delaying glucose absorption (Nelson, 1989;
Graham et al., 1994).


===== PDF PAGE 151 =====
150
Nguyen et al. (1994) reported that diet composition influences postprandial
glycemia. One dry diet (D: 3.3 percent crude fiber, 48.4 percent nitrogen-free extract)
and three canned diets (C1: 2.4 percent crude fiber and 15.5 percent nitrogen-free
extract; C2: 2.1 percent crude fiber and 47.1 percent nitrogen-free extract; C3: 10.8
percent crude fiber and 35.2 percent nitrogen-free extract) were tested in healthy adult
dogs. After a single meal, only diet C3 resulted in a reduced (P < 0.05) area under the
insulin curve and a lower (P <0.05) relative insulinemic index. No relationship was
found between crude fiber content of the diet and blood glucose or insulin. This was
attributed to the inability of the crude fiber analysis to recover soluble dietary fibers,
which can play a key role in mediating postprandial hyperglycemia. A subsequent
study by Nguyen et al. (1998) measured normal canine glycemic and insulinemic
responses to 20 experimental foods (15 dry and five canned) with a wide range of
concentrations (DM basis) of TDF (3.2 to 39.1 percent), insoluble fiber (3.2 to 32.3
percent), soluble fiber (0.4 to 4.7 percent), and starch (0.4 to 52.7 percent). A linear
correlation between starch content of the foods and glucose response area was shown.
However, variations in total, soluble, or insoluble fiber did not account for the
responses observed.
Diez et al. (1998) fed dogs corn-based diets containing 7 percent (DM basis) sugar
beet fiber, guar gum, or inulin. Both guar gum and SBF delayed the onset of
hyperglycemia (40 minutes) as compared to inulin or the control (20 minutes).
Consumption of guar resulted in higher (P < 0.05) fasting glucose concentrations than
any other treatment. Insulin concentrations were not significantly affected by diet.
Massimino et al. (1998) studied the effects of chronic ingestion of fermentable DF
(60 g·kg–1 sugar beet pulp + 20 g·kg–1 gum arabic + 15 g·kg–1
fructooligosaccharides, as-fed basis) vs. nonfermentable DF (70 g·kg–1 cellulose, as-
fed basis). Dogs consuming the fermentable fiber blend had greater glucagon-like-
peptide (GLP-1) concentrations in mucosal scrapings (41 ± 4 pmol GLP vs. 25 ± 4
pmol [P < 0.05]) for dogs on the low fermentable fiber source (wood cellulose) diet.
GLP-1 acts as an insulin secretogogue in humans. However, DF type did not
influence dog blood glucose concentrations at any time (0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, or 120
minutes) after an oral glucose load of 2 g·kg BW–1.The authors concluded that
ingestion of fermentable fibers can improve glucose homeostasis.
Immune Function
Field et al. (1999) studied the effects of fermentable fiber on the immune system
of dogs. Meat-based diets were supplemented with either 60 g·kg–1 sugar beet pulp +
20 g·kg–1 gum arabic + 15 g·kg–1 fructooligosaccharides, as-fed basis (fermentable
mixture) or 70 g·kg–1 cellulose (as-fed basis; nonfermentable mixture). As compared
to the nonfermentable diet, fermentable fiber decreased (P < 0.05) the proportion of
Ig+ cells and increased the CD4/CD8 (T-helper:cytotoxic T cell) ratio in the
peripheral blood. An increase in this ratio is associated with an alteration in mitogen


===== PDF PAGE 152 =====
151
response. Accordingly, in this study, fermentable fibers variably increased mitogen
response in lymphoid organs but did not affect mitogen responses in peripheral blood.
The authors concluded that fermentable fibers alter gut-associated lymphoid tissue
but do not greatly impact type and function of immune cells in peripheral blood.
Mannanoligosaccharides may alter the immune system. Mannanoligosaccharides
are thought to act by preventing the binding of lectins to gut epithelial cells and have
been reported to increase neutrophil activity in dogs (O’Carra, 1997). Adult dogs
were fed dry diets containing 0, 0.1, 0.2, or 0.4 percent mannanoligosaccharides but
did not exhibit detectable systemic immune responses, since there was no change in
plasma IgG concentration. In 6-week-old puppies fed diets supplemented with 0.2
percent mannanoligosaccharides, the number of circulating neutrophils in the blood
were numerically increased in response to vaccination (28 percent greater on day 14
and 60 percent greater on day 21) as compared to vaccinated puppies receiving a
control diet (O’Carra, 1997). Again, there was no significant effect on plasma IgG
measurements. Swanson et al. (2002a) supplemented adult dogs with 2 g
mannanoligosaccharides, fructooligosaccharides, or mannanoligosaccharides and
fructooligosaccharides each day. After 14 days of consumption,
mannanoligosaccharide-supplemented dogs exhibited enhanced systematic immune
status as evidenced by increased number of lymphocytes as percentage of white blood
cells and a numerical increase in serum immumoglobulin IgA. Dogs supplemented
with mannanoligosaccharides plus fructooligosaccharides demonstrated increased
IgA concentrations in ileal effluent, indicating enhanced local immunity. In a follow-
up study, dogs fed 2 g fructooligosaccharides plus 1 g mannanoligosaccharides each
day did not exhibit increased IgA concentrations in blood, ileal effluent, or feces
(Swanson et al., 2002b), suggesting that the immune-enhancing ability of
mannanoligosaccharides is dependent, in part, on age and health status of the animal.
POORLY FERMENTABLE CARBOHYDRATES
(CELLULOSE AND WHEAT BRAN)
Presence in Foodstuffs
Cellulose is the most abundant plant polysaccharide on earth. It accounts for 15 to
30 percent of the dry mass of all primary plant cell walls (McNeil et al., l984) and is
found in most plants such as vegetables, sugar beets, and various brans (Meyer and
Tungland, 2001). In terms of nonfermentable carbohydrates specifically, wheat bran is
composed of 37.3 percent cellulose, 55.2 percent hemicelluloses, and 10.5 percent
lignin (Meuser et al., l985).
Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization


===== PDF PAGE 153 =====
152
Morris et al. (1977) reported a negative apparent cellulose digestibility coefficient
(–0.007 percent) for cats fed a meat-based diet supplemented with cellulose. In this
experiment, diets were prepared by mixing cellulose with the basal diet (1:7 w/w).
Sunvold et al. (1995b,c) measured fiber digestibility by dogs and cats by using an in
vitro fermentation system. Isolated wood cellulose organic matter disappearance was
the lowest (<10 percent) of all fibers tested with either dog or cat fecal inoculum.
These results were confirmed in vivo when TDF digestibility by dogs fed 7.5 percent
supplemental TDF as isolated wood cellulose was lower (11 percent) than TDF
digestibility for dogs fed beet pulp, citrus pulp, or a combination (80 percent beet
pulp, 10 percent citrus pectin, 10 percent guar gum) blend (29.0, 43.0, and 51.3
percent, respectively). Increasing cellulose from 0 to 20 percent in cat diets also
reduced organic matter digestibility from 86 to 68 percent (Brown, l989).
Compared to a meat-based control diet containing no supplemental fiber,
consumption by dogs of a diet containing 12.8 percent wheat bran resulted in a
reduction in dry matter (87.6 vs. 83.1 percent), organic matter (90.2 vs. 86.3 percent),
and NDF (57.2 vs. 41.6 percent) digestibilities (Fahey et al., 1990a). Stock-Damge et
al. (1983) demonstrated that diets supplemented with 5 g·d–1 of wheat bran fed to
dogs increased the flow rate of pancreatic secretions, bicarbonate, and amylase into
the intestinal tract. Stock-Damge et al. (1983, 1984) also found that secretin
administered intravenously altered the flow rate of pancreatic secretions and
suggested that wheat bran may have altered the flow rate of pancreatic secretions by
altering endogenous secretions of secretin.
Factors Affecting Digestibility, Absorption, and Utilization
Normal extrusion conditions may facilitate redistribution of insoluble to soluble
fiber (Camire et al., 1990). However, since nonfermentable carbohydrates contain
mostly insoluble fiber, it is unlikely that this occurs for cellulose and wheat bran.
Nutritive Value
Depending on the extent of fermentation, carbohydrates have an energy value of 0
to 2.4 kcal·g–1 (10.04 kJ·g–1) in monogastric species (Roberfroid, 1993; Molis et al.,
1996). Since neither cellulose nor wheat bran is extensively fermented, their energetic
contribution is thought to be minimal to none.
Physicochemical Effects
Because of its β-1,4-linkage, cellulose crystallizes in a linear configuration, with a
high degree of intermolecular hydrogen bonding. This gives it substantial shear and
tensile strength. The cellulose derivative carboxymethylcellulose is resistant to the
effects of acid and salt. It has a superior stability in baked goods and sauces, and can


===== PDF PAGE 154 =====
153
withstand extreme processing conditions such as extended heating and high shear
processing. Methylcelluloses are strong film formers and can serve as binders in food
matrices (Prosky and DeVries, 1992).
Water-Binding Capacity
Insoluble fibers such as cellulose are only poorly fermented once they reach the
colon. Water retention characteristics of these fibers exert a stool-bulking effect that
causes shorter transit times and increased fecal mass (Meyer and Tungland, 2001).
Powdered cellulose can retain about 3.5 to 10 times its weight in water. The water-
binding capacity of powdered cellulose is directly related to its average fiber length.
Commercial forms of powdered cellulose for food application are available in fiber
lengths ranging from 22 to 290 μm. The water-binding capacity of cellulose increases
as fiber length increases. The water-binding capacity of wheat bran is similar to that
of cellulose and also is highly affected by particle size (Dreher, 1999). In addition, the
type of wheat can affect the water-binding capacity of wheat bran. The water-binding
capacity of the bran of soft white wheat is 1.1 g·g–1, while that of hard red wheat is
4.5 g·g–1 (Dreher, 1999).
Viscosity
Colloidal cellulose gel products can increase the viscosity of sugar solutions at
concentrations less than 1 percent (Dreher, 1999). Reppas et al. (1991) administered
500-mL solutions of 0.9 percent sodium chloride and 0.8 percent polyethylene glycol
(PEG) as a volume marker by orogastric tube to dogs. Viscosity of the solutions was
increased by addition of different amounts (2.0 or 3.3 percent) of
hydroxypropylmethylcellulose. The lag time of PEG recovery at the duodenum and
mid-jejunum increased linearly as a function of viscosity. These researchers
concluded that the ability of water-soluble fibers to control absorption rate of
nutrients from the gut could contribute to an increase in luminal viscosity and a
decrease in rate of transit.
Bulking Capacity
Powdered cellulose is commonly used as a noncaloric bulking agent in reduced-
calorie foods (Ang and Miller, 1991).
Physiological Effects
Effects on Food Intake, Transit Time, and Fecal Excretion


===== PDF PAGE 155 =====
154
Numerous studies have demonstrated an increase in stool weight and a decrease in
transit time due to cellulose supplementation of human diets (Stephen, l989).
Dobenecker and Kienzle (l998) supplemented incremental concentrations of cellulose
in dogs fed a meat-based diet in an effort to determine the fiber concentration at
which food intake decreased. Dogs fed higher-fat diets tolerated more fiber (41.8
percent crude fiber) compared to lower-fat meat or chicken meal diets (30.8 and 31.9
percent crude fiber, respectively).
Wheat bran, an ingredient rich in hemicelluloses, cellulose, and lignin, affects
transit time (Payler et al., 1975; Wyman et al., 1976) and stool weight, moisture, and
composition (Stephen and Cummings, 1980) in humans. Addition of 30 g of either
wheat bran or cellulose increased duration of the postprandial pattern of intestinal
motility by 41 to 54 percent in the duodenum of dogs. Addition of wheat bran also
increased transit time by 28 percent, while cellulose caused a 900 percent increase in
transit time and a 50 percent reduction in flow of digesta in dogs (Bueno et al., l980).
In contrast, Burrows et al. (1982) reported that dogs fed a diet containing 9 percent α-
cellulose had decreased intestinal transit time compared to dogs not consuming
supplemental fiber (28.7 vs. 37.4 hours).
Stool weight reflects residual fiber and adherent bacteria (Kritchevsky, 1988).
Cellulose results in a decreased fecal nitrogen concentration compared to highly
fermentable fibers such as pectin, sugar beet, and soy bran (Tetens et al., 1996).
Burrows et al. (l982) found that fecal weight and water content increased linearly as
the supplemental α-cellulose concentration of dog diets increased from 3 to 6 to 9
percent.
Effects on Availability of Other Nutrients
Muir et al. (1996) found no differences in digestion of dry matter, organic matter,
crude protein, TDF, or gross energy at the distal ileum of dogs fed beet pulp versus
cellulose and pectin-containing diets. However, fat digestion was decreased (P <
0.10) for dogs fed 7.5 percent beet pulp compared to dogs fed a low-cellulose mixture
(2.5 percent cellulose + 5 percent pectin), high-cellulose mixture (5 percent cellulose
+ 2.5 percent pectin), or 7.5 percent cellulose. In contrast, Earle et al. (l998) found
that the apparent digestibility of organic matter and gross energy correlated negatively
with dietary cellulose content for both dogs (r = –0.88 and –0.88, respectively) and
cats (r = –0.92 and –0.87, respectively). In addition, Burrows et al. (l982) found that
dry matter, protein, and fat digestibilities decreased linearly when increasing
concentrations (3, 6, and 9 percent) of α-cellulose were incorporated into meat-based
dog diets. The regression estimate of true digestibility for α-cellulose was 6 percent.
Sunvold et al. (1995b) measured lower dry matter (81.0 percent) and organic
matter (83.5 percent) digestibilities by cats consuming cellulose-containing diets, and
higher dry matter (88 percent) and organic matter (91.6 percent) digestibilities by cats
fed diets containing no supplemental fiber. However, nitrogen and lipid digestibilities
by cats fed cellulose-containing diets were higher (88.4 and 95.0 percent,


===== PDF PAGE 156 =====
155
respectively) compared to diets with no fiber added (86.7 and 93.9 percent,
respectively).
Zentek (1996) compared the effects of 10 percent cellulose, pectin, or guar gum on
apparent nutrient digestibilities by dogs. The apparent digestibility of dry matter by
dogs fed the cellulose diet was lower (80.3 ± 2.0 percent) than for the pectin (89.6 ±
1.7 percent) or guar gum (88.1 ± 1.3 percent) diets. In addition, dogs fed the
cellulose-containing diet had a lower sodium absorption (86.4 ± 4.2 percent)
compared to dogs fed either the pectin (95.2 ± 2.4 percent)—or the guar gum (94.1 ±
2.1 percent)—containing diets. Wheat bran has been shown to affect mineral
excretion by humans, although most of the effects are thought to be due to its phytate
content and not NSPs (Stephen, 1989).
Kienzle et al. (1991) reported that cats consuming diets containing 10 percent
wheat bran, 15 percent horn meal, 15 percent feather meal, or 15 percent dried grass
meal had decreased protein (>3 percentage units) and/or lipid (0 to 11 percentage
units) digestibilities than animals fed a diet without these components. In experiments
with dogs, Muir et al. (1996) found that amino acid digestion at the distal ileum was
not affected by dietary cellulose, except for lysine, which increased from 68.2 percent
for dogs fed a low-cellulose mixture (2.5 percent cellulose + 5 percent pectin) to 83.5
percent in dogs fed a 7.5 percent cellulose diet. Further, these authors found that dogs
fed the low-cellulose mixture had lower apparent ileal digestibility values compared
to dogs on the high-cellulose mixture (5.0 percent cellulose + 2.5 percent pectin) for
dry matter (64.1 vs. 74.0 percent), organic matter (71.5 vs. 79.2 percent), crude
protein (66.1 vs. 76.7 percent), fat (93.8 vs 96.1 percent), TDF (–22.3 vs. –8.1
percent), and gross energy (76.3 vs. 82.8 percent).
Effects on Growth Performance
Delorme et al. (1985) evaluated the effect of 6 or 12 percent supplemental wheat
bran diets fed to female beagle puppies. Addition of wheat bran up to 16 percent
dietary NDF did not affect growth, food intake, or food efficiency, but, when wheat
bran addition exceeded 22 percent dietary NDF in a 22 percent crude protein diet,
animals were unable to adapt fully to the dilution of their diets, leading to reduced
growth and food efficiency.
Effects on Weight Control and Nutrition of the Obese Animal
Both insoluble and soluble fibers have been used as a means to restrict energy
intake by companion animals. Butterwick et al. (1994) found that adding 2 percent
wheat bran or α-cellulose to a low-calorie, meat-based commercial diet had no effect
on satiety in dogs, as measured by intake of a challenge meal offered 3 hours after
introduction of the test diet, when fed at an energy intake that allowed for weight
reduction. These results were confirmed when either 4 or 7 percent α-cellulose was
incorporated into commercial low-energy diets (Butterwick and Markwell, l997).


===== PDF PAGE 157 =====
156
Health-Related Characteristics
Gastrointestinal Tract Health
Diets high in fiber are thought to be a factor in prevention of conditions such as
diverticular disease (Smith et al., 1981). Coarse wheat bran increased (P < 0.01) stool
weight and decreased (P < 0.05) intestinal transit time to a greater extent than finely
ground wheat bran from the same source in human patients with diverticular disease.
CARBOHYDRATES IN DOG AND CAT DIET
FORMULATIONS
The recommended carbohydrate content of diets depends on amount of food
consumed, caloric density of the food, and energy requirement of the animal (Meyer
and Kienzle, 1991). Cereal grains are carbohydrate-rich ingredients used in
formulating cat and dog foods. These ingredients are included at different dietary
concentrations depending on diet type.
Adult dogs have a jejunal lactase activity of 33 U·g–1protein and tolerate lactose at
approximately 3 g·kg BW–1·d–1 (Meyer and Kienzle, 1991). For this reason, lactose
content of the adult dog diet should be limited. In contrast, puppies have high lactase
activity (96 U·g–1 protein) and are able to digest, absorb, and metabolize lactose
(Kienzle, 1993d). Bennett and Coon (1966) observed immediate diarrhea and malaise
in dogs when lactose furnished 54 percent of the calories in the diet. Burger (1993)
reported that dogs tolerate lactose at concentrations of 5 percent or less of total
energy.
Due to their lack of pancreatic amylase, suckling puppies and kittens should not be
given milk substitutes containing starch (Meyer and Kienzle, l991). By the time
puppies can consume appreciable amounts of solid food, they can efficiently use
calories from fat and nonstructural carbohydrates such as starch (Hintz, 1988),
although an optimal ratio of fat to nonstructural carbohydrates in puppy foods is
unknown. Cats have a limited capacity to metabolize certain sugars. Kienzle (1994)
observed signs of toxicity in cats at relatively low intakes of galactose (5.6 g·kg BW–
1·d–1).
Kienzle (1993d) speculated that cats are unable to adapt to increased
concentrations of dietary carbohydrates since the activities of disaccharidases in the
small intestinal mucosa are not affected by the diet of adult cats. Although the cat
depends on gluconeogenesis to meet much of its daily energy needs (Tarttelin, 1991),
there is evidence that cats effectively utilize dietary glucose from starch digestion
(Kienzle, 1993a,b). Tarttelin (1991) suggested that feeding too high a concentration of
carbohydrate may induce feline urologic syndrome since any persistent increase in
urine pH, such as that induced by ingestion of high carbohydrate concentrations,


===== PDF PAGE 158 =====
157
results in precipitation of magnesium ammonium phosphate crystals (struvite). This
may lead to blockage of the urethra and predispose the cat to dietary induced feline
urologic syndrome (Tarttelin, l991). There is no known optimal starch inclusion level
for the cat diet.
The fiber content of various companion animal diets is quite variable. Plant-based
diets often contain a considerable amount of fiber. For example, corn and wheat
grains contain approximately 9 and 18 percent TDF, respectively (Fahey, 1995).
Conversely, rice contains only 3 percent TDF (Fahey, 1995). By-products (e.g., corn
gluten feed, soybean hulls) and purified fiber sources (e.g., wood cellulose) often are
included in pet diets and contribute varying amounts of fiber.
Utilization of high-fiber diets is dependent on the animal’s life stage. Anecdotal
information exists, suggesting that animals with no apparent health problems can
grow and reproduce with as much as 15 to 20 percent TDF in their diets (Fahey,
1995). However, supplementing a bitch’s diet with insoluble fiber during the latter
phases of pregnancy and during lactation should be avoided since it will decrease the
energy density of the diet, potentially increasing the intake necessary to meet energy
needs beyond physical capacity. Fiber can be used during this time if indicated for
constipation (Moser, l992).
The appropriate use of fiber in weight reduction diets is of particular concern.
Fiber content is not central to a low-calorie diet; rather, caloric intake of the animal
per unit of time (Brown, l990) is the key issue. The typical crude fiber concentration
in dry petfood is 2.5 to 4.5 percent, but its concentration in some reduced-calorie diets
may be 9 to 10 percent. Use of these high concentrations of fiber in weight reduction
diets may allow the animal to achieve a sense of fullness without a high energy intake
(Brown, l990).
Companion animal longevity is important to pet owners and is affected by many
factors, including diet. The purpose of diets specifically formulated for geriatric
animals is to ameliorate or avoid the effects of aging that are impacted by nutrition
(Markham and Hodgkins, 1989). In the geriatric animal, a small amount of dietary
fiber facilitates the desired caloric restriction and aids intestinal function (Markham
and Hodgkins, l989). Although it is not a required nutrient, dietary fiber is directly
involved in maintaining gut health through provision of SCFAs, maintaining a healthy
gut microflora, and possibly even preventing diseases.
The question has been raised of how much dietary fiber is too much. Although no
simple answer exists, it has been demonstrated earlier in this chapter that high fiber
concentrations in companion animal diets can decrease the digestibility of other
nutrients. In addition, numerous fiber sources exist for companion animal diet
supplementation, and not all fibers are equal in terms of their physiological effects.
One source that has been shown to provide good stool characteristics without
significantly decreasing nutrient digestibility is beet pulp (Fahey et al., l990a,b;
Sunvold et al., 1993). Beet pulp contains both insoluble and soluble fiber components
in a desirable ratio (approximately 17 to 20 percentage units of soluble fiber; Fahey,
1995). Additional examples of beneficial fibers are provided in Tables 4-7 and 4-9.


===== PDF PAGE 159 =====
158
For many carbohydrate sources, there exists sufficient data to establish a level of
dietary inclusion at which no adverse effects can be expected. The safe upper limit
(SUL) of dietary inclusion for various carbohydrates is listed in Table 4-9. Values
presented are only for adult animals at maintenance. Adverse effects taken into
consideration include, but are not limited to, occurrence of loose stools, elevated fecal
water content, frequent defecation, marked reduction of nutrient digestibility, poor
diet acceptability or palatability, and disturbances in nutrient metabolism. For
example, Fahey et al. (1990b) supplemented dog diets with graded levels of beet pulp
(0, 2.5, 5.0, 7.5, 10.0, and 12.5 percent, DM basis). At 10.0 or 12.5 percent inclusion,
beet pulp resulted in more frequent defecation, a large increase in wet fecal volume,
and a marked decrease in fecal DM percentage. Therefore, SUL for beet pulp in adult
dog diets was set at 7.5 percent. However, studies investigating dose-responses are
not available on all ingredients used in companion animal diets. In this situation, the
SUL is set as the highest level tested that did not result in adverse effects.
Occasionally, data do not exist to indicate a safe limit for inclusion of certain
ingredients. An example of this is illustrated by a study with cats clearly showing that
digestive disorders occurred when approximately 9.5 percent TDF was added to a diet
as a fiber blend (35 percent citrus pectin, 30 percent locust bean gum, 20 percent
carob bean gum, and 15 percent guar gum). The authors attributed the poor
performance of these cats to several possible factors, including the rapidly
fermentable nature of the fibers promoting bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine,
decreased intestinal pH resulting in reduced activity of pancreatic enzymes, reduced
activity of pancreatic enzymes by citrus pectin, and reduced nutrient absorption due to
the viscous nature of the fibers (Sunvold et al., 1995). Since no lower concentrations
of this fiber blend were tested, no SUL can be established.
TABLE 4-9 Safe Upper Limits of Selected Carbohydrates for Adult Dog and Cat
Maintenance Diets (g·kg diet–1, DM basis)


===== PDF PAGE 160 =====
159
NOTE: ND = no experimental data available.
aHigher levels not experimentally tested.
bWhen mixed with sugar beet fiber in a 4:1 ratio.
cMixture of Solka Floc and gum arabic in a 3:1 ratio.
For glucose and sucrose, there exists a range of SULs in cat diets due to conflicting
data presented in the literature. This disparity may be attributed to differences in basal
diet composition, because Drochner and Muller-Schlosser (1980) fed a plant-based
diet, whereas Meyer and Kienzle (1991) fed meat-based diets. Therefore, basal diet
composition also is an important consideration when interpreting SUL and/or
desirable concentrations of ingredients that contain carbohydrate.
Different carbohydrates have varying physiological effects. Although few data
exist for cats, there is considerable evidence suggesting that fermentable substrates
are useful to dogs. When considering digestible or nondigestible carbohydrate
inclusion in companion animal diets, it is critical to evaluate carefully the unique
characteristics of all categories of carbohydrates used. Although SULs for many
carbohydrates have been suggested, much more information is needed before
minimum requirements (MRs) and recommended allowances can be established for
the categories of carbohydrates discussed in this chapter.
REFERENCES
Adkins, Y., S. C. Zicker, A. Lepine, and B. Lonnerdal. l997. Changes in nutrient and
protein composition of cat milk during lactation. Am. J. Vet. Res. 58:370-375.
Allen, S. E, G. C. Fahey, Jr., J. E. Corbin, J. L. Pugh, and R. A. Franklin. 1981.
Evaluation of by-product feedstuffs as dietary ingredients for dogs. J. Anim. Sci.


===== PDF PAGE 161 =====
160
53:1538-1544.
Aman, P., and K. Hesselman. 1984. Analysis of starch and other main constituents in
cereal grains. Swed. J. Agric. Res. 14:135-139.
Ang, J. F., and W. B. Miller. 1991. Multiple functions of powdered cellulose as a food
ingredient. Cereal Foods World 36:558-564.
Annison, G., and D. L. Topping. 1994. Nutritional role of resistant starch: Chemical
structure vs physiological function. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 14:297-320.
Araya-Kojima, T., T. Yaeshima, N. Ishibashi, S. Shimamura, and H. Hayasawa. 1995.
Inhibitory effects of Bifidobacterium longum BB536 on harmful intestinal bacteria.
Bifidobacteria Microflora 14:59-66.
Argenzio, R. A. 1989. Digestion and absorption of carbohydrate, fat, and protein. Pp.
308-309 in Dukes’ Physiology of Domestic Animals, 10th ed., M. J. Swenson, ed.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Asp, N. G., C. G. Johansson, H. Hallmer, and M. Siljestrom. 1983. Rapid enzymatic
assay of insoluble and soluble dietary fiber. J. Agric. Food Chem. 31:476-482.
Bach-Knudsen, K. E. 1997. Carbohydrate and lignin contents of plant materials used
in animal feeding. Anim. Feed Sci. Technol. 67:319-338.
Bach-Knudsen, K. E., and I. Hansen. 1991. Gastrointestinal implications in pigs of
wheat fractions. I. Digestibility and bulking properties of polysaccharides and other
major constituents. Br. J. Nutr. 65:217-232.
Ballard, F. J. 1965. Glucose utilization in the mammalian liver. Comp. Biochem.
Physiol. 14:437-443.
Banks, K. L. 1981. Changes in the immune response related to age. Vet. Clin. North
Am. Small Anim. Pract. 11:683-688.
Banta, C. A., E. T. Clemens, M. M. Krinsky, and B. E. Sheffy. 1979. Sites of organic
acid production and patterns of digesta movement in the gastrointestinal tract of
dogs. J. Nutr. 109:1592-1600.
Barrette, D. 1990. Feeding older cats and dogs. Can. Vet. J. 31:784-785.
Bartges, J., and W. H. Anderson. 1997. Dietary fiber. Vet. Clin. Nutr. 4:25-28.
Bednar, G. E., A. R. Patil, S. M. Murray, C. M. Grieshop, N. R. Merchen, and G. C.
Fahey, Jr. 2001. Starch and fiber fractions in selected food and feed ingredients
affect their small intestinal digestibility and fermentability and their large bowel
fermentability in vitro in a canine model. J. Nutr. 131:276-286.
Belo, P. S., D. R. Romsos, and G. A. Leveille. 1976. Influence of diet on glucose
tolerance on the rate of glucose utilization and on gluconeogenic enzyme activities
in the dog. J. Nutr. 106:1465-1474.
BeMiller, J. N., and R. L. Whistler. 1996. Carbohydrates. Pp. 157-168 in Food
Chemistry, 3rd ed, O. R. Fennema, ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Bennett, M. J., and E. Coon. 1966. Mellituria and postprandial blood sugar curves in
dogs after the ingestion of various carbohydrates with the diet. J. Nutr. 88:163-169.
Berry, C. S. 1986. Resistant starch: Formation and measurement of starch that
survives exhaustive digestion with amylolytic enzymes during the determination of
dietary fiber. J. Cereal Sci. 4:301-304.


===== PDF PAGE 162 =====
161
Beynen, A. C., H. J. Kappert, and S. Yu. 2001. Dietary lactulose decreases apparent
nitrogen absorption and increases apparent calcium and magnesium absorption in
healthy dogs. J. Anim. Phys. Anim. Nutr. 85:67-72.
Bird, A. R., I. L. Brown, and D. L. Topping. 2000. Starches, resistant starches, the gut
microflora and human health. Curr. Issues Intest. Microbiol. 1:25-37.
Bjorck, I., M. Nyman, B. Pedersen, M. Siljestrom, N. G. Asp, and B. O. Eggum.
1986. On the digestibility of starch in wheat bread—Studies in vitro and in vivo. J.
Cereal Sci. 4:1-11.
Blundell, J. E., and V. J. Burley. 1987. Satiation, satiety, and the action of fiber on
food intake. Int. J. Obesity 11(Suppl. 1):9-25.
Borggreve, G. J., G. J. M. van Kempen, J. P. Cornelissen, and A. H. M. Grimbergen.
1975. The net energy content of pig feed according to the Rostock formula: The
value of starch in feed. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 34:199-204.
Bourquin, L. D., E. C. Titgemeyer, G. C. Fahey, Jr., and K. A. Garleb. 1993.
Fermentation of dietary fibre by human colonic bacteria: Disappearance of, short-
chain fatty acid production from, and potential water-holding capacity of, various
substrates. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 28:249-255.
Bowling, T. E., A. H. Ralmundo, G. K. Grimble, and D. A. B. Silk. 1993. Reversal by
short-chain fatty acids of colonic fluid secretion induced by enteral feeding. Lancet
342:1266-1268.
Brown, I. L., K. J. McNaught, D. Andrews, and T. Morita. 2001. Resistant starch:
Plant breeding, applications development and commercial use. Pp. 401-412 in
Advanced Dietary Fiber Technology, B. V. McCleary and L. Prosky, eds. Oxford,
UK: Blackwell Science Ltd.
Brown, R. G. 1989. Fiber in cat diets. Can. Vet. J. 30:258-259.
Brown, R. G. 1990. Current topics in nutrition. Can. Vet. J. 31:308-309.
Buckley, B. M., and D. H. Williamson. 1997. Origins of blood acetate in the rat.
Biochem. J. 166:539-545.
Buddington, R. K., J. W. Chen, and J. M. Diamond. 1991. Dietary regulation of
intestinal brush-border sugar and amino acid transport in carnivores. Am. J.
Physiol. 261:R793-R801.
Buddington, R. K., K. K. Buddington, and G. D. Sunvold. 1999. Influence of
fermentable fiber on small intestinal dimensions and transport of glucose and
proline in dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 60:354-358.
Bueno, L., F. Praddaude, J. Fioramonti, and Y. Ruckebusch. 1980. Effect of dietary
fiber on gastrointestinal motility and jejunal transit time in dogs. Gastroenterol.
80:701-707.
Burger, I. H. 1993. A basic guide to nutrient requirements. Pp. 5-24 in The Waltham
Book of Companion Animal Nutrition, I. H. Burger, ed. New York: Pergamon
Press.
Burkholder, W. J. 1999. Age-related changes to nutritional requirements and digestive
function in adult dogs and cats. Vet. Med. Today 215:625-629.


===== PDF PAGE 163 =====
162
Burkholder, W. J., and P. W. Toll. 2000. Obesity. Pp. 401-430 in Small Animal
Clinical Nutrition, M. S. Hand, C. D. Thatcher, and R. L. Remillard, eds. Topeka,
Kan.: Mark Morris Institute.
Burrows, C. F., D. S. Kronfeld, C. A. Banta, and A. M. Merritt. 1982. Effects of fiber
on digestibility and transit time in dogs. J. Nutr. 112:1726-1732.
Butterwick, R. F., and P. J. Markwell. 1997. Effect of amount and type of dietary fiber
on food intake in energy-restricted dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 58:272-276.
Butterwick, R. F., P. J. Markwell, and C. J. Thorne. 1994. Effect of level and source of
dietary fiber on food intake in the dog. J. Nutr. 124:2695S-2700S.
Camire, M. E., A. Camire, and K. Krumhar. 1990. Chemical and nutritional changes
in foods during extrusion. Food Sci. Nutr. 29:35-57.
Campbell, J. M., L. L. Bauer, G. C. Fahey, Jr., A. J. C. L. Hogarth, B. W. Wolf, and D.
E. Hunter. 1997. Selected fructooligosaccharide (1-kestose, nystose, and 1F-β-
fructofuranosylnystose) composition of foods and feeds. J. Agric. Food Chem.
45:3076-3082.
Champ, M. 1992. Determination of resistant starch in foods and food products:
Interlaboratory study. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 46(S2):S51-S62.
Champ, M., L. Martin, L. Noah, and M. Gratas. 1999a. Analytical methods for
resistant starch. Pp. 169-187 in Complex Carbohydrates in Foods, S. S. Cho, L.
Prosky, and M. Dreher, eds. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Champ, M., L. Martin, L. Noah, and M. Gratas. 1999b. In vivo techniques to quantify
resistant starch. Pp. 157-168 in Complex Carbohydrates in Foods, S. S. Cho, L.
Prosky, and M. Dreher, eds. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Cho, S., J. W. DeVries, and L. Prosky. 1997. Dietary Fiber Analysis and Applications.
Gaithersburg, Md.: AOAC Int’l.
Colonna, P., J. Tayeb, and C. Mercier. 1989. Extrusion cooking of starch and starchy
products. Pp. 247-319 in Extrusion Cooking, C. Mercier, P. Linko, and J. M.
Harper, eds. American Association of Cereal Chemists.
Colonna, P., V. Leloup, and A. Buleon. 1992. Limiting factors of starch hydrolysis.
Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 46:S17-S32.
Crampton, E. W., and L. A. Maynard. 1938. The relation of cellulose and lignin
content to the nutritive value of animal feeds. J. Nutr. 15:383-395.
Crapo, L. P. A., G. Reaven, and J. Olefsky. 1976. Plasma glucose and insulin
responses to orally administered simple and complex carbohydrates. Diabetes
25:741-747.
Crittenden, R., and M. Playne. 1996. Production, properties, and applications of food-
grade oligosaccharides. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 7:353-459.
Cummings, J. H., and G. T. Macfarlane. 1991. The control and consequences of
bacterial fermentation in the human colon. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 70:443-459.
Cummings, J. H., S. A. Bingham, K. W. Heaton, and M. A. Eastwood. 1992. Fecal
weight, colon cancer risk, and dietary intake of nonstarch polysaccharides (dietary
fiber). Gastroenterol. 103:1783-1789.


===== PDF PAGE 164 =====
163
Cummings, J. H., M. B. Roberfroid, H. Anderson, C. Barth, A. Ferro-Luzzi, Y.
Ghoos, M. Gibney, K. Hermonsen, W. P. T. James, O. Korver, D. La-iron, G.
Pascal, and A. G. S. Voragen. 1997. A new look at dietary carbohydrate:
Chemistry, physiology, and health. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 51:417-423.
Debraekeleer, J. 1998. Comparative analysis of milk replacers for puppies and kittens.
J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 80:185-193.
Delorme, C. B., D. Barrette, R. Monean, and R. Lariviere. 1985. The effect of dietary
fiber on feed intake and growth in beagle puppies. Can. J. Comp. Med. 49:278.
Delzenne, N. M., and M. B. Roberfroid. 1994. Physiological effects of nondigestible
oligosaccharides. Lebensm. Wiss. Technol. 27:1-6.
Diez, M., J.-L. Hornick, P. Baldwin, and L. Istasse. 1997a. Influence of a blend of
fructo-oligosaccharides and sugar beet fiber on nutrient digestibility and plasma
metabolite concentrations in healthy beagles. Am. J. Vet. Res. 58:1238-1242.
Diez, M., C. van Eenaeme, J.-L. Hornick, P. Baldwin, and L. Istasse. 1997b. Dietary
fibre in dogs diet: Comparisons between cellulose, pectin, guar gum, and between
two incorporation rates of guar gum. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 78:220-229.
Diez, M., J. L. Hornick, P. Baldwin, C. Van Eenaeme, and L. Istasse. 1998. The
influence of sugar-beet fibre, guar gum and inulin on nutrient digestibility, water
consumption and plasma metabolites in healthy beagle dogs. Res. Vet. Sci. 64:91-
96.
Dobenecker, B., and E. Kienzle. 1998. Interactions of cellulose content and diet
composition with food intake and digestibility in dogs. J. Nutr. 128:2674S-2675S.
Dobenecker, B., B. Zottman, E. Kienzle, P. Wolf, and J. Zentek. 1998. Milk yield and
composition of lactating queens. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 80:173-178.
Drackley, J. K., and A. D. Beaulieu. 1998. Energetic substrates for intestinal cells. Pp.
463-472 in Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition: 1998 Iams Nutrition
Symposium Proceedings, G. A. Reinhart and D. P. Carey, eds. Wilmington, Ohio:
Orange Frazer Press.
Dreher, M. 1999. Food sources and uses of dietary fiber. Pp. 327-372 in Complex
Carbohydrates in Foods, S. S. Cho, L. Prosky, and M. Dreher, eds. New York:
Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Dreher, M. L., C. J. Dreher, and J. W. Berry. 1984. Starch digestibility of foods. A
nutritional perspective. CRC Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 20:47-71.
Drochner, W., and S. Muller-Schlosser. 1980. Digestibility and tolerance of various
sugars in cats. Pp. 101-11 in Nutrition of the Dog and Cat, R.S. Anderson, ed.
London: Pergamon Press.
Earle K. E., E. Kienzle, B. Opitz, P. M. Smith, and I. E. Maskell. 1998. Fiber affects
digestibility of organic matter and energy in petfoods. J. Nutr. 128:2798S-2800S.
Eastwood, M. A. 1992. The physiological effect of dietary fiber: An update. Annu.
Rev. Nutr. 12:19-35.
Ebiner, J. R., K. J. Acheson, and A. Doerner. 1979. Comparison of carbohydrate
utilization in man using indirect calorimetry and mass spectrometry after an oral
load of 100 g naturally-labelled (13C) glucose. Br. J. Nutr. 41:419-429.


===== PDF PAGE 165 =====
164
Englyst, H. 1989. Classification and measurement of plant polysaccharides. Anim.
Feed Sci. Technol. 23:27-42.
Englyst, H. N., and J. H. Cummings. 1984. Simplified method for the measurement of
total non-starch polysaccharides by gas-liquid chromatography of constituent
sugars as alditol acetates. Analyst 109:937-942.
Englyst, H. N., and J. H. Cummings. 1987. Resistant starch, a “new” food
component: A classification of starch for nutritional purposes. Pp. 221-233 in
Cereals in a European context, I. D. Morton, ed. Chichester, UK: First European
Conference on Food Science and Technology.
Englyst H. N., and J. H. Cummings. 1988. Improved method for measurement of
dietary fiber as non-starch polysaccharides in plant foods. J. Assoc. Off. Anal.
Chem. 71:808-814.
Englyst, H. N., and G. J. Hudson. 1987. Colorimetric method for routine
measurement of dietary fiber as non-starch polysaccharides. A comparison with
gas-liquid chromatography. Food Chem. 24:63-76.
Englyst, H. N., H. S. Wiggins, and J. H. Cummings. 1982. Determination of the non-
starch polysaccharides in plant foods by gas-liquid chromatography of constituent
sugars as alditol acetates. Analyst 107:307-318.
Englyst, H. N., J. H. Cummings, and R. Wood. 1987. Determination of dietary fiber in
cereals and cereal products—collaborative trials. III. Study of further simplified
procedures. J. Assoc. Public Anal. 25:73-111.
Englyst, H. N., S. M. Kingman, and J. H. Cummings. 1992a. Classification and
measurement of nutritionally important starch fractions. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 46:S33-
S50.
Englyst, H. N., M. E. Quigley, G. J. Hudson, and J. H. Cummings. 1992b.
Determination of dietary fiber as non-starch polysaccharides by gas-liquid
chromatography. Analyst 117:1707-1714.
Englyst, H. N., M. E. Quigley, and G. J. Hudson. 1994. Determination of dietary fibre
as non-starch polysaccharides with gas-liquid chromatographic, high-performance
liquid chromatographic, or spectrophotometric measurement of constituent sugars.
Analyst 119:1497-1509.
Englyst, K. N., H. N. Englyst, G. J. Hudson, T. J. Cole, and J. H. Cummings. 1999.
Rapidly available glucose in foods: An in vitro measurement that reflects the
glycemic response. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 69:448-454.
Fahey, G. C., Jr. 1995. Practical considerations in feeding dietary fibers to companion
animals. Pp. 44-54 in Petfood Forum Proceedings. Mt. Morris, Il.: Watt Publishing.
Fahey, G. C., Jr., N. R. Merchen, J. E. Corbin, A. K. Hamilton, K. A. Serbe, S. M.
Lewis, and D. A. Hirakawa. 1990a. Dietary fiber for dogs. II. Isototal dietary fiber
(TDF) additions of divergent fiber sources to dog diets and their effects on nutrient
intake, digestibility, metabolizable energy and digesta mean retention time. J.
Anim. Sci. 68:4229-4235.
Fahey, G. C., Jr., N. R. Merchen, J. E. Corbin, A. K. Hamilton, K. A. Serbe, S. M.
Lewis, and D. A. Hirakawa. 1990b. Dietary fiber for dogs. I. Effects of graded


===== PDF PAGE 166 =====
165
levels of dietary beet pulp on nutrient intake, digestibility, metabolizable energy
and digesta mean retention time. J. Anim. Sci. 68:4221-4228.
Fahey, G. C., Jr., N. R. Merchen, J. E. Corbin, A. K. Hamilton, L. L. Bauer, E. C.
Titgemeyer, and D. A. Hirakawa. 1992. Dietary fiber for dogs. III. Effects of beet
pulp and oat fiber additions to dog diets on nutrient intake, digestibility,
metabolizable energy, and digesta mean retention time. J. Anim. Sci. 70:1169-1174.
Faisant, N., V. Planchot, F. Kozlowski, M. P. Pacouret, P. Colonna, and M. Champ.
1995. Resistant starch determination adapted to products containing high level of
resistant starch. Sci. Alim. 15:83-89.
Felig, P., and V. Lynch. 1970. Starvation in human pregnancy: Hypoglycemia,
hypoinsulinemia, and hyperketonemia. Science 170:990-992.
Fernandez, R., and S. F. Phillips. 1982. Components of fiber impair iron absorption in
the dog. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 35:107-112.
Ferrell, F. 1984. Preference of sugars and nonnutritive sweeteners in young beagles.
Neuroscience Biobehavioral Rev. 8:199-203.
Field, C. J., M. I. McBurney, S. Massimino, M. G. Hayek, and G. D. Sunvold. 1999.
The fermentable fiber content of the diet alters the function and composition of
canine gut associated lymphoid tissue. Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 72:325-341.
Finely, J. W., and G. A. Leveille. 1996. Macronutrient substitutes. Pp. 581-595 in
Food Chemistry, 3rd ed., O. R. Fennema, ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Firmansyah, A., D. Penn, and E. Lebenthal. 1989. Isolated colonocyte metabolism of
glucose, glutamine, n-butyrate, and beta-hydroxybutyrate in nutrition.
Gastroenterol. 97:622-629.
Flatt, J. P. 1988. Importance of nutrient balance in body weight regulation. Diabetes
Metab. Rev. 4:571-581.
Flatt, J. P., E. Ravussin, K. J. Acheson, and E. Jequier. 1985. Effects of dietary fat on
postprandial substrate oxidation and on carbohydrate and fat balances. J. Clin.
Invest. 76:1019-1024.
Fleming, S. E., M. D. Fitch, S. DeVries, M. L. Liu, and C. Kight. 1991. Nutrient
utilization by cells isolated from rat jejunum, cecum, and colon. J. Nutr. 121:869-
878.
Flickinger, E. A., B. W. Wolf, K. A. Garleb, J. Chow, G. J. Leyer, P. W. Johns, and G.
C. Fahey, Jr. 2000. Glucose-based oligosaccharides exhibit different in vitro
fermentation patterns and affect in vivo apparent nutrient digestibility and
microbial populations in dogs. J. Nutr. 130:1267-1273.
Fukuda, S., N. Kawashima, H. Iida, J. Aoki, and K. Tokita. 1989. Age dependency of
hematological values and concentrations of serum biochemical constituents in
normal Beagle dogs from 1 to 14 years of age. Jpn. J. Vet. Sci. 51:636-641.
Gee, M., I. T. Johnson, and E. K. Lund. 1992. Physiological properties of resistant
starch. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 46:S125.
Gibson, G. R., and M. B. Roberfroid. 1995. Dietary modulation of the human colonic
microbiota: Introducing the concept of prebiotics. J. Nutr. 125:1401-1412.


===== PDF PAGE 167 =====
166
Gibson, G. R., and X. Wang. 1994. Regulatory effects of bifidobacteria on the growth
of other colonic bacteria. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 77:412-420.
Gordon, D. T. 1999. What is dietary fiber? Food Technol. 53:242.
Graham, P. A., I. E. Maskell, and A. S. Nash. 1994. Canned high fiber diet and
postprandial glycemia in dogs with naturally occurring diabetes mellitus. J. Nutr.
124:2712S-2715S.
Gray, G. l992. Starch digestion and absorption in nonruminants. J. Nutr. 122:172-177.
Grizard, D., and C. Barthomeuf. 1999. Non-digestible oligosaccharides used as
prebiotic agents: Mode of production and beneficial effects on animal and human
health. Reprod. Nutr. Dev. 39:563-588.
Guilbot, A., and C. Mercier. 1985. Starch. Pp. 209-282 in The Polysaccharides, G. O.
Aspinall, ed. New York: Academic Press.
Hallman, J. E., R. A. Moxley, G. A. Reinhart, E. A. Wallace, and E. T. Clemens.
1995. Cellulose, beet pulp, and pectin/gum arabic effects on canine colonic
microstructure and histopathology. Vet. Clin. Nutr. 4:137-142.
Harmon, D. L., J. A. Walker, J. M. Silvio, A. M. Jamikorm, and K. L. Gross. 1999.
Nutrient digestibility in dogs fed fiber-containing diets. Vet. Clin. Nutr. 6:6-8.
Harper, E. J. 1998. Changing perspectives on aging and energy requirements: Aging
and digestive function in humans, dogs, and cats. J. Nutr. 128:2623S-2626S.
Harris, P. J., A. B. Blakeney, R. H. Henry, and B. A. Stone. 1988. Gas
chromatographic determination of the monosaccharide composition of plant cell
wall preparations. J. Assoc. Off. Anal. Chem. 71:272-275.
Hassid, W. Z. 1970. Biosynthesis of sugars and polysaccharides. Pp. 301-373 in The
Carbohydrates. Chemistry and Biochemistry, W. Pigman and D. Horton, eds. New
York: Academic Press.
Henneberg, W., and F. Stohmann. 1859. Ueber das Erhaltungsfutter volljaehrigen
Rindviehs. J. Landwirtsch. 3:485-551.
Henshall, A. 1999. High performance anion exchange chromatography with pulsed
amperometric detection (HPAE-PAD): A powerful tool for the analysis of dietary
fiber and complex carbohydrates. Pp. 267-289 in Complex Carbohydrates in Foods,
S. S. Cho, L. Prosky, and M. Dreher, eds. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Herschel, D. A., R. A. Argenzio, M. Southworth, and C. E. Stevens. 1981. Absorption
of volatile fatty acid and H2O by the colon of the dog. Am. J. Vet. Res. 42:1118-
1124.
Hietanen, E. 1973. Interspecific variation in the levels of intestinal alkaline
phosphatase, adenosine triphosphatase and disaccharidases. Com. Biochem.
Physiol. 46A:359-369.
Hilton, J. 1990. Carbohydrates in the nutrition of the dog. Can. Vet. J. 31:128-129.
Hintz, H. F. 1988. Dietary management of puppies. Cont. Ed. 9:372-380.
Holm, J., I. Bjorck, A. Drews, and N. G. Asp. 1986. A rapid method for the analysis
of starch. Staerke 38:224-226.
Holtug, K., M. R. Clausen, J. Christiansen, and P. B. Mortensen. 1992. The colon in
carbohydrate malabsorption: Short-chain fatty acids, pH, and osmotic diarrhea.


===== PDF PAGE 168 =====
167
Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 27:545-552.
Hore, P., and M. Messer. 1968. Studies on disaccharidase activities of the small
intestine of the domestic cat and other mammals. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 24:717-
725.
Houpt, K. A., B. Coren, H. F. Hintz, and J. E. Hilderbrant. 1979. Effect of sex and
reproductive status on sucrose preference, food intake, and body weight of dogs. J.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 174:1083-1085.
Howard, M. D., M. S. Kerley, F. A. Mann, G. D. Sunvold, and G. A. Reinhart. 1999.
Blood flow and epithelial cell proliferation of the canine colon are altered by
source of dietary fiber. Vet. Clin. Nutr. 6:8-15.
Institute of Medicine. 2001. Proposed Definition of Dietary Fiber: A Report of the
Panel on the Definition of Dietary Fiber and the Standing Committee on the
Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes. Food and Nutrition Board.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Jackson, J. E., D. P. Laflamme, and S. F. Owens. 1997. Effects of dietary fiber content
on satiety in dogs. Vet. Clin. Nutr. 4:130-134.
James, W. P. T., and O. Theander, eds. 1981. The Analysis of Dietary Fiber in Food.
Marcell Dekker, New York. 276 pp.
Jenkins, D. J. A., T. M. S. Taylor, R. H. Barker, and H. Fielder. 1981. Glycemic index
of foods: A physiological basis for carbohydrate exchange. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
35:346-366.
Jequier, E. 1994. Carbohydrates as a source of energy. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 59:682S-
685S.
Jewell, D. E., and P. W. Toll. 1996. Effects of fiber on food intake in dogs. Vet. Clin.
Nutr. 3:115-118.
Jewell, D. E., W. Toll, and B. J. Novotny. 2000. Satiety reduces adiposity in dogs. Vet.
Therapeutics 1:17-23.
Kamalu B. P. 1991. Digestibility of nutritionally-balanced cassava (Mani-hot
esculenta Crantz) diet and its effect on growth in young male dogs. Br. J. Nutr.
66:199-208.
Karkalas, J. 1985. An improved enzymic method for the determination of native and
modified starch. J. Sci. Food. Agric. 36:1019-1027.
Keen, C. L., B. Lonnerdal, M. S. Clegg, L. S. Hurley, J. G. Morris, Q. R. Rogers, and
R. B. Rucker. 1982. Developmental changes in composition of cats’ milk: Trace
elements, minerals, protein, carbohydrate, and fat. J. Nutr. 112:1763-1769.
Keller, P. 1980. The tolerance of some sugars and sugar alcohols in dogs. Pp. 113-116
in Aus dem Institut fur Tierenahrung der Tierarztlichen Hochschule, Hannover.
Kendall, P. T., and D. W. Holme. 1982. Studies on the digestibility of soybean
products, cereals, cereal and plant by-products in diets of dogs. J. Sci. Food Agric.
33:813-822.
Keys, J. E., Jr., and J. V. DeBarthe. 1974. Cellulose and hemicellulose digestibility in
the stomach, small intestine and large intestine of swine. J. Anim. Sci. 39:53-56.


===== PDF PAGE 169 =====
168
Kienzle, E. 1988. Enzymeaktivitaet in pancreas, darmwand und chymus des hundes in
abhangigkeit von alter und futterart. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 60:276-288.
Kienzle E. 1989. Untersuchungen zum Intestinal- und Intermediärstoffwechsel von
Kohlenhydraten (Stärke verschiedener Herkunft und Aufbereitung, Mono- und
Disaccharide) bei der Hauskatze (Felis catus) (Investigations on intestinal and
intermediary metabolism of carbohydrates (Starch of different origin and
processing, mono- and disaccharides) in domestic cats (Felis catus). (Habilitation
thesis). Tierärztliche Hochschule, Hannover.
Kienzle, E. 1993a. Carbohydrate metabolism in the cat. 1. Activity of amylase in the
gastrointestinal tract of the cat. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 69:92-101.
Kienzle, E. 1993b. Carbohydrate metabolism in the cat. 2. Digestion of starch. J.
Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 69:102-114.
Kienzle, E. 1993c. Carbohydrate metabolism in the cat. 3. Digestion of sugars. J.
Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 69:203-210.
Kienzle, E. 1993d. Carbohydrate metabolism in the cat. 4. Activity of maltase,
isomaltase, sucrase, and lactase in the gastrointestinal tract in relation to age and
diet. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 70:89-96.
Kienzle, E. 1994. Blood sugar levels and renal sugar excretion after the intake of high
carbohydrate diets in cats. J. Nutr. 124:2563S-2567S.
Kienzle E., M. Meyer, and H. Lohrie H. 1985. Einfluss kohlenhydratfreier Rationen
mit unterschiedlichen Protein/Energierelationen auf foetale Entwicklung und
Vitalität von Welpen sowie die Milchzusammensetzung von Hündinnen (Effect of
differing protein/energy ratios in carbohydrate-free diets for breeding bitches on
development and vitality of puppies and milk composition). Adv. Anim. Physiol.
Anim. Nutr. 16: 73-99.
Kienzle, E., H. Meyer, and R. Schneider. 1991. Investigations on palatability,
digestibility, and tolerance of low digestible food components in cats. J. Nutr.
121:S56-S57.
Kripke, S. A., A. D. Fox, J. M. Berman, R. G. Settle, and J. L. Rombeau. 1989.
Stimulation of intestinal mucosal growth with intracolonic infusion of short-chain
fatty acids. J. Paren. Enteral Nutr. 13:109-116.
Kritchevsky, D. 1988. Dietary fiber. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 8:301-328.
Lee, S. C., and L. Prosky. 1994. Perspectives on new dietary fiber definition. Cereal
Foods World 39:767-768.
Lee, S. C., and L. Prosky. 1995. International survey on dietary fiber: Definition,
analysis, and reference materials. J. Assoc. Off. Anal. Chem. Int. 78:22-36.
Lee, S. C., and L. Prosky. 1999. International survey on dietary fiber, definition,
analysis, and reference materials. Pp. 605-608 in Complex Carbohydrates in Foods,
S. S. Cho, L. Prosky, and M. Dreher, eds. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Legrand-Defretin, V. 1994. Differences between cats and dogs: A nutritional view.
Proc. Nutr. Soc. 53:15-24.
Levin, R. J. 1994. Digestion and absorption of carbohydrates: From molecules and
membranes to humans. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 59(Suppl):690S-698S.


===== PDF PAGE 170 =====
169
Levinson, R. A., and E. Englert, Jr. 1970. Small intestinal absorption of simple sugars
and water in the cat. Experentia 26:262-263.
Lewis, L. D., J. H. Magerkurth, P. Roudebush, M. L. Morris, E. E. Mitchell, and S. M.
Teeter. 1994. Stool characteristics, gastrointestinal transit time, and nutrient
digestibility in dogs fed different fiber sources. J. Nutr. 124:2716S-2718S.
Lichtenthaler, F. W. 1998. Towards improving the utility of ketoses as organic raw
materials. Carbohydr. Res. 313:69-89.
Lineback, D. R. 1999. The chemistry of complex carbohydrates. Pp. 115-129 in
Complex Carbohydrates in Foods, S. S. Cho, L. Prosky, and M. Dreher, eds. New
York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Lowseth, L. A., N. A. Gillet, R. F. Gerlach, and B. A. Muggenburg. 1990. The effects
of aging on hematology and serum chemistry values in the Beagle dog. Vet. Clin.
Pathol. 19:13-19.
Mansfield, P. D., R. J. Kemppainen, and J. L. Sartin. 1986. The effects of megestrol
acetate treatment on plasma glucose concentration and insulin response to glucose
administration in cats. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 22:515-518.
Markham, R. W., and E. M. Hodgkins. l989. Geriatric nutrition. Geriatrics Gerontol.
19:165-185.
Marlett, J. A. 1989. Measuring dietary fiber. Anim. Feed Sci. Technol. 23: 1-13.
Marsman, G. J. P., H. Gruppen, A. J. Mul, and A. G. J. Voragen. 1997. In vitro
accessibility of untreated, toasted, and untoasted soybean meals for proteases and
carbohydrase. J. Agric. Food Chem. 45:4088-4095.
Maskell, I. E., and J. V. Johnson. 1993. Digestion and absorption. Pp. 25-44 in The
Waltham Book of Companion Animal Nutrition, I. H. Burger, ed. New York:
Pergamon Press.
Massimino, S. P., M. I. McBurney, C. J. Field, A. B. R. Thompson, M. Keelan, M. G.
Hayek, and G. D. Sunvold. 1998. Fermentable dietary fiber increases GLP-1
secretion and improves glucose homeostasis despite increased intestinal glucose
transport capacity in healthy dogs. J. Nutr. 128:1786-1793.
McBurney, M. I. 1991. Potential water-holding capacity and short-chain fatty acid
production from purified fiber sources in a fecal incubation system. Nutr. 7:421-
424.
McCleary, B. V., T. S. Gibson, V. Solah, and D. C. Mugford. 1994. Total starch
measurement in cereal products: Inter-laboratory evaluation of a rapid enzymic test
procedure. Cereal Chem. 71:501-504.
McCleary, B. V., M. McNally, and P. Rossiter. 2002. Measurement of resistant starch
by enzymatic digestion in starch and selected plant materials: Collaborative study.
J. AOAC Int’l. 85:1103-1111.
McNeil, M., A. G. Darvill, S. C. Stephen, and P. Albersheim. 1984. Structure and
function of primary cell walls of plants. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 53:625-663.
Meuser, F., P. Suchow, and W. Kulikowski. 1985. Verfahren zur Bestimmung von
unloslichen und loslichen Ballaststoffen in Lebensmitteln. Zeitschrift Lebensmittel
Untersuchung und Forschung 181:101-106.


===== PDF PAGE 171 =====
170
Meyer, D., and B. Tungland. 2001. Non-digestible oligosaccharides and
polysaccharides: Their physiological effects and health implications. Pp. 455-470
in Advanced Dietary Fibre Technology, B. V. McCleary and L. Prosky, eds.
Oxford, UK: Blackwell Science Ltd.
Meyer, H., and E. Kienzle. 1991. Dietary protein and carbohydrates: Relationship to
clinical disease. In Proc. Purina Int. Symp., Orlando, Fla.
Meyer, H., T. Behfeld, C. Schunemann, and A. Muehlum. 1989. Intestinaler Wasser-,
Natrium- und Kaliumstoffwechsel (Intestinal metabolism of water, sodium and
potassium). Adv. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 19:109-119.
Molis, C., B. Flourie, F. Ouarne, M. Gailing, S. Lartigue, S. Guibert, F. Bornet, and J.
Galmiche. 1996. Digestion, excretion, and energy value of fructooligosaccharides
in healthy humans. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 64:324-328.
Monsan, P. F., and F. Paul. 1995. Oligosaccharide feed additives. Pp. 233-245 in
Biotechnology in Animal Feeds and Animal Feeding, R. J. Wallace and A.
Chesson, eds. New York: VCH.
Morris, J. G., J. Trudell, and T. Pencovic. 1977. Carbohydrate digestion by the
domestic cat (Felis catus). Br. J. Nutr. 37:365-373.
Moser, E. 1992. Feeding to optimize canine reproductive efficiency. Prob. Vet. Med.
4:545-550.
Mosier, J. E. 1989. Effects of aging on body systems of the dog. Vet. Clin. North Am.
(Small Anim. Pract.) 19:1-12.
Muehlum, V. A., M. Ingwersen, C. Schunemann, H. Wilfarth, and H. Meyer. 1989.
Praecaecale und postileale verdauung von saccharose, lactose sowie stachyose und
raffinose. Fortchr. Tierphysiol. Tierernahrg. 19:31-43.
Muir, H. E., S. M. Murray, G. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, and G. A. Reinhart. 1996.
Nutrient digestion by ileal cannulated dogs as affected by dietary fibers with
various fermentation characteristics. J. Anim. Sci. 74:1641-1648.
Muir, J., and K. O’Dea. 1993. Validation of an in vitro assay for predicting the
amount of starch that escapes digestion in the small intestine of humans. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. 57:540-546.
Murray, S. M., A. R. Patil, G. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, B. W. Wolf, C.-S. Lai,
and K. A. Garleb. 1998. Apparent digestibility of a debranched amylopectin-lipid
complex and resistant starch incorporated into enteral formulas fed to ileal-
cannulated dogs. J. Nutr. 128:2032-2035.
Murray, S. M., G. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, G. D. Sunvold, and G. A. Reinhart.
1999. Evaluation of selected high-starch flours as ingredients in canine diets. J.
Anim. Sci. 77:2180-2186.
Murray, S. M., E. A. Flickinger, A. R. Patil, N. R. Merchen, J. L. Brent, Jr., and G. C.
Fahey, Jr. 2001. In vitro fermentation characteristics of native and processed cereal
grains and potato starch using ileal chyme from dogs. J. Anim. Sci. 79:435-444.
Nantel, G. 1999. Carbohydrates in human nutrition. Food Nutr. Agric. 24: 6-10.
Nelson, R. W. 1989. The role of fiber in managing diabetes mellitus. Vet. Med.
84:1156-1160.


===== PDF PAGE 172 =====
171
Nguyen, P., H. Dumon, P. Buttlin, L. Martin, and A. Gouro. 1994. Composition of
meal influences changes in postprandial incremental glucose and insulin in healthy
dogs. J. Nutr. 124:2707S-2711S.
Nguyen P., H. Dumon, V. Biourge, and E. Pouteau. l998. Glycemic and insulinemic
responses after ingestion of commercial foods in healthy dogs: Influence of food
composition. J. Nutr. 128:2654S-2658S.
O’Carra, R. 1997. An assessment of the potential of mannanoligosaccharides as
immunostimulants. M.S. thesis. National University of Ireland, Galway.
Pappas, T. N., R. L. Melendez, and H. T. Debas. 1989. Gastric distension is a
physiologic satiety signal in the dog. Digest. Dis. Sci. 34:1489-1493.
Payler, D. K., E. W. Pomare, K. W. Heaton, and R. F. Harvey. 1975. The effect of
wheat bran on intestinal transit. Gut 16:209-213.
Pazur, J. H. 1970. Oligosaccharides. Pp. 69-138 in The Carbohydrates. Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Vol. IIA., W. Pigman and D. Horton, eds. New York: Academic
Press.
Piccaglia, R., and G. C. Galletti. 1988. Sugar and sugar alcohol determination in
feedstuffs by HRGC, HPLC and enzymatic analysis. J. Sci. Food Agric. 45:203-
213.
Pouteau, E., H. Dumon, V. Biourge, M. Krempf, and P. Nguyen. 1998a. A kinetic
study of acetate metabolism in dogs using [1-13C]acetate. J. Nutr. 128:2651S-
2653S.
Pouteau, E., H. Dumon, V. Biourge, M. Krempf, and P. Nguyen. 1998b. Lactulose
ingestion has no effect on plasma acetate in dogs studied with [1-13C]acetate. J.
Nutr. 128:2663S-2665S.
Prosky, L. 1991. The AOAC method for dietary fiber: Then and now. Pp. 150-152 in
Proc. Cereals Int. D. J. Martin and C. W. Wrigley, eds. Parkville, Victoria: Royal
Australian Chemical Institute.
Prosky, L., and J. DeVries. 1992. Controlling Dietary Fiber in Food Products. New
York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Prosky, L., N. G. Asp, I. Furda, J. W. Devries, T. F. Schweizer, and B. F. Harland.
1984. Determination of total dietary fiber in foods, food products and total diets:
Interlaboratory study. J. Assoc. Off. Anal. Chem. 67:1044-1052.
Quigley, M. E., and H. N. Englyst. 1992. Determination of neutral sugars and
hexoseamines by high-performance liquid chromatography with pulsed
amperometric detection. Analyst 117:1715-1718.
Quigley, M. E., and H. N. Englyst. 1994. Determination of the uronic acid
constituents of non-starch polysaccharides by high-performance liquid
chromatography with pulsed amperometric detection. Analyst 119: 1511-1518.
Remesy, C., S. R. Behr, M. A. Levrat, and C. Demigne. 1992. Fiber fermentability in
the rat cecum and its physiological consequences. Nutr. Res. 12:1235-1244.
Report of the British Nutrition Foundation Task Force. 1990. Complex Carbohydrates
in Foods. London: Chapman and Hall.


===== PDF PAGE 173 =====
172
Reppas, C., J. H. Meyer, P. J. Sirois, and J. B. Dressman. 1991. Effect of
hydroxypropylmethylcellulose on gastrointestinal transit and luminal viscosity in
dogs. Gastroenterol. 100:1217-1223.
Rerat, A. 1978. Digestion and absorption of carbohydrates and nitrogenous matters in
the hindgut of the omnivorous nonruminant animal. J. Anim. Sci. 46:1808-1837.
Rerat, A., M. Fiszlewicz, A. Guisi, and P. Vaugelade. 1987. Influence of meal
frequency on postprandial variations in the production and absorption of volatile
fatty acids in the digestive tract of conscious pigs. J. Anim. Sci. 64:448-456.
Ristert, E. 1914. Intestinal absorption of calcium. Pp. 321-403 in Mineral
Metabolism, Vol. III, L. L. Comar and U. F. Bronner, eds. New York: Academic
Press.
Roberfroid, G. 1993. Dietary fiber, inulin, and oligofructose: A review comparing
their physiological effects. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 33:103-148.
Roberfroid, M., G. R. Gibson, and N. Delzenne. 1993. The biochemistry of
oligofructose, a nondigestible fiber: An approach to calculate its caloric value.
Nutr. Rev. 51:137-146.
Robertson, J. B., and P. J. van Soest. 1981. The detergent system of analysis and its
application to human foods Pp. 123-158 in The Analysis of Dietary Fiber in Foods,
W. P. T. James and O. Theander, eds. New York: Marcell Dekker.
Roediger, W. E. W. 1980. Role of anaerobic bacteria in the metabolic welfare of the
colonic mucosa in man. Gut 21:793-798.
Romsos, D. R., P. S. Belo, M. R. Bennink, W. G. Bergen, and G. A. Leveille. 1976.
Effects of dietary carbohydrate, fat, and protein on growth, body composition, and
blood metabolite levels in the dog. J. Nutr. 106:1452-1464.
Romsos, D. R., M. J. Hornshuh, and G. A. Leveille. 1978. Influence of dietary fat and
carbohydrate on food intake, body weight and body fat of adult dogs. Proc. Soc.
Exper. Bio. Med. 157:278-281.
Romsos, D. R., H. J. Palmer, K. L. Muiruri, and M. R. Bennink. 1981. Influence of a
low carbohydrate diet on performance of pregnant and lactating dogs. J. Nutr.
111:678-689.
Rossner, S. 1992. Dietary fiber in the prevention and treatment of obesity. Pp. 265-
277 in Dietary Fiber—A Component of Food. Nutritional Function in Health and
Disease, T. F. Schweizer and C. A. Edwards, eds. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Russell, J., and P. Bass. 1985. Canine gastric emptying of fiber meals: Influence of
meal viscosity and antroduodenal motility. Am. J. Physiol. 249:G662-667.
Sakata, T. 1987. Stimulatory effect of short-chain fatty acids on epithelial cell
proliferation in the rat intestine: A possible explanation for trophic effects of
fermentable fibre, gut microbes and luminal tropic factors. Br. J. Nutr. 58:95-103.
Scarlett, J. M., S. Donoghue, J. Saidla, and J. M. Wills. 1994. Overweight cats:
Prevalence and risk factors. Int. J. Obesity 18:S22-S28.
Scheppach, W., P. Bartran, and A. Richter. 1992. Effect of short chain fatty acids on
the human colonic mucosa in vitro. J. Paren. Ent. Nutr. 16:43-48.


===== PDF PAGE 174 =====
173
Schneeman, B. O. 1987. Soluble vs insoluble fiber—Different physiological
responses. Food Technol. 41:81-82.
Schneeman, B. O. 1994. Carbohydrates: Significance for energy balance and
gastrointestinal function. J. Nutr. 124(Suppl):1747S-1753S.
Schultz A., and F. Grande. 1968. Effects of starch and sucrose on the serum lipids of
dogs before and after thyroidectomy. J. Nutr. 94:71-73.
Schünemann, V. C., A. Muehlum, S. Junker, H. Wilfarth, and H. Meyer. l989.
Precaecal and postileal digestibility of various starches, pH-values and
concentrations of organic acids in intestinal chyme. Fortschr Tierphysiol.
Tierernaehr. 19:44-58
Selvendran, R. R. 1984. The plant cell wall as a source of dietary fiber: Chemistry
and structure. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 39:320-337.
Sheffy, B. E., and A. J. Williams. 1981. Nutrition and the aging animal. Vet. Clin.
North. Am. 11:669-675.
Sheffy, B. E., A. J. Williams, J. F. Zimmer, and G. D. Ryan. 1985. Nutrition and
metabolism of the geriatric dog. Cornell Vet. 75:324-347.
Silvio, J., D. L. Harmon, K. L. Gross, and K. R. McLeod. 2000. Influence of fiber
fermentability on nutrient digestion in the dog. Nutr. 16:289-295.
Sloth, C. 1992. Practical management of obesity in dogs and cats. J. Small Anim.
Practice 33:178-182.
Smith, A. N., E. Drummond, and M. A. Eastwood. 1981. The effect of coarse and fine
Canadian Red Wheat and French Soft Wheat bran on colonic motility in patients
with diverticular disease. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 34:2460-2463.
Southgate, D. A. T. 1981. Use of the Southgate method for unavailable carbohydrates
in the measurement of dietary fiber. Pp. 1-19 in The Analysis of Dietary Fiber in
Food, W. P. T. James and O. Theander, eds. New York: Marcell Dekker, Inc.
Sparkes, A. H., K. Papasouliotis, G. Sunvold, G. Werrett, C. Clarke, M. Jones, T. J.
Gruffydd-Jones, and G. Reinhart. 1998a. Bacterial flora in the duodenum of
healthy cats, and effect of dietary supplementation with fructooligosaccharides. Am
J. Vet. Res. 59:431-435.
Sparkes, A. H., K. Papasouliotis, G. Sunvold, G. Werrett, E. A. Gruffydd-Jones, K.
Egan, T. J. Gruffydd-Jones, and G. Reinhart. 1998b. Effect of dietary
supplementation with fructooligosaccharides on fecal flora of healthy cats. Am. J.
Vet. Res. 59:436-440.
Sreenath, H. K. 1992. Studies on starch granule digestion by α-amylase.
Starch/Staerke 44:61-63.
Stanogias, G., and G. R. Pearce. 1985. The digestion of fibre by pigs. I. The effects of
amount and type of fibre on apparent digestibility, nitrogen balance and rate of
passage. Br. J. Nutr. 53:513-530.
Stenutz, R., P. E. Jansson, and G. Widmalm. 1998. Computer-assisted structural
analysis of oligo- and polysaccharides: An extension of CASPER to multibranched
structures. Carbohydr. Res. 306:11-17.


===== PDF PAGE 175 =====
174
Stephan, A. M. 1983. Other plant polysaccharides. Pp. 97-193 in The
Polysaccahrides, G.O. Aspinall, ed. New York: Academic Press.
Stephen, A. M. 1989. The physiological effects of cellulose in the human large
intestine. Anim. Feed. Sci. Tech. 23:241-259.
Stephen, A. M., and J. H. Cummings. 1980. Mechanism of action of dietary fiber in
the human colon. Nature 284:283-284.
Stevens, C. E., R. A. Argenzio, and E. T. Clemens. 1980. Microbial digestion: Rumen
versus large intestine. Pp. 685-706 in Digestive Physiology and Metabolism in
Ruminants, Y. Ruckebusch and P. Thivend, eds. Lancaster, UK: MTP Press.
Stock-Damge, C., P. Bouchet, A. Dentinger, M. Aprahamian, and J. F. Grenier. 1983.
Effect of dietary fiber supplementation on the secretory function of the exocrine
pancreas in the dog. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 38:843-848.
Stock-Damge, C., M. Aprahamian, F. Raul, W. Humbert, and P. Bouchet. 1984. Effect
of wheat bran on the exocrine pancreas and small intestinal mucosa in the dog. J.
Nutr. 114:1076-1082.
Strasser, A., H. Niedermueller, G. Hofecker, and G. Laber. 1993. The effect of aging
on laboratory value of dogs. J. Vet. Med. A40:720-730.
Strickling, J. A., D. L. Harmon, K. A. Dawson, and K. L. Gross. 2000. Evaluation of
oligosaccharide addition to dog diets: Influences on nutrient digestion and
microbial populations. Anim. Feed Sci. Technol. 86:205-219.
Sunvold, G. D. 1996. Dietary fiber for dogs and cats: An historical perspective. Pp. 3-
14 in Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition: 1996 Iams Nutrition
Symposium Proceedings, D. P. Carey, S. A. Norton, and S. M. Bolser, eds.
Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Sunvold, G. D., and G. F. Bouchard. 1998. Assessment of obesity and associated
metabolic disorders. Pp. 135-148 in Recent Advances in Canine and Feline
Nutrition, Vol. II: 1998 Iams Nutrition Symposium Proceedings, G. A. Reinhart
and D. P. Carey, eds., Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Sunvold, G. D., L. D. Bourquin, E. C. Titgemeyer, G. C. Fahey, Jr., and G. A.
Reinhart. 1993. Fermentability of various fibrous substrates by canine fecal
microflora. FASEB J. 7:4276 (abstr.).
Sunvold, G. D., G. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, and G. A. Reinhart. 1995a. In vitro
fermentation of selected fibrous substrates by dog and cat fecal inoculum:
Influence of diet composition on substrate organic matter disappearance and short-
chain fatty acid production. J. Anim. Sci. 73:1110-1122.
Sunvold, G. D., G. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, L. D. Bourquin, E. C. Titgemeyer, L.
L. Bauer, and G. A. Reinhart. 1995b. Dietary fiber for cats: In vitro fermentation of
selected fiber sources by cat fecal inoculum and in vivo utilization of diets
containing selected fiber sources and their blends. J. Anim. Sci. 73:2329-2339.
Sunvold, G. D., G. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, L. D. Bourquin, E. C. Titgemeyer, L.
L. Bauer, and G. A. Reinhart. 1995c. Dietary fiber for dogs. IV. In vitro
fermentation of selected fiber sources by dog fecal inoculum and in vivo digestion
and metabolism of fiber-supplemented diets. J. Anim. Sci. 73:1099-1109.


===== PDF PAGE 176 =====
175
Sunvold, G. D., H. S. Hussein, G. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, and G. A. Reinhart.
1995d. In vitro fermentation of cellulose, beet pulp, citrus pulp, and citrus pectin
using fecal inoculum from cats, dogs, horses, humans, and pigs, and ruminal fluid
from cattle. J. Anim. Sci. 73:3639-3648.
Swanson, K. S., C. M. Grieshop, G. M. Clapper, R. G. Shields, Jr., T. Belay, N. R.
Merchen, and G. C. Fahey, Jr. 2001. Fruit and vegetable fiber fermentation by gut
microflora from canines. J. Anim. Sci. 79:919-926.
Swanson, K. S., C. M. Grieshop, E. A. Flickinger, L. L. Bauer, H. P. Healy, K. A.
Dawson, N. R. Merchen, and G. C. Fahey, Jr. 2002a. Supplemental
fructooligosaccharides and mannanoligosaccharides influence immune fuction,
ileal and total tract nutrient digestibilities, microbial populations and concentrations
of protein catabolites in the large bowel of dogs. J. Nutr. 132:980-989.
Swanson, K. S., C. M. Grieshop, E. A. Flickinger, H. P. Healy, K. A. Dawson, N. R.
Merchen, and G.C. Fahey, Jr. 2002b. Effects of supplemental
fructooligosaccharides plus mannanoligosaccharides on immune function and ileal
and fecal microbial populations in adult dogs. Arch. Anim. Nutr. 56:309-318.
Swenson, M. J. 1989. Physiological properties and cellular and chemical constituents
of blood. Pp.15-40 in Duke’s Physiology of Domestic Animals, 10th ed., M. J.
Swenson, ed. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Tappenden, K. A., A. B. R. Thomson, G. E. Wild, and M. I. McBurney. 1997. Short-
chain fatty acid-supplemented total parenteral nutrition enhances functional
adaptation to intestinal resection in rats. Gastroenterol. 112:792-802.
Tarttelin, M. F. 1991. Specific dietary needs of the cats and some related endocrine
and metabolic disorders. Proc. Nutr. Soc. New Zealand. 16: 83-92.
Terada, A., H. Hara, T. Oishi, S. Matsui, T. Mitsuoka, S. Nakajyo, I. Fujimori, and K.
Hara. 1992. Effect of dietary lactosucrose on fecal flora and fecal metabolites of
dogs. Microb. Ecol. Health Dis. 5:87-92.
Terada, A., H. Hara, S. Kato, T. Kimura, I. Fujimori, K. Hara, T. Maruyama, and T.
Mitsuoka. 1993. Effects of lactosucrose (4G-β-D-galactosylsu-crose) on fecal flora
and fecal putrefactive products of cats. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 55:291-294.
Tetens, I., G. Livesey, and B. O. Eggum. 1996. Effects of the type and level of dietary
fiber supplements on nitrogen retention and excretion patterns. Br. J. Nutr. 75:461-
469.
Theander, O., and E. Westerlund. 1986. Determination of individual components of
dietary fiber. Pp. 57-75 in Handbook of Dietary Fiber in Human Nutrition, G.
Spiller, ed. Boca Raton, Fl.: CRC Press.
Theander, O., and E. Westerlund. 1987. Studies on chemical modifications in heat-
processed starch and wheat flour. Starch/Staerke 39:88-93.
Theander O., E. Westerlund, P. Aman, and H. Graham. 1989. Plant cells and
monogastric diets. Anim. Feed Sci. Technol. 23:205-225.
Theander, O., P. Aman, E. Westerlund, and H. Graham. 1994. Enzymatic/chemical
analysis of dietary fiber. J. Assoc. Off. Anal. Chem. 77:703-709.


===== PDF PAGE 177 =====
176
Thivend, P., M. Christiane, and A. Guilbot. 1972. Determination of starch with
glucoamylase. Meth. Carbohydr. Chem. 6:100-105.
Topping, D. L. 1999. Physiological effects of dietary carbohydrates in the large
bowel: Is there a need to recognize dietary fiber equivalents? Asia Pacific J. Clin.
Nutr. 8:S22-S26.
Trowell, H. 1972. Crude fiber, dietary fiber and atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis
16:138-140.
Trowell, H., D. A. T. Southgate, T. M. S. Wolever, A. R. Leeds, M. A. Gus-sell, and
D. J. A. Jenkins. 1976. Dietary fiber redefined. Lancet i:967.
Van der Meulen, J., J. G. M. Bakker, B. Smits, and H. De Visser. 1997. Effect of
source of starch on net portal flux of glucose, lactate, volatile fatty acids, and
amino acids in the pig. Br. J. Nutr. 78:533-544.
Van Loo, J., J. Cummings, N. Delzenne, H. Englyst, A. Frank, M. Hopkins, N. Kok,
G. Macfarlane, D. Newton, M. Quigley, M. Roberfroid, I. Van Vliet, and E. Van
Den Heuvel. 1999. Functional food properties of nondigestible oligosaccharides: A
consensus report from the ENDO project (DGXII AIRII-CT94-1095). Br. J. Nutr.
81:121-132.
Van Soest, P. J. 1963. Use of detergents in the analysis of fibrous feeds. II. A rapid
method for the determination of fiber and lignin. J. Assoc. Off. Anal. Chem.
46:829-835.
Van Soest, P. J., and R. H. Wine. 1967. Use of detergents in the analysis of fibrous
feeds. IV. Determination of plant cell-wall constituents. J. Assoc. Off. Anal. Chem
50:50-55.
Van Soest, P. J., J. B. Robertson, and B. A. Lewis. 1991. Methods for dietary fiber,
neutral detergent fiber, and nonstarch polysaccharides in relation to animal
nutrition. J. Dairy Sci. 74:3583-3597.
Vickers, R. J., G. D. Sunvold, R. L. Kelley, and G. A. Reinhart. 2001. Comparison of
fermentation of selected fructooligosaccharides and other fiber substrates by canine
colonic microflora. Am. J. Vet. Res. 62:609-615.
Visek, W. J., and J. B. Robertson. 1973. Dried brewers’ grains in dog diets. Proc.
Cornell Nutr. Conf., pp. 40-44.
Von Engelhardt, W., K. Roennau, G. Rechkemmer, and T. Sakata. 1989. Absorption
of short-chain fatty acids and their role in the hindgut of monogastric animals.
Anim. Feed Sci. Technol. 23:43-53.
Washabau, R. J., D. R. Strombeck, C. A. Buffington, and D. Harrold. 1986.
Evaluation of intestinal carbohydrate malabsorption in the dog by pulmonary
hydrogen gas excretion. Am. J. Vet. Res. 47:1402-1406.
Welsh, J. D., and A. Walker. 1965. Intestinal disaccharidase and alkaline phosphatase
activity in the dog. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 120:525-527.
Wilcox, E. R., and J. R. Whitaker. 1984. Some aspects of the mechanism of
complexation of red kidney bean α-amylase inhibitor and α-amylase. Biochem.
23:1783-1791.


===== PDF PAGE 178 =====
177
Willard, M. D., R. B. Simpson, E. K. Delles, N. D. Cohen, T. W. Fossum, D. Kolp,
and G. Reinhart. 1994. Effects of dietary supplementation of fructooligosaccharides
on small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 55:654-659.
Wisker, E., K. E. Bach Knudsen, M. Daniel, B. O. Eggum, and W. Feldheim. 1997.
Energy values of non-starch polysaccharides: Comparative studies in humans and
rats. J. Nutr. 127:108-116.
Wolfram, S., E. Eggenberger, and E. Scharrer. 1989. Kinetics of D-glucose transport
across the intestinal brush-border membrane of the cat. Biochem. Physiol.
94A:111-115.
Wood, P. J. 2001. Cereal β-glucans: Structure, properties and health claims. Pp. 315-
327 in Advanced Dietary Fibre Technology, B.V. McCleary and L. Prosky, eds.
Oxford, UK: Blackwell Science Ltd.
Wuersch, P., S. Del Vedevo, and B. Koellreutter. 1986. Cell structure and starch
nature as key determinants of the digestion rate of starch in legumes. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr. 43:25-29.
Wyman, J. B., K. W. Heaton, A. P. Manning, and A. C. Wicks. 1976. The effect on
intestinal transit and the feces of raw and cooked bran in different doses. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. 29:1474-1479.
Zentek, J. 1995. Influence of diet composition on microbial activity in the gastro-
intestinal tract of dogs. III. In vitro studies on the metabolic activities of the small-
intestinal microflora. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 74:62-73.
Zentek, J. 1996. Cellulose, pectins, and guar gum as fiber sources in canine diets. J.
Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 75:36-45.
Zentek, J., I. Stephan, S. Kramer, C. Goerig, J. Blum, and I. Nolte. 1998. Parenteral
nutrition in healthy dogs: Comparison of fat versus glucose as main energy sources.
J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 80:67-69.
Zentek, J., B. Marquart, and T. Pietrzak. 2002. Intestinal effects of
mannanoligosaccharides, transgalactooligosaccharides, lactose and lactulose in
dogs. J. Nutr. 132:1682S-1684S.
Zimmer, J. F. 1983. Comparative nutritional requirements of young adult and older
dogs. Small Anim. Pediatr. 5:1053-1058.
Zuo, Y., G. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, and N. L. Bajjalieh. 1996. Digestion
responses to low oligosaccharide soybean meal by ileal-cannulated dogs. J. Anim.
Sci. 74:2441-2449.


===== PDF PAGE 179 =====
178
5
Fat and Fatty Acids
IMPORTANCE OF DIETARY FATS AND FATTY ACIDS
Fats are an important component of companion animal diets. Dietary fats provide a
concentrated source of energy for storage and utilization and supply the essential fatty
acids (EFAs) that are not otherwise synthesized. All fatty acids, including the EFAs,
serve structural functions and their degree of unsaturation imparts specific fluid
properties to cell membranes. Several polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) serve as
precursors of prostaglandins and other eicosanoids, which are powerful physiologic
regulators of cell functions. Dietary fats generally improve palatability and add an
acceptable texture to foods beyond their provision of EFAs. They also serve as carriers
for fat-soluble vitamins and thus provide important substrates for cell processes during
all life stages.
Fats belong to a broader group of compounds known as lipids that can be glycerol or
non-glycerol based. Glycerol-based lipids include simple lipids such as the hydrophobic
triacylglycerols (triglycerides) and compound lipids that are more polar (phospholipids
and glycolipids). Cholesterol and its fatty acid esters are non-glycerol-based lipids, and
this category includes waxes, cerebrosides, terpenes, sphingomyelins, and various
sterols.
TYPES AND SOURCES OF DIETARY FATS AND FATTY
ACIDS
Nomenclature


===== PDF PAGE 180 =====
179
Lipids are a diverse group of substances that have both structural and functional
roles. Dietary lipids consist of free fatty acids linked either to a glycerol backbone as
triacylglycerols or phospholipids or to a plant or animal alcohol such as cholesterol or
retinol. In mammals, fatty acids may be saturated or unsaturated, with or without double
bonds, respectively, but all are straight-chain hydrocarbon molecules. Saturated and
monounsaturated fatty acids can be derived from the diet or synthesized by the animal
body. Dietary unsaturated fatty acids may have their double bonds in either cis or trans
configurations depending on fat source. However, the EFAs of mammals are
polyunsaturated (i.e., two or more double bonds), straight-chain hydrocarbons with their
important double bonds in a methylene-interrupted cis configuration that is required for
EFA activity (Mead, 1980; Gurr, 1984). The presence of a trans double bond in a fatty
acid is not incompatible with EFA activity as long as the basic pattern of a methylene-
interrupted double-bond sequence of the cis, cis type is also present. Fatty acids are
typically named either for the number of carbon atoms they contain and number of
double bonds or after their parent molecule (Figure 5-1). Designation of the double-
bond placement depends on the point of reference used in the molecular structure. The
usual chemical convention is to number the carbon atoms from the functional group (in
this case the carboxyl group) onward. Using this system, linoleic acid has double bonds
between carbons 9 and 10 and 12 and 13 and is designated Δ9,12-18:2. This notation is
referred to as the Δ-notation. It numbers the carbon atoms from the carboxyl terminus
and indicates the location of each double bond. Cis and trans double bonds are
designated with either a “c” or “t” in front of the number of the carbon where the double
bond is located and the “Δ” symbol may not be used, such as c9,t12-18:2.
Fatty acid structures can also be specified using the ω-notation in the form of A:Bn-
C (or A:Bω-C), where A is the number of carbon atoms in the chain, B is the number of
double bonds, and C is the position of the first double bond from the methyl terminus.
All double-bond placements are specified by this notation because it is applied only to
straight-chain fatty acids having methylene-interrupted double bonds in their structure.
Thus, linoleic acid is referred to as 18:2n-6 (or 18:2ω-6). Placement of the first double
bond is between carbons 6 and 7 counted from the methyl terminus. Because the double
bonds occur in methylene-interrupted sequence, only the first double-bond position has
to be stipulated. Strictly speaking, the ω-notation only applies to cis-unsaturated double
bonds.


===== PDF PAGE 181 =====
180
FIGURE 5-1 Chemical structure of the n-3 and n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid families.
Each nomenclature has its advantages, and both are used. The Δ-notation readily
demonstrates fatty acid regulation because desaturase activities are specific for double-
bond placement from the carboxyl end. By contrast, the ω-notation shows the
relationship within a specific fatty acid family and highlights metabolic relationships as
a result of chain elongation and desaturation reactions that may occur. Appreciation of
both nomenclatures provides a better understanding of the possible metabolic
conversions involved.
Sources
The materials from which dietary fats are derived are primarily the storage fats of
land and marine animals and the seed oils of numerous plants. The composition of
storage fats derived from monogastric land mammals (e.g., dogs, cats, pigs, poultry)
generally reflects the diets fed these animals. However, animals used for food
production are generally fed low-fat diets based on grains. As such, the majority of
tissue fatty acids are produced de novo from carbohydrates. Thus, their storage fats are
primarily of the saturated and monounsaturated fatty acid type. When fats high in either
linoleic acid (LA; e.g., soybean, corn, sunflower, safflower oils) or α-linolenic acid


===== PDF PAGE 182 =====
181
(ALA; e.g., linseed oil) are included, higher percentages of the respective PUFA in
tissue lipids will result (Gurr, 1984; Campbell and Dorn, 1992; Campbell and
Roudebush, 1995; Pawlosky et al., 1997; Waldron, 1999). This effect is similar in
ruminants, although not to the same extent as a result of microbial hydrogenation of
unsaturated fatty acids in the rumen prior to absorption. Thus, only modest changes in
fatty acid composition of adipose tissue occur when feeding unprotected fats rich in
PUFAs to ruminant animals. As might be expected, some trans fatty acids also are seen
in ruminant species. Fats derived from marine life sources such as fish, phytoplankton,
and other marine plants typically contain higher amounts of the n-3 type fatty acids than
do land mammals. It should be noted that fish oils differ in composition between species
and vary according to diet, seasonal influences, and habitat. In addition to high n-3 fatty
acid content, some species contain reasonable amounts of long-chain monounsaturated
fatty acids as well as saturated acids. Given the lack of equivalence among these
sources, a clear picture of the types and amounts of specific n-3 fatty acids desired in a
finished food product should be kept in mind when selecting from among them.
The oils derived from vegetable sources are comprised primarily of triacylglycerols
and are found in both the seeds (e.g., soybean, corn) and, in some cases, the fleshy fruit
(e.g., olive, palm). Leaf tissues of terrestrial plants contain reasonably high amounts of
ALA (18:3n-3). However, these latter plant materials are low in total fat and generally
do not constitute a major dietary source of fats for dogs and cats. Seed oils vary widely
in their fatty acid composition, and a given fatty acid often predominates as
characteristic of its particular plant origin. Thus, seed oils may be rich in either 18-
carbon n-6 fatty acids or 18-carbon n-3 fatty acids, and some will contain varying
amounts of both. The n-6 PUFAs including LA (18:2n-6) and γ-linolenic acid (GLA,
18:3n-6) are readily obtained from terrestrial animal and plant seed sources (see Table
13-3).
Trans Fatty Acids
When fat is added as a separate ingredient in manufactured foods for dogs and cats, it
has typically undergone some type of extraction and partial purification process that
may modify its overall composition. In some cases such as hydrogenation, more
extensive changes in composition may occur especially because of the introduction of
trans double bonds. Hydrogenation of fats and oils reduces the degree of unsaturation
by adding hydrogen atoms to the carbon-carbon double bonds, thereby increasing their
melting points and making them less susceptible to oxidative deterioration. This process
is used primarily in manufacturing human food to achieve certain desirable
characteristics of specific products. Hydrogenation is carried out using a finely
powdered metal catalyst at moderately high temperatures and then the catalyst is
removed. As hydrogenation occurs, some of the cis double bonds in the natural fatty
acids are isomerized to the trans configuration. In addition, there is a migration of some
double bonds along the length of the chain. Because the hydrogenation process is rarely
taken to completion, the resultant products necessarily vary in their composition as a
function of the precise conditions used. For a review of trans fatty acids, see Dutton


===== PDF PAGE 183 =====
182
(1971). The possible health consequences of feeding trans fatty acids to animals and
man have also been reviewed (Mensink and Katan, 1990; Emken, 1991). In essence, it
appears that trans fatty acid-containing diets may modify lipoprotein metabolism
similarly to diets that are rich in saturated fatty acids. The extent to which these fatty
acids may affect dog and cat metabolism has not been studied to date.
Medium-Chain Triacylglycerols
Medium chain triacylglycerols (MCTs) are those primarily containing a mixture of
fatty acids 8:0 and 10:0 with small amounts of 6:0 and 12:0. Hydrogenated coconut oil
is a source of MCTs, but it also contains other longer-chain fatty acids and must be
fractionated to obtain more pure preparations of MCTs. MCTs are readily hydrolyzed
during digestion and reportedly absorbed and transported through mesenteric capillaries
into the portal circulation (Bach and Babayan, 1982). Recent data in dogs have provided
evidence that short-term feeding of a low-fat diet (5.35 percent fat, as is) containing 3.2
percent 8:0 (as is) and 1.5 percent 10:0 (as is) resulted in some absorption of these MCT
fatty acids into the intestinal lymphatics (Newton et al., 2000). Overall, MCTs do not
have the same energy value because of their shorter chain length, although their more
direct route of absorption may provide other benefits (Remillard and Thatcher, 1989). In
spite of this potential benefit, MCTs reportedly decrease food palatability for dogs
(Remillard and Thatcher, 1989) and appear to be contraindicated in cats (MacDonald et
al., 1985). Indeed, feeding dogs a diet containing 22 percent of dietary metabolizable
energy (ME) in the form of MCTs was found to depress food intake along with
increased plasma lipid concentrations (Van Dongen et al., 2000). However, when dogs
were fed 11 percent of dietary ME as MCTs (total fat 13.4 percent, as is) for 14 days,
there was no food refusal, no influence on rate of food ingestion, and no effect on
plasma cholesterol and phospholipid concentrations (Beynen et al., 2002). Fat
digestibility in these dogs averaged 95.3 percent of intake. Also, no effects on protein
digestibility or calcium or magnesium absorption were noted (Beynen et al., 2002).
Because these studies were short term, it is unknown whether the amount of MCTs used
in the latter study might be of an order of magnitude to define a presumed safe upper
limit (SUL) for this nutrient. Small amounts such as those present in hydrogenated
coconut oil (i.e., approximately 9 percent and 7 percent of total fat for 8:0 and 10:0,
respectively) are unlikely to be detrimental in practical diets containing a total coconut
oil content of 10 percent or less (as is).
Conjugated Linoleic Acid
Conjugated linoleic acids (CLAs) are naturally occurring fatty acids found
principally in ruminant species. These acids are a mixture of positional and geometric
isomers of LA (Δ9,12-18:2n-6). They have one of two double bonds translocated at Δ9
and Δ11 or at Δ10 and Δ12 positions in a chemical structure known as a conjugated
diene rather than in a methylene-interrupted sequence as in LA. Because each double
bond can be in either the cis or the trans position, eight geometric isomers of Δ9,11 and


===== PDF PAGE 184 =====
183
Δ10,12 can exist. Other singular positional isomers of CLA include Δ7,9, Δ8,10,
Δ11,13, and Δ12,14, and each of these can occur in the following geometric
configurations: cis, trans; trans, cis; cis, cis; and trans, trans (Sehat et al., 1998).
However, one primary isomer, c9,t11-18:2 is typically distinguished from the others and
has been the subject of numerous investigations. Nonetheless, it should be noted that the
term CLA typically refers to mixtures of these isomers, although in many studies the
term has been used to describe the group of Δ9,11-18:2 isomeric forms.
As noted above, CLAs are naturally produced in ruminants as normal isomerization
products of LA by rumen bacteria. Preferential transformation to the Δ9,11-18:2 isomer
group accounts for it being one of the major forms of this fatty acid. Biotransformation
of trans fatty acids in this way, accounts for small percentages of these fatty acids in
ruminant fats and tissues as well. CLAs also can be generated by autooxidation of LA in
the presence of hydrogen. Consequently, meat processing procedures including cooking
or grilling, especially at high temperatures, may increase CLA content of meat and meat
products, although several other factors may affect this conversion (Siems et al., 2001).
Several potentially beneficial effects have been ascribed to CLAs including
antiatherogenic properties by using rabbit and hamster model systems (Lee et al., 1994;
Nicolosi et al., 1997). However, a study in mice demonstrated that CLAs at 0.5 and 0.25
percent of the total diet increased fatty streak development (Munday et al., 1999). It was
initially proposed that CLAs may function as antioxidants, thereby protecting low-
density lipoproteins from oxidation. However, an in vitro investigation showed that this
did not occur (Van den Bergh et al., 1995). More important to canine and feline species
are the potential effects of CLAs on body fat content, skeletal muscle growth, and bone
metabolism or as an anticarcinogen; these possibilities await future study. With the
exception of a few published abstracts of dog and cat studies (Bartges, 1999; Schoenherr
and Jewell, 1999), all data published to date have been obtained using cell cultures or
other animal species (Pariza, 1991, 1997; Ip et al., 1994a,b; Haufmann, 1996; Park et
al., 1997; Li and Watkins, 1998; Watkins et al., 2000). For a review of CLAs and their
health effects, see Watkins and Li (2001) and Haufmann (1996).
Other Sources
Other sources of dietary fats in dog and cat diets that may sometimes be overlooked
include eggs, muscle, and offal that comprise many typical ingredients used in pet food
manufacture. The overall fatty acid composition of a finished food product ultimately
depends on all fatty acids contained in the ingredients. Many of the common ingredients
used in dog and cat food manufacturing such as poultry byproduct meal and lamb meal,
while not primary sources of dietary fat, do contribute a source of dietary fatty acids to a
finished product. It is for this reason that fatty acid profiles of some of these commonly
used ingredients have been included (see Table 13-2).
As might be expected, these ingredients will vary as to their fat content and fatty acid
composition. For example, whole wheat, although low in total fat, may contribute
appreciable amounts of LA. Poultry by-product meal and lamb meal also may contribute


===== PDF PAGE 185 =====
184
several PUFAs, but their types may vary depending on diets fed these animals prior to
slaughter and regions of origin of food ingredients (Table 13-2).
ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES
Acid Hydrolysis
Food fats are composed principally of triacylglycerols with smaller amounts of more
complex lipids. The lipid materials extracted from a food ingredient using anhydrous
diethyl ether are termed crude fat and are primarily triacylglycerols with minor amounts
of chlorophyll and xanthophylls. Lipids in extruded or baked food products require that
the material be acid hydrolyzed prior to ether extraction, otherwise significant
underestimation of crude fat will occur (Budde, 1952; Hoffman, 1953). Other solvent
systems may also be used and are necessary to ensure extraction of more polar lipids
that may be present (see discussion of total lipid extraction below).
Extraction and Saponification of Fatty Acids
Both simple and compound lipids and some non-glycerol-based lipids (i.e.,
cholesteryl ester and sphingomyelin) contain substantial amounts of individual fatty
acids. Specific fatty acid families (n-6 and n-3 series) have become an important feature
in canine and feline nutrition and modern petfood manufacture. Thus, when an accurate
analysis of the total fatty acid profile of a food or food ingredient is desired, additional
techniques are required. A recently peer-verified technique has been published by the
American Association of Analytical Chemists International based on determination of
total fat in feeds by the Caviezel method (Anonymous, 1997). This method complies
with the new definition of fat from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). It
takes into consideration all fatty acid chain lengths, from C4 to C24, when fat is present
at 0.3-100 percent. Using tridecanoic acid as an internal standard, the sample is added to
the solvent n-butyl alcohol. The fat is extracted and simultaneously saponified by
potassium hydroxide, and the potassium salts are converted to fatty acids by addition of
an acidic aqueous salt solution, producing a two-phase system. The upper phase
containing the fatty acids and standard is subjected to the fat determination system and
subsequent gas chromatographic separation of individual fatty acids. The fat content is
determined from fatty acid peak areas and calculated as triacylglycerol.
Extraction for Total Lipid Analysis
An alternative method often used in research laboratories is the extraction of total
lipid content using a relatively more polar solvent prior to fatty acid analysis with gas
chromatographic techniques. A chloroform-methanol mixed solvent (2/1, v/v) is
recommended for the initial extraction. This solvent ensures that all fatty acid-
containing lipid components including those belonging to the non-triacylglycerols (e.g.,


===== PDF PAGE 186 =====
185
cholesteryl esters, phospholipids, nonesterified fatty acids) are extracted (Folch et al.,
1957; Bligh and Dyer, 1959). Addition of 0.2 percent glacial acetic acid to this solvent
mixture improves extraction yield as a result of protonation of the polar lipids prior to
their partition into the chloroform-methanol (Bauer and Ransone, 1983; Nelson, 1991).
Alternate solvent systems also have been proposed using isopropanol-hexane, but
chloroform-methanol remains the solvent of choice for this purpose (Nelson, 1991).
Prior to the advent of gas chromatography, analytic fat constants such as iodine
value, saponification value, and melting point were used to characterize fat quality and
degree of unsaturation. Although much of these earlier data exist, they are used only in a
very general sense in modern laboratory practice for the assessment of fat quality and fat
type. However, many laboratories do use some of these techniques. Finally, valid and
reliable methods are needed to assess the extent of oxidation of fats and oils. Methods
for measuring lipid oxidation and oxidative deterioration in foods have been described
along with their advantages and limitations (Warner and Eskin, 1995).
FAT ENERGY AND NUTRIENT DENSITY
Dietary fat provides the most concentrated source of energy in the diet. It accounts
for approximately 2.25 times the metabolizable energy (ME) of either protein or
carbohydrate. Consequently, alterations in the fat content of a diet can significantly
affect its caloric density. Because animals typically eat to meet their energy needs
(Cowgill, 1928; see Chapter 3), wide changes in caloric density may require the
adjustment of other nutrients such as protein, vitamins, and minerals. Such adjustments
are necessary to maintain an appropriate nutrient-energy profile. For example, as caloric
density increases, if protein remains constant, then the protein:energy ratio would
decrease. Intake of total protein mass then would decrease if the animal stopped eating
when its energy needs had been met at each meal. A net decrease of protein intake
would thus result over time (Elvehjem and Krehl, 1947; Crampton, 1964).
DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION
Digestion of dietary fat (lipase-mediated hydrolysis) and its absorption is a multistep
process requiring intrinsic coordination of three recognized stages in the upper
gastrointestinal tract (Maskell and Johnson, 1983)—luminal, mucosal, and secretory
(into portal or lymphatic circulation). Each contributes its share to the total digestive
environment.
Preduodenal Lipase
The luminal phase begins with preduodenal hydrolysis of ingested fat under the
control of lingual and gastric lipases. These enzymes are active at gastric pH and do not
require bile salts for activity. The presence of these lipases varies somewhat, depending
on animal species. Lipase originating in the oropharyngeal area (lingual lipase) has been
described in rat, man, and ruminants (Nelson et al., 1977). However, only traces of


===== PDF PAGE 187 =====
186
lingual lipase activity have been found in adult dogs (Iverson et al., 1991), and no
activity has been demonstrated to date in cats (Knospe and Plendl, 1997). It is unknown
whether lingual lipase activity might be higher in newborn puppies, but histochemical
evidence shows an absence of a lingual lipase in newborn kittens (Knospe and Plendl,
1997). Early reports on the existence of lingual lipases in various species should be
interpreted cautiously because sensitive techniques for assay were not available and
bacterial contamination of samples was likely in many studies (Douglas et al., 1953).
Both dogs and cats have been found to have gastric lipase activity (Nelson et al.,
1977; Hamosh, 1984; Carriere et al., 1992; Descroiz-Vagne et al., 1993; Knospe and
Plendl, 1997; Vaganay et al., 1998). Activities in dogs are reportedly highest in the
cardia area and greater curvature and lowest in the antrum and lesser curvature of the
stomach (Iverson et al., 1991). Histochemical evidence for strong enzymatic lipase
activity in the gastric mucosa in suckling kittens, persisting as long as the animals were
nursed, also has been demonstrated (Knospe and Plendl, 1997). It should be noted that,
in contrast to earlier studies in adult cats, histochemical evidence of gastric lipase in
both weaned and adult cats could not be demonstrated in a later study, although it was
found in kittens (Knospe and Plendl, 1997).
In dogs and cats, gastric lipase hydrolyzes triacylglycerol to a certain extent in the
stomach. As an initial step of dietary fat digestion, the resulting amphipathic lipids
formed actually facilitate triacylglycerol emulsification (Hamosh et al., 1975). This
observation was confirmed by Linthorst et al. (1977) who showed that the combination
of bile salts and lipolytic products (i.e., mono- and diacylglycerols) present in the
intestine participated in the emulsification of additional triacylglycerol, requiring only
low shear forces for formation. Such pre-hydrolysis of dietary triacylglycerols supports
the belief that the diacylglycerols, as well as triacylglycerols, are appropriate
physiologic substrates for pancreatic lipase (Verger, 1984). Another study found that the
fractional amount of dietary triacylglycerol hydrolyzed in vivo was higher after the
ingestion of a preemulsified meal than from a similar quantity of unemulsified fat
(Bergstrom et al., 1957). Taken together, more efficient fat digestion occurs because of
emulsification of lipids.
Pancreatic Lipase
When free fatty acids leave the stomach, they help stimulate cystokinin release by
the duodenal mucosa. Here, mixed micelles are formed by incorporating bile salts and a
colipase with the fatty acids and acylglycerols, resulting in the formation of a suitably
activated substrate for pancreatic lipase action on triacylglycerols. Cholesterol,
cholesteryl esters and other esters (e.g., retinyl esters), and phospholipids all participate
in micelle formation. The fatty acyl ester bonds of these molecules also are hydrolyzed
to various extents. Triacylglycerols are broken down to free fatty acids and mono- and
diacylglycerols.
Other Lipases


===== PDF PAGE 188 =====
187
Several other lipases are secreted by the pancreas in addition to pancreatic lipase.
These include pancreatic colipase and carboxyl ester hydrolase (Borgstrom, 1975; Rudd
and Brockburn, 1984; Mickel et al., 1989). Pancreatic colipase exists in multiple forms.
The nascent form is a pro-colipase, which is secreted as such in pancreatic juice
(Vandermeers et al., 1975). The chemistry and physiology of colipase has been reviewed
(Lowe, 2001). After its secretion into the duodenum, pro-colipase is converted into its
active form by trypsin (Borgstrom, 1975) via limited proteolysis at both the C- and the
N-terminal ends. The resultant active colipase functions principally to restore the
activity of bile salt-stimulated pancreatic lipase as the micellar concentration of
acylglycerols changes over time. In essence, as the bile salts desorb pancreatic lipase
from its interface with its emulsified substrate, colipase functions by anchoring it to the
substrate in the presence of the bile salts (Borgstrom, 1975).
The hydrolysis of cholesteryl esters is regulated by an additional lipolytic enzyme,
cholesteryl esterase, which was first demonstrated in dog pancreas extracts and
pancreatic juice. Data on this enzyme have been reviewed (Rudd and Brockburn, 1984).
It has been speculated that the action of this lipase initially depends on pancreatic lipase-
mediated hydrolysis of triacylglycerols, whose products establish the appropriate
physical environment for subsequent cholesteryl esterase action. As such, conditions
become favorable for cholesteryl esterase to hydrolyze cholesteryl esters or retinyl
esters. In this way, the overall substrate specificity of the enzyme for several types of
dietary esters is extended (Rudd and Brockburn, 1984).
Finally, a phospholipase A2 also exists that hydrolyzes dietary phospholipid. It is
synthesized in an inactive precursor form and secreted into the intestine where limited
trypsinolysis occurs, providing the active enzyme and a small activator peptide for
phospholipid hydrolysis.
Summary of Triacylglycerol Hydrolysis
The process of lipid digestion is integrated under the action of several lipases.
Although the bulk of dietary triacylglycerol is hydrolyzed via pancreatic lipase, this
phenomenon is dependent on the action of gastric lipase, colipase, and several other
factors as well (Bengtsson-Olivecrona et al., 1994). First, gastric lipase is stable and acts
over a wide pH range (Carriere et al., 1991, 1992). It appears to attack virtually any lipid
droplet, and its action results in hydrolysis of some triacylglycerol to diacylglycerol and
fatty acids. This gastric hydrolysis facilitates emulsification of lipids and prepares them
for intestinal digestion. Pancreatic lipase seems to have strict requirements for a
physiologic substrate-water interface (i.e., formation of mixed micelles). Bile
components help provide a suitable environment for micelle formation and also continue
to solubilize the resulting lipophilic products. The rate of bile salt uptake by the jejunum
is low compared with that by the ileum. Thus, bile salts remain in the intestinal lumen
and can participate in the formation of new micelles until their partial reabsorption in
the lower small intestine.
Because long-chain fatty acids and cholesterol are relatively nonpolar, most of the
end products of hydrolysis remain in the micelle rather than in solution in the aqueous


===== PDF PAGE 189 =====
188
phase (Hoffmann, 1963). The bile salts themselves are in an equilibrium between the
micelle and the surrounding aqueous environment (Carey and Small, 1970, 1972). Bile
salts also assist in the desorption of other proteins from the surface of lipid droplets.
Pancreatic colipase ensures that pancreatic lipase can become adsorbed to lipid droplets.
Carboxyl ester hydrolase, due to its wide substrate specificity, hydrolyzes
monoacyglycerols, cholesteryl esters, retinyl esters, and other lipid esters that may be
present. Hence, this hydrolase complements the narrow substrate specificity of colipase-
dependent pancreatic lipase. An additional point of interest for fat digestion in neonates
is that carboxyl ester hydrolase also is secreted by the lactating mammary gland.
Because this lipase is active only in the presence of certain bile salts, it is inactive in
milk. In the digestive tract, it becomes active only after its arrival in the duodenum.
Absorption
Absorption of the hydrolyzed products of fat digestion occurs in the enterocyte of the
small intestine. It is generally assumed that most lipid uptake occurs by passive
diffusion. However, some component of it also may be carrier mediated. All biological
membranes, including the intestinal enterocyte, possess a layer of relatively unstirred
water through which solutes must move by diffusion; this layer is referred to as the
unstirred water layer (UWL). The UWL consists of a series of progressively stirred
aqueous environments that extend from the intestinal brush border membrane until it
blends with the bulk aqueous phase (Thomson and Wild, 2001). The thickness and
surface area of the UWL provide characteristic resistance to passive absorption. In the
canine jejunum, UWL thickness has been estimated to be from 500 to 1,000 μm (Ryu
and Grim, 1982). There is evidence to suggest that the thickness of the UWL may be
specific for individual conditions and therefore variable (Thomson et al., 1993). In any
case, for absorption of micellarized lipid to occur, lipid products must diffuse across the
intestinal UWL where they are protonated prior to traversing the intestinal brush border
membrane (Dietschy et al., 1971). This process occurs by either passive diffusion or
protein-mediated mechanisms. Protein-mediated movements of lipid across the brush
border membranes include lipid-binding proteins for both long- and medium-chain fatty
acids as well as for cholesterol (for review, see Thomson and Wild, 2001).
Once inside the cytosol of the enterocyte, fatty acids are bound to fatty acid binding
proteins and transported to the endoplasmic reticulum where reesterification of free fatty
acids and reassembly of triacylglycerols occurs (Ockner and Manning, 1974). Similarly,
cholesterol is bound and transported by a sterol carrier protein (Scallen et al., 1985).
Reesterification of the absorbed fatty acids to monoacyglycerols take place via a
triacylglycerol synthase complex and the monoacylglycerol pathway (Brindley, 1974),
and cholesterol also may become esterified with a fatty acid by acyl:cholesterol acyl
transferase. Such reesterification helps maintain a concentration gradient for additional
absorption. Some portion of the fatty acids may pass directly into the portal circulation,
with the remainder being formed into lipoproteins in conjunction with cholesterol,
phospholipids, and enterocyte-synthesized apoproteins for secretion into the lacteals.
Most notable among the enterocyte-synthesized lipoproteins in response to a fat-


===== PDF PAGE 190 =====
189
containing meal are the chylomicra. For a review of lipoprotein metabolism, see Gotto
(1986) and Bauer (2000).
DIGESTIBILITY
Apparent digestibilities of crude fat are generally high, although some subtleties do
exist depending on fat type and amount and the presence of other dietary components.
The apparent digestibility of fat in dogs can vary from approximately 85 to 95 percent
when mixed acylglycerols from both plant and animal sources are fed (James and
McCay, 1950; Orr, 1965; Meyer, 1984). A recent study found that the apparent fat
digestibility of commercially available dry extruded-type diets varied between 70 and 90
percent (Huber et al., 1986). Total fat digestibility was unchanged when texturized
vegetable protein from soy was compared with beef in cannulated dogs (Hill et al.,
2001). In young dogs (3 to 9.5 months old), the digestibility of beef tallow was
dependent on the unsaturated fatty acid concentration of the diet (Meyer et al., 1992).
Using diets that were 35 percent dry matter (DM) as fat and with unsaturated acids less
than 40 percent of total dietary fat, the digestibility of beef tallow decreased to 81-86
percent. This range of values compared with 95 percent digestibility when more than 50
percent of total fat was present as unsaturated fatty acids.
In cats, reported apparent digestibilities were 99 percent when a diet of beef and
mutton was fed (Morris, 1977). In a group of commercial foods, values ranged from 85
to 94 percent (Norvel, 1978). Kane et al. (1981) reported that the apparent digestibility
of fat was 90 percent when fed at 10 percent of DM but increased dramatically (97-99
percent) when fed at either 25 or 50 percent dry matter. Peachey et al. (1999) recently
compared apparent digestibilities in young versus senior cats when fed beef tallow-,
sunflower oil-, and olive oil-enriched diets. They found that young cats (3.0 ± 0.9 year)
have somewhat greater apparent total fat digestibilities than do senior cats (11.6 ± 1.4
year) at 94.4 versus 92.2 percent, respectively. Total fat content of the diets used in these
studies was approximately 44 percent DM. It also was noted that saturated fatty acids
had the lowest apparent digestibility (95.2 percent in young vs. 93.2 percent in senior
cats), followed by monounsaturated (98.2 percent vs. 96.4 percent, young vs. senior),
and polyunsaturated (98.7 percent vs. 98.0 percent, young vs. senior) fatty acids.
Shorter-chain fatty acids were more easily digested than longer-chain types. It seems
that a reduction in fat digestibility with age may be a general phenomenon for all fatty
acid groups (Peachey et al., 1999). By contrast, Munday and Lowe (1993) found that
apparent total fat digestibilities in growing cats progressively increased at 9, 11, 13, 15,
and 17 weeks of age, citing the following percentage digestibilities, respectively: 81, 86,
88, 88, and 91 percent.
In other studies using different species, the saturated fatty acid stearic acid also was
the least readily digested (Schrijver et al., 1991; Hwang et al., 1994; Mountzouris et al.,
1999) and shorter-chain acids appeared to be digested more readily (Cera et al., 1990).
The form of the dietary fat also may alter its apparent digestibility (Adams and
Jensen, 1984). In weanling pigs, average fat digestibility of in-seed fat was only 74.9
percent compared to 90.2 percent for the fats extracted from corn, soybean, and


===== PDF PAGE 191 =====
190
sunflower seeds. Similar findings might be anticipated in dogs and cats, although no
literature reporting such a distinction is presently available.
The dietary recommendation of fat for domestic cats is currently 9.0 percent on a dry
matter basis (about 19 percent of energy) (AAFCO, 2003). However, it appears that
felines can tolerate and digest amounts as high as 67 percent ME (MacDonald et al.,
1984a), and possibly even higher. Observations of feeding pattern and behavior of large
cats also have provided some clues as to the fat content of their diets. It has been
estimated that large cats obtain 60 percent of their total calories from dietary fats and
that diets up to 67 percent ME as fat are efficiently digested and utilized (Scott, 1968).
The apparent digestibility of crude fat by captive wild felids has been reported to be 95-
99 percent (ME) when fed a meat-based diet containing 160 g crude fat·kg–1 (Barbiers
et al., 1982). In addition to the domestic cat, the lion, Panthera leo, and cheetah,
Acinonyx jubatus, also seem to lack the ability to efficiently desaturate fatty acids at the
Δ6 position (Davidson et al., 1986; Bauer, 1997). Cheetahs belong to a different genus
than do either lions or domestic cats and demonstrate other adaptive differences from
these species (Myers, 1974; Kingdon, 1977). The cheetah is diurnal, does not cache its
food, and does not scavenge (Myers, 1974). Another difference is that cheetahs are more
frequently robbed of their kill; so, they must compensate by being extraordinarily
efficient hunters (Kingdon, 1977). In this way, for better or worse, the freshness of their
food supply is ensured. From the perspective of dietary fat requirements, the possibility
exists that their long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid (LCPUFA) supply must be
oxidatively unspoiled. In one study, the liver fatty acid profiles of two cheetahs killed in
the wild versus one captive animal showed markedly lower amounts of nearly all highly
unsaturated long-chain fatty acids in the captive animal tissue (Davidson et al., 1986).
The authors noted that this animal had been fed in captivity most of its life and that the
possibility of dietary fatty acid deterioration may have been a factor in the differences
that were seen.
BIOCHEMICAL BASIS OF FATTY ACID ESSENTIALITY
Biosynthesis
Mammals can synthesize saturated fatty acids de novo starting with glucose, except
for some ruminants, or amino acids by the production of a common precursor, acetyl
coenzyme A (CoA). The biochemistry of these processes has been reviewed (Salati and
Goodridge, 1996). Additional end products are the 16- and 18-carbon monounsaturated
fatty acids belonging to the n-7 and n-9 fatty acid families (16: 1n-7 and 18:1n-9). These
acids are the result of the introduction of a single double bond between carbons 9 and 10
of the respective saturated acids. The enzymes involved in these reactions are active
when high-carbohydrate, low-fat diets are consumed but suppressed with high-fat diets.
Thus, animals fed relatively high-fat diets will not synthesize their own fatty acids at a
high rate. Instead, they utilize the dietary supply of fatty acids, including those of the n-
6 and n-3 fatty acids families that are not synthesized de novo.


===== PDF PAGE 192 =====
191
In contrast to animals, plants can manufacture all of the aforementioned fatty acids
plus those belonging to the n-6 and n-3 families. This synthesis of unsaturated fatty
acids is accomplished by inserting additional double bonds between the existing n-9
bond and the methyl end of the 18:1n-9 molecule. Enzymes responsible for these
reactions include a Δ12 desaturase, producing linoleic acid (18:2n-6), and a Δ15
desaturase, which inserts a double bond into 18:2n-6 to produce α-linolenic acid (18:3n-
3) (Cook, 1996). Many marine plants are able to insert additional double bonds into
18:3n-3 with subsequent chain elongation, thereby accounting for the formation of long-
chain n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and their abundance in marine oils.
However, terrestrial plants do not typically insert additional bonds into 18:2n-6. Thus,
arachidonic acid (AA, 20:4n-6) is not found in plant materials.
The inability of animals to synthesize n-6 and n-3 fatty acids via Δ12 and Δ15
desaturases is the cornerstone of fatty acid essentiality. Once n-7 or n-9 fatty acid
families are produced or n-6 or n-3 acids are ingested, further metabolic conversions
occur in dogs and to a lesser extent in cats. In dogs, rats, mice, and man, these
conversions are regulated by a Δ6 desaturase (Cook, 1996; Dunbar and Bauer, 2002;
Rodriguez et al., 1999). Cats are unusual among mammals in that they have limited Δ6
desaturase activities (Rivers et al., 1975; Pawlosky et al., 1994). This latter observation
further distinguishes the essential fatty acid requirements of cats because, without Δ6
desaturase, conversions of EFAs to other physiologically important PUFAs may not
occur. Consequently the long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid (LCPUFA) products of
these conversions also may be essential in the feline species especially under certain
physiological conditions. For that matter, there is a growing body of evidence that
LCPUFAs may be essential during normal development of dogs and cats as well as
several other species that demonstrate insignificant Δ6 desaturase activities compared to
adults (Carlson, 1990; Simopoulos, 1991; Conner et al., 1992; Uauy et al., 1996;
Pawlowsky et al., 1997; Waldron et al., 1998).
Desaturation and Elongation
As noted, mammals can introduce a double bond between the 9- and 10-position of
de novo-synthesized saturated acids. In the absence of any dietary n-6 or n-3 PUFA,
these resultant monounsaturated fatty acids (i.e., 16:1n-7 and 18:1n-9) can serve as
substrates for Δ6 desaturase. Oleic acid (18:1n-9) thus can be converted into 18:2n-9,
20:2n-9, and 20:3n9 (Figure 5-2). (Interested readers should refer to Voss et al., 1991,
for details of the peroxisomal pathways for 22-carbon PUFA synthesis.) The fatty acid,
20:3n-9 is also known as Mead acid, and its accumulation is a hallmark of EFA
deficiency (Holman, 1960).
When EFAs are present, the Δ6 desaturase reaction is the rate limiting step in a
cascade of desaturations and elongations of n-6 and n-3 fatty acids that also include
chain elongations and Δ5 desaturation (Cook, 1996). The net result is the production of
a variety of LCPUFAs including arachidonic (AA, 20:4n-6), eicosapentaenoic (EPA,
20:5n-3), docosapentaenoic (DPA, 22:5n-3), and docosahexaenoic (DHA, 22:6n-3)
acids. Specific amounts of these LCPUFAs depend on competitive interactions among


===== PDF PAGE 193 =====
192
the various substrates and their products and the specific cell type involved (Smith,
1992). It is noteworthy that as a result of animals’ lost capacity to insert double bonds in
position 12 and 15, interconversions of the n-3, n-6, n-7, and n-9 families cannot occur.
The argument for fatty acid essentiality is again apparent because the n-6 and n-3 fatty
acids are needed for important physiologic functions.
Fatty Acid Ratios
Numerous reports from professional and government committees have advocated
modifications of the intake of various n-6 and n-3 PUFAs over the past 20 years. In
some instances, dietary recommendations have included specifying n-6 to n-3 acid
ratios. To help clarify this concept, it should be noted that different methods of
calculating this ratio have been employed. Not all of the resultant ratios reflect dietary
fatty acid profiles that are metabolically equivalent. For example, some studies defined
the ratio as the sum of all n-6 PUFAs to all n-3 PUFAs (total n-6 to total n-3 ratio;
including all derived LCPUFAs), whereas in other cases the value is calculated using
only the 18-carbon parent fatty acids (LA and ALA). A further complication arises in
that review articles on the topic often do not clearly specify this difference. Most studies
have typically used long-chain n-3 PUFAs (marine sources), but vegetable sources (18-
car-bon n-3 acids) also have been employed, and some studies reported using mixtures
of both vegetable and marine sources. This latter practice is complicated when a single
ratio is calculated because the long-chain metabolites are known to be more potent as
substrates for eicosanoid production than their parent fatty acids. For example, greater
amounts of 18:3n-3 must be fed at constant 18:2n-6 to achieve a similar eicosanoid
effect to that obtained by using a lesser amount of 20:5n-3 (Anonymous, 1992b).
Furthermore ALA and marine n-3 LCPUFAs have distinct physiologic effects on plasma
and tissue enrichment in their own right. Such metabolic differences have been observed
in dogs (Vaughn et al., 1994; Waldron 1999; Rees et al., 2001).


===== PDF PAGE 194 =====
193
FIGURE 5-2 Predominant pathways of essential fatty acid metabolism in mammals. Enzyme
abbreviations: d-6 desaturase = Δ6 desaturase; d-5 desaturase = Δ5 desaturase; elongase =
chain elongase.
An important recent development in the use of fatty acid ratios has been agreement
by participants at two expert workshops convened in Europe and the United States in
recommending dietary n-3 fatty acids to help decrease risk of coronary artery disease.
Both groups, and others, agree that the four types of PUFA—18:2n-6, 18:3n-3, n-6
LCPUFAs (primarily 20:4n-6), and n-3 LCPUFAs (primarily 20:5n-3 and 22:6n-3)—
should be considered separately when making dietary recommendations (Anonymous,
1992b; de Deckere et al., 1998; Buttriss, 1999; Simopoulos et al., 1999).
The European expert committee also specifically concluded that the use of a total n-
6:n-3 ratio is not helpful (de Deckere et al., 1998). The British Nutrition Foundation
Task Force on Fatty Acids (BNF) has stated that attempts to explain data based on the
total n-6:n-3 ratio may be distorted (Anonymous, 1992b). Use of the simpler ratio of LA


===== PDF PAGE 195 =====
194
to ALA has been recommended by the BNF until more is known about the relative
potencies of various n-3 acid types. The simpler ratio could be used but it does not take
into account the extent to which marine-based n-3 PUFAs are also present, which can
lead to important metabolic consequences. Additional complexities exist even when this
18-carbon ratio is employed. For example, decreasing the amount of LA in the diet or
increasing the amount of ALA may result in the same ratio even though these separate
modifications do not have the same metabolic consequences (Anonymous, 1992b).
Because the metabolisms of LA and ALA are not independent of one another
(Mantzioris et al., 1995; de Deckere et al., 1998), high cellular LA will affect ALA
conversion to a greater extent than high ALA at lower LA content (Dunbar and Bauer,
2001). Thus, where fatty acid ratios are noted in the present recommendations, the
method of calculation is indicated.
Essential Fatty Acid Utilization for Structure and Function
The EFAs or their derivatives are those that are required for normal growth and
physiologic integrity and cannot be synthesized adequately by the body. All of the lesser
unsaturated members of the n-6 fatty acid family (18:2n-6, 18:3n-6, 20:3n-6) have EFA
activity by virtue of their conversion to 20:4n-6 and interdependent effects on fatty acid
metabolism overall. Because all but the parent fatty acid, linoleic, can be synthesized in
dogs, only this fatty acid is regarded as a dietary essential n-6 fatty acid. The α-linolenic
acid, n-3, family has historically been regarded as not quite the nutritional equivalent of
the n-6 family. Signs of ALA deficiency may be more subtle than LA deficiency
(Holman et al., 1982). However, evidence from numerous laboratories has now
established ALA (18:3n-3) as a true EFA (Anonymous, 1992a). Although ALA has less
potency as an EFA than does LA, several of its long-chain derivatives such as EPA and
DHA have important metabolic consequences particularly in nervous tissue and in the
inflammatory and immune responses (Carlson, 1990; Conner et al., 1992; Uauy et al.,
1996; Simopoulos, 1999). So, in addition to the 18-carbon PUFAs, long-chain
derivatives of both the n-6 and the n-3 families may now be regarded as “conditionally
essential” especially because of their role in the normal development of premature
human infants and possible role in neurological tissue.
COMPARATIVE STUDIES
This section describes the physiologic role of EFAs in health maintenance. Species-
specific supportive data on fatty acid essentiality and well-being in dogs and cats are
covered later in the appropriate sections. Therapeutic effects of EFAs on disease per se
are not covered, although such studies in dogs and cats, both clinical and experimental,
have been reviewed (Case et al., 2000; Hand et al., 2000).
Membrane Composition and Integrity


===== PDF PAGE 196 =====
195
Structurally, the PUFAs are important for maintaining membrane fluidity and related
cell functions such as transport, metabolic regulation, and the epidermal water barrier
(Prottey, 1977; Elias et al., 1980; Wertz and Downing, 1982). Cell membrane stability,
structure, and function are critically dependent on having unsaturated fatty acids
incorporated into them. The PUFAs found in membrane phospholipids also affects their
shape and ability to pack together (e.g., the normal biconcave shape of red blood cells)
(Jos et al., 1985). Tissues that perform such functions as storage (adipose tissue),
metabolism (liver), mechanical work (muscle), and excretion (kidney) tend to have cell
membranes in which n-6 fatty acids predominate (Gurr and Harwood, 1991a). Other
specialized tissues contain unique fatty acids such as n-6 and n-3 LCPUFAs with five
and six double bonds but with a higher proportion of the n-3 types. These include
reproductive tissue as well as neurologic tissue such as myelin, which is an ion-
impermeable insulating cell membrane, and the outer segment cell membranes of rod
cells of the eye with their high long-chain fatty acids including high DHA (22:6n-3)
(Tinoco, 1982; Gurr and Harwood, 1991a).
Lipid-Protein Interactions
Interactive roles of fatty acids and lipids in membranes with proteins also exist that
facilitate conformational changes necessary for membrane protein function. Such
interactions are well reflected in the many examples of activities of purified and
partially purified membrane proteins being influenced by their lipid environment.
Transporter proteins, enzymes, and cell signals, including the inositol-lipid cycle and its
second messengers, are examples of these types of interactions (Carruthers and
Melchior, 1986; Manzoli et al., 1988; Kinsella, 1990; Anonymous, 1992a).
Eicosanoid Production
Additional functional aspects of the EFAs are that they are precursors of eicosanoids,
which includes a diverse group of physiologically active, but often short-lived, fatty
acyl-derived metabolites such as prostaglandins, prostacyclin, thromboxanes, lipoxins,
leukotrienes, and related hydroxyl fatty acids. These metabolites contain 20 carbon
atoms. They are synthesized locally, on demand, by individual cell types in response to
their immediate environment. Both cyclooxygenase (CO) and lipoxygenase (LO) are
involved in their synthesis, which leads either to prostaglandin or thromboxane from
CO-regulated pathways and to leukotrienes from LO reactions (Figure 5-3).
Prostaglandins are typically vasodilators, whereas leukotrienes are vasoconstrictors.
Leukotrienes also can stimulate neutrophil chemotaxis and thromoboxane release.
Additional pathways that have been rarely studied in companion animals are those that
result in the formation of epoxy and hydroxy metabolites of 18- and 20-carbon fatty
acids, which also have been shown to play a role in modulating cellular responses
(Kietzmann, 1990).
Different cell types will produce a variable array of eicosanoids depending on the
functional characteristics of the specific cell type involved. Summaries of these effects


===== PDF PAGE 197 =====
196
have been published (Gurr and Harwood, 1991b; Smith and Fitzpatrick, 1996). For
example, platelets, when stimulated, will synthesize thromboxane A2, which promotes
vasconstriction and aggregation. Leukotriene B4 (LTB4) is produced when neutrophils
are stimulated as part of the inflammatory response. Also, the same eicosanoids may
have opposite effects when produced in different tissues. For example prostaglandin E2
(PGE2) is considered proinflammatory in skin because of its vascular dilation effect,
whereas it is protective of gastric mucosa in the gastrointestinal tract (Hammarstrom et
al., 1975; Miller and Jacobson, 1979). PGE2 also is involved in helping maintain normal
glomerular filtration of kidney because of its vasodilatory effect on renal mesangium
(Scharschmidt, 1983).
FIGURE 5-3 Generalized pathways of eicosanoid formation from n-3 and n-6 PUFAs.
Eicosapentaenoic and arachidonic acids compete with one another for incorporation into cell
membranes and as substrates for cyclooxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase. EPA is the precursor
of the less active leukotriene B5 (LTB5) and can form hydroxyl fatty acids via 15-lipoxygen-
ase, which is a potent inhibitor of leukotriene B4 (LTB4).
A necessary prerequisite for eicosanoid production is the availability of an
appropriate unesterified fatty acid (Weiss, 1989; Smith, 1994; Bates, 1995; Nelson et al.,
1997). In mammals, this is usually AA, which is derived from LA. Thus, although LA
and ALA are typically regarded as EFAs, the metabolic significance of AA must be
borne in mind. As a fundamental component of cell membranes, AA generally
comprises 20-25 percent of the total fatty acids of cell membrane phospholipids of skin
and other tissues. Studies with guinea pigs, rats, and humans have found that epidermal
microsomes from these species are unable to synthesize AA because of lack of the


===== PDF PAGE 198 =====
197
necessary enzyme systems in skin tissues for conversion from LA. It is generally
accepted that in mammals AA is synthesized primarily in liver and then transported to
various tissues via circulating lipoproteins. These phenomena have not been confirmed
in dogs and cats, but most workers have assumed that the ability of canine skin to
manufacture AA is limited.
Thus, where skin health is concerned, the release of AA from tissue cells (e.g.,
keratinocytes, neutrophils, platelets, macrophages, vascular endothelia, mast cells,
fibroblasts) is a rate-limiting step in eicosanoid biosynthesis and subsequent physiologic
response (Galli, 1981; Rouzer et al., 1982; Samuelsson, 1983; Terano et al., 1986; Ziboh
et al., 1986). The availability of AA in membranes of these cells is central to this
cascade of steps, which can alter physiologic responses and, ultimately, animal well-
being. The analogous n-3 PUFA, EPA, can competitively substitute for AA, thereby
modulating the family of eicosanoids produced and their overall responses. Although
these processes are highly cell specific and fundamental to cell membranes, the direct
link among eicosanoids, the dietary EFAs, and their derivatives provides a metabolic
environment that is particularly responsive to dietary modification. The proportions of
tissue n-6 LCPUFAs to n-3 LCPUFAs can be modified by inclusion of dietary n-3 fatty
acids and, as noted earlier, the n-3 LCPUFAs are especially effective in this regard
compared to 18-carbon n-3 acids. These relationships are competitive and have been
determined in rats, humans, and dogs to be hyperbolic and not linear (Lands, 1992;
Bauer et al., 2002). This fact must be borne in mind when eicosanoid responses are
targeted by way of dietary modification. Also, modifying the amounts of n-6 LCPUFAs
should be beneficial because excessive activity of n-6 eicosanoids produced in the body
occurs in several health disorders.
Growth and Development
Mammalian species vary in the extent of their retinal and other development in that
growth can be classified as prenatal, perinatal, or postnatal with respect to any major
retinal growth spurt. Altricial species such as dogs, cats, and rats generally have the
greater part of their retinal development occurring after birth (Dobbing and Sands,
1970), whereas guinea pigs, primates, and humans have both pre- and postnatal
development (Dobbing and Sands, 1970; Huang et al., 1990). Compared to humans,
rodents and carnivores are born much earlier in their developmental life (Widdowson,
1970). Brain development likely follows this same pattern. Thus, significant brain
growth occurs and may even peak during the early neonatal period in rodent and canine
animal species. Because myelination follows the peak rate of cell division, major
demands are placed on the provision of large amounts of LCPUFAs to support neural
development during this time. Thus, in dogs and cats, early lipid nutrition such as that
provided by milk fatty acid composition may be significant in understanding
developmental needs in these species.
Brain and retinal development in animals and humans depends upon the PUFAs AA
and DHA in prenatal and neonatal life (Conner et al., 1992). Primates (Neuringer et al.,
1986), rats (Benolken, 1973), and guinea pigs (Weisinger et al., 1996) fed diets deficient


===== PDF PAGE 199 =====
198
in ALA were observed to have large decreases in brain and retinal DHA associated with
impaired visual function. Retinal accretion of DHA is significant in development given
its high concentration in rod outer segment cells in many animals including dogs
(Abedin et al., 1999; Delton-Vanderbroucke et al., 1998). Substantial brain fatty acid
accretion occurs during late gestation and neonatal period in rats and is marked by a
pronounced accumulation of DHA. In humans during the third trimester of pregnancy,
the concentration of DHA increases substantially and continues to be deposited during
the first 2 years of life. Accumulation of DHA also has been observed in other species
such as piglets, kittens, and nonhuman primates. In retina, DHA may make up as much
as 50 percent of the fatty acids. It is found in photoreceptor outer segment membranes of
retina, and this tissue tenaciously conserves this fatty acid during periods of n-3
deficiency. Other data suggest that DHA is necessary for improving learning ability in
rats (Yamamoto et al., 1987). In rats and humans, the fatty acid composition of cerebral
cortical gray matter was most affected by diet during the suckling period (Kanazawa et
al., 1995). These observations suggest that reduced amounts of DHA during gestation
and lactation may result in suboptimal neural development and therefore underscore the
importance of ensuring appropriate maternal EFA, and possibly LCPUFA, tissue status
during gestation and the suckling period.
Along with DHA, there is also a need for AA (Carlson et al., 1992; Crawford, 1993).
Both DHA and AA are required for vascular development and regulation of blood flow
(Fleischauer et al., 1993; Pritchard et al., 1995; Pfister et al., 1996). In premature human
infants, amounts of both AA and DHA fell while LA rose in plasma phospholipids
during postnatal development (Uauy et al., 1989; Carlson et al., 1996). Thus, dietary
strategies to ensure the availability of these PUFAs are needed. Human studies have
shown that increasing ALA in an infant formula significantly increased DHA in
erythrocytes; yet, it remained below the amount seen in breast-fed infants (Clark et al.,
1992; Jensen et al., 1996). Dietary ALA also causes a reduction in plasma AA content,
which may be undesirable for neonates (Clark et al., 1992; Jensen et al., 1996). A study
was conducted in guinea pigs using either DHA supplementation alone or DHA in
conjunction with AA, and these treatments were compared with ALA supplements at
constant dietary LA (Abedin et al., 1999). It was found that dietary ALA alone or
combined with a DHA + AA supplement increased neural DHA content without
affecting AA. However, the LCPUFA supplement also caused enrichment in liver and
heart tissues. This study also found that a diet containing 0.6 percent DHA and 1 percent
ALA gave the same retinal and brain phospholipid DHA values as one containing 7.1
percent ALA. Thus, dietary DHA is a much more effective direct precursor of tissue
DHA than is ALA. This effect is the result of low conversion rates of ALA to longer-
chain derivatives (Sinclair, 1975). No alteration of retinal phospholipid AA was seen
when the DHA and DHA + AA diets were fed, which is consistent with results found in
piglets (Craig-Schmidt et al., 1996).
CANINE STUDIES


===== PDF PAGE 200 =====
199
Signs of Deficiency or Excess
Low amounts of dietary fat will lead to deficiencies of EFAs and energy. Because of
the effect of fat on palatability, ultralow-fat diets may result in decreased intakes, further
exacerbating compromised nutritional status. The skin is an important target for EFA
deficiency signs because it is one of the largest organs in the body and because of the
important role of LA in the transepidermal water barrier. Puppies fed an ultralow-fat diet
(estimated at 0.01 percent ME) were observed to have coarse, dry hair with
desquamation of skin ventrally after about 2 months, with lesions becoming more severe
at 4-5 months. When energy intakes were normal, the onset of these signs was delayed
approximately 1 month (Wiese et al., 1962). Gross lesions first appeared on the
abdomen, then the thigh, and finally the interscapular regions. With time, the skin
became greasy, pruritic, and potentially susceptible to infection because of the altered
surface lipids, bacterial flora, and presence of secondary bacterial invasion to varying
extents (Codner and Thatcher, 1990). Histologically, the epidermis became thickened
and edematous, with numerous cell layers building up in the most affected regions.
Keratinization of the skin with parakeratosis occurring in more advanced stages also
developed. Impairment of epithelial cells with invasion of monocytes and neutrophils
leading to ulceration also was noted. These clinical signs resolved after administration
of diets providing 2 percent or more of total calories as LA (Hansen et al., 1954; Weise
et al., 1966). Substituting ALA did not appear to completely resolve these problems.
In addition to skin lesions, experimentally produced EFA deficiency in growing rats
(Burr and Burr, 1929, 1930), dogs (Hansen et al., 1948, 1954; Hansen and Weise, 1951;
Weise et al., 1965, 1966), and cats (MacDonald et al., 1983a) caused renal and
reproductive abnormalities, decreased growth rate, immunologic abnormalities,
hypotrichosis, alopecia, scaling skin, weak cutaneous blood vessels and an increased
tendency to bruise, decreased wound healing, sebaceous gland hypertrophy, and
increased epidermal water loss (reviewed by White, 1995). Degenerative changes in
numerous other organs and increased cell membrane fragility also have been found
(Holman, 1971).
Regarding ALA, Capuchin monkeys maintained on a diet containing adequate LA
but little ALA showed signs closely resembling those of LA deficiency that resolved
after addition of linseed oil to the diet (Fiennes, 1973).
Clinical manifestations of n-3 fatty acid deficiency because of inadequate intake of
ALA are more subtle (Tinoco, 1982). They include nervous system abnormalities such
as decreased visual acuity, electroretinographic abnormalities, polyneuropathy, and
reduced learning ability (Tinoco, 1979; Holman et al., 1982; Neuringer et al., 1988;
Conner et al., 1992; Uuay et al., 1996). Such signs require more technical sophistication
to detect clinically. Nonetheless, the brain and retinal rod cells of most species,
including dogs, are characterized by a high proportion of long-chain fatty acid
derivatives of ALA such as DHA (Anderson et al., 1992; Alvarez et al., 1994; Delton-
Vanderbroucke, 1998). A requirement for ALA to support normal growth in rat pups and
the need for long-chain n-3 PUFAs such as DHA for cognitive and visual development
have often been demonstrated (Pudelkewicz et al., 1968; Anonymous 1992b) and dogs
would not be expected to be an exception. By inference then, because these acids cannot


===== PDF PAGE 201 =====
200
be synthesized in the body, a dietary requirement for them is expected. This requirement
may be small and may be limited to early development. Counter to this argument, no
apparent developmental problems have yet to be reported in dogs because of an ALA or
other n-3 PUFA deficiency. However, it is only in recent years that interest in this topic
has developed and that analysis of canine diets for the presence of n-3 fatty acids has
been conducted.
Overt signs of excessive intake in healthy dogs also remain uncharacterized,
although many studies have associated chronic inflammatory conditions with n-6 PUFA
excess or n-3 PUFA depletion. There is growing support for the concept that diets
generally have become too highly enriched in n-6 PUFAs. The inclusion of additional n-
3 PUFAs to blunt the availability of AA may be desirable (reviewed in Lands, 1986). In
spite of this, Lands et al. (1990, 1992) have demonstrated that tissue saturation with AA
derived from LA using rat and human data appears to occur at a concentration of dietary
LA not much higher than its minimum requirement (MR). This phenomenon also
appears to be the case in dogs (Bauer et al., 2002). Indeed, one study in dogs found that
diets containing 2.5 percent ME LA vs. 27.4 percent ME LA (40 percent of energy total
fat) resulted in the same degree of AA enrichment of isolated neutrophils (Waldron,
1999). Thus, simply using tissue saturation of n-6 LCPUFAs as an index of excessive
intake is not sufficient to address this question and additional biochemical, functional, or
clinical measures are needed. With respect to the n-3 LCPUFAs, deleterious effects on
increased bleeding times and platelet function in dogs fed excess amounts of these fatty
acids have not been demonstrated, although exhaustive studies relating to dosages have
not been performed (Boudreaux et al., 1997).
Early studies on dietary EFAs in dogs focused on the need for n-6 fatty acids for
growth and prevention of skin lesions (Hansen et al., 1948, 1954; Hansen and Wiese,
1951; Wiese et al., 1962, 1965, 1966). More recent studies on the interdependence of the
n-6 and n-3 EFAs for their metabolism to active long-chain metabolites have added new
complexities to the question of essentiality. For example, diets high in ALA (18:3n-3)
suppress the conversion of LA to AA (Mohrauer and Holman, 1963; Holman and
Mohrauer, 1963; Hwang and Carroll, 1980; Bauer et al., 1998). The competition
between these molecules affects both cell structure and function and is the result not
only of accumulation of parent compounds but also of their metabolic derivatives and
eicosanoids. One important question is to what extent the presence of one fatty acid
family will affect the requirement for the other. Data are presently unavailable to answer
this question fully. However, studies investigating the effect of PUFA types and amounts
on specific responses in dogs have provided some insight. Amounts of recommended
minima and maxima ultimately depend on the clinical, biochemical, and physiologic
criteria used to define them. Studies in which interactions between n-3 and n-6 PUFAs
in canine species have been found are summarized below.
Skin and Hair Coat
The epidermal water barrier function of skin depends on the 18:2n-6 content of the
cellular phospholipid fraction known as ceramides. In normal healthy skin, ceramides


===== PDF PAGE 202 =====
201
containing 18:2n-6 are extruded as intercellular lamellar granules from epidermal
keratinocytes at the stratum granulosum-stratum corneum interface. This 18-carbon acid
enhances cohesion between the lipid sheets that make up these intercellular lamellae,
thereby imparting an effective water barrier to the epidermis (Elias, 1987; Freinkel,
1987). This function may explain why many instances of dry, dull hair coat and scaling,
nonpruritic skin disorders of dogs generally respond to increased dietary fat in the diet
usually provided by vegetable oils. Studies in dogs have shown that both serum and
cutaneous fatty acid composition can be modified (Campbell and Dorn, 1992, Vaughn et
al., 1994; Campbell and Roudebush, 1995) by dietary supplementation. One study
evaluated four diets for 56 days, one of which contained 18:3n-3, and found both serum
and cutaneous samples to be relatively enriched in this fatty acid, a nonsignificant
increased sheen of the dogs’ hair coats, and significantly lower transepidermal water
losses compared to that for the other diets (Campbell and Roudebush, 1995).
Unfortunately, the complete lipid profiles of diets used in this study were not reported;
so, a thorough comparison of the diets was not performed. More recently, significant
short-term improvements in skin and hair coat scores of clinically normal dogs have
been demonstrated using ground oilseed supplements enriched in either LA or LA plus
ALA (Rees et al., 2001). In this study, 3 percent (w/w) supplementation of diets with
either whole ground sunflower seed (9.3 percent ME LA, 0.4 percent ME ALA) or
whole ground flaxseed (7.3 percent ME LA, 2.5 percent ME ALA) led to an increase in
the amount of circulating n-6 fatty acid. This enrichment likely resulted in the
incorporation of LA into lipid ceramide fractions of the epidermis, thereby supporting
more desirable skin and coat condition scores. It should be noted, however, that these
improvements were only seen with 28 days of feeding and that some adaptation beyond
this time occurred (Rees et al., 2001). Also, it could not be determined whether the
improvement seen under these conditions was the result of an overall increase in dietary
total fat independent of fat type. Another study supplemented an existing diet with LA,
zinc, or a combination of LA and zinc and assessed skin and coat quality in dogs (Marsh
et al., 2000). The total LA and zinc contents ingested were 12.75 percent ME (ca. 15 g
per 1,000 kcal) LA and 100 mg zinc per 1,000 kcal. Dogs supplemented with the
combination of nutrients showed significant improvement in coat gloss and significant
decrease in transepidermal water loss over the 9-week test period. These amounts are
substantially greater than the amounts recommended to prevent deficiencies of these
nutrients. The possibility of a total fat effect could once again not be ruled out from
these data.
Inflammatory and Immune Cell Structure and Function
Nutritional modification to decrease the amount of AA available for eicosanoid
synthesis and provide alternative substrates for the enzymes LO and CO is believed to
lessen the inflammatory response. Recommendations for health maintenance have been
based on the potential benefits of decreasing known mediators of inflammation
especially because of their possible involvement in chronic, progressive diseases such as
osteoarthritis and those of the gastrointestinal tract, kidney, and skin. Both n-6 and n-3


===== PDF PAGE 203 =====
202
fatty acid families appear to participate in these effects but generally by different
mechanisms.
n-6 Fatty Acid Effects
The antiinflammatory effect of n-6 fatty acids relates to the synthesis of
dihomogammalinolenic acid (20:3n-6, DGLA) from dietary γ-linolenic acid (18:3n-6)
(Miller and Ziboh, 1988). Although these intermediates can be further converted into
AA, such conversions occur more slowly when GLA is fed in supplemental or higher
amounts. Under this condition, accumulation of DGLA and competition for inclusion
into cell membranes result. Because DGLA is a substrate for LO and CO, it may be
converted to the less inflammatory PGE1 and inhibit the release of AA from other
membranes. It also can be converted into a fairly potent antiinflammatory hydroxy fatty
acid by virtue of being able to block the LO pathway and additional leukotriene (LTB4)
biosynthesis (Hammarstrom et al., 1979; Miller and Ziboh, 1988). Although
concentrations of plasma GLA and DGLA are responsive to diet change, conflicting
results have been found in studies with dogs and cats on the utility of using oil
supplements containing GLA and other n-6 and n-3 PUFAs in clinical settings (reviewed
in Case et al., 2000). Whether cats differ from dogs in their metabolism of GLA because
of low Δ6 desaturase is unknown.
n-3 Fatty Acid Effects
Long-chain n-3 PUFAs from fish oil or other marine sources seem to be especially
capable of modifying inflammatory and immune responses. Diets containing only ALA
as an n-3 source or mixtures of ALA and fish oil may not perform as effectively in this
regard when included on an equivalent weight basis (Vaughn et al., 1994; Wander et al.,
1997; Waldron, 1999). One reason for this is the inefficient rate of conversion of ALA to
EPA (Sinclair, 1975).
Studies in dogs have investigated neutrophil structure and function by using diets
supplemented with 18:3n-3 fatty acids from linseed oil, 18:2n-6 from safflower oil, low
PUFAs from beef tallow, and fish oil PUFAs for 28 days (18 percent w/w fat supplement
added to a basal diet replete in LA) (Waldron, 1999). The fish oil group showed
significant enrichment of EPA and DPA over AA, increased neutrophil membrane
fluidity and ex vivo phagocytosis, lower LTB4 production, and decreased superoxide
dismutase activities (Waldron, 1999). The n-3 PUFA diets in these studies contained 103
g ALA per kilogram (19.6 percent ME) in the linseed oil group and 45.5 g (EPA + DPA
+ DHA) per kilogram (8.6 percent ME) in the fish oil group. The fluidity effect may
depend on double-bond number up to some maximum because other studies have found
that enrichment of cell membranes with DHA actually results in a leveling off of
membrane fluidity (Dratz and Deese, 1986; Stubbs and Smith, 1990). Another study
described similar blunting of ex vivo neutrophil LTB4 production when dogs were fed a
high n-3 PUFA diet using marine sources compared with corn oil (milligram per


===== PDF PAGE 204 =====
203
kilogram diet amounts of the n-3 PUFA not specified) (Byrne et al., 2000). These
findings are consistent with earlier reports that diets containing high marine source n-3
PUFAs were particularly adept at modifying neutrophil and inflammatory skin responses
of healthy dogs (Vaughn et al., 1994). This latter study concluded that the effects seen
were because of the ratio of total n-6 PUFAs to total n-3 PUFAs. However, no
accounting was given for the varying amounts of ALA in the diets, which have an
impact on the calculated ratio, but are less potent overall in blunting biochemical indices
of inflammation.
Regarding dietary maxima, one study described older beagle dogs (9.5-11.5 years)
being fed one of three diets containing the following: EPA + DPA + DHA, <0.3, 2.2, and
6.15 g·kg–1; LA, 24.1, 17.1, and 10.35 g·kg–1; and nearly constant ALA, 0.7, 0.7, and
0.85 g·kg–1 diet, respectively. After 8-12 weeks, cell-mediated immunity was
significantly lower in the 6.15-g (EPA + DPA + DHA) group. Also, PGE2 response was
blunted in mononuclear cells, vitamin E was decreased, and indices of lipid peroxidation
were increased (Wander et al., 1997). Percentages of fatty acids on an energy basis in
the diet containing the highest n-3 PUFA were calculated as approximately 2.6 percent
ME (EPA + DPA + DHA), 4.4 percent ME LA, with a total fat content of approximately
43 percent ME (calculated from Wander et al., 1997). Further, a report by Hall et al.
(1999) from this same study also found the highest n-3 LCPUFA diets to have
significant effects on CD4+ lymphocytes after vaccination. An additional study fed three
amounts of α-tocopheryl acetate in diets with approximately 2.1 percent ME EPA +
DPA + DHA (from menhaden fish oil) using a complete diet. The diets contained
approximately 6.5 percent ME LA and total fat of approximately 40.4 percent ME
(calculated from Hall et al., 2002). Inconsistent effects on plasma α-tocopherol status
were found depending on how the data were expressed. Adverse effects were not
documented in this study. Plasma cholesterol concentrations were lower in the high n-3
groups, but no triacylglycerol lowering effect was observed.
Based on the few studies in which dietary concentrations can be calculated, it is
difficult to state a maximal safe amount of diet n-3 PUFA from marine sources with a
high degree of certainty. Most studies have been of short duration, so the question of
long-term effects cannot be resolved completely. However, several studies have been
conducted in which results allow some conclusions to be reached. One such study found
no clinically significant changes in platelet function and coagulation assays when diets
containing menhaden fish oil with ratio of a total n-6 to total n-3 of 5:1 was fed
(Boudreaux et al., 1997). Mooney et al. (1998), when feeding this same diet, found
biochemical evidence that n-3 fatty acids affect the inflammatory stage of wound
healing but selected quantitative histological factors were unaffected. Also, Scardino et
al. (1999) compared fish versus soybean oil-supplemented diets containing total n-
6:total n-3 of 0.3:1 and 7.7:1, respectively, and reported no statistical evidence that n-3
fatty acids suppress the inflammatory stage of wound healing histologically. However,
significantly less epithelialization of open wounds and less wound contraction were
found. These findings may lead to more granulation and, possibly, scar formation. In
each of these studies, absolute amounts of individual n-3 or n-6 fatty acids or total fat
contents of diets used were not described in detail. In the absence of such details, it is


===== PDF PAGE 205 =====
204
not possible to determine at what concentration n-3 LCPUFAs may have adverse effects
on canine species. The data of Wander et al. (1997) and Hall et al. (1999) have provided
the best dietary concentrations to date showing metabolic alterations that, under some
conditions, might be considered a safety risk.
FELINE STUDIES
Signs of Deficiency or Excess
Attempts at devising semipurified diets containing vegetable oils that cats would eat
led Rivers and coworkers to a series of experiments on feline essential fatty acid
metabolism. In the early 1970s, they observed that domestic cats appeared to require a
dietary source of LCPUFAs. Biochemical evidence of this was published in 1975 when
cat liver preparations were observed to lack the Δ6 desaturase needed to synthesize AA
from LA and EPA from ALA (Rivers et al., 1975). Cats in this study had dry, lusterless
hair coats, dandruff, behavioral infertility, and hepatic lipid infiltration. A series of
studies published by Rivers and colleagues followed (Hassam et al., 1971; Rivers et al.,
1976a,b; Frankel and Rivers, 1978, 1980, 1981; Rivers, 1982) that demonstrated an EFA
requirement for cats, a deficiency of which could be caused by feeding hydrogenated
coconut oil as the sole fat source. In addition, cats with EFA deficiencies had lower feed
efficiency without changing body weight gain, mild mineralization of kidneys
(MacDonald et al., 1984a), and changes in platelet aggregation (MacDonald et al.,
1984b). Enlarged, fatty livers and histologic fatty infiltration of kidneys also were
found.
What made these studies unique, in contrast to those of other mammals, was that
EFA deficiency signs were observed even though cats were fed diets containing the
requisite LA and ALA (MacDonald et al., 1984a,c). Thus, the possibility of a dietary
requirement for LCPUFAs derived from these 18-carbon precursors emerged.
The diets used in the earliest EFA studies in cats may have been marginal in taurine
(Hayes et al., 1975; MacDonald et al., 1984a) and vitamin E (Stephan and Hayes, 1978)
and had excessive vitamin D content (MacDonald et al., 1984a). However, it was later
found that taurine supplementation did not change the fatty acid profiles seen earlier
(Rivers and Frankel, 1980). Rivers and colleagues did recognize that dietary vitamin D
concentrations may have been excessive in their earlier work. However, when dietary
vitamin E concentrations were corrected, similar fatty acid changes again occurred.
Hydrogenated coconut oil, which would not readily deplete vitamin E stores, was the
source of fat in this latter study. In addition, when GLA (18:3n-6) containing oils were
added to the diets, reproductive status improved. This fatty acid may have improved AA
status to some extent by virtue of bypassing the Δ6 desaturase step (Rivers and Frankel,
1980). For more details of these early studies, see Sinclair (1994) and Bauer (1997).
Studies by MacDonald and colleagues found that EFA deficiency resulted in signs
similar to those reported by Rivers and coworkers (MacDonald et al., 1983a,b, 1984c).
However, one of these studies (MacDonald, 1983b) observed that diets containing 5


===== PDF PAGE 206 =====
205
percent safflower oil plus 30 percent hydrogenated coconut oil (6.7 percent ME LA, no
AA) prevented all clinical signs except reproduction problems in females. Reports from
Australia (Sinclair et al., 1979, 1981; McLean and Monger, 1989) indicated that cats
maintained for up to 8 years on diets containing 5 percent (as-is) safflower oil did not
suffer the severe signs noted by Rivers and Franke (1980). The Australian cats seemed
normal except for some dulling of hair coats and a general inability of females to
produce more than two litters. It was speculated that the severity of signs was attenuated
by improper amounts of taurine and some vitamins as acknowledged in the earlier
studies. Nonetheless, it was believed at the time that amounts of LA that would be
adequate for other mammalian species did not maintain cats in optimal health during all
life stages. Explanations for these observed differences included the possibility that diets
differing in their relative fatty acid profiles or other nutrients may have led to variable
capacity of cats to synthesize AA. Indeed, certain n-3 fatty acids such as ALA (Holman
and Mohrauer, 1963; Mohrauer and Holman, 1963; Hwang and Carroll, 1980; Monger,
1986) may be involved in regulation of the Δ6 desaturase enzyme. For that matter, AA
itself may regulate this enzyme (Whelan, 1996).
Evidence for Limited Δ6 Desaturase Activities
In addition to the above findings, early biochemical evidence of low but existent Δ6
desaturase activities in cats was obtained when production of small amounts of
Δ5,8,1120:3 (20:3n-9) was observed in cats fed LA diets containing no AA (Rivers and
Franke1, 1981; Sinclair et al., 1981; MacDonald et al., 1983a). This fatty acid is
produced from oleic acid by the same pathway as AA from LA. More recently, limited
Δ6 desaturase activity in cats has been confirmed by using sophisticated stable isotope
techniques combined with gas chromatography and mass spectrometry (Pawlosky et al.,
1994) and appeared when a diet completely devoid of AA was fed. Because Δ6
desaturase activity is limited in cats, feeding diets rich in LA results in a modest
accumulation of 20:2n-6 via chain elongation and the appearance of a novel fatty acid
Δ5,11,14-20:3. This fatty acid is the result of Δ5 desaturation of 20:2n-6 (Sinclair et al.,
1981) and is a hallmark of limited Δ6 desaturase but active Δ5 desaturation when
dietary supplies of LA are high (Bauer, 1997).
Dietary LCPUFA and Feline Life Stage
The need for dietary AA for successful reproduction was studied recently by using
three groups of cats fed diets containing either 1 percent corn oil and 9 percent
hydrogenated coconut oil (calculated to contain approximately 2 percent ME as LA and
10 percent total fat by weight); 3 percent corn oil; or 1 percent corn oil plus 0.02 percent
AA before mating and throughout pregnancy (Pawlosky and Salem, 1996). All animals
became pregnant, but a high incidence of congenital defects and low viability was found
in the 1 percent corn oil group. By comparison, the diet containing 3 percent corn oil
without AA supported reproduction. This study showed that queens are incapable of
effective reproduction when maintained on a diet low in PUFAs including LA and that


===== PDF PAGE 207 =====
206
the addition of a small amount of AA restored this function. However, because the diet
containing 3 percent corn oil without AA also supported reproduction, it was concluded
that dietary factors other than AA may be involved. Also, the neonatal kittens from
queens fed AA in this study were found to synthesize AA from labeled LA precursor
(Pawlosky et al., 1997).
Morris (2001, 2002) also investigated the effect of AA-depleted diets on feline
reproduction and confirmed earlier findings that male cats fed diets containing LA, but
not AA, are fertile. This work was extended by showing that queens reared from
weaning on diets devoid of AA were also fertile. After conception occurred, the queens
showed subsequent gains in body weight; however, only one successful pregnancy
resulted. Supplementation of these queens with AA did not result in any successful
pregnancies. Morris speculated that, except for one or two litters, queens do not need
AA but that for additional litters, some other factor is missing for successful
reproduction.
Information on the capacity for LCPUFA synthesis in feline tissues has been
obtained in a recent series of studies in cats using stable isotopes. In addition to some
AA synthesis, adult cats were also found to produce 20:5n-3 and 22:5n-3 (DPA, n-3) in
liver and 22:6n-3 (DHA) and 22:5n-6 in brain (Pawlosky et al., 1994, 1997). Of
particular interest from these findings is that the final step of desaturation to form DHA
may take place only in the nervous system, and not in the liver, of cats.
Independent of site of tissue synthesis, the important question is whether the
synthetic capacities of cats for LCPUFAs (whether n-6 or n-3) are adequate for various
life stages. Following their earlier study, Pawlosky et al. (1997) fed diets with various
amounts of corn oil and hydrogenated coconut oil to cats prior to mating, during
pregnancy, and during lactation. Two reference diets that contained AA and DHA were
also evaluated. The corn oil diets were capable of maintaining AA concentrations in the
developing retina and brain, but only those diets containing DHA could support the high
concentrations of DHA generally found in these tissues. Low concentrations of 22:5n-6
were also found, suggesting that kittens have a low capacity to produce this fatty acid as
well as DHA. Differences in electroretinograms were observed in all LCPUFA-deficient
diet groups compared to control animals fed either 1,100 mg AA·kg–1 and 640 mg
DHA·kg–1 of the reference diet used (calculated from Pawlosky et al., 1997) or a
supplemented corn-oil/ hydrogenated coconut oil diet containing 200 mg AA·kg–1 and
200 mg DHA·kg–1 (Pawlosky et al., 1997). The LCPUFA-deficient diets did not provide
kittens with an adequate supply of n-3 fatty acids for proper accumulation of neural and
retinal DHA during development and thus were inadequate for support of optimal visual
function. Conversion of either the n-6 or the n-3 18-carbon precursors simply may not
occur to the extent needed in developing or immature cats. Another study using practical
diets found the presence of small amounts of dietary AA, EPA, and DHA (i.e., 0.14
percent, 0.02 percent, and 0.03 percent, as-is basis) in combination with high LA (i.e.,
4.2 percent as is) resulted in insignificant conversion of ALA to LCPUFAs when
supplied as 0.88 percent (as is) in the diets of 19- to 20-month-old cats (Chew et al.,
2000). Thus, the picture emerging is that, for maintenance or normal conception, adult
cats may not require an exogenous source of AA. However, for proper gestation,


===== PDF PAGE 208 =====
207
development, lactation, and growth, metabolic demands are such that provision of
appropriate exogenous amounts of both n-6 and n-3 LCPUFAs is advised and thus
conditionally essential.
Immune, Inflammatory, and Platelet Cell Functions
Little is known about possible antiinflammatory and immunomodulatory function of
dietary n-3 PUFA in cats. One recent report compared effects of plant versus marine-
based n-3 fatty acid-containing diets (i.e., flaxseed vs. fish oil) at two total fat
concentrations. Dietary n-3 PUFAs from either fish or flaxseed oil decreased skin
inflammatory response to histamine to the same extent. In contrast, dietary fish oil
significantly decreased LTB5 concentrations (Chew et al., 2000). Neither of the n-3 fatty
acid sources affected the large variety of immune parameters investigated including
delayed-type hypersensitivity responses, interleukin 2 (IL-2) production, or lymphocyte
proliferation. Only those cats fed the fish oil diets showed lower B cell subpopulations
and lower total T and T helper cell subsets. It was concluded that flaxseed may be less
immunosuppressive in a lower-fat diet (14 percent) than it is in a higher-fat diet (Chew
et al., 2000). These findings are likely the result of limited conversion of flaxseed ALA
to LCPUFAs compared to feeding pre-formed LCPUFAs. LCPUFAs are well known to
more characteristically modify inflammatory and immune functions in mammalian
species than their 18-carbon precursors.
Platelet function tests using platelet-rich plasma from a small group of cats fed diets
containing approximately 75 percent moisture and 27.7 percent (DM) crude fat varying
in corn oil, choice white grease, and menhaden fish oil to modify total n-6:total n-3
ratios (25:1, 12:1, and 1.3:1) have been conducted. The diets also contained turkey,
turkey liver, and rice. The cats had been fed one of the three diets for 16 weeks. Animals
consuming the diet with the lowest ratio (highest amount of fish oil) were observed to
have decreased platelet aggregation and platelet activation, and increased bleeding
times. No differences were seen in activated partial thromboplastin time, one-stage
prothrombin time, and fibrinogen concentrations as measured in whole-blood samples
from the animals (Saker et al., 1998). It was concluded that prolonged ingestion of
enriched n-3 fatty acid diets from fish oil resulted in detrimental effects at the dietary
dosages examined. Specific amounts of the n-6 and n-3 fatty acids used in the diets were
not reported in this study.
REQUIREMENTS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND
ALLOWANCES
Table 5-1 lists the fatty acid abbreviations used in describing the recommendations
for both n-6 and n-3 fatty acid families.
Recommendations for dietary fat types for dogs and cats have taken into
consideration the consensus of several expert workshops as well as the body of literature
available comparatively and specifically for the target species. The notions that potential


===== PDF PAGE 209 =====
208
benefits are to be gained in human adults by reducing dietary n-6 PUFAs, whereas
increasing the amounts of n-3 PUFAs benefits cardiac health and that increasing n-3
PUFAs in infants promotes development, have been considered. However, it must be
borne in mind that despite several similarities in lipid metabolism among dogs, cats, and
humans, distinct differences also exist. For example, unlike humans, dogs and cats are
“high-density lipoprotein mammals” expressing atherogenic resistance. Thus, they are
able to tolerate high dietary fat concentrations. Further, among mammals, cats are
unique regarding their fatty acid metabolism. Being fur bearing, a beneficial response
relating to skin and coat conditions has been shown in dogs fed high LA plus zinc-
containing diets (Marsh et al., 2000), and high dietary PUFAs generally appear to be
associated with improvements in skin and coat scores (Rees et al., 2001). In guinea pigs,
it has been found that more than 46 percent of an oral dose of radiolabeled ALA was
associated with skin and fur lipids after 48 hours (Fu and Sinclair, 2000). When labeled
LA was fed, approximately two-thirds of the label was found in the skin plus fur
fractions (Fu et al., 2001). These data indicate that a large portion of the dietary 18-
carbon PUFAs are present in skin and fur. They also point to the possibility that, after 48
hours of feeding, there was little metabolism of LA to the more highly unsaturated fatty
acids (Fu et al., 2001). These findings are consistent with data in dogs in which AA
enrichment of neutrophil membranes of animals fed either 2.5 or 27.4 percent ME as LA
was equivalent (Waldron, 1999). In view of their fur-bearing nature and existing
information, a decrease of dietary LA in dogs and cats similar to that recommended for
humans is not believed appropriate. For humans, the Nutrition Committee of the
American Heart Association has recommended that dietary LA content not exceed 10
percent ME. This value was based, in part, on studies of artificially induced tumors in
mice in which diets containing either 17 or 25 percent ME LA increased tumor weight
(Rose et al., 1993, 1994). Furthermore, participants at a recent expert workshop
convened in the United States to consider human dietary needs recommended that LA
not exceed 3 percent ME for humans (6.67 g in a 2,000-kcal diet) (Simopoulos et al.,
1999). The recommendations made here for dogs and cats diverge somewhat from these
recommendations for humans. In dogs and cats, higher amounts of LA are considered
safe and efficacious (see Chapter 15).
TABLE 5-1 List of Abbreviations of Selected Fatty Acids and Fatty Acid Terminology


===== PDF PAGE 210 =====
209
With respect to cats, given their poor efficiency of LA conversion to longer-chain
PUFAs, a modest dietary supply of AA and an upper threshold of LA somewhat lower
than those for dogs are recommended.
Finally, recommendations for increasing the n-3 fatty acid content in both dog and
cat diets has been made. These are based on the competitive but nonlinear hyperbolic
relationship versus n-6 fatty acids that has been found for rats, humans, and dogs (Lands
et al., 1990, 1992; Bauer et al., 2002); stable isotope studies with cats during
development; estimates of adequate intakes from modern-day pet food fatty acid
compositions; and the body of literature already described. Addition of n-3 PUFA to dog
and cat diets, while maintaining current amounts of n-6 fatty acids for adults, is
therefore recommended (see Chapter 15). The SUL values, where shown, are those
believed to be safe based on specific data available for dogs and cats.
Essential Fatty Acids for Dogs and Cats
Both n-6 and n-3 fatty acids are essential for dogs and cats. In some cases, the
requirement can be met using LA and ALA, but there are some important exceptions
depending on the physiologic state of the animal. Thus, some fatty acids are considered
conditionally essential in a number of instances. The following discussion is focused on
both absolute and conditional requirements for adult maintenance, growth, and
reproduction and lactation.
Foremost among the EFAs is the dietary requirement for n-6 fatty acids in the form
of LA for both dogs and cats.
Under certain conditions, such as growth and reproductive performance of queens,
modest dietary provision of AA is also necessary. Early studies have shown that signs of
EFA deficiency in puppies and young dogs were reversed when 2 to 6 percent of energy
was provided by LA or AA (Hansen and Weise, 1951; Wiese et al., 1966). This amounts
to 0.94 to 2.82 percent DM given an energy density of 4.0 kcal·g–1 DM metabolizable
energy. Although AA also shows EFA activity, dogs can synthesize sufficient amounts
of it from LA. Thus, only LA must be supplied to dogs. For cats, dietary LA may also


===== PDF PAGE 211 =====
210
be sufficient to supply the essential n-6 fatty acids needed for adult maintenance and for
conception to occur. However, maintenance of normal pregnancy and neonatal growth
and development of cats requires a source of the preformed long-chain n-6 fatty acid,
AA.
With respect to the n-3 fatty acid ALA, definitive studies on its essential nature have
not been conducted in dogs and cats. Nonetheless, work in other species indicates that
the provision of small amounts to adult dogs will support health, cell turnover, and cell
function. Conversion of ALA to EPA occurs in dogs and cats, but its conversion to DHA
is limited. However, based on studies in other species, the variability of these
conversions is such that some individuals may show no detectible conversion of ALA to
DHA. For adult maintenance, conversion of ALA may be sufficient to provide long-
chain n-3 PUFAs (i.e., 20- and 22-carbon acids) because the amount needed is small.
However, under special circumstances such as growth, reproduction, or lactation,
adequate and recommended amounts of long-chain n-3 PUFAs are indicated in the
tables. A dietary requirement for them remains to be demonstrated, and only adequate
intakes, and recommended amount based on the existing literature have been estimated
at this time.
DOGS
Fat Content of Diets: Preferences, Minima, and Maxima
Diets with a wide range of fat concentration appear to be consonant with good health
in dogs. However, as noted earlier, when diets high in total fat are formulated, care must
be taken to ensure the adequate intake of protein, minerals, and vitamins. Proper
formulation of diets containing fat thus requires adjustment for its high energy value
(Cowgill, 1928). Published literature on the preferences of dogs for various sources of
dietary fat is sparse, but it appears that dogs adapt to a fairly wide range of fat types and
amounts. It has been noted that dogs may prefer animal fats for reasons ascribed to
flavor and added palatability (Rainbird, 1988; Earle and Smith, 1993). Also, it should be
noted that dogs will eat rancid fat, but this is not a recommended practice. One early
study reported no adverse effects of feeding partially hydrogenated soybean oil
previously used for commercial deep fat frying to four dogs for 54 weeks (Nolen, 1973).
However, more recently, retinal degenerations and lipofuscin accumulation in intestinal
smooth muscle and neurons have been documented to be associated with vitamin E
deficiency in a group of adult hunting dogs that had been fed food scraps with a high
content of red meat and fat from restaurant waste (Davidson et al., 1998). Feeding
predominantly meat and table scraps has been consistently associated with naturally
occurring vitamin E deficiencies (Hayes et al., 1970a,b). Ingestion of oxidized fats also
has been associated with reduced weight gain and body fat content, decreased serum
vitamin E, and alterations of some cellular measures of immune function (Turek et al.,
2000).


===== PDF PAGE 212 =====
211
As noted, dogs have a wide tolerance for dietary fat. However, depending on the EFA
concentrations of fat sources used and on provision of sufficient nutrient density,
minimal amounts of total fat can suffice. Thus, strictly speaking and beyond the need to
provide appropriate EFAs, an MR of total fat for dogs and cats is unknown. Dogs can be
maintained by feeding dry-type diets containing 5 to 8 percent total fat in dry matter,
and many canned foods for adult maintenance contain in excess of 10 percent on a DM
basis (Kraybill and Curtis, 1938; Anonymous, 1998a, b, 2000). However, in practice, a
minimal fat content of 5 percent of DM has been suggested for commercial foods
(Linton, 1934), and this amount generally allows for the inclusion of adequate EFAs
with most fat sources. Nonetheless, some caution is needed. For example, using beef fat
(tallow) exclusively is not advised because of its low LA content. In some cases, its
combination with other pet food ingredients that contain fat, such as corn, may result in
a formulation that contains enough LA and ALA to maintain nutritional adequacy.
However, this is not always the case.
Maximal fat contents of diets for dogs may be reasonably high without adverse
effect, although there are some exceptions. Several canned veterinary specialized
products in which dietary protein is modestly reduced by fat substitution are among the
diets whose amount of energy from fat ranges from 50 to 60 percent ME. Diets with 10
to 24 percent fat have been fed for 2 years without identified adverse effects (Morgan,
1935, 1940), and other studies have reported tolerance for 40 percent fat (Ivy, 1936;
Axelrod et al., 1951). Also, diets containing 81 g total fat per 1,000 kcal (calculated
from data provided) have been fed to sled dogs without evident problems (Adkins and
Kronfeld, 1975; Downey et al., 1980). However, when dogs were fed a low-protein,
high-fat diet containing 7 g of lean meat and 10 g of lard per kilogram of body weight
along with 50 g sucrose plus vitamin and mineral supplements, pancreatitis was induced
(Lindsay et al., 1948). This diet contained only 6 percent ME protein and 78 percent ME
fat (calculated from Lindsay et al., 1948) and facilitates defining a SUL for dietary fat.
By comparison, Meyer et al. (1979) fed 3- to 5-month-old puppies diets containing from
8 to 14 g fat·kg BW–1 for 3 months without any negative effect on pancreatic activity.
One other precaution is that sedentary adult dogs have a greater tendency to become
obese when fed high-fat diets ad libitum compared to high-carbohydrate diets (Romsos
et al., 1978), although a slight restriction in food intake will prevent the development of
obesity when high-fat diets are fed. Finally, hypercholesterolemia in dogs occurs when
animals are maintained on high-fat diets (ca. 60 percent ME) (Kronfeld et al., 1979;
McAlister et al., 1996). However, it is unlikely that this particular alteration is associated
with any serious metabolic consequence because the excess cholesterol is primarily in
the esterified form and associated with high-density lipoprotein fractions (McAlister et
al., 1996). Because high-density lipoproteins are considered beneficial relative to
coronary artery disease risk, the likelihood of atherogenesis in dogs is minimal at the
plasma cholesterol concentration observed. This phenomenon may, in part, explain this
species’ generalized resistance to developing coronary artery disease and stroke (Bauer,
1996; Wagner et al., 1999).
Growth


===== PDF PAGE 213 =====
212
Dietary amounts of total fat needed for growth of young dogs are greater than those
needed for adult maintenance yet likely less than that in canine milk consumed during
suckling. However, a total fat SUL for canine growth is similar to that for adults (see
Adult Maintenance section). The requirements for growth are likely to lie between the
nutrient profiles of canine milk and adult maintenance needs. When milk total fat
content (Bauer et al., 2000; Lepine et al., 2000) is arbitrarily multiplied by a factor of
0.30, the result is remarkably consistent with total fat needs for growth reported
previously (NRC, 1985). Thus, a recommended allowance (RA) of 8.5 percent dry
matter (DM) (ca. 18 percent ME) for growth is unchanged from its earlier estimate.
Using a similar calculation for the individual fatty acids, an estimated adequate intake
for LA of 1.18 percent DM (2.5 percent ME) can be calculated, which is also similar to
previous recommendations [i.e., 2.43 percent ME (AAFCO, 2003) and 2.3 percent ME
(NRC, 1985)]. Accordingly, an estimated adequate intake (AI) for ALA has been
calculated to be 0.07 percent (DM) (0.15 percent ME). The LA:ALA ratio resulting
from these two calculations (based on percent ME) approximates the high value of the
range recommended for reproductive performance at less than 17. These amounts are
presumed to be adequate at this time. Using these values and adding a 10 percent safety
margin, the RAs are 1.3 percent DM for LA and 0.08 percent DM for ALA with an
LA:ALA ratio of 16.3. Modestly higher ALA contents will result in a lower LA:ALA
ratio that is also within the recommended range (see Table 15-3, footnote f). It is
important to note that the use of milk fatty acid composition data as a basis to determine
the AI values for PUFAs takes into consideration that LCPUFAs are also present in
canine milk. Thus, if only LA and ALA (no n-3 or n-6 LCPUFAs) are provided in a diet
formulated for growth, adequate amounts of LA and ALA needed may be greater than
those estimated above.
Given their presence in canine milk, it seems reasonable that some estimate of AI for
n-3 LCPUFAs also must be made. For DHA, the AI is approximately 0.030 percent DM
(0.028 percent DM) based on milk composition and factored as above. Similarly, the AI
of AA should be in the range of 0.03 to 0.05 percent DM. Because EPA is not known to
offer health benefits to very young dogs, AIs for EPA are low and should not exceed
more than 0.03 percent DM. Support for using this approach exists in that the values
calculated by factoring average milk composition values in the above fashion compare
favorably with those recommended by the recent Workshop on the Essentiality of and
Recommended Dietary Intakes (RDIs) of Omega-6 and Omega-3 Fatty Acids in which
adequate intakes for infant formulas and diets were delineated (Simopoulos et al., 1999).
However, it must be emphasized that these are, at best, only estimates of AI. There are
no published studies available to define precisely the MR, AI, or RA values for these
fatty acids.
Adult Maintenance
The RA of total dietary fat for adult dogs is 11.7 percent ME (5.5 percent DM in a
4,000 kcal·kg–1 DM diet). There is no new evidence to recommend changing this value
from earlier estimates (Linton, 1934), and lesser amounts may depress food intake. The


===== PDF PAGE 214 =====
213
MR for total fat may actually be lower than this value, but it has not been specifically
determined to date. If so, the AI for total fat may be as low as 4 percent DM, but only
under circumstances in which total food intake is not affected (Campbell and Phillips,
1953). This latter value is deemed adequate and should be considered speculative until
additional studies are performed. The safe upper limit (SUL) for total dietary fat is
approximately 70 percent ME or 82.5 g per 1,000 kcal ME (Downey et al., 1980;
Adkins and Kronfeld, 1982). At higher fat concentrations, hypertension and obesity
were induced in dogs by feeding 2 pounds cooked beef plus 1 can of dog food daily for
5 weeks (Rochhini et al., 1987). The amount of fat in this diet was estimated to be
approximately 95 g total fat per 1,000 kcal ME. Another study, noted earlier, induced
pancreatitis in dogs using approximately 92 g per 1,000 kcal ME (Lindsay et al., 1948).
Thus, the SUL for total fat is based on a safety margin of about 10 percent less than the
amount reported to have induced pancreatitis and is consistent with the data of Adkins
and Kronfeld (1982) and Downey et al. (1980). Many practical diets for healthy dogs
will typically contain between 22 and 60 g per 1,000 kcal ME total fat, well below the
SUL, especially because protein to calorie ratios are a problem in 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1
diets when total fat exceeds 82.5 g per 1,000 kcal.
When formulating canine diets, fat sources and other components should be chosen
to include LA at an RA of 2.34 percent ME (1.1 percent DM). There is some evidence
to indicate that the MR for LA is less than 1.1 percent DM, with adequate amounts
approximating 0.6 percent DM (Bauer et al., 2002), but further work will be needed to
confirm this possibility. For growing puppies, 1 percent of ME did not seem to be
adequate although 2 percent was sufficient to prevent deficiency. This latter amount is
approximately 0.95 percent DM in a diet containing 4 kcal·g–1 ME and is recommended
as an AI. Using a safety margin of approximately 10 percent, the RA for diet
formulation, given a nutrient density of 4,000 kcal·kg–1, is thus 11 g·kg–1 DM LA
(Table 15-5). It should be noted that, while epidermal ceramide EFAs are enriched in
LA, tissue cell membranes generally are rich in AA. Because dogs readily convert LA to
AA, a portion of the dietary LA amount will be used for AA synthesis and utilization.
The RA for LA thus should be minimally sufficient to reliably maintain normal
physiologic functions of all organ systems. Higher amounts of total fat, LA, or other
fatty acids are also acceptable to improve palatability of food or hair coat gloss.
However, definitive studies on the amounts and types of dietary fats needed to maintain
or improve hair coat quality have not been published to date. When fat content is
increased, calculations regarding the nutrient-energy ratio should always be verified.
Regarding an SUL for LA, population intakes of LA range from 2.4 to 13.3 percent
ME based on recent analyses of 27 separate commercial dog foods (calculated from
Roudebush, 2001). Results from long-term studies in dogs have not been published, but
one report on the incidence of naturally occurring mammary cancer in rats found no
difference in incidence in tumor-free and tumor-bearing animals fed diets with 13.8
percent LA in DM (Appleton and Landers, 1986). For dogs, the SUL of LA may
approach this value, depending on the ALA or EPA content of the diet. This is because
high amounts of LA may be metabolically balanced by the presence of ALA in the diet
as a result of competitive interactions with LA for metabolism. The SUL also may be


===== PDF PAGE 215 =====
214
increased by the presence of EPA or lowered by the presence of AA. Unfortunately,
quantitative data have not yet been published on these types of interactions in canine
species. Consequently, the SUL for LA is based on the available data and the hyperbolic
and competitive relationships among the various n-6 and n-3 acid types recently
reported for dogs (Bauer et al., 2002). Given the above information, the SUL for LA is
estimated at 16.3 g per 1,000 kcal (13.8 percent ME). An ALA concentration that equals
or exceeds 0.25 percent DM (0.55 percent ME) can be subsequently calculated and used
as a guideline for metabolic balance of these two fatty acids so that the ratio of LA to
ALA is within the recommended range (see Table 15-5, footnote e). Amounts of LA in
excess of this amount are not recommended for long-term feeding.
The RA, AI, and SUL for ALA are based on data available on n-3 PUFAs in
experimental animals and humans for development as reviewed above. Recent
recommendations for laboratory animals (Reeves et al., 1993) and supportive studies in
dogs demonstrate that ALA provides substrate for cellular EPA synthesis as well as
plasma accumulation of DPA (n-3) (Bauer et al., 1998; Bibus and Stitt, 1998). DPA is
then transported via plasma and ultimately converted to DHA in retina and neurologic
tissues of normal dogs. DPA is thus an important source of DHA for neurological tissue
(Alvarez et al., 1994). In this way, ALA acts as a precursor of n-3 LCPUFAs. Estimates
of existing average daily intakes of ALA in human populations range from 0.35 to 0.7
percent ME (Anonymous, 1992c). For adult dogs, the MR for ALA is likely to be less
than the MR for fetal or neonatal development but an exact value has not been
determined. Nonetheless, an RA of approximately 0.044 percent DM (0.09 percent ME)
for dietary ALA at an LA concentration of 1.1 percent DM (2.34 percent ME) is
recommended. Because of competitive metabolic interactions with LA (Dunbar and
Bauer, 2002), all recommendations for ALA (i.e., RA, AI, SUL) likely depend on the
LA content of the diet. Thus, if considerably more than the RA of LA is present in a diet
(which is often the case in many practical diets), the addition of more ALA may be
prudent to achieve a metabolic balance of derived n-3 and n-6 20-carbon fatty acids for
eicosanoid synthesis in healthy dogs. This is one instance in which the ratio of LA to
ALA should be considered. A range for this ratio of 2.6 to 26 is presumed safe based on
evidence to date. It includes a margin of safety of approximately 10 percent at both
extremes.
A specific requirement for long-chain n-3 PUFAs (EPA and DHA) in adult dogs has
not been identified to date. Despite their metabolic roles in inflammation and neural
development in several species, direct evidence of a requirement for pre-formed sources
of these fatty acids in adult dogs is not available. The same proviso applies to defining a
dietary minimum for long-chain n-6 PUFAs (i.e., AA) in adult dogs. However, an AI of
0.11g per 1,000 kcal of combined EPA and DHA for overall health is recommended
based on studies in other species including humans, and pet food usage data. Bear in
mind, however, that individual amounts of EPA and DHA will vary among sources
typically used. Thus, small variations in amounts of both of these n-3 LCPUFAs are
acceptable until more data become available (Table 15-5). Safe upper limits of long-
chain n-3 PUFAs have been inferred as a result of evidence of impaired cellular
immunity when dogs were fed diets containing 3.13 percent ME n-3 LCPUFAs at an n-6
PUFA content of approximately 4.8 percent ME for 12 weeks (Wander et al., 1997).


===== PDF PAGE 216 =====
215
Long-term studies of Greenland Eskimo populations consuming 9 g·d–1 of long-chain n-
3 PUFAs did not discover any adverse effects. This amount is approximately analogous
to 2.6-3.8 percent ME. No data on long-term effects in dogs are available, and many
short-term studies have focused only on fatty acid ratios, with actual amounts not
reported. Other studies in dogs used high doses for short periods (Waldron, 1999; Brown
et al., 2000; Hall et al., 2002). The upper limit for the sum of EPA and DHA for humans
proposed by the BNF Task Force (Anonymous, 1992b) was 2 percent ME with a
maximal margin of safety of total n-3 PUFAs of 4.5 percent ME. The former value does
not include amounts of DPA (22:5n-3) present in many naturally occurring sources, but
the latter value does. However, the studies by Wander et al. (1997) and Hall et al. (1999)
of normal beagle dogs would appear to place the SUL at between 2.1 and 2.6 percent
ME of a diet containing 4,241 kcal·kg–1 DM and 42.6 percent ME as total fat.
Decreasing the upper value of this range by approximately 10 percent as a margin of
safety establishes an SUL for total n-3 LCPUFAs in dogs of approximately 2.4 percent
ME (i.e., 2.8 g per 1,000 kcal).
Gestation and Lactation
The requirement of total dietary fat necessary to support gestation and lactation of
dogs is greater than that for maintenance (Siedler and Schweigert, 1952; Ontko et al.,
1957). However, studies precisely establishing the MR for total fat have not been
conducted to date. There are data to indicate that 7.7 percent total fat, as is, resulted in
successful reproductive performance (Siedler and Schweigert, 1952), and this amount
provides the basis for the AI. In view of these findings, by considering moisture content
and typical fat digestibilities of dry extruded-type diets, the AI and RA values of 8.5
percent DM should provide sufficient dietary fat for canine reproduction. Although a
MR of LA for reproduction has not been established, an AI for LA on a dry matter basis
would be expected to be somewhat lower than that for growth (i.e., 1.1 percent DM vs.
1.18 DM assuming a nutrient density of 4,000 kcal·kg–1). If so, an AI for ALA can be
calculated as approximately 0.07 percent DM within the recommended range of dietary
LA:ALA ratio (see Table 15-8). Estimates of the RAs for EFAs based on quantitative
measurements of physical growth of maternal tissues and fetuses during pregnancy
(Hytten and Leitch, 1971) have been calculated by the Food and Agricultural
Organization-World Health Organization to be 1-1.5 percent ME as an additional total
EFA requirement for pregnancy With this calculation in mind, the RA for LA may easily
be 0.42 percent ME higher than that for maintenance, resulting in a total LA energy
recommendation of 2.76 percent ME (1.3 percent DM in a 4,000 kcal·kg–1 DM diet). At
this LA value, the RA for ALA may have to be minimally increased by 0.06 percent ME
over that recommended for maintenance (i.e., total ALA of 0.17 percent ME or 0.08
percent DM in a 4,000 kcal·kg–1 DM diet). Bear in mind that more (up to 0.5 percent
DM) would also be appropriate given the recommended range of LA:ALA ratios.
Because of competition between LA and ALA for metabolism, the LA:ALA ratio
should range between 2.6 and 16. This range is not as wide as that for maintenance,


===== PDF PAGE 217 =====
216
thereby helping ensure the availability of 18-carbon n-3 ALA for subsequent elongation.
With respect to the LCPUFAs, preliminary studies on the fatty acid composition of
canine milk have provided some guidance. One recent study reported that AA and DHA
are present in amounts similar to those in other mammals (AA, 1.22 percent; DHA, 0.7
percent of total milk fat) (Lepine and Kelley, 2000), and another study has found
relatively higher AA and lower DHA (1.82 percent and 0.08 percent of total milk fat,
respectively) (Bauer et al., 2000). The extent to which milk fatty acids can be modified
by diet is unknown in dogs, but data in humans, rats, and pigs indicate a dietary
influence on milk fatty acid profiles (Huang et al., 1992; Ruan et al., 1995; Makrides et
al., 1996). Given the benefits of providing pre-formed amounts of both DHA and AA in
human premature infant formulas and the conditionally essential nature of these fatty
acids in neurological development (Carlson et al., 1993; Huang and Craig-Schmidt,
1996), it is expected that small amounts of dietary DHA during gestation would be
expected to ensure fetal development as well as subsequent lactation. However, not
enough information exists at present to define an MR for LCPUFAs during gestation
and lactation in dogs. Modest amounts (i.e., 0.05-0.10 percent DM) are considered
adequate at this time. The SUL values are the same as for maintenance.
CATS
Fat Content of Diets: Preferences, Minima, and Maxima
Large cats in the wild may obtain 60 percent of their energy from dietary fat, and
diets containing 67 percent ME as fat are efficiently utilized (Scott, 1968). In domestic
cats, reasonably high-fat diets from either animal or plant sources have been fed using
purified diets containing 25-30 percent total fat and 30-40 percent protein (as is). By
comparison, dry-type, extruded cat foods typically contain 8 to 13 percent fat DM. Both
type and amount of dietary fat affect food acceptability to cats. Generally, higher-fat
diets appear to be more palatable than low-fat diets (Greaves, 1965; Kendall, 1984;
NRC, 1986). However, diets containing 25 percent total fat were preferred to diets with
either 10 percent or 50 percent total fat. Beef tallow was selected over butter and
chicken fat, but no preference was evident among beef tallow, lard, or partially
hydrogenated vegetable oil (Kane et al., 1981).
Type and amount of fat also appear to affect growth in kittens. Scott (1966) found
satisfactory performance in kittens fed diets containing 22 percent fat. Diets with 25
percent hydrogenated coconut oil were found to be unpalatable and failed to support
growth. By contrast, hydrogenated beef tallow did support growth in kittens over a 7-
week period, although fatty acid deficiency developed. The difference between these
fats was attributed to palatability, because consumption of the hydrogenated beef tallow
diet was markedly higher than that of the hydrogenated coconut oil diet. Acceptance of
the latter could be improved by adding amounts of EFAs from safflower oil and poultry
fat (MacDonald et al., 1983b, 1985). Kittens chose nonhydrogenated beef tallow over


===== PDF PAGE 218 =====
217
chicken fat (3:1), but no significant difference was found between 35 percent total fat
diets with hydrogenated tallow versus regular beef tallow (MacDonald et al., 1983a).
Medium-chain triacylglycerols are poorly accepted by cats. When an MCT
preparation enriched in caprylic acid (C8:0) was offered, young cats would not eat again
after first tasting the diet. Caprylic acid between 0.1 and 1 g·kg–1 diet caused the diet to
be unpalatable (MacDonald et al., 1985).
As in dogs, because the ME content of fat is approximately 2.25 times that of protein
or carbohydrate, changes in fat amounts will modify the caloric density of a diet.
Adjustment of other nutrient concentrations, particularly protein, vitamins, and minerals,
must be made in order to maintain appropriate overall nutrient intakes.
Maximal fat contents of balanced diets for cats may be reasonably high without any
known adverse effects (total calories notwithstanding). Many feline diets presently
being fed contain approximately 50 percent or more of total energy from fat. Some diets
for adult animals that are designed to modestly decrease protein amount contain more
than 70 percent ME total fat. These values are consonant with estimates of fat utilization
in this species.
The recommended safe upper limit (SUL) of total dietary fat is approximately 70
percent ME (82.5 g per 1,000 kcal), although practical diets generally span a wide range
from 22 to 55 percent ME, depending on cat food category.
Growth
Dietary amounts of total fat needed for growth of young cats are greater than those
needed for adult maintenance. The needs for growth are likely to lie between the
nutrient profiles of queens’ milk and adult feline maintenance. Again, when the total fat
content of milk (Lepine and Kelly, 2000) is multiplied by a factor of 0.3, the result is
similar to the previous total fat recommendations for growth. Thus, the RA of total fat
for growth is 9 percent DM (assuming 4,000 kcal·kg–1 DM). Using this approach for
individual fatty acids, an estimated amount of LA for growth would be 1.3 percent DM,
which is somewhat higher than earlier recommendations. This amount may reflect a
surplus of dietary LA, resulting in its enrichment in queens’ milk. Thus, the RA of LA is
more likely to be similar to those amounts needed for gestation and lactation (i.e., 0.55
percent DM of a 4,000 kcal·kg–1 DM diet). An estimated supply of ALA has been
calculated to be 0.02-0.03 percent DM at the recommended LA level. This amount is
presumed adequate at this time, although no requirement has been established for this
nutrient in growing kittens. With respect to the LCPUFAs, an AI of 0.05 percent DM for
AA is presumed adequate based on milk composition factored as above. However, this
amount also seems excessive in terms of an adequate intake because it is 2.5 times
higher than amounts of AA presumed adequate for reproductive performance. It may be
that this higher concentration of AA reflects the possibility that the diet used in the
Lepine and Kelly study (2000) largely exceeded the MR for AA. Until more information
is known, no changes in the AI and RA values of AA from the amounts for gestation
and lactation are recommended (i.e., 0.02 percent DM of a 4,000 kcal·kg–1 diet). For
DHA, 0.01 percent to 0.02 percent DM is presumed adequate, but little information is


===== PDF PAGE 219 =====
218
available in cats on this or other n-3 LCPUFAs. It is of interest that values calculated by
factoring average milk composition in the above fashion compare only reasonably well
with previously estimated requirements for cats, as noted above, and for human infants
recommended by a recent workshop on the RDIs of ω-6 and ω-3 fatty acids
(Simopoulos et al., 1999). Compared to dogs, many of the PUFA values calculated using
feline milk composition tended to overestimate previous recommendations when
factored by 0.3. This may be due, in part, to the limited information presently available
on the fatty acid composition of feline milk or other errors associated with this
approach. It must be emphasized that values based on the few existing reports of milk
fatty acid composition discussed here have, at best, provided only a first approximation
of AI in puppies and kittens for growth. This approach has not been established as
reliably providing such estimates to date or establishing MR or RA values for these
nutrients.
Adult Maintenance
Except for some data on the requirement for AA, studies determining the MR for
total fat and other EFAs have not been conducted specifically in cats. Thus, for the most
part, only AIs and RAs have been defined. It is recommended that cat foods for adult
maintenance minimally contain 9 percent total fat on a DM basis, which is also the AI.
Fat sources and other components should be chosen to include an RA for LA of 0.55
percent (DM). The MR for LA may be lower than this value, but specific data are not
available on this topic and earlier estimates of the MR do not appear to be well
substantiated (NRC, 1986). Thus, a 10 percent safety margin has been added to previous
estimates. When stipulating a nutrient density of 4,000 kcal·kg–1, the targeted RAs for
diet formulation would be approximately 22.5 g total fat per 1,000 kcal and 1.4 g LA per
1,000 kcal. Feline requirements for LA are expected to be lower than those for dogs
because, unlike dogs, very little LA is used for LCPUFA synthesis in cats. Nonetheless,
these concentrations are sufficiently reliable for maintaining normal adult physiologic
function.
There are few data defining an SUL of LA. One study supplemented an EFA-
deficient diet with 5 percent safflower oil and found considerable amounts of the chain
elongation product of LA (20:2n-6) in both plasma and liver tissues (MacDonald et al.,
1983a). This fatty acid accumulates when large amounts of LA are fed. However, it has
no known physiologic function, and any possible untoward effects of it or its metabolite
Δ5,11,13- 20:3 have not been reported. By assuming an average LA concentration value
for safflower oil and the available data used in the MacDonald et al. (1983a) study, the
LA content of the diet used in this study has been estimated to be 37 g·kg–1. Typical
analyses of present-day cat foods supplied by several manufacturers show that these
products contain nearly 60 g LA·kg–1, with most products in the range of 32-47 g. On
this basis, such amounts of dietary LA are not expected to produce an adverse effect. An
SUL for dietary LA of 13.8 g per 1,000 kcal seems prudent at this time.
The MR of ALA for cats also has not been determined experimentally. In the absence
of any significant Δ6 desaturase activity, ALA would not be converted to n-3 LCPUFAs


===== PDF PAGE 220 =====
219
in significant amounts. Some conversion may exist if diets are completely devoid of n-3
LCPUFAs. However, a metabolic requirement for dietary ALA has not been shown to
date in feline species.
Recommendations and allowances for AA are based on the available literature
including the reported low biosynthetic capacity of cats for this fatty acid. Earlier it was
noted that a specific requirement of AA for feline maintenance either may not exist or
appears to be quite low. In view of this phenomenon and recent stable isotope data on
the existence of Δ6 desaturase in feline tissues, conversion of LA to meet the metabolic
need for AA may be adequate in a majority of adult cats. Thus, for feline maintenance,
intake of 0.02 g AA·kg–1 DM is presumed adequate rather than required in adults.
However, it is not known whether all adult cats are capable of sufficient AA synthesis.
Thus an RA of 0.06 g AA·kg–1 DM has been set to address this possibility. Also, it
should be noted that a modest increase of dietary AA may be necessary when long-chain
n-3 fatty acids are present (MacDonald, 1984b; Goustard-Langlier et al., 1999). Thus,
although AA may not be required in adults, care should be taken to provide this fatty
acid when diets contain high amounts of n-3 LCPUFAs (see Table 15-12 for relative
amounts of AA and EPA + DHA recommended). Finally an SUL of AA for cats of 2
g·kg–1 (0.2 percent DM) is believed prudent at this time.
Studies establishing requirements for long-chain n-3 PUFAs (EPA and DHA) in adult
cats have not been performed. Theoretically, an argument could be made for some
requirement given the low Δ6 desaturase activities in this species. If so, amounts needed
would be quite small and of an order of magnitude similar to that for AA. Nonetheless,
at present there are no data supporting a requirement for n-3 LCPUFAs for feline adult
maintenance. An AI of 0.1 g (EPA + DHA) per kilogram of DM diet containing 4,000
kcal·kg–1 DM appears reasonable at this time.
Gestation and Lactation
On a percent ME basis, amounts of total dietary fat recommended for gestation and
lactation of queens are similar to those for maintenance. However, absolute intakes will
be greater because of increased energy needs overall. Thus, the RA for total fat of 9
percent DM (MacDonald et al., 1984c) remains because there are no new data to
warrant modification of that value at this time. EFAs will similarly be provided in this
fashion so the RA of LA may need not exceed that needed for maintenance (i.e., 0.55
percent DM of a 4,000 kcal·kg–1 diet). The RA for AA at 0.02 percent DM is
unchanged from previous estimates. This value is considerably higher than the adult
maintenance AI value described for AA. However, recent studies have used this amount
successfully for reproduction (Pawlosky et al., 1997), and the use of lower amounts or
the absence of AA entirely may lead to problems during repeated breeding (Morris,
2001). With regard to the n-3 acids, an AI of 0.02 percent DM for ALA has been
estimated specifically to supply some substrate for limited n-3 LCPUFA synthesis.
Practical diet formulations typically contain small amounts of these LCPUFAs, and their
synthesis may occur only in cases where the concentrations of LCPUFAs in foods are


===== PDF PAGE 221 =====
220
essentially zero (Pawlosky et al., 1994). Thus, small dietary concentrations of n-3
LCPUFAs are probably a more significant source of DHA and EPA than ALA for fetal
and neonatal development. In the latter case, there may be no actual need for dietary
ALA. However, further study is needed.
With respect to LCPUFAs, a preliminary study of the fatty acid composition of
queens’ milk has provided some guidance. One recent study reported that AA and DHA
are in a range similar to other species (AA, 0.59 percent; DHA, 0.21 percent of total
milk fat) (Lepine and Kelley, 2000). It is expected that small amounts of dietary AA and
DHA during gestation would ensure fetal development and subsequent lactation. For
AA, the AI and RA are greater than those for adult maintenance. For DHA and EPA,
there is no information available to presently define an MR for this life stage. Until new
information is available, modest amounts (i.e., 0.01-0.03 percent DM) are presumed
adequate at this time, primarily from DHA rather than EPA (see Table 15-14).
REFERENCES
Abedin, L., E. L. Lien, A. J. Vingrys, and A. J. Sinclar. 1999. The effects of dietary α-
linolenic acid compared with docosahexaenoic acid on brain, retina, liver, and heart in
the guinea pig. Lipids 34:475-482.
Adams, K. L., and A. H. Jensen. 1984. Comparative utilization of in-seed fats and the
respective extreacted fats by the young pig. J. An. Sci. 59:1557.
Adkins, T. O., and D. S. Kronfeld. 1982. Diet of racing sled dogs affects erythrocyte
depression by stress. Can. Vet. J. 23:260-263.
Alvarez, R. A., G.D. Aguirre, G. M. Acland, and R. E. Anderson. 1994.
Docosapentaenoic acid is converted to docosahexaenoic acid in the retinas of normal
and prcd-affected miniature poodle dogs. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 35:402-408.
Anderson, R. E., P. J. O’Brien, and R. D. Wiegand. 1992. Conservation of
docosahexaenoic acid in the retina. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 318:285-294.
Anonymous. 1992a. Functions of unsaturated fatty acids Pp. 48-62 in Unsaturated Fatty
Acids: Nutritional and Physiological Significance. The Report of the British Nutrition
Foundation’s Task Force. London: Chapman & Hall.
Anonymous. 1992b. Recommendations for intakes of unsaturated fatty acids. Pp. 153-
163 in Unsaturated Fatty Acids: Nutritional and Physiological Significance. The
Report of the Nutrition Foundation’s Task Force. London: Chapman & Hall.
Anonymous. 1992c. Intakes of unsaturated fatty acids in the population. Pp. 12-19 in
Unsaturated Fatty Acids: Nutritional and Physiological Significance. The Report of
the British Nutrition Foundation’s Task Force. London: Chapman & Hall.
Anonymous. 1997. Determination of total fat in foods and feeds by the Caviezel method
based on a gas chromatographic technique. Peer Verified Method 4, AOAC
International, Gaithersburg, Md.
Anonymous. 2000. Oils and fats. In Official Methods of Analysis of AOAC
International, W. Horowitz, ed., 17th ed., Vol II. Gaithersburg, Md.
Appleton, B. S., and R. E. Landers. 1986. Oil gavage effects on tumor incidence in the
National Toxicology Program’s 2-year carcinogenesis bioassay. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.


===== PDF PAGE 222 =====
221
206:99-104.
Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). 2003. Official Publication.
Harrisburg, Pa.
Axelrod, H. E., M. G. Gullberg, and A. F. Morgan. 1951. Carbohydrate metabolism in
riboflavin-deficient dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 165:604.
Bach, A. C., and V. K. Babayan. 1982. Medium chain triglycerides: An update. Am J.
Clin. Nutr. 36:950-962.
Barbiers, R. B., L. M. Vosburgh, P. K. Ku, and D. E. Ullrey. 1982. Digestive efficiences
and maintenance energy requirements of captive wild Felidae: Cougar (Felis
concolor), leopard (Panthera pardus), lion (Panthera leo) and tiger (Panthera tigris).
J. Zoolog. An. Med. 13:32.
Bartges, J. M., and M. Cook. 1999. Influence of feeding conjugated linoleic acid on
body composition in healthy adult cats. Proceedings 17th ACVIM, p. 729.
Bates, E. J. 1995. Eicosanoids, fatty acids and neutrophils: Their relevance to the
pathophysiology of disease. Prost. Leuk. Essent. Fatty Acids 53:75-86.
Bauer, J. E. 1996. Comparative lipid and lipoprotein metabolism. Vet. Clin. Path. 25:49-
56.
Bauer, J. E. 1997. Fatty acid metabolism in domestic cats (Felis catus) and cheetahs
(Acononyx jubatus). Proc. Nutr. Soc. 56:1013-1024.
Bauer, J. E. 2000. Hyperlipidemias. Pp. 283-292 in Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, S. J. Ettinger and E. C. Feldman, eds., 5th ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Bauer, J. E., and W. D. Ransone. 1983. Fatty acid composition of serum lipids in fasting
ponies. Lipids 18:397.
Bauer, J. E., B. L. Dunbar, and K. E. Bigley. 1998. Dietary flaxseed in dogs results in
differential transport and metabolism of (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids. J. Nutr.
128:2641S.
Bauer, J. E., K. E. Bigley, G. E. Lees, and M. K. Waldron. 2000. Distribution of long
chain polyunsaturated fatty acids in canine milk parallels changes in plasma total
phospholipid fatty acids during lactation. P. 13 in Proceedings PUFA in Maternal and
Child Health, Kansas City, Mo.
Bauer, J. E., M. K. Waldron, A. L. Spencer, and S. S. Hannah. 2002. Predictive
equations for the quantitation of polyunsaturated fats in canine plasma and
neutrophils from dietary fatty acid profiles. J. Nutr. 132:1642S-1645S.
Bengtsson-Olivecrona, G., and T. Olivecrona. 1994. Medical aspects of triglyceride
lipase. Pp. 315-336 in Lipases, P. Wooley, and S. B. Peterson, eds. Cambridge, UK:
Press Syndicate, University of Cambridge.
Benolken, R. M., R. E. Anderson, and T. G. Wheeler. 1973. Membrane fatty acids
associated with the electrical response in visual excitation. Science 182:1253-1254.
Bergstrom, B., A. Dahlqvist, G. Lundh, and J. Sjovall. 1957. Studies on the intestinal
digestion and absorption in the human. J. Clin. Invest. 36:1521-1536.
Beynen, A. C., H. J. Kappert, A. G. Lemmens, and A. M. Van Dongen. 2002. Plasma
lipid concentrations, macronutrient digestibility and mineral absorption in dogs fed a
dry food containing medium-chain triglycerides. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr.
86:306-312.


===== PDF PAGE 223 =====
222
Bibus, D. M, and P. A. Stitt. 1998. Metabolism of α-linolenic acid from flaxseed in
dogs. In The Return of ω-3 Fatty Acids into the Food Supply, A. P. Simopoulos, ed.
Wrld. Rev. Nutr. Diet 83:186-198.
Bligh, E. G., and W. J. Dyer. 1959. A rapid method of total lipid extraction and
purification. Can. J. Biochem. Physiol. 37:911-917.
Borgstrom, B. 1975. On the interactions between pancreatic lipase and colipase and the
substrate and the importance of bile salts. J. Lipid Res. 16:411-417.
Boudreaux, M. L., G. A. Reinhart, D. M. Vaughn, J. S. Spano, and M. Mooney. 1997.
The effects of varying dietary n-6 to n-3 fatty acid ratios on platelet reactivity,
coagulation screening assays, and antithrombin II activity in dogs. J. Am. An. Hosp.
Assoc. 33:235-243.
Brindley, D. N. 1974. The intracellular phase of fat absorption. Biomembranes 4B:621-
671.
Brown, S. A., C. A. Brown, W. A., Crowell, J. A. Barsanti, C. W. Kang, T. Allen, C.
Cowell, and D. R. Finco. 2000. Effects of dietary polyunsaturated fatty acid
supplementation in early renal insufficiency in dogs. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 135:275-286.
Budde, E. F. 1952. The determination of fat in baked biscuit type of dog foods. J. Assoc.
Agric. Chem. 35:799.
Burr, G., and M. M. Burr. 1929. A new deficiency disease produced by the rigid
exclusion of fat from the diet. J. Biol. Chem. 82:345-367.
Burr, G., and M. M. Burr. 1930. On the nature of fatty acids essential to nutrition. J.
Biol. Chem. 86:587-621.
Buttriss, J. 1999. Metabolism of n-3 fatty acids. Pp. 6-8 in Briefing Paper. n-3 Fatty
Acids and Health. London: British Nutrition Foundation.
Byrne, K. P., K. L. Campbell, C. A. Davis, D. Schaeffer, and H. F. Troutt. 2000. The
effects of dietary n-3 vs n-6 fatty acids on ex vivo LTB4 generation by canine
neutrophils. Vet. Derm. 11:123-131.
Campbell, J. E., and P. H. Phillips. 1953. Some problems feeding fat to dogs.
Southwestern Vet. Winter, pp. 173-175.
Campbell, K. L. and G. P. Dorn. 1992. Effects of oral sunflower oil and olive oil on
serum and cutaneous fatty acid concentrations in dogs. Res.Vet. Sci. 53:172-178.
Campbell, K. L., and P. Roudebush. 1995. Effects of four diets on serum and cutaneous
fatty acids, transepidermal water losses, skin surface lipids, hydration and condition
of the skin and haircoat of dogs. Proceedings AAVD/ACVD 11:80-81.
Carey, M. S., and D. M. Small. 1970. The characteristics of mixed micellar solutions
with particular reference to bile. Am. J. Med. 49:590-608.
Carey, M. S., and D. M. Small. 1972. Micelle formation by bile salts. Arch. Int. Med.
130:506-527.
Carlson, S. E. 1990. Are n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids essential for growth and
development? Pp. 42-50 in Health Effects of Dietary Fatty Acids, G. J. Nelson, ed.
Champaign, Il.: American Oil Chemists’ Society.
Carlson, S. E., R. J. Cooke, S. H. Werkman, and E. A. Tolley. 1992a. First year growth
of pre-term infants fed standard compared to marine oil supplemented formula. Lipids
27:901-907.


===== PDF PAGE 224 =====
223
Carlson, S. E., R. J. Cooke, P. G. Rhodes, J. M. Peeples, and S. H. Werkman. 1992b.
Effect of vegetable and marine oils in preterm infant formula on blood arachidonic
and docosahexaenoic acids. J. Pediatr. 120:S159-S167.
Carlson, S. E., S. H. Werkman, P. G. Rhodes, and E. A.Tolley. 1993. Visual-acuity
development in healthy preterm infants: Effect of marine-oil supplementation. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. 58:35-42.
Carlson, S. E., A. J. Ford, S. H. Werkman, J. M. Peeples, and W. W. Koo. 1996. Visual
acuity and fatty acid status of term infants fed human milk and formulas with and
without docosahexaenoate and arachidonate from egg yolk lecithin. Ped. Res. 39:882-
888.
Carriere, F., H. Moreau, V. Raphel, R. Laugier, C. Benicourt, J. L. Junien, and R. Verger.
1991. Purification and biochemical characterization of dog gastric lipase. Eur. J.
Biochem. 202:75-83.
Carriere, F., V. Raphel, H. Moreau, A. Bernadac, M. A. Devaus, R. Grimaud, J. A.
Barrowman, C. Benicourt, J. L. Junien, and J. Laugier. 1992. Dog gastric lipase:
Stimulation of its secretion in vivo and cytolocalization in mucous pit glands.
Gastroent. 102:1535-1545.
Carruthers, A., and D. L. Melchior. 1986. How bilayer lipids affect membrane protein
activity. Trends Biochem. Sci. 11:331-335.
Case, L. P., D. P. Carey, D. A. Hirakawa, and L. Daristotle. 2000. Canine and Feline
Nutrition. A Resource for Companion Animal Professionals. St. Louis, Mo.: Mosby.
Cera, K. R., D. C. Mahan, and G. A. Reinhart. 1990. Evaluation of various extracted
vegetable oils, roasted soybeans, medium-chain triglyceride and an animal-vegetable
fat blend for postweaning swine. J. An. Sci. 68:2756.
Chew, B. P., J. S. Park, T. S. Wong, H. W. Kim, M. G. Hayek, and G. Reinhart. 2000.
Role of omega-3 fatty acids on immunity and inflammation in cats. Pp. 55-67 in
Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition, Vol. III, G. A. Reinhart and D. P.
Carey, eds. Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Clark, K. J., M. Makrides, M. A. Neumann, and R. A. Gibson. 1992. Determination of
the optimal ratio of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acid in infant formulas. J. Pediatric.
120(S):151-158.
Codner, E. C., and C. D. Thatcher. 1990. The role of nutrition in the management of
dermatoses. Semin. Vet. Med. Surg. (Sm. Animal) 5:167-177.
Conner, W. E., M. Neuringer, and S. Reisbeck. 1992. Essential fatty acids: The
importance of n-3 fatty acids in the retina and brain. Nutr. Rev. 50:2129.
Cook, H. W. 1996. Fatty acid desaturation and chain elongation in eukaryotes. Pp. 129-
152 in Biochemistry of Lipids, Lipoproteins and Membranes, D. E. Vance and J. E.
Vance, eds. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Cowgill, G. R. 1928. The energy factor in relation to food intake: Experiments on the
dog. Am. J. Physiol. 85:45-65
Craig-Schmidt, M. C., K. E. Stieh, and E. L. Lien. 1996. Retinal fatty acids of piglets
fed docosahexaenoic and arachidonic acids. Lipids 31:53-59.
Crampton, E. W. 1964. Nutrient-to-calorie ratios in applied nutrition. J. Nutr. 82:353.
Crawford, M. A. 1993. The role of essential fatty acids in neural development;
Implications for perinatal nutrition. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 57(suppl):703s-710s.


===== PDF PAGE 225 =====
224
Davidson, B. C., D. Morsbach, and R. C. Cantrill. 1986. The fatty acid composition of
the liver and brain of southern African cheetahs. Prog. Lipid Res. 25:97-99.
Davidson, M. G., F. J. Geoly, B. C. Gilger, G. J. McLellan, and W. Whitley. 1998.
Retinal degeneration associated with vitamin E deficiency in hunting dogs. J. Am.
Vet. Med.Assoc. 213:645-651.
de Deckere, E. A. M., O. Korver, P. M. Verschurn, and M. B. Katan. 1998. Health
aspects of fish and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids from plant and marine origin. Eur.
J. Clin. Nutr. 52:749-753.
Delton-Vanderbroucke, I., M. B. Maude, H. Chen, G. D. Aguirre, G. M. Ackland, and R.
E. Anderson. 1998. Effect of diet on the fatty acid and molecular species composition
of dog retina phospholipids. Lipids 3:1187-1193.
Descroix-Vagne, M., J. P. Perret, M. Daoud-el Baba, A. Bosshard, M. A. Dechlette, I.
Gros, A. Desvigne, and H. Rakotomala. 1993. Variation of gastric lipase and pepsin
activities in the Heidenhain pouch of the cat. Arch. Int. Physiol. Biochim. Biophys.
10:79-85.
Dietschy, J. M., V. L. Sallee, and F. A. Wilson. 1971. Unstirred water layers and
absorption across the intestinal mucosa. Gastroenterol. 61:932-943.
Dobbing, J., and J. Sands. 1970. Growth and development of the brain and spinal cord
of the guinea pig. Brain Res. 17:115-123.
Douglas, G.J., Jr., A. J. Reinauer, W. C. Books, and J. H. Pratt. 1953. The effect on
digestion and absorption of excluding the pancreatic juice from the intestine. Gastrol.
23:452-459.
Downey, R. L., D. S. Kronfeld, and C. A. Banta. 1980. Diet of beagles affects stamina.
J. Am. An. Hosp. Assoc. 16:273-277.
Dratz, E. A., and A. J. Deese. 1986. The role of docosahexaenoic acid (22:6n-3) in
biological membranes; Examples from photoreceptors and model membrane bilayers.
Pp. 319-351 in Health Effects of Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids in Seafoods, A. P.
Simopoulos, R. R. Kifer, and R. E. Martin, eds. New York: Academic Press.
Dunbar, B. L., and J. E. Bauer. 2002. Conversion of essential fatty acids by delta-6
desaturase in dog liver microsomes. J. Nutr. 132:1701S-1703S.
Dutton, H. J. 1971. Hydrogenation of fats. P. 3 in Progress in the Chemistry of Fats and
Other Lipids, Vol. 9: Polyunsaturated Acids, R. T. Holman, ed. Oxford, UK:
Pergamon Press.
Earle, K. E., and P. M. Smith. 1993. Balanced diets for dogs and cats. Pp. 45-55 in The
Waltham Book of Companion Animal Nutrition, I. Burger, ed. Oxford, UK:
Pergamon Press.
Elias, P. M. 1987. The special role of the stratum corneum. Pp. 342-346 in Dermatology
in General Medicine, T. B. Fitzpatrick, A. X. Eisen, and K. Wolff, et al., eds. New
York: McGrawHill.
Elias, P. M., B. E. Brown, and V. A. Ziboh. 1980. The permeability barrier in essential
fatty acid deficiency: Evidence for a direct role for linoleic acid in barrier function. J.
Invest. Dermatol. 74:230233.
Elvehjem, J. W., and W. Krehl. 1947. Imbalances and dietary interrelationships in
nutrition. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 135:279.


===== PDF PAGE 226 =====
225
Emken, E. A. 1991. Do trans acids have adverse health effects? Pp. 245-263 in Health
Effects of Dietary Fatty Acids, G. J. Nelson, ed. Champaign, Il.: American Oil
Chemists’ Society.
Fiennes, R. N. T. W., A. J. Sinclair, and M. A. Crawford. 1973. Essential fatty acid
studies in primates, linoleic requirements of capuchins. J. Med. Primatol. 2:155-169.
Fleischauer, F. J., W. D. Yan, and T. A. Fischell. 1993. Fish oil improves endothelium-
dependent coronary vasodilation in heart transplant recipients. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.
21:982-989.
Folch, J., M. Lees, and G. H. Sloane-Stanley. 1957. A simple method for the isolation
and purification of total lipids from animal tissue. J. Biol. Chem. 226:497.
Food and Agricultural Organization-World Health Organization. 1978. Report of an
Expert Consultation. The Role of Dietary Fatty Acids and Oils in Human Nutrition.
Rome.
Frankel, T. L. and J. P. W. Rivers. 1978. The nutritional and metabolic impact of
gamma-linolenic acid on cats deprived of animal lipid. Bri. J. Nutr. 39:227-231.
Freinkel, R. 1987. Lipids of the epidermis. Pp. 191-194 in Dermatology in General
Medicine, T. B. Fitzpatrick, A. X. Eisen, K. Wolff, et al., eds. New York:
McGrawHill.
Fu, Z., and A. J. Sinclair. 2000. Novel pathway of metabolism of alpha-linolenic acid in
the guinea pig. Ped. Res. 47:414-417.
Fu, Z., N. M. Attar-Bashi, and A. J. Sinclair. 2001. 1-14C-linoleic acid distribution in
various tissues of guinea pigs following an oral dose. Lipids 36:255-260.
Galli, C., E. Agradi, A. Petroni, and E. Tremoli. 1981. Differential effects of dietary
fatty acids on the accumulation of arachidonic acid and its metabolic conversion
through the cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase in platelets and vascular tissue. Lipids
16:165-172.
Gotto, A. M., Jr., et al. 1986. Introduction to the plasma lipoproteins. Meth. Enzymol.
128:3-41.
Goustard-Langelier, B., P. Guesnet, G. Durand, J. M. Antoine, and J. M. Alessandri.
1999. n-3 and n-6 fatty acid enrichment by dietary fish oil and phospholipid sources
in brain cortical areas and nonneural tissues of formula-fed piglets. Lipids 34:5-16.
Greaves, J. P. 1965. Protein and calorie requirements of the feline. Pp. 33-45 in Canine
and Feline Nutritional Requirements, O. Graham-Jones, ed. London: Pergamon Press.
Gurr, M. I. 1984. Agricultural aspects of lipids. In The Lipid Handbook, F. D. Gunstone,
J. L. Harwood, and F. B. Padley, eds. London: Chapman and Hall.
Gurr, M. I., and J. L. Harwood. 1991a. Dietary lipids: Implications for health and
disease. Pp. 162-243 in Lipid Biochemistry: An Introduction. London: Chapman and
Hall.
Gurr, M. I, and J. L. Harwood. 1991b. Fatty acid structure and metabolism. Pp. 22-118
in Lipid Biochemistry: An Introduction. London: Chapman and Hall.
Hall, J. A., R. C. Wander, J. L. Gradin, S.-H. Du, and D. E. Jewell. 1999. Effect of
dietary n-6-to-n-3 fatty acid ratio on complete blood and total white blood cell counts,
and T-cell subpopulations in aged dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 60:319-327.


===== PDF PAGE 227 =====
226
Hall, J. A., K. A. Tooley, J. L. Gradin, D. E. Jewell, and R. C. Wander. 2002. Influence
of dietary long-chain n-3 fatty acids from mendhaden fish oil on plasma
concentrations of α-tocopherol in geriatric beagles. Am. J. Vet Res. 63:104-110.
Hammarstrom, S., M. Hamberg, B. Samuelson, et al. 1975. Increased concentrations of
non-esterified arachidonic acid, 12L-hydroxy-5,8,10,14-eicosatetraenoic acid,
prostaglandin E2 and prostaglandin F2 alpha in epidermis of psoriasis. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 72:51305134.
Hammarstrom, S., L. A. Lindgren, C. Marcello, E. A. Duell, T. F. Anderson, and J. J.
Voorhees. 1979. Arachidonic acid transformation in normal and psoriatic skin. J.
Invest. Dermatol. 73:180-183.
Hamosh, M. 1984. Lingual lipase. Pp. 49-82 in Lipases, B. Borgstrom, and H. L.
Brockman, eds. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Hamosh, M., H. L. Klanerman, R. O. Wolf, and R. O. Scow. 1975. Pharyngeal lipase
and digestion of dietary triglyceride in man. J. Clin. Invest. 55:908-913.
Hand, M. S., C. D. Thatcher, R. L. Remillard, and P. Roudebush. 2000. Small Animal
Clinical Nutrition, 4th Ed. Marceline, Mo.: Walsworth Publishing.
Hansen, A. E., and H. F. Wiese. 1951. Fat in the diet in relation to nutrition of the dog. I.
Characteristic appearance and gross changes of animals fed diets with and without fat.
Tex. Rep. Biol. Med. 9:491-515.
Hansen, A. E., H. F. Wiese, and O. Beck. 1948. Susceptibility to infection manifested by
dogs on a low fat diet. Fed. Proc. 7:289.
Hansen, A. E., J. G. Sinclair, and H. F. Wiese. 1954. Sequence of histologic change in
skin of dogs in relation to dietary fat. J. Nutr. 52:541-554.
Hassam, A. G., J. P. W. Rivers, and M. A. Crawford. 1971. The failure of the cat to
desaturate linoleic acid: Its nutritional implications. Nutrition Metabolism 21:321-
328.
Haufmann, B. F. 1996. Conjugated linoleic acid offers promise. INFORM 7:152-159.
Hayes, K. C., J. E. Rousseau, and D. M. Hegsted. 1970a. Plasma tocopherol
concentrations and vitamin E deficiency in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 157:64-71.
Hayes, K. C., S. W. Nielsen, and J. E. Rousseau. 1970b. Vitamin E deficiency and fat
stress in the dog. J. Nutr. 99:196-209.
Hayes, K. C., R. E. Carey, and S. Y. Schmidt. 1975. Retinal degeneration associated
with taurine deficiency in the cat. Science 188:949-951.
Hill, R.C., C. F. Burrows, G. W. Elllison, and J. E. Bauer. 2001. The effect of texturized
vegetable protein from soy on nutrient digestibility compared to beef in cannulated
dogs. J. Anim. Sci. 79:2162-2171.
Hoffman, H. H. 1953. Report on crude fat in baked dog food. J. Assoc. Agric. Chem.
36:208
Hoffmann, A. F. 1963. The function of bile salts in fat absorption. Biochem. J. 69:57-68.
Holman, R. T. 1960. The ratio of trienoic:tetraenoic acids in tissue lipids as a measure of
essential fatty acid requirement. J. Nutr. 70:405-410.
Holman, R. T. 1971. Essential fatty acid deficiency. Prog. Chem. Fats Lipids 9:275-348.
Holman, R. T., and H. Mohrauer. 1963. A hypothesis involving competitive inhibitions
in the metabolism of polyunsaturated fatty acids. Acta Chem. Scand. 17:584-590.


===== PDF PAGE 228 =====
227
Holman, R. T., S. B. Johnson, and T. F. Hatch. 1982. A case of human linolenic acid
deficiency involving neurological abnormalities. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 35:617-623.
Huang, J., J. P. Wyse, and A. W. Spira. 1990. Ontogenesis of the electroretinogram in a
precocial mammal, the guinea pig. J. Hered. 83:174-181.
Huang, M. C., and M. C. Craig-Schmidt. 1996. Arachidonate and docosahexaenoate
added to infant formula influence fatty acid composition and subsequent eicosanoid
production in neonatal pigs. J. Nutr. 126:2199-2208.
Huber T. L., R. C. Wilson, and S. A. McGarity. 1986. Variations in digestibility of dry
dog food with identical label guaranteed analyses. J. Am. An. Hosp. Assoc. 22:571-
575.
Hwang, D. H., and A. E. Carroll. 1980. Decreased formation of prostaglandins derived
from arachidonic acid by dietary linolenate in rats. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 33:590-597.
Hwang, S. G., S. Torii, A. Llyas, T. Matsui, and H. Yano. 1994. Comparative changes of
fat digestibility and fat accumulation by the carbon chain length of dietary glycerol
tri-homogeneous fatty acids. Nutr. Res. 14:1821-1830.
Hytten, P. E., and I. Leitch. 1971. The Physiology of Human Pregnancy. Oxford:
Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Ip, C., J. A. Scimeca, and H. J. Thompson. 1994a. Conjugated linoleic acid. A powerful
anticarcinogen from animal sources. Cancer 74:1050-1054.
Ip, C., M. Singh, H. J. Thompson, and J. A. Scimeca. 1994b. Conjugated linoleic acid
suppresses mammary carcinogenesis and proliferative activity of the mammary gland
in the rat. Cancer Res. 54:1212-1215.
Iverson, S., J. Kirk, C. L. Hamosh, and M. Newsome. 1991. Milk lipid digestion in the
neonatal dog: The combined actions of gastric and bile salt stimulated lipases.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1083:109-119.
Ivy, A. C., C. R. Schmidt, and J. Beazell. 1936. Starch digestion in the dog. North
Am.Vet. 17:44.
James, W. T., and C. M. McCay. 1950. A study of food intake, activity, and digestive
efficiency in different type dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 11:412-413.
Jensen, C. L., H. Chen. J. K. Fraley, R. E. Anderson, and W. C. Heird. 1996.
Biochemical effects of dietary linoleic/α-linolenic acid ratio in term infants. Lipids
31:107-113.
Jos, A. F., O. den Kamp, B. Roelofsen, and L. L. M. Van Deenan. 1985. Structural and
dynamic aspects of phosphatidycholine in the human erythrocyte membrane. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 10:320-323.
Kanazawa, A., Y. Watanabe, and Y. Shirota. 1995. Effect of docosahexaenoic acid ethyl
ester supplement for lactating rat on lipid and fatty acid composition of pup’s liver
and cerebral cortex. J. Jpn. Soc. Nutr. Food Sci. 48:173-180.
Kane, E., J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1981. Acceptability and digestibility by adult
cats of diets made with various sources and levels of fat. J. Anim. Sci. 53:1516-1523.
Kendall, P. T. 1984. The use of fat in dog and cat diets. P. 383 in Fats in Animal
Nutrition, J. Wiseman, ed. Boston: Butterworths.
Kietzmann, M. 1990. Eicosanoid levels in canine inflammatory skin diseases. Pp. 211-
220 in Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, C. von Tscharner and R. E. W. Halliwell,
eds. London: Balliere Tindall.


===== PDF PAGE 229 =====
228
Kingdon, J. 1977. Pp. 397-413 in East African Mammals: An Atlas of Evolution in
Africa, Vol. 3(A). New York: Academic Press.
Kinsella, J. E. 1990. Possible mechanisms underlying the effects of dietary n-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids. Omega News V:1-5.
Knospe, E., and R. Plendl. 1997. Histological demonstration of lipase activity in the
gastric mucosa of the cat. Anatomia, Histologia, Embryologia 26:303-304.
Kraybill, H. R., and P. B. Curtis. 1938. Commercial feeding stuffs. Purdue University
Agricultural Experimental Station Circular. No. 236. West Lafayette, In.
Kronfeld, D., S. Johnson, and K. Dunlap. 1979. Inherited predisposition of dogs to diet-
induced hypercholesterolemia. J. Nutr. 109:1715-1719.
Lands, W. E. M. 1986. Fish and Human Health. Orlando, Fla.: Academic Press.
Lands, W. E. M., A. Morris, and B. Libelt. 1990. Quantitative effects of dietary
polyunsaturated fats on the composition of fatty acids in rat tissues. Lipids 25:505-
516.
Lands, W. E. M., B. Libelt, A. Morris, N. C. Kramer, T. E. Prewitt, P. Bowen, D.
Schmeisser, M. H. Davidson, and J. H. Burns. 1992. Maintenance of lower
proportions of (n-6) eicosanoid prescursors in phospholipids of human plasma in
response to added dietary (n-3) fatty acids. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1180:147-162.
Lee, K. N., D. Kritchevsky, and M. W. Pariza. 1994. Conjugated linoleic acid and
atherosclerosis in rabbits. Artherosclerosis 108:19-25.
Lepine, A. J., and R. L. Kelly. 2000. Nutritional influences on the growth characteristics
of hand-reared puppies and kittens. Pp. 307-319 in Recent Advances in Canine and
Feline Nutrition, Vol. III, G. A. Reinhart, and D. P. Carey, eds. Wilmington, Ohio:
Orange Frazer Press.
Li, Y., and B. A. Watkins. 1998. Conjugated linoleic acid alters bone fatty acid
composition and reduces ex vivo prostaglandin E2 biosynthesis in rats fed n-6 and n-3
fatty acids. Lipids 33:417-425.
Lindsay, S., C. Entenman, and I. L. Chaikoff. 1948. Pancreatitis accompanying hepatic
disease in dogs fed a high fat, low protein diet. Arch. Path. 45:635-638.
Linthorst, J. M., S. B. Clark, and P. R. Holt. 1977. Triglyceride emulsification by
amphiphiles present in the intestinal lumen during digestion of fat. J. Colloid Interfac.
Sci. 60:1-10.
Linton, R. G. 1934. Canine Nutrition. 12th Int. Vet. Congr., New York, 3:488.
Lowe, M. E. 2001. Molecular mechanisms of pancreatic lipase and colipase. In
Intestinal Lipid Metabolism, C. M. Mansbach II, P. Tso, and A. Kuksis, eds. New
York: Plenum Press.
MacDonald, M. L., B. C. Anderson, Q. R. Rogers, C. A. Buffington, and J. G. Morris.
1983a. Essential fatty acid requirements of cats: Pathology of essential fatty acid
deficiency. Am. J. Vet. Res. 45:1310-1317.
MacDonald, M. L., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1983b. Role of linoleate as an
essential fatty acid for the cat independent of arachidonate synthesis. J. Nutr.
113:1422-1433.
MacDonald, M. L., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1984a. Nutrition of the domestic cat,
a mammalian carnivore. Ann. Rev. of Nutr. 4:521-562.


===== PDF PAGE 230 =====
229
MacDonald, M. L., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1984b. Effects of dietary
arachidonate deficiency on the aggregation of cat platelets. Comp. Biochem. Physiol.
78C:123-126.
MacDonald, M. L., Q. R. Rogers, J. G. Morris, and P. T. Cupps. 1984c. Effects of
linoleate and arachidonate deficiencies on reproduction and spermatogenesis in the
cat. Journal of Nutrition 114:719-726.
MacDonald, M. L., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1985. Aversion of the cat to dietary
medium-chain triglycerides and caprylic acid. Physiology Behavior. 35:371-375.
Makrides, M., M. A. Neumann, and R. A. Gibson. 1996. Effect of maternal
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) supplementation on breast milk composition. Eur. J.
Clin. Nutr. 50:352-357.
Mantzioris, E., M. J. James, R. A. Gibson, and L. G. Cleland. 1995. Differences exist in
the relationships between dietary linoleic and α-linolenic acids and their respective
long-chain metabolites. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 61:320-324.
Manzoli, F.A., S. Capitani, L. Cocco, N. M. Maraldi, G. Mazzotti, and O. Barnabei.
1988. Lipid mediated signal transduction in the cell nucleus. Adv. Enz. Reg. 27:83-
91.
Marsh, K. A., F. L. Ruedisuelli, S. L. Coe, and T. D. G. Watson. 2000. Effects of zinc
and linoleic acid supplementation on the skin and coat quality of dogs receiving a
complete and balanced diet. Vet. Derm. 11:277-284.
Maskell, I. E., and J. V. Johnson. 1993. Digestion and absorption. Pp. 25-44 in The
Waltham Book of Companion Animal Nutrition, I. H. Burger, ed. Oxford, UK:
Pergamon Press.
McAlister, K. G., J. E. Bauer, J. Harte, J. Rawlings, and P. Markwell. 1996. Canine
lipoproteins and lecithin:cholesterol acyl transferase activities in dietary oil
supplemented dogs. Vet. Clin. Nutr. 3:50-56.
McLean, J. G., and E. A. Monger. 1989. Factors determining the essential fatty acid
requirements of the cat. Pp. 349-342 in Nutrition of the Dog and Cat, I. H. Burger,
and J. P. W. Rivers. eds. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Mead, J. F. 1980. Nutrients with special functions: Essential fatty acids. Pp. 218-238 in
Human Nutrition: A Comprehensive Treatise. New York: Plenum.
Mensink, R. P., and M. B. Katan. 1990. Effect of dietary trans fatty acids on high-
density and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels in healthy subjects. N. Engl. J.
Med. 323:439-445.
Meyer, H., 1984. Nutrient digestibility and its relationship to alimentary disease in dogs.
Pp. 55-69 in Nutrition and Behaviour in Dogs and Cats, R. S. Anderson, ed. Oxford:
Pergamon Press.
Meyer, H., K. Daxl, and A. Thomee. 1979. Ein beitrag zum vorkommen und zur beh
und lung der adiposetas der Hundes. Dtsch. Tierarzlt. Wochr. 85:133-136.
Meyer, H., J. Zentek and U. Freudenthal. 1992. Digestibility of beef tallow in dogs.
Wien. Tierarzt. Monat. 79:202.
Mickel, F. S., F. Wiedenbach, B. Swaarovsky, K. S. LaForge, and G. A. Sceele. 1989.
Structure of the canine pancreatic lipase. J. Biol. Chem. 264:12895-12901.
Miller, C. C., and V. A. Ziboh. 1988. Gamma-linolenic acid-enriched diet alters
cutaneous eicosaonoids. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 154:967-974.


===== PDF PAGE 231 =====
230
Miller, T. A., and E. D. Jacobson. 1979. Gastrointestinal cytoprotection by
prostaglandins. Gut 20:7578.
Mohrauer, H., and R. T. Holman. 1963. The effects of dose level of essential fatty acids
upon the fatty acid composition of the rat liver. J. Lipid Res. 4:159-166.
Monger, E. A. 1986. Polyunsaturated fatty acid metabolism in the cat. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Melbourne, Australia.
Mooney, M. A., D. A. Vaughn, G. A. Reinhart, R. D. Powers, J. C. Wright, C. E.
Hoffman, S. F. Swaim, and H. J. Baker. 1998. Evaluation of the effects of omega-3
fatty acid containing diets on the inflammatory stage of wound healing in dogs. Am.
J. Vet. Res. 59:859-863.
Morgan, A. F. 1935. The food needs of dogs. Vet. J. 91:204-209.
Morgan, A. F. 1940. Deficiencies and fallacies in canine diet. North Am. Vet. 21:476-
478.
Morris, J. G. 1977. The essentiality of biotin and vitamin B12 for the cat. Pp. 15-18 in
Kal Kan Symposium for Treatment of Dog and Cat Diseases, Ohio State University,
September 19-20.
Morris, J. G. 2001. Cats discriminate between cholecalciferol and ergocalciferol. J.
Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 86:229-238.
Morris, J. G. 2002. Do cats need arachidonic acid in the diet for reproduction?
Proceedings Symposia of the Comparative Nutrition Society No. 4:65-69.
Mountzouris, K. C., K. Fegeros, and G. Papadopoulos. 1999. Utilization of fats based on
the composition of sow milk fat in the diet of weanling pigs. An. Feed Sci. Tech.
77:115.
Munday, H., and B. Lowe. 1993. The digestibility of macronutrients in the growing cat.
In Summer Symposium of the Nutrition Society, University of Nottingham Medical
Center, UK.
Munday, J. S., K. G. Thompson, and K. A. G. James. 1999. Dietary conjugated linoleic
acids promote fatty streak formation in the C57BL/6 mouse atherosclerosis model. Br.
J. Nutr. 81:251-255.
Myers, N. 1974. Status of the leopard and cheetah in Africa. Pp. 54-69 in The World’s
Cats, Vol. 3, L. Randall L. Eaton, ed. Proceedings, Third International Symposium on
the World’s Cats. Seattle.
National Research Council (NRC). 1985. Nutrient Requirements of Dogs. Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). 1986. Nutrient Requirements of Cats. Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press.
Nelson, G. J. 1991. Isolation and purification of lipids from biological matrices. Pp. 20-
59 in Analyses of Fats, Oils and Lipoproteins, E. G. Perkins, ed. Champaign, Il.:
American Oil Chemists’ Society.
Nelson, G. J., P. C. Schmidt, G. L. Bartolli, D. S. Kelley, and D. Kyle. 1997. The effect
of dietary docosahexaenoic acid on plasma lipoproteins and tissue fatty acid
composition in humans. Lipids 32:1137-1146.
Nelson, J. H., R. G. Jensen, and R. E. Pitas. 1977. Pregastric esterase and other oral
lipases. A review. J. Dairy Sci. 60:327-362.


===== PDF PAGE 232 =====
231
Neuringer, M., W. E. Conner, D. S. Lin, L. Barstad, and S. Luck. 1986. Biochemical and
functional effects of postnatal omega-3 fatty acid deficiency on retina and brain in
rhesus monkeys. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83:4021-4025.
Neuringer, M., G. J. Anderson, and W. E. Conner. 1988. The essentiality of the n-3 fatty
acids for the development and function of the retina and brain. Ann. Rev. Nutr. 8:517-
541.
Newton, J. D., M. A. McLoughlin, S. J. Birchard, and G. A. Reinhart. 2000. Transport
pathways of enterally administered medium-chain triglycerides in dogs. Pp. 143-152
in Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition, Vol III, G. A. Reinhart, and D. P.
Carey, eds. Wilmington, Ohio: Orange-Frazer Press.
Nicolosi, R. J., E. J. Rogers, D. Kritchevsky, J. A. Scimeca, and P. J. Huth. 1997.
Dietary conjugated linoleic acid reduces plasma lipoproteins and early atherosclerosis
in hypercholesterolemic rabbits. Artery 22:266-277.
Nolen, G. A. 1973. A feeding study of a used, partially hydrogenated soybean oil, frying
fat in dogs. J. Nutr. 103:1248-1255.
Norvell, M. A. 1978. Personal communication. In Nutrient Requirements of Cats.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Ockner, R. K., and J. Manning. 1974. Fatty acid binding protein in small intestine.
Identification, isolation and evidence for its role in intercellular fatty acid transport. J.
Clin. Invest. 54:3265-338.
Ontko, J. A., R. E. Wuthier, and P. H. Phillips. 1957. The effect of increased dietary fat
upon the protein requirement of the growing dog. J. Nutr. 62:163-169.
Orr, N. W. M. 1965. The food requirements of antarctic sledge dogs. Pp. 101-112 in
Canine and Feline Nutritional Requirements, O. Graham-Jones, ed. London:
Pergamon Press.
Pariza, M. W. 1991. Conjugated linoleic acid, a new cancer inhibitor in dairy products.
Bull. Intl. Dairy Fed. 257:29-30.
Pariza, M. W. 1997. Conjugated linoleic acid, a newly recognized nutrient. Chem.
Indust. 464-466.
Park, Y., K. J. Allbright, W. Liu, J. M. Storkson, M. E. Cook, and M. W. Pariza. 1997.
Effect of conjugated linoleic acid on body composition in mice. Lipids 32:853-858.
Pawlosky, R. J., and N. Salem, Jr. 1996. Is dietary arachidonic acid necessary for
reproduction? J. Nutr. 126:1081S-1085S.
Pawlosky, R., A. Barnes, and N. Salem, Jr. 1994. Essential fatty acid metabolism in the
feline; Relationship between liver and brain production of long-chain polyunsaturated
fatty acids. J. Lipid Res. 35:2032-2040.
Pawlosky, R. J., Y. Denkins, G. Ward, and N. Salem. 1997. Retinal and brain accretion
of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids in developing felines: The effects of corn-
based maternal diets. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 65:465472.
Peachey, S. E., J. M. Dawson, and E. J. Harper. 1999. The effect of ageing on nutrient
digestibility by cats fed beef tallow-, sunflower oil- or olive oil-enriched diets.
Growth, Development Aging 63:49-58.
Pfister, S. L., N. Spitzbarth, W. Edgemond, and W. B. Campbell. 1996. Vasorelaxation
by an endothelium derived metabolite of arachidonic acid. Am. J. Physiol.
270:H1023-H1030.


===== PDF PAGE 233 =====
232
Pritchard, B. N. C., C. C. T. Smith, K. L. E. Ling, and D. J. Detteridge. 1995. Fish oils in
cardiovascular disease. Brit. Med. J. 310:819-820.
Prottey, C. 1977. Investigations of functions of essential fatty acids in the skin. Br. J.
Dermatol. 97:29-38.
Pudelkewicz, C., J. Seufert, and R. T. Holman. 1968. Requirements of the female rat for
linoleic acid. J. Nutr. 94:138-146.
Rainbird, A. L. 1988. A balanced diet. Pp. 57-74 in The Waltham Book of Canine
Nutrition, A. T. B. Edney, ed. 2nd Ed. Oxford, UK: Pergamon Press.
Rees, C. A., J. E. Bauer, W. J. Burkholder, R. J. Kennis, B. L. Dunbar, and K. E. Bigley.
2001. Effects of dietary flaxseed and sunflower seed supplementation on normal
canine serum polyunsaturated fatty acids and skin and hair coat condition scores. Vet.
Derm. 12:111-117.
Reeves, P. G., F. H. Nielsen, and G. A. Fahey. 1993. AIN-93 Purified diets for
laboratory rodents; Final Report of the American Institute of Nutrition Ad Hoc
Writing Committee on the Reformulation of the AIN-76A Rodent Diet. J. Nutr.
123:1939-1951.
Remillard, R. L., and C. D. Thatcher. 1989. Dietary and nutritional management of
gastrointestinal diseases. Vet. Clin. No. Am. Sm. Anim. Pract. 19:797-817.
Rivers, J. P. W. 1982. Essential fatty acids in cats. J. Small Anim. Pract. 23:563-576.
Rivers, J. P. W., and T. L. Frankel. 1980. Fat in the diet of dogs and cats. Pp. 67-99 in
Nutrition of the Dog and Cat, R. S. Anderson, ed. Oxford, UK: Pergamon Press.
Rivers, J. P. W., and T. L. Frankel. 1981. The production of 5,8,11-eicosatrienoic acid
(20:3n-9) in the essential fatty acid deficient cat. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society
40:117a.
Rivers, J. P. W., A. J. Sinclair, and M. A. Crawford. 1975. Inability of the cat to
desaturate essential fatty acids. Nature 258:171-173.
Rivers, J. P. W., A. J. Sinclair, D. P. Moore, and M. A. Crawford. 1976a. The abnormal
metabolism of essential fatty acids in the cat. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society
35:66A-67A.
Rivers, J. P. W., A. G. Hassam, M. A. Crawford and M. R. Braambell. 1976b. The
absence of Δ-6 desaturase activity in the cat. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society
35:67A-68A.
Rocchini, A. P., C. Moorehead, E. Wentz, and S. Deremer. 1987. Obesity-induced
hypertension in the dog. Hypertension 9 (Suppl III): III-64-III-68.
Rodriguez, A., P. Sarda, P. Boulot, C. L. Leger, and B. Descomps. 1999. Differential
effects of n-ethyl maleimine on Δ-6 desaturase activity in human fetal liver toward
fatty acids of the n-6 and n-3 series. Lipids 34:23-30.
Romsos, D. R., M. J. Hornshuh, and G. A. Leveille. 1978. Influence of dietary fat on
food intake, body weight, and body fat of adult dogs. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med.
157:278-281.
Rose, D. P., M. A. Hatala, J. M. Connolly, and J. Rayburn. 1993. Effect of diets
containing different levels of linoleic acid on human breast cancer growth and lung
metastasis in nude mice. Cancer Research 53:4686-4690.
Rose, D. P., J. M. Connolly, and X. H. Liu. 1994. Effects of linoleic acid on the growth
and metastasis of two human breast cancer cell lines in nude mice and the invasive


===== PDF PAGE 234 =====
233
capacity of these cell lines in vitro. Cancer Research. 54:6557-6562.
Roudebush, P. 2001. Consumption of essential fatty acids in selected commercial dog
foods compared to dietary supplementation: An update. Proceedings 16th Annual
AAVD ACVD meeting.
Rouzer, C. A., W. A. Scott, A. L. Hamill, et al. 1982. Secretion of leukotriene C and
other archidonic acid metabolites by macrophages challenged with immunoglobulin E
immune complexes. J. Exp. Med. 156:1077-1086.
Ruan C., X. Liu, H. Man, X. Ma, G. Lu, G. Duan, C. A. DeFrancesco, W. E. Connor.
1998. Milk composition in women from five different regions of China: The great
diversity of milk fatty acids. J. Nutr. 125:2993-2998.
Rudd, E. A., and H. L. Brockburn. 1984. Pancreatic carboxyl ester lipase (cholesteryl
esterase). Pp. 185-204 in Lipases, B. Borgstrom and H. L. Brockman, eds.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Ryu, K. H., and E. Grim. 1982. Unstirred water layer in canine jejunum. Am. J. Physiol.
242:G364-G369.
Saker, K. E., A. L. Eddy, C. D. Thatcher, and J. Kalnitsky. 1998. Manipulation of dietary
(n-6) and (n-3) fatty acids alters platelet function in cats. J. Nutr. 128:2845S-2647S.
Salati, L. M., and A. G. Goodridge. 1996. Fatty acid synthesis in eukaryotes. Pp. 101-
128 in Biochemistry of Lipids, Lipoproteins and Membranes, D. E. Vance and J. E.
Vance, eds. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Samuelsson, B. 1983. Leukotrienes: Mediators of immediate hypersensitivity reactions
and inflammation. Science 220:568-575.
Scallen T. J., A. Pastuszyk, and G.V. Vahouny. 1985. Sterol carrier and lipid transfer
proteins. Chem. Phys. Lipids 38:239-261.
Scardino, M. S., S. F. Swaim, E. A. Sartin, C. A. Hoffman, G. K. Oglivie, R. A. Hanson,
L. C. Shindok, and D. J. Danvenport. 1999. The effects of omega-3 fatty acid diet
enrichment on wound healing. Vet. Derm. 10:283-290.
Scharschmidt, L. A., E. Lanos, and M. J. Dunn. 1983. Arachidonate metabolites and the
control of glomerular function. Fed. Proc. 42:30583063.
Schoenherr, W., and J. Jewell. 1999. Effect of conjugated linoleic acid on body
composition of mature obese beagles. FASEB J. 13:A262
Schrijver, R., D. Vermeulen, and E. Viaene. 1991. Lipid metabolism responses in rats
fed beef tallow, native or randomized fish oil and native or randomized peanut oil. J.
Nutr. 121:948.
Scott, P. P. 1968. The special features of nutrition of cats with observations on wild
Felidae nutrition in the London Zoo. Symposium of the Zoological Society of London
21:21-36.
Sehat, N., M. P. Yurawicz, J. A. G. Roach, M. M. Mossoba, J. K. G. Kramer, and Y. Ku.
1998. Silver-ion high performance liquid chromatographic separation and
identification of conjugated linoleic acid isomers. Lipids 33:217-221.
Siedler, A. J., and B. S. Schweigert. 1952. Effect of the level of fat in the diet on the
growth and performance of dogs. J. Nutr. 48:81-90.
Siems, W. G., T. Grune, O. Hasselwander, and K. Kramer. 2001. Conjugated linoleic
acid. Pp. 257-288 in Neutraceuticals in Health and Disease Prevention, K. Kramer, P.
P. Hoppe, and L. Packer, eds. New York: Marcel Dekker.


===== PDF PAGE 235 =====
234
Simopoulos, A. P. 1991. Omega-3 fatty acids in health and disease and in growth and
development. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 54:438463.
Simopoulos, A. P., A. Leaf, and N. Salem, Jr. 1999. Workshop on the Essentiality of and
Recommended Dietary Intakes for Omega-6 and Omega-3 Fatty Acids. J. Am. Coll.
Nutr. 18:4878-489.
Sinclair, A. J. 1975. The incorporation of radioactive polyunsaturated fatty acids into
liver and brain of developing rat. Lipids 10:175-184.
Sinclair, A. J. 1994. John Rivers (1945-1989): His contribution to research on
polyunsaturated fatty acids in cats. Journal of Nutrition 124:2513S-2519S.
Sinclair, A. J., J. G. McLean, and E. A. Monger. 1979. Metabolism of linoleic acid in
the cat. Lipids 14:932-936.
Sinclair, A. J., W. J. Slattery, J. G. McLean, and E. A. Monger. 1981. Essential fatty acid
deficiency and evidence for arachidonate synthesis in the cat. Br. J. Nutr. 46:93-96.
Smith, J. A. 1994. Neutrophils, host defense, and inflammation: A double edged sword.
J. Leuk. Biol. 56:672-686.
Smith, W. L. 1992. Prostanoid biosynthesis and mechanisms of action. Am. J. Physiol.
263:F181-F191.
Smith, W. L., and F. A. Fitzpatrick. 1996. The eicosanoids; Cyclooxygense,
lipoxygenase, and epoxygenase pathways. Pp. 283-308 in D. E. Vance, and J. E.
Vance, eds. Biochemistry of Lipids, Lipoproteins and Membranes. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Stephan, Z. F., and K. C. Hayes. 1978. Vitamin E deficiency and essential fatty acid
(EFA) status of cats. Federation Proceedings 37:2588.
Stubbs, C. D., and A. D. Smith. 1990. Essential fatty acids in membrane; Physical
properties and function. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 18:779-781.
Terano, T., J. A. Salmon, G. A. Higgs, et al. 1986. Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) as a
modulator of inflammation: Effect on prostaglandin and leukotriene synthesis.
Biochem. Pharmacol. 35:779-785.
Thomson, A. B. R., and G. Wild. 2001. The influence of the intestinal unstirred water
layers on the understanding of the mechanisms of lipid absorption. Pp. 135-15 in
Intestinal Lipid Metabolism, C. M. Mansbach II, P. Tso, and A. Kuksis, eds. New
York: Plenum Press.
Thomson, A. B. R., M. Scholler, L. Smith, and M.T. Cllandinin. 1993. Lipid absorption:
Passing through the unstirred layers, brush border membrane, and beyond. Can. J.
Physiol. Pharmcol. 71:531-555.
Tinoco, J. 1982. Dietary requirements and functions of α-linolenic acid in animals. Prog.
Lipid Res. 21:1-46.
Tinoco, J., R. Babcock, I. Hincenbergs, B. Medwadowski, and M. A. Williams. 1979.
Linolenic acid deficiency. Lipids 14:166-173.
Turek, J. J., B. A. Watkins, I. A. Schoenlein, M. G. Hayek, and C. G. Aldrich. 2000.
Ingestion of oxidized lipids alters canine antioxidant status and immue function. Pp.
541-553 in Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition, Vol III, G.A. Reinhart
and D. P. Carey, eds. Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Uauy, R., M. Treen, and D. R. Hoffman. 1989. Essential fatty acid metabolism and
requirements during development. Sem. Perinatol. 13:118-130.


===== PDF PAGE 236 =====
235
Uauy, R., P. Peirano, D. Hoffman, P. Mena, D. Birch, and E. Birch. 1996. Role of
essential fatty acids in the function of the developing nervous system. Lipids
31:S167S176.
Vaganay, S., G. Joliff, O. Bertaux, E. Toselli, M. D. Devinges, and C. Benicourt. 1998.
The complete cDNA sequence encoding dog gastric lipase. DNA Sequence 8:257-
262.
Van den Bergh, J. J., N. E. Cook, and D. L. Tribble. 1995. Reinvestigation of the
antioxidant properties of conjugated linoleic acid. Lipids 30:599-605.
Vandermeers, A., M. C. Vandermeers-Piret, J. Rathe, and J. Christope. 1975. Effect of
colipase on adsorption and activity of rat pancreatic lipase on emulsified tributyrin in
the presence of bile salt. FEBS Lett. 49:334-337.
Van Dongen, A. M., A. A. Stokhof, M. J. H. Geelen, and A. C. Beynen. 2000. The high
intake of medium-chain triglycerides elevates plasma cholesterol in dogs (an
observation). Folia Vet. 44:173-174.
Vaughn, D. M., G. A. Reinhart, S. F. Swaim, S. D. Lauten, C. A. Garner, M. K.
Boudreaux, J. S. Spano, C. E. Hoffman, and B. Conner. 1994. Evaluation of effects of
dietary n-6 to n-3 fatty acid ratios on leukotriene B syntheis in dog skin and
neutrophils. Vet. Derm. 5:163-173.
Verger, R. 1984. Pancreatic lipase. Pp. 84-150 in Lipases, B. Borgstrom and H. L.
Brockman, eds. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Voss, A., M. Reinhard, S. Sankarappa, and H. Sprecher. 1991. The metabolism of
7,10,13,16, 19-docosapentaenoic acid to 4,7,10,13,16,19-docosa-hexaenoic acid in rat
liver is independent of 4-desaturase. J. Biol. Chem. 19995-20000.
Wagner, J. D., K. A. Greaves, J. E. Bauer, and D. Schwenke. 1999. Lipids and
lipoproteins. Pp. 181-228 in The Clinical Chemistry of Laboratory Animals, 2nd ed.,
W. F. Loeb and F. M. Quimby, eds. New York: Hemisphere Publishing.
Waldron, M. K. 1999. Dietary fat effects on canine neutrophil membrane fatty acid
composition and cell functions. Ph.D. dissertation, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Waldron, M. K., A. S. Spencer, and J. E. Bauer. 1998. Role of long-chain
polyunsaturated n-3 fatty acids in the development of the nervous system of dogs and
cats. J. Am Vet. Med. Assoc. 213:619-622.
Wander, R. C., J. A. Hall, J. L. Gradin, S.-H. Du, and D. E. Jewell. 1997. The ratio of
dietary (n-6) to (n-3) fatty acids influences immune system function, eicosanoid
metabolism, lipid peroxidation and vitamin E status in aged dogs. J. Nutr. 127:1198-
1205.
Warner, K, and M. Eskin. eds. 1995. Methods to Assess Quality and Stability of Oils
and Fat-Containing Foods. Champaign, Il.: American Oil Chemists’ Society Press.
Watkins, B. A. and Y. Li. 2001. Conjugated linoliec acid: the present state of knowledge.
Pp. 445-476 in Handbook of Nutraceutical and Functional Foods, R. E. C. Wildman,
ed. Boca Raton, Fla.: CRC Press.
Watkins, B. A., J. J. Turek, A. J. Lepine, M. F. Seifert, and G. A. Reinhart. 2000.
Influence of polyunsaturated fatty acids on bone modeling and health. Pp. 467-479 in
Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition, Vol III. Wilmington, Ohio: Orange
Frazer Press.


===== PDF PAGE 237 =====
236
Weisinger, H. S., A. J. Vingrys, and A. J. Sinclair. 1996. The effect of docosahexaenoic
acid on the electroretinogram of the guinea pig. Lipids 31:65-70.
Weiss, S. J. 1989. Tissue destruction by neutrophils. N. Engl. J. Med. 320:365-376.
Wertz, P. W., and P. T. Downing. 1982. Glycolipids in mammalian epidermis: Structure
and function of the water barrier. Science 217:1261.
Whelan, J. 1996. Antagonistic effects of dietary arachidonic acid and n-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids. J. Nutr. 126:1086S-1091S.
White, P. D. 1995. Essential fatty acids in veterinary medicine. Pp. 18-20 in Veterinary
Learning Systems, Shawnee Mission, Kan.
Widdowson, E. M. 1970. The harmony of growth. Lancet i:901.
Wiese, H. F., A. E. Hansen, and E. Coon. 1962. Influence of high and low caloric
intakes on fat deficiency in dogs. J. Nutr. 76:7381.
Wiese, H. F., M. J. Bennet, E. Coon, and W. Yamanaka. 1965. Lipid metabolism of
puppies as affected by kind and amount of fat and of dietary carbohydrate. J. Nutr.
86:271-280.
Wiese, H. F., W. Yamanaka, E. Coon, and S. Barber. 1966. Skin lipids of puppies as
affected by kind and amount of fat and of dietary carbohydrate. J. Nutr. 89:113-122.
Yamamoto, N., M. Saitoh, A. Moriuchi, M. Nomura, and H. Okuyama. 1987. The effect
of the dietary linolenate/linoleate balance on brain lipid composition and learning
ability of rats. J. Lipid Res. 28:144-151.
Ziboh, V. A., K. A. Cohen, C. N. Ellis, et al. 1986. Effects of dietary supplementation of
fish oil on neutrophil and epidermal fatty acids. Arch. Dermatol. 122:1277-1282.


===== PDF PAGE 238 =====
237
6
Protein and Amino Acids
BASIC CONCEPTS
Introduction
Dogs have been used as a model for the study of human nutrition for nearly two
centuries. Magendie (1816) was the first to demonstrate that protein was essential for
life by showing that olive oil or sugar alone would not support life, but if protein was
added, the dogs were in better condition for a much longer period of time. These
early experiments and many others were confounded by the lack of knowledge and
appreciation of the need for essential micronutrients. Nevertheless, it was clearly
understood that protein was essential in the diet. The Magendie Commission was
appointed in 1815 to evaluate the nutritive value of gelatin. In 1841, it reported (cited
by McCollum, 1957) that dogs could not be maintained when fed gelatin alone. This
led to the testing of other purified proteins with the result that no purified protein,
when fed alone without other food ingredients, could maintain a dog in good health.
Despite the lack of knowledge of the essentiality of micronutrients, over a period of a
few decades there came a realization that the quality (amino acid composition) of
protein in dog diets was important (Chittenden, 1904). In 1905, Kaufmann reported
that dogs maintained nitrogen equilibrium when fed a gelatin-based diet
supplemented with tyrosine, cystine, and tryptophan. Later work with rats showed
that a similar diet was not nutritionally adequate (Jackson et al., 1928). The
concentrations of other essential amino acids were too low to meet the requirement
of animals for maintenance. Nevertheless, nutritional research with dogs helped
establish that certain amino acids present in protein were essential in the diet.


===== PDF PAGE 239 =====
238
Although Abderhalden and coworkers were able to formulate satisfactory diets for
dogs using protein hydrolysates during the early part of the twentieth century, they
were never successful in formulating a satisfactory diet using amino acids as the sole
nitrogen source (Abderhalden et al., 1912). This feat had to wait until Rose isolated
and characterized threonine, the last essential amino acid to be discovered that is
required by all animals (McCoy et al., 1935). In 1939, Rose and Rice reported a
slight positive nitrogen balance in dogs fed amino acid diets containing the same 10
essential amino acids that are required for the growing rat. They also reported that
the removal of arginine had no effect on nitrogen equilibrium, whereas later work
(Burns et al., 1981) showed that arginine was an essential amino acid for the adult
dog. Since Rose and Rice did not publish the composition of the diet they used, the
difference between the two studies remains unexplained.
Cats were not used as early or as routinely in nutrition experiments on the
essentiality of protein and amino acids as were dogs. One early experiment using
cats that had general application was published by Bidder and Schmidt in 1852 in
which they showed, using controlled experimental conditions, that after cats ingested
all the meat they could eat during a 7-day period, all of the dietary nitrogen (except
0.7 percent, which was within experimental error) was found in feces and urine and
none was released as nitrogen gas. Nevertheless, it was not until the middle of the
twentieth century that Da Silva and coworkers (1950a,b) and Allison and coworkers
(1956) designed satisfactory purified diets that cats would eat readily, and cats could
then be used effectively in nutrition research. Not until 1979 were the same 10 amino
acids shown to be essential for cats as for dogs and other animal species (Rogers and
Morris, 1979).
Structure and Function
With the exception of proline, all amino acids present in most proteins are α-
amino acids and have α-amino and α-carboxyl groups, both of which are involved in
the peptide bonds that are essential for protein structure. Each amino acid has a side
chain on the α-carbon that ranges in size from a hydrogen atom to an indole ring.
The various side chains contribute to the secondary and tertiary structure of protein,
and several are often conjugated to various other groups such as phosphate and
amino sugars. Also of nutritional importance are the acidic and basic side chains in
proteins that can accept or donate protons, depending on the pH of the medium in
which the protein is present. Acid-precipitated proteins (e.g., casein) have protons
added to the carboxyl group side chains. These protons, together with those on the
basic side chains, are released during digestion, absorption, and utilization and
contribute to metabolic acidosis. Amino acids are important in providing building
blocks for many important biologically active compounds plus countless peptides
and proteins. The sensory perception of purified proteins per se is that they are quite
bland, whereas peptides and free amino acids have various tastes for humans that
range from bitter (e.g., phenylalanine, tryptophan, arginine, leucine), to sour (e.g.,


===== PDF PAGE 240 =====
239
glutamic and aspartic acids), sweet (e.g., glycine, threonine), umami (monosodium
glutamate), or combinations thereof. The D-amino acids often have a different taste;
for example, D-tryptophan is many times sweeter than sucrose. Whether dogs and
cats perceive (taste) amino acids in the same way as humans is not known; however
selection of amino acids such as leucine by the cat and different neuroresponses by
cats and dogs indicate some differences in taste perceptions of different amino acids.
Essentiality of Amino Acids
Dietary protein is required for two reasons. First, protein provides amino acids
that dogs and cats cannot synthesize (essential amino acids) but are required for
synthesis of the many proteins in the body. Second, protein provides dispensable
amino acids (amino acids that can be synthesized if appropriate nitrogen and carbon
sources are provided) that animals need for maintenance, growth, gestation, and
lactation. Dispensable amino acids provide nitrogen and carbon for the synthesis of
any needed dispensable amino acid and carbon for gluconeogenesis and/or energy.
Dispensable amino acids also provide nitrogen and/or structural components
necessary to make other compounds that are essential for life, such as purines,
pyrimidines, heme, various hormones, neurotransmitters, and/or neuromodulators
(e.g., thyroxine, catecholamines, γ-aminobutyric acid, taurine). For either dogs or
cats that consume primarily animal tissue, amino acids also provide carbon chains
for gluconeogenesis to supply glucose to tissues that require it (e.g., red blood cells,
nervous tissue) to maintain normal tissue metabolism. As for most other animals, the
following 10 amino acids have been shown to be essential for both dogs and cats:
arginine (Arg), histidine (His), isoleucine (Ile), leucine (Leu), lysine (Lys),
methionine (Met), phenylalanine (Phe), threonine (Thr), tryptophan (Trp), and valine
(Val). In omnivores and certain herbivores (e.g., rats, chicks), removal of a single
essential amino acid results in a decrease in food intake that is known to be a primary
neuroresponse caused by the lack of the limiting essential amino acid (Gietzen,
1993). In cats, the limited work available (e.g., Hardy et al., 1977; Rogers and
Morris, 1979) shows that food intake does not decrease as quickly as in rats after
initial consumption of a diet devoid of an essential amino acid. Although food intake
does decrease with time, the depression is not as severe as in omnivores and
herbivores. The depression of food intake appears to be a secondary effect, and the
result of a lack of need of energy for growth, since the kittens stop growing and
slowly lose weight. Cats may be a good model for strict carnivores since it could be
argued teleologically that strict carnivores that eat only animal tissue would never
experience an essential amino acid deficiency. Therefore, carnivores do not need to
respond in such a sensitive way to a protein or an essential amino acid deficiency as
omnivores and herbivores. There is less evidence for dogs. It appears, however, that
dogs may respond more like other omnivores (Milner, 1979a,b).


===== PDF PAGE 241 =====
240
Omnivores and herbivores avoid diets deficient in a single essential amino acid.
Rats are able to select between diets that contains less than 0.1g·kg–1 difference in an
essential amino acid (Hrupka et al., 1997). Hrupka et al. (1999) also showed that the
learned taste aversion that mediates this choice against a low dietary concentration of
a particular essential amino acid occurs before food intake is decreased. That is, the
establishment of a learned taste aversion is more sensitive to a deficiency than
simply a reduction of food intake. Little work has been done on whether learned
aversions occur after feeding various essential amino acid-deficient diets to dogs and
cats. Dogs are known to select for an adequate quantity of protein (three to four
times their requirement; Romsos and Ferguson, 1983; Torres et al., 2003), whereas
cats do not (Cook et al., 1985).
Digestibility and Bioavailability of Protein and Amino Acids
Digestion of dietary protein by animals involves enzymatic cleavage of the
protein to amino acids and small peptide residues that are capable of being absorbed
by the mucosal cells of the small intestine. Protein digestibility—or more
specifically, total digestive tract digestibility—is generally defined in nutritional
science as the percentage of ingested protein that is not excreted in the feces as
measured by input and output of nitrogen. Bioavailability is generally defined as the
degree to which an ingested nutrient in a particular source is absorbed in a form that
can be utilized in the animal’s metabolism (Lewis and Bayley, 1995). Much detailed
work has been done on the bioavailability of amino acids from common proteins in
food-animal nutrition (Lewis and Bayley, 1995; Sibbald, 1987) using ileal
digestibilities as a measure of bioavailability. Similar studies have been done with
dogs (see Johnson et al., 1998; Bednar et al., 2000; Clapper et al., 2001); however,
almost nothing is available for cats (Hendriks and Emmens, 1998; Larsen et al.,
2001, 2002), perhaps because of the perceived difficulty in keeping ileally
cannulated cats (Mawby et al., 1999).
The first approach in determining bioavailability is to measure “apparent
digestibility” of protein in a diet. This provides an overall evaluation of nitrogen
absorbed but does not provide a measure of the “quality” or efficiency of utilization
of nitrogen or of the individual essential amino acids. Historically, in human and
animal nutrition, protein quality tests such as protein efficiency ratio (PER),
biological value (BV), and net protein utilization (NPU), as determined in rat assays,
have been used as one measure of overall amino acid bioavailability. Net protein
utilization provides a measure of the efficiency of utilization of a protein.
Differences in efficiencies of utilization of the same protein in various species may
result from different digestibilities and/or nitrogen and amino acid requirements.
Carnivores in general, including cats, have lower apparent digestibilities of poorly
digestible proteins (Kendall et al., 1982; Ahlstrom and Skrede, 1998) and higher
requirements for some amino acids such as arginine (Anderson et al., 1979a;


===== PDF PAGE 242 =====
241
Costello et al., 1980). Further refinement of the bioavailability values for individual
amino acids results from determination of the ileal digestibility of individual
essential amino acids. Although these values provide a better indication of
bioavailability than total gastrointestinal (GI) tract digestibility, dietary protein could
be 100 percent digested and absorbed, but protein and amino acids would still enter
the colon because of gastrointestinal secretions (sloughed mucosa and digestive
enzymes). Thus, “true” ileal digestibilities have been measured using a number of
techniques to estimate endogenous protein excreted from the ileum (Moughan et al.,
1998). Since only some of this endogenous protein is essential for protein utilization,
even true digestibilities of nitrogen and essential amino acids may not reflect true
bioavailabilities. It should be noted that some dietary proteins contain inhibitors of
trypsin or other enzymes that can greatly increase the loss of secreted enzymes.
Generally, some in vivo measure, such as weight gain and/or nitrogen retention, is
considered the ultimate or “gold standard” for determining nitrogen and amino acid
bioavailabilities (Lewis and Bayley, 1995).
The apparent total tract digestibility of protein is similar in rats, cats, and dogs for
highly digestible proteins. Proteins with lower digestibilities have higher apparent
digestibilities in dogs than in cats (Kendall et al., 1982). For proteins with
digestibilities greater than 90 percent (e.g., fresh mince and purified diets), there is
no difference in digestibility between dogs and cats. For dry or canned dog or cat
foods, dogs have a protein digestibility about 5-8 percent higher than do cats
(Kendall et al., 1982). This difference in digestibility of protein in processed foods
appears to be the result of the shorter length of the small intestine, relative to body
size, in cats compared to dogs. Animal proteins generally have a higher digestibility
than do plant proteins (Meyer et al., 1981, 1989; Kendall and Holme, 1982; Neirinck
et al., 1991), and prolonged heat processing decreases animal protein digestibility by
dogs and cats (Meyer et al., 1981; Backus et. al., 1998; Johnson et al., 1998). Heat
processing increases the digestibility of some proteins because antitryptic activity is
destroyed by heat (Morgan et al., 1951). The digestibility of protein varies with size,
breed, and age of dogs. Pointers had a higher apparent total tract digestibility of
protein than huskies (85 vs. 81 percent), and young miniature poodles or schnauzers
had a higher digestibility (about 4 percent higher) than did older ones (Hannah et al.,
1995). Insoluble fiber is not reported to affect protein digestibility, whereas soluble
fiber often decreases the total tract protein digestibility in both dogs (Muir et al.,
1996; Silvio et al., 2000) and cats (Sunvold et al., 1995; Harper, 1996).
Digestibilities of the protein in various ingredients of typical dog food by ileally
cannulated dogs have shown that the apparent ileal digestibility of crude protein (CP)
is about 1-20 percentage units lower than apparent total tract digestibility.
Presumably, bacteria degrade and utilize protein in the colon, with the release and
absorption of ammonia and other low-molecular-weight nitrogen-containing
compounds (Mühlum et al., 1989; Muir et al, 1996; Murray et al., 1997, 1998;
Hendriks and Sritharan, 2002). Ileal crude protein digestibilities ranged from 63 to
96 percent whereas total tract protein digestibilities ranged from 71 to 98 percent.


===== PDF PAGE 243 =====
242
When diets contained a high content of low-digestible carbohydrate, ileal apparent
protein digestibility was even more impaired than total tract digestibility (Muhlum et
al., 1989). Ileal digestibilities of individual amino acids from normal ingredients in
dog foods have been shown to vary tremendously (Johnson et al., 1998). True ileal
digestibilities for some amino acids such as arginine varied from 77 to 87 percent,
whereas others such as cystine, threonine, and lysine varied from 29 to 66 percent,
52 to 78 percent, and 62 to 84 percent, respectively. The lowest amino acid
digestibilities were reported for rendered lamb meal, presumably because of
extended heating during the rendering and drying process. For all of the essential
amino acids, digestibilities of low-ash meat and bone meal were lower (5-18
percentage units) than those of high-ash meat and bone meal. The same was not true
for poultry by-product meals for which no difference was found between high- and
low-ash meals. Of particular interest is the very low cystine digestibility (29 percent)
found in low-ash lamb meal and the finding that, in general, meat and bone meals
had higher digestibilities of all of the essential amino acids than did poultry by-
product meals. These results indicate the importance of quality control in processing
ingredients (i.e., the need to control the rendering and drying processes to preserve a
high digestibility of amino acids, especially cystine, threonine, and lysine).
Surprisingly, the digestibility of methionine was not as low in this study, varying
only from 83 to 93 percent (Johnson et al., 1998). Fiber content of the diet had little
effect on ileal digestibility of crude protein except for soluble dietary fibers such as
pectin (Meyer et al., 1989; Muir et al., 1996; Silvio et al, 2000). Addition of 50 g
pectin·kg–1 diet caused a decrease of about 7 percent in ileal, but only 2 percent in
total tract crude protein digestibility (Muir et al., 1996). Good-quality soybean meal
(properly heat treated) as an ingredient in dog food has equal or higher ileal and total
tract digestibilities than good-quality meat meals (Bednar et al., 2000; Clapper et al.,
2001), and the content of various carbohydrates including oligosaccharides in
soybean meal had no significant effect on ileal digestibility of soybean protein
(Meyer et al., 1989; Zuo et al., 1996). Johnson et al. (1998) compared digestibilities
of dog food determined with cecectomized roosters to that with ileally cannulated
dogs and found correlation coefficients of 0.89, 0.94, 0.87, and 0.90 for lysine,
cystine, threonine, and methionine, respectively. Thus, apparent digestibilities
determined by cecectomized roosters may be reasonable approximations for the
bioavailabilities of amino acids for dogs.
Larsen et al. (2001, 2002) reported validation of a growth assay to determine
bioavailabilities of lysine and methionine in proteins for growing kittens. They
showed that weight gain was 25 percent lower when kittens were given a casein diet
(moistened, 50 g glucose·kg–1 casein, heated at 121°C for 2 hours) than when they
were given a diet of non–heat-processed casein. Lysine in the casein before heat
treatment had a bioavailability of 96 percent, whereas heat processing with glucose
decreased its bioavailability to 56 percent. Since total tract protein digestibilities for
the same food are lower in cats than in dogs (Kendall et al., 1982), it is doubtful that


===== PDF PAGE 244 =====
243
the rat or other omnivorous species will be satisfactory as a model for cats (Hendriks
and Emmens, 1998).
Assessing Protein and Amino Acid Status
Long-term protein status can be assessed by the maintenance of serum albumin
and lean body mass. Examination of concentrations of amino acids in plasma
provides a basis for determining which amino acids may be limiting (Zicker and
Rogers, 1990) in a particular diet. Acute protein deficiency with adequate intake of
energy (e.g., very low protein or protein-free diet) causes a decrease in all amino
acids in plasma. In long-term protein deficiency (protein-energy malnutrition), the
concentrations of both serum albumin and the essential amino acids (except histidine
and phenylalanine) plus tyrosine and cyst(e)ine are much lower than normal, and the
dispensable amino acids (especially proline, alanine, serine, and glycine) are higher
than normal (Holt et al., 1963). Since changes in concentrations of glycine and valine
are most extreme after feeding a very low protein diet, the extent of distortion of the
normal glycine:valine ratio has been used as an index of the severity of protein
malnutrition. The only known cause of this unique pattern is protein-energy
malnutrition. Food deprivation will not produce this pattern but will sustain a more
normal amino acid pattern in plasma. If only the glycine:valine ratio is used for a
nutritional diagnosis of dogs or cats with kidney disease, a false diagnosis of protein
malnutrition may occur. In kidney disease, glycine increases in plasma because the
kidney normally converts glycine to serine. However, dogs and cats are often
anorexic during renal disease; so, some protein deficiency is not unusual.
Longenecker and Hause (1959) showed that even if dogs were not deficient in
protein, the limiting dietary amino acid (and sometimes the second and third
limiting) could be determined from the pattern of plasma amino acids. The essential
amino acid that decreases the most (or increases the least), as a percentage, after
feeding a complete meal containing the protein in question is the one that is most
limiting; the one that decreases the next most is second limiting, and so forth. This
technique requires overnight food deprivation and the ingestion of a large meal. It is
important to note that amino acids tend to return to normal if the animal is food
deprived. Alternatively, plasma samples from dogs or cats fed a diet ad libitum for
several days and taken in the absorptive phase provide the same information. For
example, Hardy et al. (1977) reported that plasma valine decreased markedly when
valine was limiting in the diet, from more than 300 nmol·mL–1 to 66 nmol·mL–1 at
the requirement and to 33 nmol·mL–1 when valine was left completely out of the
diet. Reference data generated in this way are useful to determine whether the need
for each essential amino acid has been met. Rogers, Morris, and coworkers have
determined the dose-response curve of each essential amino acid during amino acid
requirement studies. These data—the concentration of each essential amino acid in
plasma after feeding normal diets (adequate intake [AI], i.e, at least 1.5 times the


===== PDF PAGE 245 =====
244
minimum requirement [MR]); the concentration after feeding diets devoid of each
essential amino acid (AA); the concentration after feeding diets containing each
amino acid just at the MR; and for some amino acids, when present at a great excess
(upper limit of tolerance or safe upper limit [SUL]) (Table 6-1)—can be used to
determine the essential amino acid adequacy of diets for cats at various life stages.
Unfortunately, similar complete plasma amino acid data are not available for dogs.
Normal plasma amino acid concentrations are available (Strombeck and Rogers,
1978; Delaney et al., 2003), and some information is available for arginine, leucine,
lysine, phenylalanine, and tyrosine for dogs (Tables 6-2A and B).
REQUIREMENTS, ALLOWANCES, AND TOLERANCES OF
PROTEIN AND AMINO ACIDS
Role of Metabolic Adaptation in Protein and Amino Acid Nutrition
Relevant to both crude protein and essential amino acid requirements in various
species is the nature and extent of metabolic adaptation in nitrogen and amino acid
metabolism. For example, rats can down-regulate nitrogen catabolic enzymes to such
an extent that they maintain nitrogen balance when fed a diet containing 4-5 percent
of metabolizable energy (ME) as protein (National Research Council, 1995). Rats
can also down-regulate the lysine catabolic pathway such that the lysine requirement
for maintenance is only 12 percent that for growth, whereas the lack of specific
down-regulation of isoleucine degradative enzymes results in an isoleucine
requirement for maintenance 50 percent that for growth. The same detailed
information is not available for dogs or cats; however, it is known that neither is as
efficient in down-regulating nitrogen catabolic enzymes as rats (Rogers et al., 1977;
Morris et al., 2002). Herbivores and omnivores in general show up- and down-
regulation of nitrogen catabolic enzymes and of enzymes involved in the first
irreversible step in the catabolism of essential amino acids. For the disposal and
conservation of nitrogen, these adaptations particularly involve the up- and down-
regulation of all of the urea cycle enzymes (Schimke, 1962), as well as alanine
aminotransferase and aspartic aminotransferase (Kaplan and Pitot, 1970). Changes in
the flux through the urea cycle occur without a change in the amount of enzymes as a
result of the following:
1. Increasing or decreasing the concentration of substrate. Increasing or
decreasing the concentration of alanine, aspartic acid, ammonia, and glutamic
acid will affect the flow of nitrogen from these and other amino acids into urea
since most of the catabolic enzymes are working with substrate concentrations
considerably below their Michaelis constant (Km) values.


===== PDF PAGE 246 =====
245
2. Changes in the concentration of ornithine in the liver. As the
postabsorptive state approaches and ammonia coming from the amino acids
decreases or after feeding a low-protein diet, ornithine concentration in the
liver decreases (as a result of the activity of ornithine δ-aminotransferase) and
with very little acceptor available for carbamoyl phosphate, urea synthesis
markedly decreases. After ingestion and absorption of arginine (usually in
dietary protein) and the action of liver arginase, the liver is provided with
sufficient ornithine to maximize urea synthesis for any particular activity of
the urea cycle enzymes. If ornithine is limiting in the liver and a nitrogen
source free of or low in arginine is given to an animal (Wergedal and Harper,
1964), hyperammonemia occurs. Cats (Morris and Rogers, 1978a,b) are more
sensitive to arginine deficiency than dogs (Burns et al., 1981; Czarnecki and
Baker, 1984), which, in turn, are more sensitive than rats (Milner et al., 1975;
Rogers, 1994).
3. Allosteric regulation of carbamoyl phosphate synthase. The first step in the
synthesis of urea occurs via activation by N-acetylglutamate (NAG). Synthesis
of NAG is allosterically regulated by arginine. Thus, although the Ka of NAG
synthesis for arginine is five times higher in cats than in rats, the concentration
of arginine in liver, as well as the precursors of NAG (glutamate and acetyl
coenzyme A), influence hepatic NAG concentrations (Stewart et al., 1981).
Both arginine and glutamate increase rapidly in liver after the intake of a high-
protein meal, enhancing the ability of the liver to dispose of excess nitrogen.
As substrates for urea synthesis decrease, NAG diffuses out of the
mitochondria and is cleaved by an acetylase.
4. Up- and down-regulation of the nitrogen catabolic enzymes. The final level
of control to enable the animal to maintain amino acid homeostasis is the up-
and down-regulation of the nitrogen catabolic enzymes. This regulation can
occur by changing the rate of degradation of the enzymes or, more generally,
by changing the rate of synthesis of the enzymes through increasing the rate of
synthesis of mRNA. Up- and down-regulation of the nitrogen catabolic
enzymes does not appear to occur to any great extent in the cat (Rogers et al.,
1977; Tews et al., 1984) and occurs to a lesser extent in the dog (Morris et al.,
2002) than in the rat. The three levels of control mentioned above are all rapid,
occurring in seconds, whereas the changes in the amounts of the enzymes take
1-5 days. It appears that the extent to which animals can up- and down-
regulate the amounts of the nitrogen catabolic enzymes is what really dictates
the ability, on the one hand, to efficiently utilize high-protein diets, and, on the
other, to be able to maintain nitrogen balance when fed a low-protein diet.
Thus, it has been suggested that the high-protein requirement of adult cats at
maintenance is the result of the inability to effectively down-regulate the
hepatic nitrogen catabolic enzymes (Rogers et al., 1977). This interpretation
has been challenged by Russell et al. (2002) using respiration calorimetry to
measure protein oxidation in adult cats; they showed that cats fully oxidized


===== PDF PAGE 247 =====
246
all of the protein after adaptation to a normal (350 g·kg–1) and a high (520
g·kg–1) crude protein diet. These authors suggest that it is still unknown how
the cats adapted to these two levels of protein, whereas Rogers and Morris
(2002) contend that the first three levels of control described above, together
with an increase in liver size (thereby increasing the total hepatic nitrogen
catabolic enzymes), are sufficient to provide for complete oxidation of the
relatively high quantities of dietary protein tested. Russell et al. (2002) did not
address the inability of the cat to adapt to low-protein diets. Regardless of the
interpretation of the results of these two groups, studies of the requirement for
maintenance of adult cats show the lack of ability of cats to maintain nitrogen
balance at the same minimal dietary concentration as dogs and the inability of
dogs (at least long term) to maintain nitrogen balance at the same low
concentration as that of rats.
The limited information available on the effect of dietary protein on amino
acid metabolism (Primal et al., 1986; Humbert et al., 2002) and the adaptation
of enzymes involved in the first step of the degradation of the essential amino
acids (as well as important dispensable amino acids such as tyrosine and
cystine) indicate some up- and down-regulation of these enzymes in the cat,
but not to the same extent as in rats. For enzymes involved in the metabolism
of tryptophan (Leklem et al., 1969), histidine (Rogers et al., 1977), methionine
(Fau et al., 1987a; Strieker, 1991), threonine (Hammer et al., 1996b), tyrosine
(Bai et al., 1998), cysteine (Park et al., 1999), and taurine transport (Park et al.,
1989), only about a 20-120 percent increase in activity occurs in cats switched
from a low- to a high-protein diet, compared to a severalfold increase of these
enzymes in rats. For example, threonine catabolic enzymes increase only about
twofold when cats are switched from a low- to a high-protein diet (Hammer et
al., 1996b), whereas under similar conditions, better than a tenfold increase
occurs in rats (Freedland and Avery, 1964; Harper, 1968). Likewise, diet-
induced daily rhythms as a result of eating a normal diet cause only a slight
change (about 35 percent) in hepatic tyrosine aminotransferase activity of cats
(Bai et al., 1998), whereas in rats a four- to five-fold change occurs (Wurtman
and Axelrod, 1967). The consequence of less metabolic adaptation in dogs and
cats is that even after adapting to a high-protein diet, plasma amino acid
concentrations are higher after a meal (Tews et al., 1984; Torres and Rogers,
2002), whereas in rats after adaptation, plasma amino acids are similar whether
they are adapted to a low- or a high-protein diet (Anderson et al., 1968).
TABLE 6-1 Plasma Amino Acid Concentrations (nmol·mL–1) of Kittens


===== PDF PAGE 248 =====
247
aAmino acid concentration from kittens fed, in turn, diets lacking each amino acid.
bAmino acid concentration from kittens fed, in turn, diets containing each amino acid at the
minimum requirement.
cAmino acid concentration from kittens fed, in turn, diets containing each amino acid at 150%
or more of the requirement (i.e., adequate intake).
dAmino acid concentration from kittens fed, in turn, diets containing each amino acid at great
excess, at or below the SUL.
e70, without any cystine in the diet.
f75, without any tyrosine in the diet.
SOURCE: Summarized from Zicker and Rogers (1990) and Taylor et al. (1996, 1998).
TABLE 6-2A Plasma Amino Acid Concentrations (nmol·mL–1) of Puppies
aAmino acid concentration from puppies fed, in turn, diets lacking each amino acid.
bAmino acid concentration from puppies fed, in turn, diets containing each amino acid at the
minimum requirement.
cAmino acid concentration from puppies fed, in turn, diets containing each amino acid at
150% or more of the requirement (i.e., adequate intake).
dAmino acid concentration from puppies fed, in turn, diets containing each amino acid at great
excess, at or below the SUL.


===== PDF PAGE 249 =====
248
eConcentration of phenylalanine when tyrosine is not present in the diet.
fConcentration of phenylalanine and tyrosine when both are present in the diet.
gConcentration of tyrosine when it is not present in the diet.
SOURCE: Summarized from the work of Strombeck and Rogers (1978); Czarnecki and Baker
(1984); Milner et al. (1984); Czarnecki et al. (1985); Hirakawa et al. (1986); Delaney et al.
(2001).
TABLE 6-2B Plasma Amino Acids Concentrations (nmol·mL–1) from Normal,
Small-, and Large-Breed Adult Dogs (n = 131) Fed a Variety of Commercial Diets
Known to Be Adequate for Maintenance
Amino Acid Mean SEM
Alanine 388 9.6
Arginine 102 2.6
Asparagine 40 1.1
Aspartate 7 0.2
Citrulline 41 1.9
Cysteine 46 1.3
Glutamate 23 1.2
Glutamine 495 9.4
Glycine 268 8.4
Histidine 71 1.6
Hydroxyproline 67 4.1
Isoleucine 51 1.3
Leucine 120 3.2
Lysine 132 5.0
Methionine 57 1.6
Ornithine 35 1.5
Phenylalanine 45 0.9
Proline 246 8.2
Serine 107 2.6
Taurine 77 2.1
Whole blood 266 5.1
Threonine 178 5.0
Tryptophan 60 1.7
Tyrosine 39 1.1
Valine 157 4.1
NOTE: SEM = standard error of the mean.


===== PDF PAGE 250 =====
249
SOURCE: Delaney et al. (2003).
Nitrogen (Crude Protein) Minimum Requirements, Recommended
Allowances, and Adequate Intakes
Variables Used in Assessing Protein and Amino Acid Requirements
Nitrogen Balance
Nitrogen balance has, for many decades, been the preferred dependent variable
for determining nitrogen and amino acid requirements for all life stages. Often, there
is no difference in the breakpoints for weight gain or nitrogen retention to determine
individual amino acid requirements for growth of many species. Nevertheless, there
are situations (and certain requirements) in which for dogs and cats, the breakpoint
for nitrogen balance results in a higher requirement than that for weight gain.
However, in determination of the nitrogen requirement of cats, a clear plateau does
not always occur (Hammer et al., 1996a), but, after the breakpoint, there is still a
significant positive slope. Although maximal nitrogen retention has been the
standard variable used, when determining the nitrogen requirement, it has been
shown that apparent nitrogen balance for maintenance may be sustained while lean
body mass is decreasing, apparently because of the low sensitivity and consistent
errors in a positive direction for nitrogen retention that do not exist for the usual
determinations of lean body mass (Hannah and Laflamme, 1996). In some
experiments, only weight gain has been used; in others, both weight gain and
nitrogen balance or just nitrogen balance (e.g., for maintenance). In still others, some
other metabolic or physiological variable was used. In reviewing the literature on
nitrogen and amino acid requirements, the variable that resulted in the highest MR
was used.
Growth
The crude protein requirements for growing puppies and kittens have been
determined primarily by using weight gain and nitrogen balance as the dependent
variable. Mixed-food proteins have been used in practical diets, and purified proteins
or free amino acids have been used in purified diets. Many experiments were done
before the individual essential amino acid requirements were known for either of
these species. There do not appear to be any detrimental effects (except a slightly
lower growth rate) of feeding diets at or slightly below the nitrogen requirement,
provided all of the essential amino acid requirements are met for all functions known
besides growth of muscle tissue and other structural body proteins (e.g., sufficient
arginine for optimal urea cycle function, sufficient histidine to prevent cataracts).
Under these conditions, if energy intake is restricted along with protein, there may be


===== PDF PAGE 251 =====
250
an increase in longevity in some breeds of dogs due to a delay in onset of chronic
diseases (e.g., arthritis and insulin resistance) (Kealy et al., 2002).
Maintenance, Gestation, and Lactation
Satisfactory maintenance can be achieved using a wide variety of dietary crude
protein concentrations for adult cats on purified diets and diets using common feed
ingredients. Cats, as compared to dogs, rats, and many herbivores or omnivores, do
not show effective adaptation to low-protein diets and, thus, excrete considerably
more nitrogen when fed a protein-free diet (Hendricks et al., 1997) or when food
deprived (Biourge et al., 1994). A comparison of obligatory nitrogen excretion in
various species is shown in Table 6-3. It is apparent that the obligatory nitrogen loss
in cats is similar whether adult cats were fed a protein-free diet or were food
deprived, the loss being nearly twice that of dogs, while the loss in dogs is more than
three times that of humans. These data support the fact that cats have a higher
nitrogen requirement than these other species. The efficiency of utilization (e.g.,
NPU; Jansen et al., 1975) of protein for maintenance and growth is also lower in cats
than in these other species. This appears to be the result of lack of ability to conserve
both nitrogen and essential amino acids even though, on a relative basis, the nitrogen
requirement is higher than that for the essential amino acids.
The protein requirements for reproduction of dogs or cats have not been studied
extensively and, therefore, have not been well defined. General observations in both
species indicate that the crude protein requirement and amino acid requirements for
gestation do not exceed those found for maximal nitrogen retention of weanling
puppies or kittens, whereas the requirement for maximal lactation is known to
exceed that for maximal weight gain of weanling puppies and kittens.
Application of Variables to Assess Requirements
The most common variables found in reviewing the literature for crude protein
and amino acid requirements of dogs and cats at various life stages were weight gain
for growing animals and nitrogen balance for adult animals. In this section, the
variables that result in the maximum requirement are used. Most often, a metabolic
variable, such as minimizing urinary orotic acid for the arginine requirement or
maximizing blood hemoglobin for the histidine requirement, gave the highest value.
Often data on response to variable dietary concentrations were not available,
especially for maintenance, gestation, and lactation. Therefore, for each amino acid,
an adequate intake (AI) was estimated for the life stage from the quantity of each
amino acid in the digestible protein of commercial, dry diets that were known to
support normal maintenance, growth, and reproduction. Successful growth and
reproduction of dogs and cats fed such diets over a period of several years are


===== PDF PAGE 252 =====
251
common. When requirement data were not available, these estimated AIs were also
used as the recommended allowances.
TABLE 6-3 Endogenous Urinary Nitrogen Excretion of Animals Fed a Protein-Free
Diet
Animal
mg N·kg–
0.75·d–1
Human 62
Marmoset 110
Rat 128
Pig 163
Dog 210
Cat 360
SOURCE: Taken from Hendriks et al. (1997).
Growth
Dogs
Estimates of the nitrogen requirement of growing puppies go back many decades.
Summaries in the National Research Council (NRC) Nutrient Requirements series
for dogs for crude protein, as a percentage of energy, in 1953, 1962, 1972-1974, and
1985 were, respectively, 200, 220, 220, and ~95-115 g·kg–1 diet. There is general
consistency in the recommended crude protein requirement across the decades
except the 1985, which is the sum of the amino acids suggested (including the
dispensable amino acids). It becomes apparent from the review by the 1985 NRC
committee and from reviewing the literature over the past 20 years that there is a
marked decrease in the requirements for both nitrogen and essential amino acids
between about 10 and 14 weeks of age for growing puppies; thus, different
requirements for weanling puppies before and after 14 weeks of age are suggested.
Also, in some instances, weight gain, rather than nitrogen balance, has been used as
the variable to determine the requirement. For dogs, generally more dietary crude
protein is required for maximal nitrogen retention than for maximal weight gain. For
newly weaned small-breed or large-breed puppies, when near maximal weight gains
were obtained, the MR appears to be a 180-g CP·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal
ME·g–1 (Milner, 1981; Burns et al., 1982; Nap et al., 1993; Schaeffer et al., 1989;
Delaney et al., 2001). These studies used either highly digestible protein or free
amino acid diets, and all of the known essential amino acid requirements were met
for maximal nitrogen retention. When practical diets from cereals and various animal


===== PDF PAGE 253 =====
252
byproducts are used, the crude protein needed for maximal nitrogen retention (AI)
appears to be about 250 g·kg–1 diet (Ontko et al., 1957; Case and Czarnecki-
Maulden, 1990). For puppies over 14 weeks of age, the respective crude protein
requirements (MR) for purified highly digestible diets and practical diets (AI) are,
respectively, 140 and 200 g·kg –1diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1 (Gessert and
Phillips, 1956; Burns et al., 1982; Delaney et al., 2001).
Cats
Several estimates have been made of the nitrogen requirement of growing kittens.
The earliest estimates, determined without considering the essential amino acid
requirements, were about 250-350 g of dietary crude protein per kilogram of diet
(Dickinson and Scott, 1956; Miller and Allison, 1958; Greaves, 1965; Jansen et al.,
1975). More recent estimates, based on dose-response curves in which protein or
amino acid diets were used that contained all of the essential amino acids at least 50
percent above the requirements as listed by the NRC (1986), reported crude protein
requirements in the range of 160-240 g·kg–1 diet containing 4 kcal ME·g–1
(Anderson et al., 1980a; Smalley et al., 1985; Rogers et al., 1987). In a series of
papers, Taylor and coworkers (1996, 1997, 1998; Rogers et al., 1998) examined the
pattern of amino acids required for maximal weight gain and nitrogen retention by
growing kittens, varying both the concentration of crude protein in the diet and the
ratio of essential amino acid nitrogen to total amino acid nitrogen (E:T). At or below
the essential dietary amino acid requirements, the addition of crude protein (as
dispensable amino acids) caused a decrease in weight gain and nitrogen retention
that was corrected by additional arginine supplementation. If methionine and
arginine were restricted to not more than about twice their requirements, optimal
weight gains and nitrogen retention were observed, with all of the nitrogen coming
from essential amino acids plus cystine and tyrosine. Kittens, therefore, can grow
maximally (see Figure 6-1) with a much broader E:T ratio (Rogers et al., 1998;
Taylor et al., 1998) than rats (Stucki and Harper, 1962) or chicks (Stucki and Harper,
1961). This work, using free amino acid diets and diets containing purified proteins
(Smalley et al., 1985; Schaffer et al., 1989), indicates the minimum crude protein
requirement (MR) for growth (with essential amino acids at about 150 percent of the
1986 NRC requirements) is about 180 g CP·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
The E:T ratio may vary widely at intermediate crude protein concentrations;
however, the ratio has to be higher for similar weight gains at both low and high
dietary crude protein concentrations (Figure 6-1). The E:T ratio must be high for low
dietary crude protein concentrations in order to provide all of the necessary essential
amino acids (Taylor et al., 1997) and high at very high dietary crude protein
concentrations to prevent toxicity of some dispensable amino acids such as
glutamate. Glutamate is considerably more toxic when other dispensable amino acids
are also high in the diet, presumably because metabolic equilibrium results in higher


===== PDF PAGE 254 =====
253
plasma and tissue glutamate concentrations (Taylor et al., 1998). Thus, for both low
and high dietary protein concentrations, body weight gains are higher with high-
quality than with low-quality proteins. Protein quality is less important at
intermediate protein concentrations in the diet. In evaluating commercial, dry
expanded diets that have sustained normal growth for growing kittens, none
contained less than 280 g CP·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
FIGURE 6-1 Effect of dietary crude protein and ratio of essential amino acid nitrogen to
total amino acid nitrogen (E:T) on weight gain of kittens. SOURCE: Taken with
permission from Rogers et al., 1998.
Maintenance
Dogs
Early estimates of the MR for crude protein for adult dogs at maintenance, using
nitrogen balance as the criterion, varied from about 35 to 90 g·kg–1 diet containing
4.0 kcal ME·g–1 for good-quality proteins. These values came from experiments
using food proteins without knowledge of the amino acid requirements for either
growth or maintenance (Melnick and Cowgill, 1937; Kade et al., 1948; Arnold and
Schad, 1954; Wannemacher and McCoy, 1966). Recently, Sanderson et al. (2001)


===== PDF PAGE 255 =====
254
published a study in which beagles maintained body weight (BW) and sustained
normal blood chemistries and health (except for one dog that developed dilated
cardiomyopathy, which was corrected by taurine supplementation) for 42-48 months
with a diet calculated to be 82 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1 as a highly
digestible, high-quality protein. Except for the question about meeting the taurine
need of the dogs, these results together with earlier work suggest 80 g of crude
protein per kilogram of diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1 as the MR. Other studies
(Wannemacher and McCoy, 1966; Ward, 1976), published and unpublished, support
an AI of about 100 g·kg–1 diet containing 4 kcal ME·g–1 as being adequate, thus
suggesting 100 g CP·kg–1 diet as the RA. Older dogs appear to require somewhat
more crude protein to maintain labile protein (so-called protein reserves), perhaps as
much as 50 percent more (Wannemacher and McCoy, 1966). The optimal
concentrations for other variables and outcomes (e.g., optimal immune response,
wound healing, health in old age) have to be evaluated before more specific
recommendations can be made.
Cats
Early estimates of the minimum crude protein requirement (or allowance) (MR)
of adult cats for maintenance, using nitrogen balance as the criterion, varied from
about 10 to 30 percent of ME. These values came from experiments using food
proteins without knowledge of the amino acid requirements for either growth or
maintenance (Allison et al., 1956; Miller and Allison, 1958; Greaves and Scott,
1960) or sometimes without considering the digestibility of the dietary proteins. The
difficulty in making a purified diet readily acceptable to adult cats, (often very
choosy about the texture and taste of their food), has made determining the crude
protein and amino acid requirements problematical. Indeed, in one of the most
thorough, long-term studies reported, using nitrogen balance as the criterion in which
the diet contained the essential amino acids at a dietary concentration at least
equivalent to the essential amino acid requirements of the growing kitten, the crude
protein requirement was suggested to be 125 g·kg–1 diet (100 g·kg–1 diet containing
4.0 kcal ME·g–1) (Burger et al., 1984; Burger and Smith, 1987). However, the
authors removed some cats from the study because they would not accept the diet,
and the cats as a whole lost a small amount of weight. Nitrogen balance is known to
underestimate the nitrogen requirement because of incomplete collection of feces
and spilled food. In most experiments with most species, there is a plateau at a small
positive nitrogen balance. In the work of Burger et al. (1984), when the regression
line crossed at 0 nitrogen balance, 7 of 18 cats fed 164 g CP·kg–1 diet were in
negative nitrogen balance. With all but one cat in positive nitrogen balance, the
protein intake was calculated to be about 160 g·kg–1 diet containing 4 kcal ME·g–1.
This value is taken as the crude protein MR of adult cats for maintenance. It should


===== PDF PAGE 256 =====
255
be pointed out that other outcome variables such as optimizing immune response,
labile tissue protein, or environmental stress were not considered in this MR. If a
safety allowance is made for such needs, a recommended allowance (RA) of 200 g
CP·kg–1 diet containing 4 kcal ME·g–1 is suggested. In evaluating commercial, dry,
expanded diets that have sustained maintenance for months to years, none were
found with less than 265 g CP·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Gestation and Lactation
Dogs
The protein and amino acid requirements of dogs during reproduction have not
been well defined. In general, it has been assumed that, if the dietary crude protein
requirement is met for growing puppies, the diet would meet the crude protein
requirement of bitches during gestation and lactation. No reports could be found in
which the crude protein requirement for gestation or lactation had been determined
using dose-response relationships in bitches fed purified diets. From experimental
work using natural ingredients (Visek et al., 1976) and evaluating commercial, dry
dog foods that have routinely supported normal gestation and lactation, the AI for
crude protein for gestation and lactation for the bitch has been shown to be 180-210
g·kg–1 diet containing 4 kcal ME·g–1. Meyer et al. (1985) did a factorial calculation
based on experimental work on milk yield and milk composition of bitches and
recommended 210 g CP·kg–1 diet containing 4 kcal ME·g–1, provided the protein
quality was good and the diet contained carbohydrates. Based on their experimental
work, they also calculated values of 10 g protein·kg BW–0.75 for small bitches
suckling two puppies, 20 g·kg BW–0.75 for medium-sized bitches suckling six
puppies, and 25 g·kg BW–0.75 for large bitches suckling eight puppies. Romsos et al.
(1981) evaluated reproduction with and without dietary carbohydrate using diets
containing about 260g·kg–1 crude protein (180-210 g digestible crude protein·kg–1 at
4 kcal ME· g–1) and showed that this concentration was ample protein for both
gestation and lactation if the diet contained carbohydrate, whereas, if the diet
contained no carbohydrate, 260 g CP·kg–1 diet was insufficient for the latter part of
gestation but was sufficient for lactation. Kienzle et al. (1985) showed that, when
carbohydrate-free diets were fed to pregnant and lactating bitches, a protein content
of 400 g·kg–1 diet was sufficient for successful reproduction, but a protein content of
only 200 g·kg–1 diet led to severe impairment of reproduction including
hypoglycemia in the bitches, high losses of puppies, low liver glycogen in the
puppies, increased milk fat, decreased milk lactose and water content, and decreased
milk yield. From the above results, the AI/RA for highly digestible crude protein for


===== PDF PAGE 257 =====
256
gestation and lactation is set at 200 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1, provided
there is carbohydrate in the diet.
Cats
The protein and amino acid requirements of queens during reproduction have not
been well defined. It has been assumed that the dietary crude protein requirement for
the growing kitten would meet the crude protein requirement of the queen during
gestation and lactation. Factorial calculations by Kienzle (1998) of the protein
requirements of queens during peak lactation indicated that 210-290 g·kg–1 diet
containing 4 kcal ME·g–1 was required. Piechota et al. (1995), using purified diets
based on soybean protein-casein (supplemented with essential amino acids to bring
each one to at least 150 percent of the 1986 NRC requirements for growth), reported
the MR to be not greater than 170 g·kg–1 diet containing 4 kcal ME·g–1 for gestation
and about 240 g·kg–1 for lactation using kitten weight gain and queen weight loss
during lactation as key variables. Thus, the MRs for crude protein for cats during
gestation and lactation, respectively, are taken as 170 and 240 g·kg–1 diet containing
4.0 kcal ME·g–1. This requirement for lactation is consistent with the lowest level of
digestible crude protein found in a number of dry, expanded, commercial diets that
have regularly sustained gestation and lactation. From an evaluation of plasma amino
acid results, the highest nutritional requirement appeared to be during peak lactation
(third to fourth week), before the kitten’s intake of the queen’s diet was significant.
When plasma amino acids were used as the criterion, several essential amino acids
appeared to be near limiting, even with commercial diets containing 260 g·kg–1
crude protein (4 kcal ME·g–1). Methionine appeared to be the limiting amino acid
most often, with the crude protein and amino acid requirements being higher for
maximal lactation than for maximal growth of kittens.
Amino Acid Minimum Requirements, Recommended Allowances,
Adequate Intakes, and Safe Upper Limits
Satisfactory maintenance and maximal growth and reproduction of dogs and cats
can be achieved on a wide variety of concentrations of amino acids in purified diets
using either free amino acids, amino acids in purified proteins, or proteins from
common feed ingredient incorporated into dry expanded or canned diets; that is, no
upper limit is known. The 10 amino acids shown to be essential for growing rats
have been shown to be essential for growing dogs and cats. No studies have been
reported in which the essential amino acids for other life stages have been deleted
from the diet of either dogs or cats, except for the abstract of Rose and Rice (1939),
which showed that all of the same amino acids that are essential for adult rats are
essential for adult dogs. Later, Burns et al. (1981) reported that arginine was essential


===== PDF PAGE 258 =====
257
in the diet to prevent hyperammonemia and orotic aciduria in the adult dog. Similar
to other adult species, it is assumed all of the other amino acids essential for adult
rats and humans are essential for adult dogs and cats.
Arginine
Some synthesis of arginine occurs in many mammals and at a sufficient rate to
provide all of the arginine needs for a variety of species including humans,
ruminants, and adult rats and swine (Rogers, 1994). Metabolically, arginine is
glucogenic and has functions other than its role in the synthesis of innumerable
proteins. Arginine is an intermediate in the urea cycle, and when absorbed with a
meal, it acts both anaplerotically to stimulate urea synthesis and as an allosteric
activator of acetylglutamate, which in turn, is an essential allosteric activator of
carbamoyl-phosphate synthase, the first enzyme in the detoxification of ammonia
and the synthesis of urea. In addition, arginine has been shown to elicit the release of
several hormones and metabolic mediators including insulin, glucagon, and gastrin,
and it is a precursor of biogenic amines, which are important in cell replication.
Arginine is also the precursor of nitric oxide, the neurotransmitter involved in many
systems, from its effect on blood pressure via relaxation of blood vessels to its role in
macrophages in killing foreign cells (e.g., bacteria and viruses). There have been
many studies using arginine as a therapeutic agent, apart from its role in normal
nutrition and health. The committee’s recommendations are based on the need of
dogs and cats to minimize urinary orotic acid.
Dog
Signs of Deficiency
When Labrador retrievers, beagle puppies (Ha et al., 1978), or English pointer
puppies (Czarnecki and Baker, 1984) were given an arginine-free diet containing
about 140 g of crude protein per kilogram, a decrease in food intake occurred
together with severe emesis, associated with hyperammonemia, but no muscle
tremors or excessive salivation were observed. Excessive salivation and muscle
tremors occurred when the dietary crude protein in the arginine-free diet was
increased to 280 g·kg–1 (Ha et al., 1978). Elevated urinary orotic acid excretion
occurred at all levels of dietary crude protein in puppies fed arginine-free diets.
Czarnecki and Baker (1984) also showed that older dogs (20 weeks old) performed
no better than recently weaned puppies on arginine-free diets. Emesis occurred at
peak ammonia concentrations. At a concentration of citrulline or ornithine equimolar
to that of 4 g·kg–1 of dietary arginine (their suggested requirement for arginine to
sustain maximal growth), some orotic aciduria occurred and clinical signs of arginine
deficiency were present but were less severe. Citrulline could replace arginine for


===== PDF PAGE 259 =====
258
growth but more was required, and ornithine did not support growth of puppies fed
an arginine-free diet. Adult pointers also have been shown to require dietary arginine
to prevent orotic aciduria (Burns et al., 1981). When dogs were force-fed the
arginine-free diet, clinical signs became more severe and included frothing at the
mouth and muscle tremors. In these short-term experiments and in those of Rose and
Rice (1939), nitrogen balance was maintained in adult dogs fed the arginine-free
diets. It is clear that dogs are more sensitive to an arginine deficiency that rats but not
as sensitive as cats.
Vainisi et al. (1981) reported cataracts in wolf pups greater than 3 weeks old that
were fed a milk-replacer diet from 7 to 10 days of age. Cataracts were prevented by
either arginine or lactose supplementation or by fostering the pups onto another
lactating wolf or dog. Cataracts assumed to be a result of arginine deficiency have
also been reported in large-breed puppies fed a milk-replacer diet (Glaze and
Blanchard, 1983; Martin and Chambreau, 1982; Ranz et al., 2002). Clearly the
arginine, and indeed all of the essential amino acids, were low in the diet, but the
mechanism whereby additional arginine or lactose would prevent cataracts has not
been reported. It may be mediated by some common secretagogue effect, such as
increased secretion of insulin. These results, together with metabolic information
available on the utilization of other nutrients such as niacin, vitamin D, and taurine,
suggest that metabolically dogs have more carnivorous nutritional metabolic
characteristics than rats but less than cats.
Requirements and Allowances
The requirement of arginine for maximal growth has been shown to be about 4-
5.6 g·kg–1 diet for growing Labradors (Ha et al., 1978) and pointers (Czarnecki and
Baker, 1984) for a diet containing about 4.2 kcal ME·g–1. The only published
arginine-response experiments with puppies indicate that the quantity of arginine
necessary to prevent orotic aciduria (extrapolated at breakpoint) was 5.3 g·kg–1 diet
containing about 140 g of crude protein per kilogram and 4.2 kcal ME·g–1
(Czarnecki and Baker, 1984). By making an adjustment to 4.0 kcal ME·g–1 and a
possible increase in the requirement if 180 g of crude protein was used per kilogram
of diet, MRs of 6.3 g·kg–1 diet for puppies 4-14 weeks of age and 5.3 g·kg–1 diet for
puppies over 14 weeks of age are suggested. Since both of the above groups have
shown that increasing dietary nitrogen increases the severity of clinical signs when a
low-arginine or arginine-free diet is fed, it is recommended that 0.01 g arginine be
added for each gram of crude protein above the requirement. The concentration in
routine commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified diets with which
normal, sustained growth has routinely been observed is about twice the above
values.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption


===== PDF PAGE 260 =====
259
No reports could be found on acute or chronic toxicity related to feeding excess
free arginine in the diet of dogs in the range of arginine toxicity in rats. Thus, no
SUL can be established at this time.
Cat
Signs of Deficiency
When cats that were given an arginine-free diet that contained substantial
quantities of other amino acids were deprived of food overnight, severe
hyperammonemia occurred within 1-3 hours that resulted in vocalization, emesis,
ptyalism, hyperactivity, hyperesthesia, ataxia, tetanic spasms, emprosthotonus,
extended limbs with exposed claws, apnea, cyanosis, and depending on the amino
acid load ingested, death (Morris and Rogers, 1978a). Under free-feeding conditions
of an arginine-free diet, clinical signs were less severe but included diarrhea, severe
weight loss, learned taste aversion, and refusal of the diet (Morris and Rogers,
1978b). Addition of ornithine or citrulline (Morris et al., 1979) to the arginine-free
diet prevented hyperammonemia and clinical signs; however, growth was restored
only with citrulline—and not with ornithine—added to the diet that lacked arginine.
These observations indicate that both ornithine and citrulline acted anaplerotically in
the urea cycle to stimulate urea synthesis, but neither ornithine nor citrulline can be
made at a fast enough rate in vivo; the precursors needed for synthesis of arginine,
which is needed for growth and optimal urea synthesis, function in the intestine
(Rogers, 1994). However, exogenous citrulline could be converted to arginine at a
sufficient rate in the kidney to sustain maximal growth and provide for satisfactory
urea synthesis. The metabolic basis for the strict essentiality of arginine in the cat is
the very low enzymatic activity of both pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase (Rogers
and Phang, 1985) and ornithine δ-aminotransferase (Morris, 1985) in the small
intestine where ornithine and citrulline are made before citrulline goes to the kidney
to be converted to arginine (Levillain et al., 1996). Other carnivores and some
herbivores and omnivores have an absolute requirement for arginine for optimal
growth (Rogers, 1994), but none have yet been shown to be as sensitive to arginine-
deficiency hyperammonemia as cats, perhaps because the cat is the most strict
carnivore studied in such depth.
Requirements and Allowances
The requirement of arginine for maximal growth of the weanling kitten has been
shown to be about 8-8.3 g·kg–1 diet (Anderson et al., 1979a; Costello et al., 1980)
when the diet contains about 4.7 kcal ME·g–1. However, to minimize urinary orotic
aciduria (Costello et al., 1980), about 10.5 g arginine·kg–1 diet containing about 280
g CP·kg–1 diet is required. Taylor et al. (1997) showed that increasing the total


===== PDF PAGE 261 =====
260
nitrogen content of the diet increased the quantity of arginine necessary to prevent
increased orotic acid excretion above baseline. For a diet containing 155 g of crude
protein per kilogram of diet (4.0 kcal ME·g–1) an increase in orotic aciduria occurred
below 7.5 g arginine·kg–1 diet. At 250 g CP·kg–1 diet, the quantity of arginine
necessary to minimize urinary orotic acid was 10 g·kg–1 diet, and 0.02 g arginine·g–1
of additional crude protein was necessary to prevent increasing orotic acid in urine as
crude protein was increased in the diet. (The equation relating grams of arginine per
kilogram of diet y to grams of protein per kilogram of diet x with an r2 of 0.99 was y
= 0.02x + 4.0). Thus, the MR in a diet that contains 4 kcal ME·g–1 at a crude protein
concentration of 200 g·kg–1 is suggested to be 7.7 g·kg–1 diet with an increase of
0.02 g of arginine per gram of crude protein per kilogram of diet above 200 g·kg–1
diet. It should be noted that the above regression equation erroneously predicts an
arginine requirement of 4 g·kg–1 diet when a protein-free diet is fed, indicating that
the equation is not linear below the range of protein tested. No hyperammonemia or
orotic aciduria has been reported after feeding a protein-free diet to kittens.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
There are no reports of acute toxicity related to large quantities of free arginine in
the diet of cats. Taylor (1995) found that when only essential amino acids
(methionine was limited to 9 g·kg–1 diet) were fed to kittens, arginine at 45 g·kg–1
diet (4.7 kcal ME·g–1) was associated with a marked increase in blood plasma
concentration of arginine to about 1 mmol·L–1 (5-10 times normal), and a small
decrease in growth rate occurred in the kittens. It thus seems prudent to set the SUL
for arginine at 35 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Histidine
Besides its structural role in proteins and glucogenic role, histidine is essential as
a precursor of neuroactive and regulatory compounds such as histamine, anserine,
and carnosine. Histidine is present at a particularly high concentration in hemoglobin
where the imidazole side chain plays a special role in accepting and donating protons
during oxygen exchange in the lung and other tissues.
Dog
Signs of Deficiency
Immature beagles fed a histidine-free diet exhibited about the same degree of
weight loss and negative nitrogen balance as that found when diets devoid of other


===== PDF PAGE 262 =====
261
essential amino acids were fed (Milner, 1979b). No problems were observed within a
week or more in adult dogs given diets devoid of histidine, whereas, after several
weeks, weight loss and decreases in plasma histidine, hemoglobin, and albumin and
in muscle histidine and carnosine resulted (Cianciaruso et al., 1981). Dogs fed the
histidine-free diet tried to avoid eating the diet, became listless, and had reduced
activity.
Requirements and Allowances
Growth was markedly depressed when immature beagles were given a diet
containing 1.4 g histidine·kg–1 diet (Milner, 1979b). Burns and Milner (1982), in a
histidine-response experiment, showed a breakpoint for maximal nitrogen retention
of weanling beagles (MR) for histidine at 2.1 g·kg–1 diet containing about 4.0 kcal
ME·g–1. These beagles were given a diet of only about 140 g CP·kg–1 diet and
hemoglobin was not evaluated. Since the crude protein requirement for 6- to 12-
week-old puppies is about 180 g CP·kg–1 diet, the MR recommended is 3.1 g
histidine·kg–1 diet (4 kcal ME·g–1) for 4- to 14-week-old puppies and 2.0 g·kg–1 diet
(4 kcal ME·g–1) for puppies older than 14 weeks. The quantity of histidine in
commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified diets with which normal,
sustained growth has routinely been observed is 4.4 g histidine·kg–1 diet containing
4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
No reports could be found on acute or chronic toxicity related to feeding large
quantities of free histidine to dogs.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Diets devoid of histidine resulted in body weight loss in kittens of about 5 g·d–1,
which is less than occurs when any other essential amino acid is omitted from the
diets (Rogers and Morris, 1979). This response is similar to that noted in other
species, including humans, where it was assumed for many years that histidine was
dispensable because, in short-term experiments, the subjects maintained nitrogen
balance in the absence of dietary histidine. Further work has shown that in virtually
all species, histidine is an essential amino acid, but histidine available from the
turnover of hemoglobin provides sufficient quantities to prevent negative nitrogen
balance in the short term while the animal has a gradual decrease in hemoglobin.
Thus, the maintenance of hemoglobin concentration is an important variable to use in


===== PDF PAGE 263 =====
262
determining the histidine requirement. A marginal deficiency of histidine, even when
an adequate quantity is provided for maximal weight gain, has been shown to cause
cataracts (Quam et al., 1987), thus providing another important variable for use in
determining the MR of histidine.
Requirements and Allowances
Anderson et al. (1980b) showed that 3 g histidine·kg–1 diet was sufficient for
maximal weight gain of young kittens. Further work by Quam et al. (1987) showed
that both maximal weight gain and nitrogen retention occurred at 2 g·kg–1 diet (4.7
kcal ME·g–1 diet), but maximal blood hemoglobin concentration was not reached
until the diet contained 3 g histidine·kg–1 diet. Further, they showed that cataracts
occurred when kittens were fed a diet containing only 2 g of histidine per gram of
diet for 4-5 months, confirming the MR for histidine for the growing kitten to be 2.6
g·kg–1 diet containing 4 kcal ME·g–1. The concentration of histidine found in
commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified diets with which normal,
sustained growth has routinely been observed is 4.7 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal
ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
No dose-response studies could be found of acute or chronic toxicity related to
feeding large quantities of free histidine to cats. Taylor et al. (1998) found that when
only essential amino acids were included in the diet (methionine and arginine were
limited to 9 and 22.5 g·kg–1 diet, respectively) (4.5 kcal ME·g–1 diet), 24.4 g
histidine·kg–1 diet did not cause any observable clinical signs. Thus, the SUL is > 22
g histidine·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Isoleucine
Isoleucine is both ketogenic and glucogenic. Its only known essential function is
as a constituent of proteins.
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
Immature beagles fed an isoleucine-free diet exhibit a marked depression in food
intake, a body weight loss of 32 g·d–1 and negative nitrogen balance (Milner,


===== PDF PAGE 264 =====
263
1979b). No other specific clinical signs were reported at the end of the 14-day
experiment.
Requirements and Allowances
Growth was depressed about 30 percent when the concentration of isoleucine in
the diet of immature beagles was decreased from 8.2 to 4.1 g·kg–1 (Milner, 1979b).
Burns et al. (1984), in an isoleucine-response experiment, showed a breakpoint (MR)
for maximal nitrogen retention of weanling beagles 12 weeks of age at 4.0 g
isoleucine·kg–1 diet containing about 4.0 kcal ME·g–1. Since these beagles were fed
only about 140 g of crude protein per kilogram of diet and the requirement for 6- to
12-week-old puppies is about 180 g crude protein, 4.0 g isoleucine·kg–1 diet is taken
as the MR for 14-week-old puppies and 5.2 g·kg–1 diet containing 4 kcal ME·g–1 for
4- to 14-week-old puppies. The concentration of isoleucine in commercial, dry,
expanded diets and various purified diets with which normal, sustained growth has
routinely been observed is 5.0 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
No reports could be found on acute or chronic toxicity related to feeding large
quantities of free isoleucine to dogs; so no SUL can be established.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Removal of isoleucine from the diet of kittens results in a weight loss of about 7-
10 g·d–1 (Rogers and Morris, 1979; Anderson et al., 1980c). When kittens were fed
subadequate isoleucine at 2.2 g·kg–1 diet (about 4.7 kcal ME·g–1 diet, Hargrove et
al., 1984), growth was suboptimal, and, after a few days they developed porphyrin-
type crusty material around the eyes, nose, and mouth, a rough hair coat with
desquamation of the outer layer of the epidermis on the pads of the paws with
cracking and occasional lesions, lethargy, slow righting reflex, and incoordination.
All clinical signs were corrected after adequate isoleucine supplementation.
Staphylococcal species were cultured from the conjunctiva of the deficient kittens
but disappeared without antibiotic treatment upon supplementation with sufficient
isoleucine; thus, the kittens appeared to have impaired resistance to common dermal
bacteria. Similar mild clinical signs were observed in kittens fed 3.8 g isoleucine·kg–
1 diet (4.7 kcal ME·g–1 DM) after several weeks.
Requirements and Allowances


===== PDF PAGE 265 =====
264
Anderson et al. (1980c), using maximal kitten weight gains of 10-12 g·d–1,
reported that 3 g isoleucine·kg–1 diet (about 4.7 kcal ME·g–1) was sufficient for
maximal growth of young kittens. Further work by Hargrove et al. (1984) showed
that both maximal weight gains (about 35 g·d–1) and nitrogen retention occurred at
about 5 g·kg–1 diet (4.7 kcal ME·g–1 diet). Thus, at 4 kcal ME·g–1 the MR is 4.3 g
isoleucine·kg–1 diet. The concentration in commercial, dry, expanded diets and
various purified diets with which normal, sustained growth has routinely been
observed, is 7.7 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
There are no reports of acute or chronic toxicity related to large quantities of free
isoleucine in the diet of cats. Hargrove et al. (1988) fed 100 g isoleucine·kg–1 diet
containing about 180 g crude protein and 240 g fat per kilogram without any
observable decrease in weight gain or other adverse clinical signs. Thus, the SUL for
isoleucine is >87 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Leucine
Leucine is a strongly ketogenic, branched-chain amino acid, since upon oxidation
the carbon forms a ketone body and an acetyl coenzyme A (CoA) molecule. The
only known structural role of leucine is as a constituent of proteins. Leucine has a
role in regulating the catabolism of all branched-chain amino acids via inhibition of
branched-chain δ-ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKAD) kinase by its δ-ketoacid, δ-
ketoisocaproic acid (Harris et al., 2001). This kinase phosphorylates BCKAD to
decrease its activity. Since the branched-chain transaminase is present in excess
relative to BCKAD, excess leucine results in activation of BCKAD, which, in turn,
causes an increase in the catabolism of all branched-chain amino acids. The
branched-chain transaminase is present in most tissues except liver, it is not rate
limiting, and the reaction is readily reversible. Leucine has been reported to enhance
protein synthesis directly and indirectly by increasing plasma insulin (Balage et al.,
2001; Anthony et al., 2002) and suppressing protein degradation (Nagasawa et al.,
2002) in skeletal muscle. Thus, leucine has a marked anabolic effect following
absorption. This regulatory role may have evolved since leucine is never limiting in
natural foods for animals and neither isoleucine nor valine is known to be limiting.
Thus, when protein is ingested, leucine increases protein synthesis and decreases
protein degradation, both of which increase the efficiency of utilization of all the
essential amino acids including leucine for maintenance, growth, or reproduction.
Since leucine controls it own degradation and that of isoleucine and valine, this
prevents potential toxicity from branched-chain amino acids at even high dietary
concentrations.


===== PDF PAGE 266 =====
265
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
Immature beagles fed a leucine-free diet exhibit a marked depression in food
intake, weight loss (about 34 g·d–1), and negative nitrogen balance (Milner, 1979a).
No specific clinical signs were reported at the end of the 14-day experiment.
Requirements and Allowances
Growth was depressed about 10 percent when leucine was decreased from 11 to
5.5 g·kg–1 diet fed to immature beagles (Milner, 1979a). Burns et al. (1984), in a
dose-response experiment, showed a breakpoint at 6.0 g leucine·kg–1 diet (4.0 kcal
ME·g–1) for maximal nitrogen retention of weanling beagles at 11 weeks of age.
Although not significantly different, weight gain was greatest at 12 g leucine·kg–1
diet, and the greatest nitrogen retention occurred at 10 g leucine·kg–1 diet. Delaney
et al. (2001), using 8-week-old beagle puppies, studied the interaction between
graded levels of leucine and dietary crude protein. They found that, although 140 g
of crude protein per kilogram of diet did not support maximal weight gain, the
leucine requirement was the same (11 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.3 kcal ME·g–1) for 8-
to 14-week-old beagles fed 140 g and those fed 280 g of crude protein per kilogram
of diet. However, for beagles >14 weeks of age, the breakpoint for both protein
groups was 7 g leucine·kg–1 diet. From these results, the MR for 4- to 14-week-old
puppies is 10.3 g·kg–1 and for puppies >14 weeks is 6.5 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0
kcal ME·g–1 diet. The quantity in commercial, dry, expanded diets and various
purified diets with which normal, sustained growth has routinely been observed is 20
g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
No reports could be found on acute or chronic toxicity related to feeding large
quantities of free leucine to dogs fed complete, balanced diets, so no SUL can be
established. There is a report that the addition of 12 g leucine·kg–1 diet containing
180 casein·kg–1 and no added niacin induced black tongue in dogs (Belavady et al.,
1967), but this could not be replicated (Manson and Carpenter, 1978).
Cats
Signs of Deficiency


===== PDF PAGE 267 =====
266
Removal of leucine from the diet of kittens resulted in a weight loss of about 7
g·d–1 (Rogers and Morris, 1979), but no other clinical signs were noted during the
short (10-day) experiment.
Requirements and Allowances
Anderson et al. (1980c), using maximal weight gains of 10-15 g·d–1, reported that
weight gains of young kittens plateaued at 12 g leucine·kg–1 diet (about 4.7 kcal
ME·g–1). Work by Hargrove et al. (1984) showed that weight gains of about 32 g·d–1
occurred at about 9 g leucine·kg–1 diet, whereas maximal nitrogen retention occurred
at about 12 g leucine·kg–1 diet or higher (4.7 kcal ME·g–1 diet). Thus, at 4 kcal
ME·g–1 the MR of kittens for leucine is 10.2 g·kg–1 diet. The concentration in
commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified diets with which normal,
sustained growth has routinely been observed is 18 g leucine·kg–1 diet containing
4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
No reports could be found relating clinical signs of acute or chronic toxicity to
feeding large quantities of free leucine to cats. Hargrove et al. (1988) fed 100 g
leucine·kg–1 diet containing about 180 g crude protein and 240 g fat per kilogram
without any observable decrease in weight gain or other adverse clinical signs; in
fact, weight gain was increased. Thus, the SUL for leucine is >87 g·kg–1 diet (4.0
kcal ME·g–1). If isoleucine and valine were limiting (80 percent of the requirement),
there was a transitory decrease in weight gain when 100 leucine·kg–1 diet was added,
indicating only a weak leucine-isoleucine and valine antagonism in kittens. Kittens
under similar conditions (i.e., isoleucine and valine limiting), when offered a choice,
chose a high-leucine diet (Hargrove et al., 1994). Thus, high dietary leucine, even
eight to nine times above the requirement, seems to be a positive influence on food
intake of kittens fed a low-protein diet.
Lysine
Lysine is weakly ketogenic; it is a constituent of proteins, acts as a precursor of
other constituents such as hydroxylysine, and is important for cross-linkages that
occur in collagen. Lysine, because of its ε-amino group, is important for the
secondary structure of proteins as it is normally charged, and it can also be
methylated or acetylated. Lysine is deaminated by intestinal bacteria to produce the
foul-smelling amine cadaverine. Lysine, post-translationally, is methylated to
trimethyllysine, which after proteolysis is the precursor of carnitine. Since lysine


===== PDF PAGE 268 =====
267
concentration is low in cereals and it readily forms Maillard reaction products with
glucose and heat, it is often the limiting amino acid when low-protein, cereal-based
diets are fed. The free L-form is relatively cheap and has been available for decades
for supplementing feeds.
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
Immature beagles fed a lysine-free diet exhibited a marked depression in food
intake and lost about 29 g BW per day, about the same degree of weight loss and
negative nitrogen balance found when diets devoid of other essential amino acids
were fed (Milner, 1979a). No specific clinical signs were reported at the end of the
14-day experiment.
Requirements and Allowances
Milner (1981) reported that beagles (less than 14 weeks old) given a diet
containing 140 g of amino acids per kilogram of diet achieved maximal weight gain
and nitrogen retention at a dietary lysine concentration of 5.8 g·kg–1 for females and
6.9 g·kg–1 for males. When the diet contained 280 g of amino acids per kilogram,
nitrogen retention increased up to 5.8 g lysine·kg–1 diet, but higher levels of lysine
were not used. Using diets based on free amino acids and intact protein
supplemented with lysine, respectively, Hirakawa and Baker (1986) reported the
lysine requirements for weanling pointer puppies to be 7 g lysine·kg–1 diet using the
amino acid diet and 8 g lysine·kg–1 diet using intact protein (diets containing about
3.9 kcal ME·g–1 diet). These results, indicating a higher requirement for the intact
protein diet, are consistent with a bioavailability of about 85 percent for lysine from
protein concentrates for dogs (Murray et al., 1997). From these results the MR for
lysine for growth of 4-to 14-week-old puppies is 7 g·kg–1 and for >14-week-old
puppies 5.6 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·kg–1 diet. The concentration in
commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified diets with which normal,
sustained growth has routinely been observed is 9.0 g lysine·kg–1 diet containing 4.0
kcal ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
A lysine-arginine antagonism was reported by Czarnecki et al. (1985) in growing
English pointer puppies. They found that, although 10 or 20 g of extra free lysine per
kilogram of diet had no effect, 40 g excess lysine in the diet caused a growth
depression and classical clinical signs of arginine deficiency (emesis, increased


===== PDF PAGE 269 =====
268
plasma ammonia, and orotic aciduria) when the diet contained 4 g arginine·kg–1. An
additional 4 g arginine prevented the clinical signs and improved weight gain but did
not appear to fully restore it. The excess lysine caused a generalized amino aciduria.
Only about 4 percent of the ingested arginine was excreted, and the excess lysine
caused no increase in liver arginase as occurs in birds (Nesheim, 1968); therefore,
the mechanism of antagonism in dogs remains unclear. The SUL for lysine is >20
and <40 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Removal of lysine from the diet of kittens resulted in a weight loss of about 11
g·d–1 (Rogers and Morris, 1979), but no other clinical signs were noted during the
short 10-day experiment. Although graying of feathers in birds (Vohra and Kratzer,
1957) and hair in rats (Vohra and Kratzer, 1956) has been known for many years to
occur as a result of lysine deficiency, this has not been reported in cats, perhaps
because it is unusual for lysine to be limiting in cat foods and no long-term
experiments on lysine deficiency in cats have been reported.
Requirements and Allowances
Jansen et al. (1975) demonstrated that the rate of body weight gain of cats given a
diet based on wheat gluten was increased by a lysine supplement. Anderson et al.
(1979a), using maximal weight gain as the determining variable, reported that 8 g
lysine·kg–1 diet (about 4.7 kcal ME·g–1) supported maximal weight gain of young
kittens. Further work by Morris et al. (2004) showed that both weight gain and
nitrogen retention were maximized at 8 g lysine·kg–1 diet (4.7 kcal ME·g–1 diet).
Thus, at 4 kcal ME·g–1, the MR for lysine is set at 6.8 g·kg–1 diet. The concentration
of lysine in commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified diets with which
normal, sustained growth has routinely been observed is 12 g·kg–1 diet containing
4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
No reports were found of clinical signs of acute or chronic toxicity related to
large quantities of free lysine in the diet of cats. Taylor et al. (1998) gave a diet
containing 65 g lysine·kg–1 (4.5 kcal ME·g–1) to kittens (i.e., about eight times the
requirement), without any observable adverse clinical signs. The SUL for lysine is >
58 g·kg–1 diet (4.0 kcal ME·g–1).


===== PDF PAGE 270 =====
269
Methionine and Cyst(e)ine
Methionine is generally the most limiting amino acid in a diet formulated using
natural ingredients for cats and is often first or second limiting for dogs. Since
methionine is a methyl group donor, a part of the coenzyme (S-adenosylmethionine)
for methyl group transfer, and an amino acid present in proteins, a deficiency of
methionine results in a multitude of metabolic aberrations. These include
interference with cell replication (defect in methylating RNA and/or DNA) and
phospholipid synthesis (causing fatty liver). During catabolism, the carbon skeleton
of methionine is glucogenic. Cysteine is an important component of proteins for their
secondary structure and a major constituent of hair and glutathione. Since
methionine serves as a precursor to cysteine, cysteine is a dispensable amino acid.
Because cysteine is made only from methionine and can provide about one-half of
the total need for sulfur amino acids, cysteine and methionine must both be
considered when establishing the total sulfur amino acid requirement. Therefore, the
requirements are presented as the MR of methionine when there is excess cysteine in
the diet, and the total sulfur amino acid requirement, which can be met with only
methionine, but commonly involves a combination of methionine and cysteine.
Cysteine cannot be converted to methionine; so the MR of methionine must be met
with methionine. Since methionine is often limiting in animal diets, DL-methionine,
which is commercially available and relatively cheap compared to the same amount
of methionine supplied by protein, is often added to dog and cat diets. Therefore, the
efficiency of utilization of DL-methionine in replacing L-methionine is given for
both dogs and cats.
Over a period of two decades (Stekol, 1935; Miller, 1944; Allison, 1947, 1956), it
was shown in both growing and adult dogs that methionine (either the L- or the DL-
form) had a unique effect in reducing nitrogen loss and maintaining serum albumin
when dogs were fed a low-protein or a protein-free diet. Although this phenomenon
does not appear to have been studied recently, it could be the result of
methionyltRNA being used as the initiator codon for protein synthesis and adequate
methionine may be particularly important in the liver for this purpose.
Cysteine is an important precursor for the synthesis of glutathione and felinine.
Glutathione is an antioxidant that has been studied extensively (Flohe, 1988).
Felinine, a branched-chain, sulfur-containing α-amino acid (2-amino-7-hydroxy-5,5-
dimethyl-4-thiaheptanoic acid) commonly found in the urine of selected members of
the felids, including domestic cats, has not been studied extensively. Felinine was
first isolated by Westall (1953) who suggested its structure, which was verified by
Trippett (1957). The biological function of felinine has not been fully established.
Although it has been suggested that felinine is involved in lipid metabolism
(Shapiro, 1962; Roberts, 1963), the most widely accepted possible role for felinine,
or its odiferous breakdown product in urine, is as a pheromone, which is of
importance in territorial marking (Hendriks, 1995a). Roberts (1963) reported that
kittens, before sexual maturity (<8 months old), did not excrete any felinine and that


===== PDF PAGE 271 =====
270
adult males excreted more than did adult females who increased their urinary output
when given testosterone. They also showed, however, that giving estrogen to adult
neutered male cats had no effect on urinary felinine excretion. Hendriks et al.
(1995b) reported that adult intact male cats excreted 95 mg felinine per day (29
mg·d–1 for neutered males), whereas adult intact females excrete only 19 mg·d–1 (13
mg·d–1 for neutered females). Recent evidence (Hendriks et al., 2001; Rutherfurd et
al., 2002) indicates that felinine is synthesized in the liver from cysteine and an
intermediate in the pathway of cholesterol biosynthesis, is conjugated to γ-
glutamylfelinylglycine, and is then transported to the kidney where hydrolysis occurs
to produce free felinine for urinary excretion. The quantity of sulfur containing
amino acids in the diet needed for synthesis of the normal quantity of felinine
excreted by adult male cats would be about 60 mg·d–1 or about 20-25 percent of the
MR for maintenance or 5-10 percent of the lower end of normal sulfur amino acid
intake.
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
The removal of methionine from a diet containing 3.5 g·kg–1 of cystine for
puppies (Milner, 1979b) or adult dogs (Rose and Rice, 1939) resulted in an
immediate decrease in food intake and severe weight loss. The puppies exhibited
dermatitis, but no other gross lesions were reported. Hirakawa and Baker (1985),
using amino acid diets and intact protein, reported that excess dietary cystine
together with a methionine deficiency resulted in severe weight loss of puppies,
swelling and reddening of the skin, and with time, increased severity of dermatosis
on the front foot pads. These lesions became necrotic and hyperkeratotic with
ulceration of the epithelium. When methionine was increased in the diet, the lesions
rapidly disappeared. These clinical signs were similar to those reported for kittens
(Strieker, 1991). When dogs were given high-carbohydrate, high-cholesterol diets
that contain protein near their requirement but are borderline in methionine and
deficient in taurine, they consistently develop pigment gallstones not corrected with
taurine but corrected with methionine supplementation (Dawes et al., 1989; Christian
and Rege, 1996). The mechanism is not understood.
Requirements and Allowances
Milner (1979b) obtained maximal weight gains with immature (1.5-2.2 kg)
beagles given an amino acid diet containing about 140 g of crude protein per
kilogram of diet with 2.1 g methionine·kg–1 and 3.5 g cystine·kg–1 (4 kcal ME·g–1).
In a methionine-response experiment, the same group (Burns and Milner, 1981),


===== PDF PAGE 272 =====
271
using immature (2.8-4.4 kg) beagles and an energy content of diets at 4.3 kcal ME·g–
1, concluded that the requirements for total sulfur amino acids and methionine were
3.9 and 2.0 g·kg–1 diet, respectively. Blaza et al. (1982), using Labradors and beagles
with isolated soybean protein-based diets with a crude protein and energy contents of
about 200 g·kg–1 and 4.7 kcal ME·g–1 diet, respectively, concluded that the
requirement for total sulfur amino acids was 6.3 g·kg–1 diet. These researchers found
that 2 weeks was not sufficient to allow the animals to come to a steady weight gain.
Hirakawa and Baker (1985), using English pointer puppies and amino acid diets
containing about 140 CP·kg–1 diet and 4.0 kcal ME·g–1, concluded that the
requirements for total sulfur amino acids and methionine were 4.5 and 2.3 g·kg–1
diet, respectively. When the longer-term experiments are considered, along with the
MR for crude protein of 180 g·kg–1 diet, the MRs for total sulfur amino acids and
methionine are 5.6 and 2.8 g·kg–1, respectively, of diets containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1,
for 4- to 14-week-old puppies and 4.2 and 2.1 g·kg–1 diet for puppies over 14 weeks
old. The concentrations of total sulfur amino acids and methionine in commercial,
dry, expanded diets and various purified diets that sustain normal growth are 6.2 and
3.2 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1, respectively.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
Oral administration of about 1 g methionine·kg–1 BW every 4 hours for 24 hours
caused no acute clinical signs in normal dogs but caused severe clinical signs similar
to hepatic coma in dogs with portacaval shunts (Merino et al., 1975). The clinical
signs appeared to be caused by the post-transamination metabolites methanethiol and
dimethyl disulfide, and not by metabolites produced in the normal (transulfurylation)
pathway of methionine catabolism. Biourge et al. (2002) reported methionine
toxicosis in six hunting dogs fed a single meal of about 300 g of a normal diet
containing 47 g DL-methionine·kg–1, apparently the result of a formulation error.
Within 3-4 hours, the dogs were ataxic, became disorientated and hyperactive, and
developed lethargy, tremors, vomiting of undigested food, and ptyalism. The
youngest dog, 6 months old, was very depressed, was unable to stand, and had
episodes of seizures. Merino et al. (1975) did not stipulate whether they used L- or
DL-methionine. If they used L-methionine, D-methionine would appear to be
considerably more toxic than the L-form, presumably because all of the D-form goes
through the δ-ketoacid, which would increase acutely the quantity of methanethiol
and dimethyl disulfide. Since there are no reports of dose-response curves with L-
methionine added to dog diets, it is not possible to determine the SUL for L-
methionine; however, it would appear that the SUL for DL-methionine is well below
47 g·kg–1 diet containing 4 kcal ME·g–1.


===== PDF PAGE 273 =====
272
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Removal of methionine from the diet of kittens and adult cats resulted in body
weight loss (Teeter et al., 1978a). Rogers and Morris (1979) reported that among the
essential amino acid deficiencies, the greatest weight loss in kittens (except for
arginine deficiency) occurred with a methionine-devoid diet (19.5 g·d–1). Clinical
signs of severe chronic methionine deficiency included lethargy and abnormal
secretions from the eyes that occlude the eyelids. Further work by Strieker (1991)
showed that cystine supplementation of a methionine-deficient diet (1.6 g
methionine·kg–1 diet) resulted in severe perioral and footpad lesions of young
kittens. These clinical signs were similar to that of prolonged protein deficiency,
indicating that methionine is most likely the first limiting amino acid when there is a
deficiency of crude protein in cats.
Requirements and Allowances
Ritter and Owens (1974), using a casein-gelatin based diet, suggested a
methionine requirement for growing kittens of 9 g·kg–1 diet. Teeter et al. (1978b),
using amino acid-based diets, showed that 4.5 g methionine·kg–1 diet (4.7 kcal
ME·g–1) was sufficient for maximal weight gain when 6 g cystine·kg–1 diet was
present. When methionine was present in the diet at 4.5 g·kg–1, 4.5 g cystine·kg–1
diet was sufficient to support maximal growth. Schaeffer et al. (1982a), using amino
acid diets devoid of cystine, concluded that 7.5 g methionine·kg–1 diet (4.7 kcal
ME·g–1) was sufficient for maximal weight gain and nitrogen retention. Smalley et
al. (1983), using both weight gain and nitrogen retention but with 6 g cystine·kg–1
diet, found maximal nitrogen retention with 3.9 g methionine·kg–1 diet (4.7 kcal
ME·g–1). From methionine-response curves for weight gain and nitrogen retention,
Strieker (1991) determined the methionine requirement of kittens given amino acids
diets containing cystine and four different levels of crude protein. The requirement
was 4.5 g methionine·kg–1 diet (4.7 kcal ME·g–1) with dietary crude protein
concentrations up to 300 g·kg–1 diet. The requirement appeared to decrease to 3.5
g·kg–1 diet when the diet contained 500 g crude protein per kilogram. From these
results, the MR for methionine was estimated to be 3.5 g·kg–1 and the total sulfur
amino acid MR to be 7.0 g·kg –1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
The D-isomer of methionine is well utilized (Teeter et al., 1978a) by growing
kittens, and dose-response studies with both the L- and the D-forms (Smalley et al.,
1993) indicated that utilization of the D-form was about 80-90 percent that of the L-
form, using nitrogen retention as the variable. The concentrations of methionine and


===== PDF PAGE 274 =====
273
total sulfur amino acids in commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified diets
with which normal, sustained growth has routinely been observed are 5.0 and 9.0
g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1, respectively. All of these sulfur amino acid
requirements have been determined with ample choline in the diet, and it has been
shown that choline deficiency causes fatty liver with fat infiltration primarily in the
periportal spaces, not around the centrolobular vein as occurs in several other species
(Da Silva et al., 1959). Choline spares some methionine in the cat (Anderson et al.,
1979c; Schaeffer et al., 1982b).
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
Cats given 1.0 g DL-methionine·kg BW–1·d–1 develop severe hemolytic anemia
and a marked increase in methemoglobin concentration with Heinz body formation
by 6 days (Maede et al., 1987). Cats given 0.5 g·kg BW–1·d–1 (DL-methionine) for
52 days had moderate Heinz body anemia with methemoglobinemia by day 17, but
later recovered from the anemia, indicating some adaptation to the excess
methionine. In vitro incubation of erythrocytes with methionine at 10 mmol·L–1 did
not produce methemoglobin or Heinz bodies, whereas incubation with the abnormal
methionine metabolite 3-methyl thiopropionate caused some increase in both. Fau et
al. (1987b) fed growing kittens a purified diet containing 180 g casein·kg–1 diet
(containing about 5 g methionine·kg–1) and an additional 20, 30, or 40 g L-
methionine·kg–1 and found that all three concentrations of methionine caused a
decrease in food intake and weight gain. Kittens given the 30 g methionine·kg–1 diet
did not readily adapt and showed no weight gain, whereas those given the 40 g
methionine·kg–1 diet continuously lost weight for 6 weeks. Fau et al. (1987a)
measured the enzymes involved in methionine catabolism and found that in cats
these enzymes were not up-regulated to the same degree by excess dietary
methionine as in rats. Schaeffer et al. (1982a), in a methionine-response experiment
to determine the requirement, found only a slight decrease (not significantly
different) in nitrogen retention at 15 g methionine·kg–1 diet containing 4.7 kcal
ME·g–1. The concentration of methionine in plasma of kittens given the 15-g
methionine·kg–1 diet was about 10 times normal, at about 540 nmol·mL–1. Taylor et
al. (1996) found a decreased weight gain and elevated concentration of plasma
methionine at 648 nmol·mL–1 in kittens given a diet containing 18 g methionine·kg–
1. The SUL for the growing kitten is 13 g L-methionine·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal
ME·g–1. This concentration is about the available methionine content of an all-meat
diet containing 300-350 g fat·kg–1 diet (dry matter), and it would be predicted that
peptide-bound methionine in protein would be less toxic than that provided in the
free form. Thus, it is unlikely that cats eating natural prey would exceed the SUL for
methionine.


===== PDF PAGE 275 =====
274
Phenylalanine and Tyrosine
Catabolism of phenylalanine for energy through tyrosine produces intermediates
that are both glucogenic and ketogenic. Although tyrosine is a dispensable amino
acid, it is made in animals only from phenylalanine, and tyrosine spares about one-
half of the phenylalanine needed by all species examined including dogs and cats.
Thus, it is appropriate to consider the amount of phenylalanine required as the sum
of phenylalanine plus tyrosine, provided the level of tyrosine in the diet is not higher
than that of phenylalanine. Phenylalanine and tyrosine have not been shown to be the
most limiting amino acids for growth or nitrogen balance in diets sufficient in protein
or in commercial diets formulated using natural ingredients for dogs and cats.
However, Morris and coworkers (Yu et al., 2001; Anderson et al., 2002) in cats and
Biourge and Sergheraert (2002) in dogs have recently shown that at least twice as
much phenylalanine (or phenylalanine plus tyrosine) is required for maximal black
hair color (adequate eumelanin in hair to produce the black color) as for growth.
Other metabolic needs for phenylalanine and tyrosine, besides the amount needed for
protein synthesis, include the synthesis of key metabolites such as thyroid hormones
and catecholamines.
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
Immature beagles fed a phenylalanine-free diet containing 3.5 g tyrosine·kg–1
exhibited a marked depression in food intake and lost about 19 g BW·d–1, which is
somewhat less than that found when other essential amino acid-devoid diets were fed
(Milner, 1979a). No specific clinical signs were reported at the end of the 14-day
experiment. Biourge and Sergheraert (2002) have reported a reddish-brown hair coat
in black dogs fed commercial, dry, expanded diets that contained less than twice as
much phenylalanine plus tyrosine as that required for maximal weight gain.
Requirements and Allowances
Growth was depressed about 10 percent when immature beagles were given a diet
containing 3.5 g tyrosine·kg–1 and phenylalanine was decreased from 11.6 to 5.8
g·kg–1 diet (Milner, 1979a). Milner et al. (1984), in two separate phenylalanine-
response experiments, showed breakpoints for maximal nitrogen retention by
weanling beagles at 10 weeks of age (MR) for phenylalanine in the absence of
tyrosine at 8.0 g·kg–1 and between 8 and 10 g·kg–1 diet (4.0 kcal ME·g–1). Since
these beagles were fed only about 140 g CP·kg–1 diet and the crude protein
requirement for 6- to 12-week-old puppies is about 180 g, 8.0 g·kg–1 diet is taken as


===== PDF PAGE 276 =====
275
the MR for 14-week-old puppies and 10.4 g phenylalanine plus tyrosine per
kilogram of diet is taken as the MR for 4-to 14-week-old puppies ingesting diets
containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1 diet. Milner et al. (1984) further showed that when the
sum of phenylalanine plus tyrosine is suboptimal (6 g·kg–1 diet), the lowest ratio of
phenylalanine to tyrosine resulting in maximal weight gain and nitrogen retention for
that concentration of total phenylalanine and tyrosine was 2:1. However, since
maximal growth or nitrogen retention was not achieved, this ratio is open to question
as the minimal ratio. Results from puppies fed purified diets containing various
levels of phenylalanine plus tyrosine to prevent the reddish brown hair in black dogs
have not been reported. The concentrations of phenylalanine and phenylalanine plus
tyrosine in commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified diets with which
normal, sustained growth has routinely been observed are, respectively, 8.3 and 12.3
g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1. These experiments with dogs have not been
evaluated for the completeness of eumelanin formation in dogs to prevent a reddish-
brown color in black hair.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
No reports could be found on acute or chronic toxicity related to feeding large
quantities of free phenylalanine or tyrosine to dogs fed complete, balanced diets, so
no SUL can be established.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
For kittens, removal of phenylalanine from a diet containing 10 g tyrosine·kg–1
resulted in a weight loss of about 10 g·d–1, whereas if tyrosine was left out of a diet
containing 7.5 g phenylalanine·kg–1, normal weight gain occurred (Rogers and
Morris, 1979). No other clinical signs were reported during these short (7-14 days)
experiments. In experiments lasting 3-4 months, Yu et al. (2001) observed that the
black hair coat of kittens turned reddish-brown when the sum of phenylalanine and
tyrosine was suboptimal. In further work in which kittens were fed 10 g
phenylalanine·kg–1 diet and only 2 g tyrosine·kg–1 diet for more than 6 months
(Anderson, 2002), the cats showed clinical signs of neurological dysfunction
involving an abnormal, uncoordinated gait with the tail bending forward over the
back. The cats were also hyperactive, hypersalivated, and emitted frequent
vocalizations. Histologically, the nerves showed marked Wallerian degeneration of
axons with secondary myelin collapse. More of either phenylalanine or tyrosine
prevented or corrected these clinical abnormalities.


===== PDF PAGE 277 =====
276
Requirements and Allowances
Anderson et al. (1980b), in a series of growth experiments in kittens using various
dietary concentrations of phenylalanine and tyrosine, reported that maximal weight
gains (16-18 g·d–1) occurred in growing kittens given 10 g phenylalanine plus
tyrosine·kg–1 and that tyrosine provided half of the total requirement (4.7 kcal
ME·g–1). Williams et al. (1987), found maximal weight gains of 25 g·d–1 and, on
this basis plus nitrogen retention data from kittens, reported the requirement for
phenylalanine alone in the diet to be 7.5 g·kg–1, whereas with 10 g tyrosine·kg–1 in
the diet the phenylalanine requirement was 3.5 g·kg–1. Recently, Anderson et al.
(2002) found that the quantity of phenylalanine plus tyrosine necessary to maximize
black hair color was 18 g·kg–1 diet, but eumelanin in black hair appeared to increase
even beyond this dietary concentration. From these results, the MR necessary to
sustain both fully black hair coat and maximal nitrogen retention is 15.3 g
phenylalanine plus tyrosine per kilogram of a diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1 with
the MR for phenylalanine (with 14 g tyrosine·kg–1 diet) as 4.0 g·kg–1 diet containing
4.0 kcal ME·g–1. The concentrations of phenylalanine plus tyrosine and of
phenylalanine, respectively, in commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified
diets that sustain maximal weight gain are 15.8 and 10.3 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0
kcal ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
No reports could be found on clinical signs of acute or chronic toxicity related to
feeding large quantities of free phenylalanine to cats. Taylor et al. (1998) fed kittens
33 g phenylalanine·kg–1 and 37 g tyrosine·kg–1 in a diet containing about 4.5 kcal
ME·kg–1 diet (i.e., about four times the requirement to prevent black hair from
turning reddish-brown) without any observable adverse clinical signs. Herwill (1994)
fed increasing tyrosine concentrations up to 80 g·kg–1 diet (4.7 kcal ME·g–1) for 82
days without any observable clinical signs except a nonsignificant decrease in food
intake. Thus, the SUL for phenylalanine is >29 and the SUL for tyrosine is 68 g·kg–1
diet (4.0 kcal ME·g–1).
Threonine
Threonine, a glucogenic amino acid, is not known to have any unique precursor
functions except possibly in the formation of glycine via threonine aldolase in some
species. The hydroxyl group on the side chain of threonine often serves as the site of
phosphorylation-dephosphorylation reactions that control the activities of various
proteins and enzymes. Since threonine cannot be reversibly transaminated, the L-


===== PDF PAGE 278 =====
277
form is required “intact” and no other organic form is known that can be substituted
in the diet for L-threonine. Hammer et al. (1996b) examined the various metabolic
pathways of threonine catabolism in cats and concluded that threonine aldolase is not
active in cats and that threonine is catabolized about equally by threonine 3-dehydro-
genase and threonine dehydratase. Increasing dietary protein concentration from 200
to 500 g·kg–1 diet increased threonine 3-dehydrogenase about 70 percent and
threonine dehydratase one- to fourfold.
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
Immature beagles fed a threonine-free diet exhibited a marked depression in food
intake and lost about 29 g BW·d–1, which is similar to that found when other
essential amino acid-devoid diets were fed (Milner, 1979a,b). No specific clinical
signs were reported at the end of the 14-day experiment.
Requirements and Allowances
Weight gain of immature beagles was depressed about 50 percent when threonine
was decreased from 8.2 to 4.1 g·kg–1 in their diet (Milner, 1979b). Burns and Milner
(1982), in a threonine-response experiment, showed a breakpoint for maximal
nitrogen retention of weanling beagles at 15 weeks of age (MR) for threonine at 5.0
g·kg–1 diet containing about 4.0 kcal ME·g–1. Since these beagles were fed only
about 140 g of crude protein per kilogram of diet and the crude protein requirement
for 6- to 12-week-old puppies is about 180, the 5.0 g·kg–1 diet is taken as the MR for
14-week-old puppies and 6.5 g·kg–1 diet is taken as the MR for 4- to 14-week-old
puppies ingesting diets containing 4.0 kcal ME·g diet. The concentration of
threonine in commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified diets with which
normal, sustained growth has routinely been observed is 8.5 g·kg–1 diet containing
4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
No reports could be found of acute or chronic toxicity in dogs related to large
quantities of free threonine in complete, balanced diets, so no SUL can be
established.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency


===== PDF PAGE 279 =====
278
Removal of threonine from the diet of kittens resulted in a depression in food
intake and a body weight loss of about 15 g·d–1 (Rogers and Morris, 1979).
Titchenal et al. (1980) fed kittens suboptimal concentrations of threonine (4 or 5
g·kg–1 diet) and found as early as the fifth day that kittens developed slight tremors
in the limbs, jerky head and leg movements, a stiff rear gait, ataxia, and difficulty
maintaining equilibrium. From the anterior, kittens appeared bowlegged; however,
this also was of neurological origin, and all of these signs were readily reversed by
additional threonine. The clinical signs and absence of histopathologic changes in the
brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves, or carpal joints of the deficient cats suggested
that the deficiency of threonine induced cerebellar dysfunction.
Requirements and Allowances
Rogers and Morris (1979) and Titchenal et al. (1980) showed that kittens grew
maximally when fed diets containing 7 g threonine·kg–1 diet. In more extensive
experiments in which various concentrations of dietary crude protein were fed,
Hammer et al. (1996a) found that, when crude protein was optimal, using growth and
nitrogen retention as the variables, the threonine requirement was 6.0 g·kg–1 diet
containing about 4.6 kcal ME·g–1. Thus, the MR is taken as 5.2 g·kg–1 diet
containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1. The concentration of threonine in commercial, dry,
expanded diets and various purified diets with which normal, sustained growth has
routinely been observed is 10.8 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
There are no reports of clinical signs of acute or chronic toxicity related to
feeding large quantities of free threonine to cats. Taylor et al. (1998) gave a diet
containing 57 g·kg–1 threonine (about 4.5 kcal ME·kg–1 diet) to kittens (i.e., about
nine times the requirement for optimal growth), without any observable adverse
clinical signs and with plasma threonine often exceeding 1.5 mmol·L–1. Thus, the
SUL for threonine is >51 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Tryptophan
Tryptophan has unique precursor functions besides being needed for protein
synthesis. Tryptophan is a precursor of niacin in dogs, and indeed dogs were
important as an animal model for solving the problem of pellagra in humans during
the early part of the last century (Elvehjem et al., 1937; Krehl, 1981). The cat cannot
make significant quantities of niacin from tryptophan as the dog can, primarily
because the concentration of picolinic carboxylase is sufficiently high in cats to
allow this pathway to predominate rather than the pathway to niacin; the latter


===== PDF PAGE 280 =====
279
pathway, although it exists in the cat, has activities too low to compete effectively
with the oxidation pathway (Ikeda et al., 1965). Although tryptophan dioxygenase is
up-regulated in cats similar to that in omnivores after administration of tryptophan,
this enzyme is not induced by glucocorticoids in cats as in omnivores (Leklem et al.,
1969). Tryptophan is also the precursor of the neurotransmitters 5-
hydroxytryptophan, serotonin, and melatonin. Plasma tryptophan is usually rather
tightly regulated so that there is a sufficient quantity for protein and neurotransmitter
syntheses but not an amount that would result in the synthesis of excess
neurotransmitters. Plasma concentration of tryptophan in most species is
homeostatically controlled by up- and down-regulation of tryptophan dioxygenase,
which has a short half-life and can respond quickly, within the absorptive period of a
single meal. This short half-life provides for oxidation of excess tryptophan, but
prevents the degradation of tryptophan when it is needed for protein or
neurotransmitter synthesis. There are indications that dietary supplementation with
high concentrations of tryptophan may have some neurobehavioral effects, such as
reduced aggression in dogs (DeNapoli et al., 2000), presumably by increasing
neurotransmitter synthesis.
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
Immature beagles fed a tryptophan-free diet exhibited a marked depression in
food intake and lost about 29 g BW·d–1, which is similar to the loss when other diets
devoid of an essential amino acid were fed (Milner, 1979a,b). No specific clinical
signs were reported at the end of the 14-day experiment.
Requirements and Allowances
Weight gain of immature beagles was depressed about 75 percent when
tryptophan concentration was decreased from 1.75 to 0.88 g·kg–1 diet (Milner,
1979b). Burns and Milner (1982), using 7-week-old beagles in a tryptophan-response
experiment, showed a breakpoint for tryptophan for maximal nitrogen retention at
1.5 g·kg–1 diet (MR) containing about 4.0 kcal ME·g–1. Czarnecki and Baker
(1982), using weight gain of English pointer puppies fed a 162-g amino acid mixture
per kilogram of diet, found that the requirement of 6- to 10-week-old puppies was
1.6 g tryptophan or greater, and for 12- to 14-week-old puppies, 1.2 g tryptophan, per
kilogram of diet. Since the beagles were fed only about 140 CP·kg–1 diet and the
pointers about 150 g and the crude protein requirement for 6- to 12-week-old puppies
is about 180 g, 1.8-g tryptophan·kg–1 diet is taken as the MR for 4- to 14-week-old
puppies and 1.4 g tryptophan·kg–1 diet for 14-week-old puppies ingesting diets


===== PDF PAGE 281 =====
280
containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1 diet. The concentration in commercial, dry, expanded
diets and various purified diets with which normal, sustained growth has routinely
been observed is 2.2 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
No reports could be found on acute or chronic toxicity related to feeding large
quantities of free tryptophan to dogs fed complete, balanced diets, so no SUL can be
established.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Removal of tryptophan from the diet of kittens results in a depression in food
intake and a weight loss of about 13 g·d–1 (Rogers and Morris, 1979). No other signs
of deficiency have been reported; nor has long-term deficiency been studied.
Requirements and Allowances
Anderson et al. (1980b) obtained maximal weight gains in kittens given a 186-g
amino acid·kg–1 diet containing 1.5 g tryptophan·kg–1 (4.7 kcal ME·g–1), but they
grew at only half that rate when fed 1 g·kg–1 diet. Hargrove et al. (1983), using
smaller intervals and 240-g amino acid·kg–1 diet, reported breakpoints for weight
gain and nitrogen retention at 1.1 g tryptophan·kg–1 diet (4.7 kcal ME·g–1).
Somewhat later, Rogers et al. (1987) showed that increasing the ratio of essential
amino acids to dispensable amino acids decreased the crude protein requirement, and
that 1.5 g tryptophan·kg–1 diet enhanced weight gain more than a diet containing 1.1
g·kg–1 with the total dietary amino acids at either 230 or 300 g·kg–1 diet. Thus, the
MR is taken as 1.3 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1. The concentration of
tryptophan in commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified diets with which
normal, sustained growth has routinely been observed is 1.9 g·kg–1 diet containing
4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
Taylor et al. (1998) fed 15 g·kg–1 tryptophan in a diet containing about 4.5 kcal
ME·kg–1 (i.e., about 10 times the requirement for optimal growth) without any
observable adverse clinical signs and with plasma tryptophan increasing only slightly
compared to a control diet. Herwill (1994) fed increasing quantities of tryptophan up


===== PDF PAGE 282 =====
281
to 60 g·kg–1 diet (4.7 kcal ME·g–1) to cats and found food intake was somewhat
decreased when tryptophan was increased from 20 to 40 g·kg–1 and was significantly
decreased when tryptophan was increased from 40 to 60 g·kg–1. One cat fed 60 g
tryptophan·kg–1 diet for 42 days died and was found to have severe diffuse tubular
degeneration and atrophy, with proteinaceous casts and interstitial fibrosis of the
kidney. Thus, the SUL is about 17 g tryptophan·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–
1.
Valine
Valine is glucogenic; its only known essential role is as a constituent of proteins.
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
Immature beagles fed a valine-free diet exhibited a marked depression in food
intake and lost about 49 g BW·d–1 (Milner, 1979a). No specific clinical signs were
reported at the end of the 14-day experiment.
Requirements and Allowances
Weight gain of immature beagles was depressed about 55 percent when valine
concentration in the diet was decreased from 8.2 to 4.1 g·kg–1 (Milner, 1979a).
Burns et al. (1984), in a dose-response experiment, showed that both weight gain and
nitrogen retention of weanling beagles at 12 weeks of age plateaued for valine at
about 4.5 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.1 kcal ME·g–1. Since these beagles were fed only
about 140 g of crude protein per kilogram of diet and the requirement for 6- to 12-
week-old puppies is about 180 g, 4.5 g·kg–1 is taken as the MR for 14-week-old
puppies and 5.4 g·kg–1 (4 kcal ME·g–1) as the MR for 4- to 14-week-old puppies.
The concentration of valine in commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified
diets with which normal, sustained growth has routinely been observed is 9.0 g·kg–1
diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
No reports could be found on acute or chronic toxicity related to feeding large
quantities of free valine to dogs, so no SUL can be established.
Cats


===== PDF PAGE 283 =====
282
Signs of Deficiency
Removal of valine from the diet of kittens resulted in a weight loss of about 6-14
g·d–1 (Hardy et al., 1977; Anderson et al., 1980c). No clinical signs other than
weight loss were reported when kittens were fed the valine-free diet for less than 2
weeks.
Requirements and Allowances
Hardy et al. (1977) fed weanling kittens diets containing 6 and 18 g valine·kg–1
and found that the weight gains and nitrogen retention of the kittens fed the two
concentrations were superimposable. Anderson et al. (1980c), using 3 g valine·kg–1
increments below 6 g valine·kg–1 diet, reported that 6 g valine·kg–1 diet (about 4.7
kcal ME·g–1) was sufficient for maximal weight gain of young kittens. Clearly, 6 g
valine·kg–1 diet is sufficient, but the requirement could be somewhat lower. Thus, at
4 kcal ME·g–1, the MR for valine is 5.1 g· kg–1 diet. The concentration in
commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified diets with which normal,
sustained growth has routinely been observed is 10 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal
ME·g–1.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
There are no reports of acute or chronic toxicity related to feeding large quantities
of free valine to cats. Hargrove et al. (1988) fed cats 100 g valine·kg–1 diet
containing about 180 g of crude protein and 240 g of fat·kg–1 without any observable
decrease in weight gain or other adverse clinical signs. Thus, the SUL for valine
would be >87 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Minimal Requirements and Recommended Allowances for Maintenance
Dogs
Arginine
No data are available from dose-response experiments for the MR of arginine for
maintenance for adult dogs. From Burns et al. (1981), the lowest concentration fed to
adult dogs above the arginine-free treatment was 2.8 g·kg–1 diet and this
concentration minimized orotic acid in urine, thus providing the MR. Casein, milk,
and wheat contain sufficient arginine if they are fed at adequate crude protein


===== PDF PAGE 284 =====
283
concentrations, and other proteins including other animal byproducts, protein
concentrates, and cereals would provide an even greater excess.
Methionine and Cyst(e)ine
Methionine is often considered the first limiting amino acid for adult dogs fed
soybean and/or rendered meat meals. For more than 50 years, there have been
various reports that supplementing low-protein diets with methionine increased
nitrogen retention or decreased the quantity of crude protein required to maintain
nitrogen balance (Allison et al., 1947; Kade et al., 1948; Arnold and Schad, 1954;
Ward, 1976). Most were short-term experiments, and results indicated that the total
sulfur amino acid requirement was in the range of 2-4 g·kg–1 diet. Recently,
Sanderson et al. (2001) reported a study in which a diet containing 5.2 g total sulfur
amino acids per 4,000-kcal diet was fed to beagles for 4 years without any apparent
abnormalities, whereas feeding 4.8 g per 4,000 kcal with a higher-fat diet resulted in
one dog exhibiting dilated cardiomyopathy as a result of taurine deficiency, which
was corrected by taurine supplementation. Thus, the suggested MRs for maintenance
are 5.2 g of total sulfur amino acids and 2.6 g of methionine per kilogram of diet
containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1. The D-isomer of methionine has been reported to be
well utilized (Cho et al., 1980; Burns and Milner, 1981) by the growing puppy and
the adult dog, although dose-response studies have not been reported. Utilization of
the D-form, from the above-mentioned work, appeared to be 100 percent that of the
L-form.
Histidine, Isoleucine, Leucine, Lysine, Phenylalanine and Tyrosine,
Threonine, Tryptophan, and Valine
No individual dose-response peer-reviewed reports could be found for the MR of
any of these amino acids for dogs for maintenance. Ward (1976) estimated the MR
for these amino acids for maintenance, and Sanderson et al. (2001) fed a low-protein
diet to adult dogs for 4 years without any observable clinical signs of deficiency. The
lowest dietary concentrations of these two groups are used to estimate the minimum
requirements for maintenance and are listed in Table 15-5. No diet that meets the
crude protein requirement of dogs at maintenance and includes cereals, animal
byproducts, and plant protein concentrates has been shown to be deficient in
histidine, isoleucine, leucine, phenylalanine and tyrosine, threonine, or valine. Some
commercial diets have anecdotally been associated with reddish-brown hair coat in
black dogs. No dose-response studies relating phenylalanine and tyrosine to reddish-
brown hair in black dogs have been reported in adult dogs. Lysine can be limiting
when a cereal protein is fed at the nitrogen requirement, and tryptophan may be
limiting when corn and high-collagen diets are used as protein sources.


===== PDF PAGE 285 =====
284
Cats
Lysine
From the results of a dose-response experiment with adult cats, Burger and Smith
(1987) used regression analysis to determine the requirement of lysine at
maintenance and reported an MR for lysine for maintenance equivalent to 3 g·kg–1
diet containing 4.5 kcal ME·g–1. Thus, the MR for lysine for maintenance is set at
2.7 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Methionine and Cyst(e)ine
Burger and Smith (1987) also reported that the methionine requirement for
maintenance of nitrogen balance in a diet lacking cyst(e)ine for the adult cat was 3
g·kg–1 diet containing 4.5 kcal ME·g–1. Thus, the MR for total sulfur amino acids
for maintenance is set at 2.7 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
Arginine, Histidine, Isoleucine, Leucine, Phenylalanine and Tyrosine,
Threonine, Tryptophan, and Valine
No reports of dose-response experiments could be found for the MR of these
amino acids for maintenance of adult cats. Since the quantity of these amino acids in
the digestible protein in both commercial, dry, expanded diets and purified diets
containing 200 g crude protein per kilogram of diet that support maintenance
(Piechota et al., 1995) all exceed known MRs for the growing kitten, the MRs for
growth for each of these amino acids are taken as the AIs and RAs and reported in
Table 15-12.
Minimal Requirements and Recommended Allowances for Gestation and
Lactation
Dogs
Arginine, Histidine, Isoleucine, Leucine, Lysine, Methionine and Cyst(e)ine,
Phenylalanine and Tyrosine, Threonine, Tryptophan, and Valine
No reports could be found in which the amino acid requirements of the bitch for
gestation and lactation have been determined, so no MRs could be estimated.
Therefore, the lowest concentrations of each of the essential amino acids from
digestible protein in commercial, dry, expanded diets that have been shown to sustain


===== PDF PAGE 286 =====
285
normal gestation and lactation for bitches are taken as the AIs and RAs for gestation
and lactation for these amino acids (Table 15-8).
Cats
Arginine, Histidine, Isoleucine, Leucine, Lysine, Methionine and Cyst(e)ine,
Phenylalanine and Tyrosine, Threonine, Tryptophan, and Valine
No reports of dose-response experiments could be found for the MR of any
essential amino acids for gestation or lactation of adult cats. The AIs, based on the
quantity in commercial, dry, expanded diets and various purified diets known to
support gestation and lactation (Piechota et al., 1995) for each of the amino acids are
shown in Table 15-14.
Dispensable Amino Acids
Dispensable amino acids are good sources of nitrogen in all species including
dogs and cats. Although none of the individual dispensable amino acids have been
shown to be necessary for any life stage, plasma concentrations of proline and
asparagine decreased markedly in growing kittens when they were absent from the
diet (Taylor et al., 1996), but growth was not affected. The effect of deleting any one
of the dispensable amino acids during gestation and lactation has not been studied;
so, it seems prudent to include a mixture of dispensable amino acids in dog and cat
diets to supply nitrogen for these life stages. Likewise, excesses of most of the
dispensable amino acids have not been studied; so, SUL values cannot be given for
any but glutamic acid. Glutamic acid is a central intermediate in amino acid
metabolism and is often given as a nitrogen source when free amino acid diets are
used in animal research. Generally, it has been shown to be well tolerated. Deady et
al. (1981a), in a dose-response study using growing kittens, reported that some
emesis occurred, with an associated decrease in weight gain beginning at about 90 g
glutamic acid·kg–1 diet containing about 4.7 kcal ME·g–1. Thus, the SUL of
glutamic acid for the growth of kittens is 75 g·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·g–1.
It should be noted that the excess glutamic acid caused a thiamin deficiency when
thiamin was adequate but marginal in the diet of growing kittens (Deady et al.,
1981b). The mechanism by which high dietary glutamic acid increases the thiamin
requirement is not known. The SUL for glutamic acid or other dispensable amino
acids for dogs is not known.
Taurine


===== PDF PAGE 287 =====
286
Taurine is a β-aminosulfonic acid (2-aminoethanesul-fonic acid), an essential
dietary nutrient for cats but dispensable for dogs fed adequate quantities of sulfur-
containing amino acids. Taurine is one of the most abundant free amino acids in
mammals, being particularly high in brain, heart, and skeletal muscle. Peak
concentrations of taurine occur in the total body of newborns and in neonatal brain
and gradually decrease by 75 percent as cats mature, but 10 mmol taurine·kg–1 is
maintained in several tissues in adult cats (Sturman, 1988). Highest concentrations
occur in the olfactory bulb and optic nerve. Quantitatively, the major reaction of
taurine is its conjugation with bile acids in the liver, but it is also involved in
conjugation with a number of compounds to increase their hydrophilic properties for
excretion (e.g.; xenobiotics [James et al., 1971; Emudianughe et al., 1983] and
vitamin A [Skare et al., 1982]). Taurine is present in a variety of other compounds
such as quinaldylglycyltaurine (Kaihara and Price, 1961), guanidotaurine (Thoai and
Robin, 1954; Schram and Crokaert, 1957), and γ-Lglutamyltaurine (Furka et al.,
1980) in which its functions are poorly understood. Since taurine does not contain a
carboxyl group and is a β-amino acid, it is not found in proteins and is made in most
species from cysteine. The synthesis of taurine appears to be severely limiting for
strict carnivores, but not for most herbivores or omnivores (Chesney, 1985). Taurine
is found abundantly in many fish, birds, and small rodents and at lower
concentrations in larger species such as bovines, despite first being isolated from ox
(Bos taurus) bile (Demarcay, 1838). It is present in high concentrations in algae
(Reynoso and De Gamboa, 1982), but absent or present only in trace quantities in
bacteria and higher plants. Thus, strict vegetarian diets are commonly deficient in
taurine. However, crystalline taurine is readily available for supplementing these
diets. Taurine deficiency causes a multitude of metabolic aberrations and clinical
signs. Taurine is involved in fetal development, growth, reproduction,
neuromodulation, sight, hearing, heart function, osmoregulation, fat emulsification,
neutrophil function, immune response, antioxidation, and bile acid and xenobiotic
conjugation and acts as an anticonvulsant (Huxtable, 1992).
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
The most common clinical sign of taurine deficiency in dogs has been dilated
cardiomyopathy (DCM) (Gavaghan and Kittleson, 1997; Pion et al., 1998;
Sanderson et al., 2001; Fascetti et al., 2003). However, it has been reported that some
dogs with low plasma taurine also have bilaterally symmetrical hyperreflective
retinal lesions, which is similar to classic feline central retinal degeneration (FCRD)
(Pion et al., 1998), and poor reproduction has been reported anecdotally in
Newfoundlands that had low plasma and whole-blood taurine concentrations
(Backus et al., 2003). The occurrence of central retinal lesions together with DCM in


===== PDF PAGE 288 =====
287
dogs seems to be the exception. Whether this represents a species difference or a
relative infrequency of retinal examination in dogs is unknown. The incidence of
retinal lesions might be higher if the taurine deficiency were more severe. Most dogs
with low plasma taurine concentration were large breed dogs fed a diet based on
lamb and rice (Backus et al., 2003; Fascetti et al., 2003). Rice bran increases the
requirement for taurine in cats (Stratton-Phelps et al., 2002), apparently by binding
taurocholic acid and carrying it out in feces or by supporting a bacterial flora that
cleaves taurocholic acid and metabolizes free taurine. Since some preparations of
lamb meal have very low bioavailabilities of sulfur amino acids (Johnson et al.,
1998), a combination of factors could induce taurine deficiency in dogs. Dietary
taurine is essential for the fox (Moise et al., 1991), and there are breed differences in
dogs susceptibility to DCM and probably also to taurine deficiency (Kramer et al.,
1995; Kittleson et al., 1997; Pion et al., 1998; Freeman et al., 2001; Sleeper et al.,
2002); however, the roles of genetics, environmental factors, and nutrition have not
been fully clarified.
Requirements and Allowances
No reports could be found of dose-response experiments with taurine for dogs fed
diets that cause taurine deficiency. Normal dogs make ample taurine from dietary
sulfur amino acids via cysteine dioxygenase and cysteinesulfinic acid decarboxylase
by conversion to hypotaurine then oxidation to taurine. Thus, dogs fed commercial
(Kramer et al., 1995) or purified amino acid diets (Delaney et al., 2001) have normal
plasma taurine even if there is no taurine in the diet, and dogs fed these types of diets
show no signs of taurine deficiency throughout life. Thus, the MR for taurine for
dogs fed a normal diet is 0. Eutaurine status, however, is dependent on an adequate
supply of dietary sulfur amino acids; so, with low-protein (Sanderson et al., 2001),
low-sulfur amino acid diets or if sulfur amino acids are poorly available (Backus et
al., 2003), dogs can become deficient in taurine and exhibit the primary clinical signs
of dilated cardiomyopathy (Gavaghan and Kittleson, 1997; Pion et al., 1998;
Sanderson et al., 2001; Fascetti et al., 2003), poor reproduction (Backus et al., 2003),
and retinal degeneration (Pion et al., 1998). Daily supplements of methionine,
without changing the diet, results in an increase in plasma taurine concentration
(Backus et al., 2003). It is common for commercial companies that sell low-protein
diets to add about 1,000 mg taurine·kg–1 diet (DM), which appears to maintain body
taurine pools; so, this value is suggested for the AI for diets low in protein or known
to be low in sulfur amino acids.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
No reports could be found on acute or chronic toxicity related to feeding large
quantities of free taurine to dogs, so no SUL can be established.


===== PDF PAGE 289 =====
288
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Taurine deficiency in cats results in FCRD and blindness; DCM and heart failure;
inadequate immune response; poor neonatal growth; reduced auditory brain stem
evoked potentials resulting in deafness; poor reproduction resulting in a low number
of fetuses, resorptions, abortions, decreased birth weight, and low survival rate of
kittens; and congenital defects including hydrocephalus and anencephaly.
Hayes et al. (1975a) were the first to report that FCRD was caused by taurine
deficiency in cats fed purified diets that contained no taurine. For some time before
this report, FCRD had been observed in cats, both clinically (Rubin, 1963; Bellhorn
et al., 1974) and in laboratory cats fed casein as the sole dietary protein source
(Scott, 1964; Morris, 1965; Rabin et al., 1973). FCRD was also reported in cats fed
dog food (Aguirre, 1978). A taurine-free diet fed to cats will produce FCRD with a
slight reduction in cone and rod electroretinogram (ERG) a-wave and b-wave
amplitudes and delays in the temporal aspects of the cone system b-wave (Hayes et
al., 1975b) in as little as 6 weeks. As early as 4 months, after initiation of a taurine-
deficient diet, bilateral hyperreflective spots appear in the outer segment of the area
centralis in the retina (Anderson et al., 1979b). As the lesions progress, they appear
in the outer nuclear layer and outer plexiform layer and are most severe in the area
centralis, extending to the periphery. This results in degeneration of that area, which
appears as large ellipsoidal lesions, progressing to complete degeneration of the
photoreceptor cells, eventually spreading as a generalized atrophy to the entire retina
and resulting in blindness. More recently, Leon et al. (1995) showed that in advanced
cases of FCRD, regional lesions extended circumferentially to form a peripheral
annular band-like arrangement around the retinal extremity, with the circumferential
annulus being confluent with both temporal and nasal extremes of the horizontal
band-shaped lesion. They reported sclerad displacement of photoreceptor cells into
the subretinal space as a common feature.
Pion et al. (1987) was the first to report the association of DCM with taurine
deficiency. Dilated cardiomyopathy in cats is characterized by clinical signs rather
common for various kinds of heart diseases (Pion, 1989; Pion et al., 1989) such as
dehydration, lethargy, and hypothermia, which are most often overlooked by cat
owners before an apparent sudden onset of severe dyspnea. Cats with DCM have
congestive heart failure, which may be associated with abnormal cardiac sounds or
rhythm. Cats with DCM have enlarged hearts with thin walls that weaken the
contractibility and thereby lead to inadequate cardiac output, resulting in congestion
or edema. Echocardiographs reveal increased end-systolic and diastolic dimensions,
especially of the left ventricle, with a marked decrease in shortening fraction (Pion et
al., 1987). The right atrium may also appear enlarged. Since there are no specific
histopathological lesions associated with DCM it is thought that the primary problem
is biochemical, not structural. The primary biochemical defect has been elusive, but


===== PDF PAGE 290 =====
289
is thought to be concerned with membranes and calcium channels that may be
involved in the energetics of cardiocytes. Not all cats that have FCRD have DCM,
nor do all cats that have DCM have FCRD; nevertheless, many do have both defects.
Sturman and coworkers have reported many taurine-deficiency-related problems
in reproduction of queens (Imaki et al., 1986; Sturman et al., 1986; Sturman, 1988;
Sturman and Messing, 1991, 1992; Sturman and Lu, 1997). Overall reproduction is
poor in taurine-depleted queens, but no reports are available indicating any problem
with fertility in taurine-depleted male cats. Both male and female taurine-depleted
cats have normal food intake. Taurine-depleted queens are reported to have greater
than normal resorptions, abortions, and stillborns; fewer kittens born alive; lower
kitten birth weights; lower growth rates; abnormal hind leg development and peculiar
gait; greater mortality of kittens born alive; thoracic kyphosis; and neurological
defects including a greater number of congenital defects such as hydrocephalus and
anencephaly (Sturman et al., 1986, 1887). Taurine-deficient queens have lower
taurine concentrations in their milk, but the rest of the milk composition appears
normal (Sturman et al., 1985, 1986). Dieter et al. (1993) confirmed these effects on
reproduction and also reported normal estrus and ovulation in taurine-deficient
queens; so, they concluded that the defect in taurine-deficient queens is
postovulatory and occurs within the first 10 days after implantation.
Other clinical signs have been reported but are more subtle, such as neurological
defects (Sturman et al., 1986, 1987) including hearing deficits (Vallecalle-Sandoval
et al., 1991, 1993; Davies et al., 1994), osmoregulatory defects (Trachtman et al.,
1988), and malfunction of neutrophils (Marcinkiewicz et al., 2000) and other
immunological functions (Schuller-Levis et al., 1990). Thus, it can be seen that
taurine deficiency has the potential, either directly or indirectly, to adversely affect
nearly every system in the body.
Requirements and Allowances
Since taurine depletion that results in clinical signs usually occurs over months to
years, depending on the extent of deficiency, few dose-response experiments have
been carried out to determine the requirement (Burger and Barnett, 1982; Sturman
and Messing, 1991; Morris and Rogers, 1992), and these were done using purified
diets, with primarily casein as the dietary protein. Indeed, for many years, Sturman
(1993) gave cats diets containing 500 mg taurine·kg–1 diet as their control diet
without observing any clinical signs of taurine deficiency. However, they reported a
slight improvement in reproduction with higher levels of taurine (Sturman and
Messing, 1992). Using purified diets in a 17-month experiment, Morris and Rogers
(1992), found that 375 mg·kg–1 diet (containing 4.7 ME·kg–1 diet) prevented
abnormal ERG values that occurred when 250 mg taurine·kg–1 diet was fed. From
this work, which established normal eye function during growth and maintenance
and normal gestation and lactation for cats fed purified diets containing 350-400 g


===== PDF PAGE 291 =====
290
CP·kg–1 diet (amino acid diets, or one-half from casein and one-half from soybean
protein), the MRs for growth, maintenance, gestation, and lactation are 320, 320,
425, and 425 mg taurine·kg–1 diet, respectively, containing 4.0 kcal ME·kg–1 diet.
Although these MR values are consistent with the 1986 NRC report and continue
to be appropriate for purified diets containing highly digestible proteins (Backus et
al., 1998), the finding of Pion et al. (1987) in which cats fed commercial canned
products containing 1,400-1,800 mg free taurine·kg–1 diet exhibited DCM clearly
shows that diet composition has a dramatic effect on dietary taurine need. A
decadeof work has resulted in a metabolic explanation (Hickman et al., 1990,
1992a,b,c; Kim et al., 1995, 1996a,b; Backus et al., 1998). First, certain fibers
(Gallaher and Schneeman, 1986; Anatharaman-Barr et al., 1994; Stratton-Phelps et
al., 2002) and peptides (Sugano et al., 1990) bind taurocholic acid and carry it out
with feces, which is similar to the effects of cholestyramine (Morris and Rogers,
1994), preventing enterohepatic reutilization of taurocholic acid. Bile acids are
obligatorily conjugated to taurine in the cat (Rabin et al., 1976; Rentschler et al.,
1986; Hickman et al., 1992a). Certain fibers and/or undigestible protein (Morris et
al., 1995) may result in bacterial overgrowth in the ileum by microbes containing
cholylhydrolase and cause cleavage of taurocholic acid to taurine and cholic acid,
with subsequent oxidation of taurine by microbes, thus preventing its reutilization
(Hickman et al., 1990, 1992a,b,c; Backus et al., 1994; Kim et al., 1996b). This
mechanism also appears to involve indigestible peptides and increasing
cholecystokinin (CCK) (Backus et al., 1995), which in turn increases bile secretion,
resulting in more taurocholic acid being available in the intestine for cleavage by
bacterial cholylhydrolase and leads to oxidation of taurine, making it unavailable for
enterohepatic reutilization of bile acids. Since cats obligatorily conjugate bile acids
with taurine when taurine deficient, a high percentage of free cholic acid is found in
bile (Rentschler et al., 1986; Hickman et al., 1992a).
There is no single dietary requirement for taurine; the need depends on diet
composition, primarily the type, quantity, and digestibility of protein and fiber. As
indicated above, the MR for all stages of life for purified diets containing little fiber
and highly digestible protein is about 425 mg·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·kg–1
diet. Because of the variability of fiber type and concentrations used and of protein
concentrations and digestibility, no MR can be determined for commercial diets.
However, the AI can be established, based on results after feeding a variety of
commercial dry and canned diets and examining either the lack of clinical signs of
taurine deficiency or, more commonly, whether a particular diet supports adequate
plasma and whole-blood taurine concentrations.
Numerous reports show a decrease in the concentration of taurine in plasma
(Schmidt et al., 1976; Anderson et al., 1979b; Barnett and Burger, 1980; O’Donnell
et al., 1981; Sturman et al., 1986), whole blood (Morris et al., 1990; Douglass et al.,
1991; Trautwein and Hayes, 1991; Messing and Sturman, 1993; Pacioretty et al.,
2001), and skeletal muscle (Sturman et al., 1986; Pacioretty et al., 2001) when


===== PDF PAGE 292 =====
291
taurine is low or absent from the diet of cats. Cats fed taurine-free purified diets for
3-6 months or longer commonly have plasma taurine concentration of 1-5 nmol·mL–
1 (Schmidt et al., 1976; Anderson et al., 1979b; Barnett and Burger, 1980; O’Donnell
et al., 1981; Sturman et al., 1986), which is the most rapid body pool to be depleted,
except possibly the liver, which uses taurine for conjugation to bile acids. Careful
preparation of plasma is required because taurine is particularly high in platelets,
granulocytes, and lymphocytes (Laidlaw et al., 1987); thus, partial clotting or
contamination of the plasma with white cells can cause false high taurine values for
plasma. Using a constant preparation procedure for clotting, Pacioretty et al. (2001)
found that normal serum taurine concentration was about twice that of plasma and
about half that of whole blood. These ratios increased somewhat as body taurine
pools were depleted. Use of serum for determining taurine status is not
recommended because the quantity of taurine in serum varies with the procedure and
the time allotted for coagulation and retraction of the clot. Sturman and coworkers
(1993) and Pacioretty et al. (2001) demonstrated that various body pools are depleted
at different rates. Plasma taurine is depleted most rapidly, followed by whole blood,
muscle, and finally brain and other nervous tissue. Although taurine concentrations
are highest in certain parts of the brain, and heart muscle has a higher concentration
than skeletal muscle, it is not normally feasible to obtain heart or neural tissue for
clinical evaluation, and muscle biopsies are not routinely obtained. Therefore,
plasma and whole-blood taurine concentrations have become the standard variables
for use in assessing the taurine status of cats. Whole-blood concentration is
preferred, since it provides an indication of longer-term taurine status and contains
white cells so that clotting is not a problem (except in subsampling). Eutaurine status
in which sufficient taurine is present to provide substantial taurine in the urine
supports plasma and whole-blood concentrations of about 100 and 500 nmol·mL–1,
respectively (Pacioretty et al., 2001). Minimal safe plasma and whole-blood
concentrations (AI) are not unequivocally defined, but 40 and 200 nmol·mL–1,
respectively, have been used without any reported problems as minimal safe levels
for complying with Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO, 2002)
protocols. These concentrations have been used as guidelines by clinicians for a low
risk of taurine deficiency causing DCM in cats. It is known that 25 nmol·mL–1 in
plasma is clearly inadequate (Pion et al., 1987). The use of whole blood for
determining taurine status is also recommended because of the effect of time of
feeding and food deprivation on plasma taurine. Pion et al. (1991) found that plasma
taurine of meal-fed cats fed a purified diet or a dry or canned commercial cat food
increased postprandially and then decreased with time of food deprivation up to 71
hours. From these results, it is clear that, if plasma is used to evaluate taurine status,
cats should be fed and not food-deprived for a prolonged period. This same group
reported that at no time was there any significant difference in whole-blood taurine
concentrations among cats fed various diets. This supports the use of whole-blood
taurine concentration in determining the taurine status of an animal.


===== PDF PAGE 293 =====
292
Using clinical data and plasma and whole-blood taurine concentrations as
indicated above for assessing commercial, dry, expanded diets, the AI suggested is
1,000 mg taurine·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·kg–1 (Morris et al., 1990; Earle
and Smith, 1991; Morris and Rogers, 1992; Markwell and Earle, 1995) and for
commercial, canned diets, 1,700 mg taurine·kg–1 diet containing 4.0 kcal ME·kg–1
(dry matter) (Morris et al., 1990; Earle and Smith, 1991; Morris and Rogers, 1992;
Markwell and Earle, 1995).
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption
There are no reports of acute or chronic toxicity related to feeding large quantities
of free taurine to cats. Sturman and Messing (1992) fed weanling kittens 10 g
taurine·kg–1 diet containing about 4.5 kcal ME·g–1 for up to 3 years and found no
adverse effects; thus, the SUL for kittens is >8.9 g·kg–1 diet containing 4 kcal ME·g–
1.
AMINO ACID IMBALANCES AND ANTAGONISMS
There are few reports of studies on amino acid imbalances and antagonisms in
dogs and cats. Omnivores are most sensitive to disproportional quantities of dietary
amino acids when fed diets limiting in protein and all of the essential amino acids
(Harper et al., 1970). Omnivores and herbivores adapt to high-protein diets by
decreasing their food intake and weight gain for 1-5 days (depending on the levels of
dietary protein used) and then, after amino acid and nitrogen homeostasis is restored,
by up-regulating amino acid and nitrogen catabolic enzymes, normal growth resumes
(Harper, 1965; Schimke, 1962; Anderson et al., 1968, 1969). It is clear that cats are
much less sensitive to disproportional quantities of dietary amino acids than are rats,
chicks, and other herbivores and omnivores (Rogers et al., 1987; Strieker, 1991),
probably because the quantity of protein that meets the MR usually carries with it a
high percentage of the MR of essential amino acids. Although the metabolic basis of
the high crude protein requirement for maintenance is controversial (Rogers and
Morris, 2002; Russell et al., 2002), it has been shown consistently that cats will not
maintain nitrogen balance at the same low dietary crude protein concentrations that
occur for most herbivores and omnivores (Hendriks et al., 1997). It is known that
cats do not up- or down-regulate the nitrogen catabolic enzymes to nearly the same
extent as omnivores and herbivores (Rogers et al., 1977), so it appears that cats are
always adapted to handle a medium to high level of dietary amino acids. This
minimizes the adverse effects of disproportional quantities of amino acids.
Only a very minor growth depression occurred in kittens when crude protein was
increased in a diet limiting in threonine (Hammer et al., 1996a), whereas Strieker
(1991) showed that, even if methionine was limiting, increasing dietary crude protein
slightly increased weight gain. Rogers et al. (1987) reported a survey of the effects of


===== PDF PAGE 294 =====
293
increasing crude protein in diets in which an essential amino acid was limited to
about 80-90 percent of the requirement for weight gain of kittens. They showed
either that there was no effect or that weight gain was improved by the addition of an
amino acid mixture to the diet that lacked the limiting amino acid. Although
decreasing the percentage of each amino acid even further may have resulted in an
amino acid imbalance, it is clear that cats are less sensitive to such imbalances than
omnivores and herbivores. Cats are also insensitive to arginine-lysine antagonisms
(Anderson et al., 1979a) and much less sensitive to leucine-isoleucine and -valine
antagonism (Hargrove et al., 1988, 1994). Thus, cats transitorily reduced their food
intake and growth when excess leucine was added to the diet only if isoleucine was
already limiting (Hargrove et al., 1988), and even then, cats would select the high-
leucine diet over the more balanced diet (Hargrove et al., 1994). Strieker (1991)
found that when methionine was severely limiting (1.6 g·kg–1 diet each of
methionine and cysteine) although a dietary supplementation of 13.4 g cystine·kg–1
did not lead to a further decrease in food intake and growth, it did cause severe
pyrodermatitis at the commisures of the mouth and necrolytic dermatosis on the pads
of the feet, all of which were rapidly corrected when more methionine was added to
the diet.
Metabolic adaptation of amino acid metabolism in dogs indicates that they are
intermediate between rats and cats (i.e., there is some up- and down-regulation of
amino acid and nitrogen catabolic enzymes but not to the same extent as found in
rats; Morris et al., 2002). After adaptation, dogs do not maintain plasma amino acids
within as narrow a range (Torres and Rogers, 2002) as rats (Anderson et al., 1969).
Over the short term, dogs can maintain nitrogen balance at nearly as low a crude
protein concentration as rats (Melnick and Cowgill, 1937; Kade et al., 1948; Arnold
and Schad, 1954), and indeed, in sporadic reports during the past 50 years, results
indicate that dogs show amino acid imbalances and antagonisms more similar to
those of rats. Gessert and Phillips (1956) reported that when 4 g lysine·kg–1 was
added to a low-protein basal diet, apparently limiting in sulfur amino acids, weight
gain was depressed 28 percent and was restored by the further addition of 3 g DL-
methionine·kg–1 diet. In a second experiment with a different basal diet apparently
limiting in lysine, they showed that 1.5 g methionine·kg–1 diet depressed weight gain
37 percent, which was restored by the addition of 1.3 g lysine·kg–1 diet. They
concluded that the depressions in weight gain were the result of amino acid
imbalances that fit the general definition of imbalance as defined by Harper et al.
(1970). Other reports confirm that amino acid imbalances occur in growing dogs
(Bressani, 1963). A lysine-arginine antagonism has been reported in growing dogs
by Czarnecki et al. (1985) (i.e., 40 g lysine·kg–1 added to a basal diet somewhat
limiting in arginine caused a decrease in weight gain that was largely corrected by
the addition of 4 g arginine·kg–1 diet). This same group (Hirakawa and Baker, 1985)
reported that in puppies the addition of 2.2 g cystine·kg–1 to a diet severely limiting


===== PDF PAGE 295 =====
294
in methionine (1.1 g·kg–1 diet) caused a decrease in weight gain and necrotic skin
lesions on the pads of the front feet, which were corrected rapidly when methionine
was added to the diet. There have been reports that leucine induces niacin de-
ficiency in dogs fed diets marginal in tryptophan and niacin (Belavady et al.,
1967), but these results could not be reproduced in dogs (Manson and Carpenter,
1978) or rats (Nakagawa and Sasaki, 1977). Thus, in general, dogs appear to be more
sensitive to disproportionalities among dietary amino acids than cats, especially
when fed low-protein diets.
REFERENCES
Abderhalden, E. 1912. Futterungsversuche mit vollstandig abgebauten
Nahurungsstoffen. Losung des Problems der kunstlichen Darstellung der
Nahrungsstoffe. Ztschr. Physiol. Chem 77:22-58.
Aguirre, G. D. 1978. Retinal degeneration associated with the feeding of dog foods
to cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 172:791-796.
Ahlstrom, O., and A. Skrede. 1998. Comparative nutrient digestibility in dogs,
bluefoxes, mink and rats. J. Nutr. 128:2676S-2677S.
Allison, J. B. 1956. Supplementation with methionine. Pp. 69-85 in Some Aspects of
Amino Acid Supplementation, W. H. Cole, ed. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers
University Press.
Allison, J. B., J. A. Anderson, and R. D. Seeley. 1947. Some effects of methionine
on the utilization of nitrogen in the adult dog. J. Nutr. 33:361-370.
Allison, J. B., S. A. Miller, J. R. McCoy, and M. K. Brush. 1956. Studies on the
nutrition of the cat. North Am. Vet. 37:38-43.
Anantharaman-Barr, G., O. Ballevre, P. Gicquello, I. Bracco-Hammer, J. Vuichoud,
F. Montigon, and E. Fern. 1994. Fecal bile acid excretion and taurine status in cats
fed canned and dry diets. J. Nutr. 124:2546S-2551S.
Anderson, H. L., N. J. Benevenga, and A. E. Harper. 1968. Associations among food
and protein intake, serine dehydratase, and plasma amino acids. Am. J. Physiol.
214:1008-1013.
Anderson, H. L., N. J. Benevenga, and A. E. Harper. 1969. Effect of prior high
protein intake, serine dehydratase activity and plasma amino acids of rats fed
amino acid-imbalanced diets. J. Nutr. 97:463-474.
Anderson, P. A., D. H. Baker, and J. E. Corbin. 1979a. Lysine and arginine
requirements of the domestic cat. J. Nutr. 109:1368-1372.
Anderson, P. A., D. H. Baker, J. E. Corbin, and L. C. Lloyd. 1979b. Biochemical
lesions associated with taurine deficiency in the cat. J. Anim. Sci 49:1227-1234.
Anderson, P. A., D. H. Baker, P. A. Sherry, and J. E. Corbin. 1979c. Choline-
methionine interrelationship in feline nutrition. J. Anim. Sci. 49:522-527.
Anderson, P. A., D. H. Baker, P. A. Sherry, and J. E. Corbin. 1980a. Nitrogen
requirement of the kitten. Am. J. Vet. Res. 41:1646-1649.


===== PDF PAGE 296 =====
295
Anderson, P. A., D. H. Baker, P. A. Sherry, and J. E. Corbin. 1980b. Histidine,
phenylalanine-tyrosine and tryptophan requirements for growth of the young
kitten. J. Anim. Sci. 50:479-483.
Anderson, P. A., D. H. Baker, P. A. Sherry, R. G. Teeter, and J. E. Corbin. 1980c.
Threonine, isoleucine, valine, and leucine requirements of the young kitten. J.
Anim. Sci. 50:266-271.
Anderson, P. J. B., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 2002. Cats require more dietary
phenylalanine or tyrosine for melanin deposition in hair than for maximal growth.
J. Nutr. 132:2037-2042.
Anthony, J. C., C. H. Lang, S. J. Crozier, T. G. Anthony, D. A. MacLean, S. R.
Kimball, and L. S. Jefferson. 2002. Contribution of insulin to the translational
control of protein synthesis in skeletal muscle by leucine. Am. J. Physiol. Endo.
Metab. 282:E1092-E1101.
Arnold, A., and J. S. Schad. 1954. Nitrogen balance studies with dogs on casein or
methionine-supplemented casein. J. Nutr. 53:265-273.
Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). 2002. Official
Publication. Harrisburg, PA.
Backus, R. C., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1994. Microbial degradation of
taurine in fecal cultures from cats given commercial and purified diets. J. Nutr.
124:2540S-2545S.
Backus, R. C., Q. R. Rogers, G. L. Rosenquist, J. Calam, and J. G. Morris. 1995.
Diets causing taurine depletion in cats substantially elevate postprandial plasma
cholecystokinin concentration. J. Nutr. 125:2650-2657.
Backus, R. C., J. G. Morris, S. W. Kim, J. A. O’Donnell, M. A. Hickman, C. A. Kirk,
J. A. Cooke, and Q. R. Rogers. 1998. Dietary taurine needs of cats vary with
dietary protein quality and concentration. J. Vet. Clin. Nutr. 5:18-22.
Backus, R. C., G. L. Cohen, P. D. Pion, D. L. Good, Q. R. Rogers, and A. J. Fascetti.
2003. Taurine deficiency among Newfoundland dogs maintained on commercial
diets is corrected by dietary change or methionine supplementation. J. Am. Med.
Assoc. 223:1130-1136.
Bai, S. C., Q. R. Rogers, D. L. Wong, D. A. Sampson, and J. G. Morris. 1998.
Vitamin B-6 deficiency and level of dietary protein affect hepatic tyrosine
aminotransferase activity in cats. J. Nutr. 128:1995-2000.
Balage, M., S. Sinaud, M. Prod’Homme, D. Dardevet, T. C. Vary, S. R. Kimball, L.
S. Jefferson, and J. Grizard. 2001. Amino acids and insulin are both required to
regulate assembly of the eIF4E·eIF4G complex in rat skeletal muscle. Am. J.
Physiol. Endo. Metab. 281:E565-E574.
Barnett, K. C., and I. H. Burger. 1980. Taurine deficiency retinopathy in the cat. J.
Sm. Anim. Pract. 21:521-534.
Bednar, G. E., S. M. Murray, A. R. Patil, E. A. Flickinger, N. R. Merchen, and G. C.
Fahey, Jr. 2000. Selected animal and plant protein sources affect nutrient
digestibility and fecal characteristics of ileally cannulated dogs. Arch. Anim. Nutr.
53:127-140.


===== PDF PAGE 297 =====
296
Belavady, G., T. V. Madhavan, and C. Gopalan. 1967. Production of nicotinic acid
deficiency (black tongue) in pups fed diets supplemented with leucine.
Gastroenter. 53:749-753.
Bellhorn, R. W., G. D. Aguirre, and M. Bellhorn. 1974. Feline central retinal
degeneration. Invest. Ophthalmol. 13:608-616.
Bidder, F., and C. Schmidt. 1852. Die Verdauungssafte un der Stoffwechsel. Mitau.
Quoted by McCollum, E. V., 1957, A History of Nutrition, p. 104. Boston, Mass.:
Houghton Mifflin.
Biourge, V., and R. Sergheraert. 2002. Hair pigmentation can be affected by diet in
dogs. Proc. Comp. Nutr. Soc. Number 4, Kirk-Baer, C.L., pp. 103-104.
Biourge, V., J. M. Groff, C. Fisher, D. Bee, J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers 1994.
Nitrogen balance, plasma free amino acid concentrations and urinary orotic acid
excretion during long-term fasting in cats. J. Nutr. 124:1094-1103.
Biourge, V. C., P. Pierson, and F. Metz. 2002. Methionine toxicosis in a group of 7
hunting dogs. Proc. Am. Acad. Vet. Nutr. Res Symp. Dallas, TX, May 29, pp. 9-
10.
Blaza, S. E., I. H. Burger, D. W. Holme, and P. T. Kendall. 1982. Sulfur-containing
amino acid requirements of growing dogs. J. Nutr. 112: 2033-2042.
Bressani, R. 1963. Effect of amino acid imbalance on nitrogen retention II.
Interrelationships between methionine, valine, isoleucine and threonine as
supplements to corn protein for dogs. J. Nutr. 79:389-394.
Burger, I. H., and K. C. Barnett. 1982. The taurine requirement of the adult cat. J.
Sm. Anim. Pract. 23:533-537.
Burger, I. H., and P. M. Smith. 1987. Amino acid requirements of adult cats Pp.49-51
in Nutrition, Malnutrition and Dietetics in the Dog and Cat. Proceedings of an
international symposium held in Hanover, September 3-4, English edition, A. T.
B. Edney, ed. British Veterinary Association.
Burger, I. H., S. E. Blaza, P. T. Kendall, and P. M. Smith. 1984. The protein
requirement of adult cats for maintenance. Fel. Pract. 14:8-14.
Burns, R. A., and J. A. Milner. 1981. Sulfur amino acid requirements of immature
Beagle dogs. J. Nutr. 111:2117-2124.
Burns, R. A., and J. A. Milner. 1982. Threonine, tryptophan and histidine
requirements of immature Beagle dogs. J. Nutr. 112:447-452.
Burns, R. A., J. A. Milner, and J. E. Corbin. 1981. Arginine: An indispensable amino
acid for mature dogs. J. Nutr. 111:1020-1024.
Burns, R. A., M. H. LeFaivre, and J. A. Milner. 1982. Effects of dietary protein
quantity and quality on the growth of dogs and rats. J. Nutr. 112:1843-1853.
Burns, R. A., R. L. Garton, and J. A. Milner. 1984. Leucine, isoleucine and valine
requirements of immature Beagle dogs. J. Nutr. 114:204-209.
Case, L. P., and G. L. Czarnecki-Maulden. 1990. Protein requirements of growing
pups fed practical dry-type diets containing mixed-protein sources. Am. J. Vet.
Res. 51:808-812.


===== PDF PAGE 298 =====
297
Chesney, R. W. 1985. Taurine: Its biological role and clinical implications. Adv.
Pediatr. 32:1-42.
Chittenden, R. H. 1904. The effect of low proteid diet on high proteid animals. Pp.
229-265 in The Nutrition of Man, R. H. Chittenden, ed. New York: Frederick A.
Stokes.
Cho, E. S., E. W. Andersen, L. J. Filer, and L. D. Stegink. 1980. D-Methionine
utilization in young miniature pigs, adult rabbits and adult dogs. J. Parent. Enteral
Nutr. 4:544-547.
Christian, J. S., and R. V. Rege. 1996. Methionine, but not taurine, protects against
formation of canine pigment gallstones. J. Surg. Res. 61:275-281.
Cianciaruso, B., M. R. Jones, and J. D. Kopple. 1981. Histidine, an essential amino
acid for adult dogs. J. Nutr. 111:1074-1084.
Clapper, G. M., C. M. Grieshop, N. R. Merchen, J. C. Russett, J. L. Brent, Jr., and G.
C. Fahey, Jr. 2001. Ileal and total tract nutrient digestibilities and fecal
characteristics of dogs as affected by soybean protein inclusion in dry, extruded
diets. J. Anim. Sci. 79:1523-1532.
Cook, N. E., E. Kane, Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1985. Self-selection of dietary
casein and soy-protein by the cat. Physiol. Behav. 34:583-594.
Costello, M. J., J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1980. Effect of dietary arginine level
on urinary orotate and citrate excretion in growing kittens. J. Nutr. 110:1204-1208.
Czarnecki, G. L., and D. H. Baker. 1982. Utilization of D- and L-tryptophan by the
growing dog. J. Anim. Sci. 55:1405-1410.
Czarnecki, G. L., and D. H. Baker. 1984. Urea cycle function in the dog with
emphasis on the role of arginine. J. Nutr. 114:581-590.
Czarnecki, G. L., D. A. Hirakawa, and D. H. Baker. 1985. Antagonism of arginine by
excess dietary lysine in the growing dog. J. Nutr. 1115:743-752.
Da Silva, A. C. 1950a. The domestic cat as a laboratory animal for experimental
nutrition Studies. I. General considerations, care and feeding of animals. Acta
Physiol. Latinoamericana 1:20-25.
Da Silva, A. C. 1950b. The domestic cat as a laboratory animal for experimental
nutrition Studies. II. Comparative growth rate and hematology on stock and
purified rations. Acta Physiol. Latinoamericana 1:26-32.
Da Silva, A. C., M. F. Guerios, and S. R. Monsao. 1959. The domestic cat as a
laboratory animal for experimental nutrition studies. VI. Choline deficiency. J.
Nutr. 67:537-547.
Davies, W. E., N. J. Harding, I. S. Kay, and P. C. Hopkins. 1994. The role of taurine
in mammalian hearing. In Taurine in Health and Disease, R. Huxtable and J. D.
Michalk, eds. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 359:393-398.
Dawes, L. G., D. L. Nahrwold, S. I. Roth, and R. V. Rege. 1989. Reversal of pigment
gallstone disease in a canine model. Arch. Surg. 124:463-466.
Deady, J. E., B. Anderson, J. A. O’Donnell III, J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers.
1981a. Effects of level of dietary glutamic acid and thiamin on food intake, weight


===== PDF PAGE 299 =====
298
gain, plasma amino acids and thiamin status of growing kittens. J. Nutr. 111:1568-
1579.
Deady, J. E., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1981b. Effect of high dietary glutamic
acid on the excretion of 35S-thiamin in kittens. J. Nutr. 111:1580-1585.
Delaney, S. J., A. S. Hill, R. C. Backus, G. L. Czarnecki-Maulden, and Q. R. Rogers.
2001. Dietary crude protein concentration does not affect the leucine requirement
of growing dogs. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 85:88-100.
Delaney, S. J., P. H. Kass, Q. R. Rogers, and A. J. Fascetti. 2003. Plasma and whole
blood taurine in normal dogs of varying size fed commercially prepared food. J.
Ani. Physiol. Ani. Nutr. 87: 236-244.
Demarcay, H. 1838. Uber die Natur der Galle. Ann. Pharmazie 27:270-291.
DeNapoli, J. S., N. H. Dodman, L. Shuster, W. M. Rand, and K. L. Gross. 2000.
Effect of dietary protein content and tryptophan supplementation on dominance
aggression, territorial aggression, and hyperactivity in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Assoc. 217:504-508.
Dickinson, E. D., and P. P. Scott. 1956. Nutrition of the cat. 2. Protein requirements
for growth of weanling kittens and young cats maintained on a mixed diet. Brit. J.
Nutr. 10:311-316.
Dieter, J. A., D. R. Stewart, M. A. Haggarty, G. H. Stabenfeldt, and B. L. Lasley.
1993. Pregnancy failure in cats associated with long-term dietary taurine
insufficiency. J. Reprod. Fert., Suppl. 47:457-463.
Douglass, G. M., E. B. Fern, and R. C. Brown. 1991. Feline plasma and whole blood
taurine levels as influenced by commercial dry and canned diets. J. Nutr.
121:S179-S180.
Earle, K. E., and P. M. Smith. 1991. The effect of dietary taurine content on plasma
taurine concentration of the cat. Br. J. Nutr. 66:227-235.
Earle, K. E., and P. M. Smith. 1994. The taurine requirement of the kitten fed canned
foods. J. Nutr. 124:2552S-2554S.
Elvehjem, E. A., R. J. Madden, F. M. Strong, and D. W. Woolley. 1937. Relation of
nicotinic acid and nicotinic acid amide to canine black tongue. J. Am. Chem Soc.
59:1767-1768.
Emudianughe, T. S., J. Caldwell, and R. L. Smith. 1983. The utilization of
exogenous taurine for the conjugation of xenobiotic acids in the ferret.
Xenobiotica 13:133-138.
Fascetti, A. J., F. R. Reed, Q. R. Rogers, and R. C. Backus. 2003. Taurine-deficiency
dilated cardiomyopathy in dogs. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 223:1137-1141.
Fau, D., J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1987a. Effects of high dietary methionine on
activities of selected enzymes in the liver of kittens (Felis domesticus). Comp.
Biochem. Physiol. B88:551-555.
Fau, D., K. A. Smalley, J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1987b. Effect of excess
dietary methionine on weight gain and plasma amino acids in kittens. J. Nutr.
117:1838-1843.
Flohe, L. 1988. Glutathione peroxidase. Basic Life Sci. 49:663-668.


===== PDF PAGE 300 =====
299
Freedland, R. A., and E. H. Avery. 1964. Studies on threonine and serine dehydrase.
J. Biol. Chem. 239:3357-3360.
Freeman, L. M., J. E. Rush, D. J. Brown, and P. Roudebush. 2001. Relationship
between circulating and dietary taurine concentrations in dogs with dilated
cardiomyopathy. Vet. Ther. 2:370-379.
Furka, A., F. Sebestyen, L. Feuer, A. Horvath, J. Hercsel, S. Ormai, and B. Banyai.
1980. Isolation of γ-L-glutamyl-taurine from the protein free aqueous extract of
bovine parathyroid powder. Acta Biochim. Biophys. Acad. Sci. Hung. 15:39-47.
Gallaher, D., and B. O. Schneeman. 1986. Intestinal interaction of bile acids,
phospholipids, dietary fibers and cholestyramine. Am. J. Physiol. 250:G420-G426.
Gavaghan, B., and M. D. Kittleson. 1997. Dilated cardiomyopathy in an American
Cocker Spaniel with taurine deficiency. Aust. Vet. J. 75:862-868.
Gessert, C. F., and P. H. Phillips. 1956a. Protein in the nutrition of the growing dog.
J. Nutr. 58:415-421.
Gessert, C. F., and P. H. Phillips. 1956b. Adverse effects of some amino acid
supplements in low-protein diets for growing dogs. J. Nutr 58:423-431.
Gietzen, D. W. 1993. Neural mechanisms in the responses to amino acid deficiency.
J. Nutr. 123:610-625.
Glaze, M. B., and G. L. Blanchard. 1983. Nutritional cataracts in a Samoyed litter. J.
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 19:951-954.
Greaves, J. P. 1965. Protein and calorie requirements of the feline. In Canine and
Feline Nutritional Requirements, O. Graham-Jones, ed., Oxford, UK: Pergamon
Press.
Greaves, J. P., and P. P. Scott. 1960. Nutrition of the cat: 3. Protein requirements for
nitrogen equilibrium in adult cats maintained on a mixed diet. Brit. J. Nutr 14:361-
369.
Ha, Y. H., J. A. Milner, and J. E. Corbin. 1978. Arginine requirements in immature
dogs. J. Nutr. 108:203-210.
Hammer, V. A., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1996a. Dietary crude protein
increases slightly the requirement for threonine in kittens. J. Nutr. 126:1496-1504.
Hammer, V. A., Q. R. Rogers, and R. A. Freedland. 1996b. Threonine is catabolized
by L-threonine 3-dehydrogenase and L-threonine dehydratase in hepatocytes from
domestic cats (Felis domestica). J. Nutr. 126:2218-2226.
Hannah, S. S., and D. P. Laflamme. 1996. Effect of dietary protein on nitrogen
balance and lean body mass in cats. Vet. Clin. Nutr. 3:30 (abs.).
Hannah, S. S., H. Son, R. D., Kealy, and S. Owens. 1995. Digestibility of diet in
small and large breed dogs. Vet. Clin. Nutr. 2:145 (abs.).
Hardy, A. J., J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1977. Valine requirement of the
growing kitten. J. Nutr. 107:1308-1312.
Hargrove, D. M., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1983. The tryptophan requirement
of the kitten. Brit. J. Nutr. 50:487-493.
Hargrove, D. M., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1984. Leucine and isoleucine
requirements of the kitten. Br. J. Nutr. 52:595-605.


===== PDF PAGE 301 =====
300
Hargrove, D. M., Q. R. Rogers, C. C. Calvert, and J. G. Morris. 1988. Effects of
dietary excesses of branched-chain amino acids on growth, food intake and plasma
amino acid concentrations of kittens. J. Nutr. 118:311-320.
Hargrove, D. M., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1994. Kittens choose a high leucine
diet even when isoleucine and valine are the limiting amino acids. J. Nutr.
124:689-693.
Harper, A. E. 1965. Effect of variations in protein intake on enzymes of amino acid
metabolism. Can. J. Biochem. 43:1589-1602.
Harper, A. E. 1968. Diet and plasma amino acids. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 21: 358-366.
Harper, A. E., N. J. Benevenga, and R. M. Wohlhueter. 1970. Effects of ingestion of
disproportionate amounts of amino acids. Physiol. Rev. 50:428-558.
Harper, E. J. 1996. The effect of fiber on nutrient availability in cats of different
ages. Vet. Clin. Nutr. 3:114 (abs.)
Harris, R. A., R. Kobayashi, T. Murakami, and Y. Shimomura. 2001. Regulation of
branched-chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase kinase expression in rat liver. J. Nutr.
131:841S-845S.
Hayes, K. C., R. E. Carey, and S. Y. Schmidt. 1975a. Retinal degeneration associated
with taurine deficiency in the cat. Science 188:949-951.
Hayes, K. C., A. R., Rabin, and E. L. Berson. 1975b. An ultrastructural study of
nutritionally induced and reversed retinal degeneration in cats. Am. J. Pathol.
78:505-524.
Hendriks, W. H., and M. Emmens. 1998. Apparent ileal nitrogen and amino acid
digestibility of a moist cat food. J. Nutr. 128: 2801S-2802S.
Hendriks, W. H., and K. Sritharan. 2002. Apparent ileal and fecal digestibility of
dietary protein is different in dogs. J. Nutr. 132:1692S-1694S.
Hendriks, W. H., P. J. Moughan, M. F. Tarttelin, and A. D. Woolhouse. 1995a.
Felinine: A urinary amino acid of Felidae. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 112B:581-
588.
Hendriks, W. H., M. F. Tarttelin, and P.J. Moughan. 1995b. Twenty-four hour feline
excretion patterns in entire and castrated cats. Physiol. Behav. 58:467-469.
Hendriks, W. H., P. J. Moughan, and M. F. Tarttelin. 1997. Urinary excretion of
endogenous nitrogen metabolites in adult domestic cats using a protein-free diet
and the regression technique. J. Nutr. 127:623-629.
Hendriks, W. H., S. M. Rutherfurd, and K. J. Rutherfurd. 2001. Importance of
sulfate, cysteine and methionine as precursors to felinine synthesis by domestic
cats (Felis catus). Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 129C:211-216.
Herwill, A. 1994. Effect of excess L-tyrosine and L-tryptophan added to a low
protein diet for growing kittens. M.S. thesis, University of California, Davis.
Hickman, A. M., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1990. Effect of processing on fate
of dietary [C14] taurine in cats. J. Nutr. 120:995-1000.
Hickman, A. M., M. L. Bruss, J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1992a. Dietary protein
source (soybean vs. casein) and taurine status affect kinetics of enterohepatic
circulation of taurocholic acid in cats. J. Nutr. 122:1019-1028.


===== PDF PAGE 302 =====
301
Hickman, M. A., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1992b. Taurine balance is different
in cats fed purified and commercial diets. J. Nutr. 122:553-559.
Hickman, M. A., J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1992c. Intestinal taurine and the
enterohepatic circulation of taurocholic acid in the cat. Pp. 45-54 in Taurine
Nutritional Value and Mechanisms of Action, J. B. Lombardini, S. W. Schaffer,
and J. Azuma, Eds., volume 315. New York: Plenum Press.
Hirakawa, D. A., and D. H. Baker. 1985. Sulfur amino acid nutrition of the growing
puppy: Determination of dietary requirements for methionine and cystine. Nutr.
Res. 5:631-642.
Hirakawa, D. A., and D. H. Baker. 1986. Lysine requirement of growing puppies fed
practical and purified diets. Nutr. Res. 6: 527-538.
Holt, L. E., S. E. Snyderman, P. M. Norton, E. Roitman, and J. Finch. 1963. The
plasma aminogram in kwashiorkor. Lancet Dec 28:1343-1348.
Hrupka, B. J., Y. M. Lin, D. W. Gietzen, and Q. R. Rogers. 1997. Small changes in
essential amino acid concentrations alter diet selection in amino acid-deficient
rats. J. Nutr. 127:777-784.
Hrupka, B. J., Y. Lin, D. W. Gietzen, and Q. R. Rogers. 1999. Lysine deficiency
alters diet selection without depressing food intake in rats. J. Nutr. 129:424-430.
Humbert, B., L. Martin, H. Dumon, D. Darmaun, and P. Nguyen. 2002. Dietary
protein level affects protein metabolism during the postabsorptive state in dogs. J.
Nutr. 132:1676S-1678S.
Huxtable, R. J. 1992. The physiological actions of taurine. Physiol. Rev. 72:101-163.
Ikeda, M., H. Tsuji, S. Nakamura, S. Ichiyama, Y. Nishizuka, and O. Hayaishi. 1965.
Studies on the biosynthesis of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. II. A role of
picolinic carboxylase in the biosynthesis of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
from tryptophan in mammals. J. Biol. Chem. 240:1395-1401.
Imaki, H., R. C. Moretz, H. M. Wisniewski, and J. A. Sturman. 1986. Feline
maternal taurine deficiency: Effects on retina and tapetum of the offspring. Dev.
Neurosci. 8:160-181.
Jackson, R. W., B. E. Sommer, and W. C. Rose. 1928. Experiments on the nutritive
properties of gelatin. J. Biol. Chem. 80:167-186.
James, M., R. L. Smith, and R. T. Williams. 1971. Conjugates of phenylacetic acid
with taurine and other amino acids in various species. Biochem. J. 124:15P-16P.
Jansen, G. R., M. A. Deuth, G. M. Ward, and D. E. Johnson. 1975. Protein quality
studies in growing kittens. Nutr. Rep. Internatl. 11:525-536.
Johnson, M. L., C. M. Parsons, G. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, and C. G. Aldrich.
1998. Effects of species raw material source, ash content, and processing
temperature on amino acid digestibility of animal by-product meals by
cecectomized roosters and ileally cannulated dogs. J. Anim. Sci. 76:1112-1122.
Kade, C. F., J. H. Phillips, and W. A. Phillips. 1948. The determination of the
minimum nitrogen requirement of the adult dog for maintenance of nitrogen
balance. J. Nutr. 36:109-121.


===== PDF PAGE 303 =====
302
Kaihara, M., and J. M. Price. 1961. Quinaldylglycyltaurine: A urinary metabolite of
quinaldic acid and kynurenic acid in the cat. J. Biol Chem. 236:508-511.
Kaplan, J. H., and H. C. Pitot. 1970. The regulation of intermediary amino acid
metabolism in animal tissues. Pp 387-443 in Mammalian Protein Metabolism, Vol.
4, H. N., Munro, ed.. New York: Academic Press.
Kauffmann, M. 1905. Uber den ersatz von eiweiss durch leim im stoffwechsel.
Pfluger’s Arch. 109: 440-465.
Kealy R. D., D. E. Lawler, J. M. Ballam, S. L. Mantz, D. N. Biery, E. H. Greeley, G.
Lust, M. Segre, G. K. Smith, and H. D. Stowe. 2002. Effects of diet restriction on
life span and age-related changes in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 220:1315-
1320.
Kendall, P. T., and D. W. Holme. 1982. Studies on the digestibility of soya bean
products, cereals, cereal and plant by-products in diets of dogs. J. Sci. Food Agric.
33:813-822.
Kendall, P. T., D. W. Holme, and P. M. Smith. 1982. Comparative evaluation of net
digestive and absorptive efficiency in dogs and cats fed a variety of contrasting
diet types. J. Sm. Anim. Pract. 23:577-587.
Kienzle, E. 1998. Factorial calculation of nutrient requirements in lactating queens.
J. Nutr. 128:2609S-2614S.
Kienzle E., H. Meyer, and H. Lohrie. 1985. Einfluss kohlenhydratfreier Rationen mit
unterschiedlichen Protein/Energierelationen auf foetale Entwicklung und Vitalität
von Welpen sowie die Milchzusammensetzung von Hündinnen (Effect of differing
protein/energy ratios in carbohydrate-free diets for breeding bitches on
development and vitality of puppies and milk composition). Adv. Anim. Physiol.
Anim. Nutr. 16:73-99.
Kim, S. W., J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1995. Dietary soybean protein decreases
plasma taurine in cats. J. Nutr. 125:2831-2837.
Kim, S. W., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1996a. Maillard reaction products in
purified diets induce taurine depletion in cats which is reversed by antibiotics. J.
Nutr. 126:195-201.
Kim, S. W., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1996b. Dietary antibiotics decrease
taurine loss in cats fed a canned heat-processed diet. J. Nutr. 126:509-515.
Kittleson M. D., B. Keene, P. D. Pion, and C. G. Loyer. 1997. Results of the
Multicenter Spaniel Trial (MUST): Taurine- and carnitine-responsive dilated
cardiomyopathy in American cocker spaniels with decreased plasma taurine
concentration. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 11:204-211.
Kramer, G. A., M. D. Kittleson, P. R. Fox, J. Lewis, and P. D. Pion. 1995. Plasma
taurine concentrations in normal dogs and dogs with heart disease. J. Vet. Intern.
Med. 9:253-258.
Krehl, W. A. 1981. Discovery of the effect of tryptophan on niacin deficiency.
Federation Proc. 40:1527-1530.
Laidlaw, S. A., J. A. Sturman, and J. S. Kopple. 1987. Effect of dietary taurine on
plasma and blood cell taurine concentrations in cats. J. Nutr. 117:1945-1949.


===== PDF PAGE 304 =====
303
Larsen J. A., C. C. Calvert, and Q. R. Rogers. 2001. Processing of dietary protein
decreases methionine bioavailability in growing kittens. 2001 Purina Forum
Proceedings, Comp. Contin. Educ. Pract. Vet. 24:87 (abs.).
Larsen J. A., C. C. Calvert, and Q. R. Rogers. 2002. Processing of dietary casein
decreases bioavailability of lysine in growing kittens. J. Nutr. 132:1748S-1750S.
Leklem, J. E., J. Woodford, and R. R. Brown. 1969. Comparative tryptophan
metabolism in cats and rats: Differences in adaptation of tryptophan oxygenase
and in vivo metabolism of tryptophan, kynurenine and hydroxykynurenine. Comp.
Biochem. Physiol. 31:95-109.
Leon, A., W. R. Levick, and W. R. Sarossy. 1995. Lesion topography and new
histological features in feline taurine deficiency retinopathy. Exp. Eye Res.
61:731-741.
Levillain, O., P. Parvy, and A. Hus-Citharel. 1996. Arginine metabolism in cat
kidney. J. Physiol. (London) 491(Part 1):471-477.
Lewis, A. J., and H. S. Bayley. 1995. Amino acid bioavailability. Pp. 35-65 in
Bioavailability of Nutritients for Animals: Amino Acids, Minerals and Vitamins,
C. B., Ammerman, D. H. Baker, and A. J. Lewis, eds. New York: Academic Press.
Longenecker, J. B., and N. L. Hause. 1959. Relationship between plasma amino
acids and composition of the ingested protein. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 84:46-59.
Maede, Y., T. Hoshino, M. Inaba, and S. Namioka. 1987. Methionine toxicosis in
cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. 48:289-292.
Magendie, M. F. 1816. Sur les proprietes nutritives des substances qui ne contiennent
pas d’azote Ann. Chim. Phys. 3:66-77.
Manson, J. A., and K. J. Carpenter. 1978. The effect of a high level of dietary leucine
on the niacin status of dogs. J. Nutr. 108:1889-1898.
Marcinkiewicz, J., B. Chain, B. Nowak, A. Grabowska, K. Bryniarski, and J. Baran.
2000. Antimicrobial and cytotoxic activity of hypochlorous acid: Interactions with
taurine and nitrite. Inflamm. Res. 49:280-289.
Markwell, P. J., and K. E. Earle. 1995. Taurine: An essential nutrient for the cat. A
brief review of the biochemistry of its requirement and the clinical consequences
of deficiency. Nutr. Res. 15:53-58.
Martin, C. L., and T. Chambreau. 1982. Cataract production in experimentally
orphaned puppies fed a commercial replacement for bitch’s milk. J. Am. Anim.
Hosp. Assoc. 18:115-119.
Mawby, D. I., A. G. Mathew, E. A. Mears, T. D. Moyers, and D. J. Krahwinkel.
1999. Complications of ileal cannulation in cats. Am. Assoc. Lab. Anim. Sci.
49:406-410.
McCollum, E. V. 1957. A History of Nutrition, Houghton Mifflin Company; Boston.
Compt. Rend. 13:237, 269 (1841).
McCoy, R. H., C. E. Meyer, and W. C. Rose. 1935. Feeding experiments with
mixtures of highly purified amino acids. VIII. Isolation and identification of a new
essential amino acid. J. Biol. Chem. 112:283-302.


===== PDF PAGE 305 =====
304
Melnick, D., and G. R. Cowgill. 1937. The protein minima for nitrogen equilibrium
with different proteins. J. Nutr. 13:401-424.
Merino G. E., T. Jetzer, W. M. D. Dolzaki, and J. S. Najarian. 1975. Methionine-
induced hepatic coma in dogs. Am. J. Surg. 130:41-46.
Messing, J. M., and J. A. Sturman. 1993. Evaluation of taurine status in cats
consuming diets containing different amounts of taurine by determination of
plasma and whole blood taurine concentrations. J. Nutr. Biochem. 4:168-171.
Meyer, H., P.-J. Schmitt, and E. Heckotter. 1981. Nutritional content and digestibility
of food stuffs for dogs (Translation). Anim. Nutr. 9:71-104.
Meyer, H., E. Kienzle, and C. Dammers. 1985. Milchmenge und
Milchzusammensetzung bei der Hündin sowie Futteraufnahme und
Gewichtsentwicklung ante und post partum (Milk yield, milk composition, feed
intake and weight development in bitches before and after birth). Adv. Anim.
Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 16:51-72.
Meyer, H., J. Arndt, T. Behfeld, H. Elbers, and C. Schunemann. 1989. Praecaecale
und postileale Verdaulichkeit verschiedener Eiweisse. Adv. Anim. Physiol. Anim.
Nutr. 19:59-77
Miller, L. L. 1944. The metabolism of dl-methionine and l-cystine in dogs on a very
low protein diet. J. Biol. Chem. 152:603-611.
Miller, S. A., and J. B. Allison. 1958. The dietary nitrogen requirements of the cat. J.
Nutr. 64:493-501.
Milner, J. A. 1979a. Assessment of indispensable and dispensable amino acids for
the immature dog. J. Nutr. 109:1161-1167.
Milner, J. A. 1979b. Assessment of the essentiality of methionine, threonine,
tryptophan, histidine and isoleucine in immature dogs. J. Nutr. 109:1351-1357.
Milner, J. A. 1981. Lysine requirements of the immature dog. J. Nutr. 111:40-45.
Milner, J. A., R. L. Prior, and W. J. Visek. 1975. Arginine deficiency and orotic
aciduria in mammals. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 150:282-288.
Milner, J. A., R. L. Garton, and R. A. Burns. 1984. Phenylalanine and tyrosine
requirements of immature Beagle dogs. J. Nutr. 114:2212-2216.
Moise N. S., L. M. Pacioretty, F. A. Kallfelz, M. H. Stipanuk, J. M. King, and R. F.
Gilmour, Jr. 1991. Dietary taurine deficiency and dilated cardiomyopathy in the
fox. Am. Heart J. 121(Pt 1):541-547.
Morgan, A. F., C. N. Hunt, L. Arnrich, and E. Lewis. 1951. Evaluation of five
partially purified proteins by nitrogen balance in mature dogs, including a study of
the antitryptic activity of egg white. J. Nutr. 43:63-75.
Morris, J.G. 1985. Nutritional and metabolic responses to arginine in carnivores. J.
Nutr.115:524-531.
Morris, J. G., and Q. R. Rogers. 1978a. Ammonia intoxication in the near-adult cat
as a result of a dietary deficiency of arginine. Sci. 199:431-432.
Morris, J. G., and Q. R. Rogers. 1978b. Arginine: An essential amino acid for the
cat. J. Nutr. 108:1944-1953.


===== PDF PAGE 306 =====
305
Morris, J. G., and Q. R. Rogers. 1992. The metabolic basis for the taurine
requirement of Cats. Pp. 33-44 in Taurine Nutritional Value and Mechanisms of
Action, J. B. Lombardini, S. W. Schaffer, and J. Azuma, eds., Volume 315. New
York: Plenum Press.
Morris, J. G., and Q. R. Rogers. 1994. Dietary taurine requirement of cats is
determined by microbial degradation of taurine in the gut. Pp. 59-70 in Taurine in
Health and Disease, R. Huxtable and D. V. Michalk, eds. New York: Plenum
Press.
Morris, J. G., Q. R. Rogers, D. L. Winterrowd, and E. M. Kamikawa. 1979. The
utilization of ornithine and citrulline by the growing kitten. J. Nutr. 109:724-729.
Morris, J. G., Q. R. Rogers, and L. M. Pacioretty. 1990. Taurine: An essential
nutrient for cats. J. Sm. Anim. Pract. 31:502-509.
Morris, J. G., Q. R. Rogers, S. W. Kim, and R. C. Backus. 1995. Dietary taurine
requirement of cats is determined by microbial degradation of taurine in the gut.
Proceedings of the Purina Forum on Small Animal Nutrition. Vet. Clin. Nutr.
1:118-127.
Morris, J. G., Q. R. Rogers, and R. A. Freedland. 2002. Hepatic enzyme activities of
puppies given adequate or high protein diets. Comp. Cont. Educ. Pract. Vet. 24:71
(abs.).
Morris, J. G., Q. R. Rogers, and J. A. O’Donnell. 2004. Lysine requirement of kittens
given purified diets for maximal growth. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. (Berl.).
88:113-116.
Morris, M. L., Jr. 1965. Feline degenerative retinopathy. Cornell Vet. 55:296-308.
Moughan P. J., W. B. Souffrant, and S. M. Hodgkinson. 1998. Physiological
approaches to determining gut endogenous amino acid flows in the mammal.
Arch. Tierernahr. 51:237-252.
Mühlum, A., S. Junker, and H. Meyer. 1989. Praecaecale und postileale
Verdaulichkeit verschiedener Eiweisse (Ileal and fecal digestibility of various
proteins). Adv. in Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 19:59-77.
Muir, H. E., S. M. Murray, G. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, and G. A. Reinhart.
1996. Nutrient digestion by ileal cannulated dogs as affected by dietary fibers with
various fermentation characteristics. J. Anim. Sci. 74:1641-1648.
Murray, S. M., A. R. Patil, G. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, and D. M. Hughes. 1997.
Raw and rendered animal by-products as ingredients in dog diets. J. Anim. Sci.
75:2497-2505.
Murray, S. M., A. R. Patil, G. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, and D. M. Hughes. 1998.
Raw and rendered animal by-products as ingredients in dog diets. J. Nutr.
128:2812S-2815S.
Nagasawa, T., T. Kido, F. Yoshizawa, Y. Ito, and N. Nishizawa. 2002. Rapid
suppression of protein degradation in skeletal muscle after oral feeding of leucine
in rats. J. Nutr. Biochem. 13:121-127.
Nakagawa, I., and A. Sasaki. 1977. Effect of an excess intake of leucine, with and
without additions of vitamin B6 and/or niacin, on tryptophan and niacin


===== PDF PAGE 307 =====
306
metabolism in rats. J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol. 23:535-548.
Nap, R. C., H. A. W. Hazewinkel, G. Voorhout, W. J. Biewenga, J. P. Koeman, S. A.
Goedegebaure, and A. Th. van’t Klooster. 1993. The influence of dietary protein
content on growth in giant breed dogs. Vet. Comp. Orthop. Traumatol. 6:1-8.
National Research Council, (NRC). 1986. Nutrient Requirements of Cats.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council, (NRC). 1995. Nutrient Requirements of Laboratory
Animals. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Neirinck, K. L. Istasse, A. Gabriel, C. Van Eenaeme, and J.-M. Bienfait. 1991.
Amino acid compostion and digestibility of four protein sources for dogs. J. Nutr.
121:S64-S65.
Nesheim, M. C. 1968. Kidney arginase activity and lysine tolerance in strains of
chickens selected for a high or low requirement of arginine. J. Nutr. 95:79-87
O’Donnell, J. A., III, Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1981. Effect of diet on plasma
taurine in the cat. J. Nutr. 111:1111-1116.
Ontko, J. A., R. E. Wuthier, and P. H. Phillips. 1957. The effect of increased dietary
fat upon the protein requirement of the growing dog. J. Nutr. 62:163-169.
Pacioretty, L., M. A., Hickman, J. G., Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 2001. Kinetics of
taurine depletion and repletion in plasma, serum, whole blood and skeletal muscle
in cats. Amino Acids 21:417-427.
Park, T., Q. R. Rogers, J. G. Morris, and R. W. Chesney. 1989. Effect of dietary
taurine on renal taurine transport by proximal tubule brush border membrane
vesicles in the kitten. J. Nutr. 119:1452-1460.
Park, T., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1999. High dietary protein and taurine
increase cysteine desulfhydration in kittens. J. Nutr. 129:2225-2230.
Piechota, T. R., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1995. Nitrogen requirement of cats
during gestation and lactation. Nutr. Res. 15:1535-1546.
Pion, P. D. 1989. Taurine deficiency myocardial failure: New evidence for old
theories. Cornell Vet. 79:5-9.
Pion, P. D., M. D. Kittleson, Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1987. Myocardial
failure in cats associated with low plasma taurine: A reversible cardiomyopathy.
Sci. 237:764-767.
Pion, P. D., M. D. Kittleson, and Q. R. Rogers. 1989. Cardiomyopathy in the cat and
its relation to taurine deficiency. Pp. 251-262 in Current Vet Therapy X, R.W.
Kirk, ed. Philadelphia: W.B Sanders.
Pion, P. D., J. Lewis, K. Greene, Q. R. Rogers, J. G. Morris, and M. D. Kittleson.
1991. Effect of meal-feeding and food deprivation on plasma and whole blood
taurine concentrations in cats. J. Nutr. 121:S177-S178.
Pion, P. D., S. L. Sanderson, and M. D. Kittleson. 1998. The effectiveness of taurine
and levocarnitine in dogs with heart disease. Vet. Clin. North Am. 28:1495-1514.
Primal, S. V., S. Silva, and J. R. Mercer. 1986. Protein degradation in cat liver cells.
Biochem. J. 240:843-846.


===== PDF PAGE 308 =====
307
Quam, D. D., J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1987. Histidine requirement of kittens
for growth, haematopoiesis and prevention of cataracts. Br. J. Nutr. 58:521-532.
Rabin, A. R., D. C. Hayes, and E. L. Berson. 1973. Cone and rod responses in
nutritionally induced retinal degeneration in the cat. Invest. Ophthalmol. 12:694-
704.
Rabin, B., R. J. Nicolosi, and K. C. Hayes. 1976. Dietary influence on bile acid
conjugation in the cat. J. Nutr. 106:1241-1246.
Ranz, D., F. Gutbrod, C. Eule, and E. Kienzle. 2002. Nutritional lens opacities in two
litters of Newfoundland dogs. J. Nutr. 132:1688S-1689S.
Rentschler, L. A., L. L. Hirschberger, and M. H. Stipanuk. 1986. Response of the
kitten to dietary taurine depletion: Effects on renal reabsorption, bile acid
conjugation and activities of enzymes involved in taurine synthesis. Comp.
Biochem. Physiol. 84B:319-325.
Reynoso, G. T., and B. A. De Gamboa. 1982. Salt tolerance in the freshwater algae
Chlamydomonas reinhardii: Effect of proline and taurine. Comp. Biochem.
Physiol. 73:95-100.
Ritter, S. M., and F. N. Owens. 1974. Methionine requirements of the growing cat. J.
Anim. Sci. 39:981 (abs. 68).
Roberts, R. N. 1963. A study of felinine and its excretion by the cat. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Buffalo, N.Y.
Rogers, Q. R. 1994. Species variation in arginine requirements. Pp. 9-21 in
Proceedings Symp. Honoring Willard J. Visek: From Ammonia to Cancer and
Gene Expression. Special Publication 86, Agr. Exp. Station. Urbana: University of
Illinois.
Rogers, Q. R., and J. G. Morris. 1979. Essentiality of amino acids for the growing
kitten. J. Nutr. 109:718-723.
Rogers, Q. R., and J. G. Morris. 2002. Up-regulation of nitrogen catabolic enzymes
is not required to readily oxidize excess protein in the cat. J. Nutr. 132:2819-2820.
Rogers, Q. R., and J. M. Phang. 1985. Deficiency of pyrroline-5-carboxylate
synthase in the intestinal mucosa of the cat. J. Nutr. 115:146-150.
Rogers, Q. R., J. G. Morris, and R. A. Freedland. 1977. Lack of hepatic enzymatic
adaptation to low and high levels of dietary protein in the adult cat. Enzyme
22:348-356.
Rogers, Q. R., M. J. Strieker, and J. G. Morris. 1987. Effect of quantity and pattern
of dietary amino acids on amino acid requirements of the dog and cat. Pp. 52-56 in
Nutrition, Malnutrition and Dietetics in the Dog and Cat, English edition, A. T. B.
Edney, ed. Proceedings of an International Symposium, Hannover, Germany,
September 3-4.
Rogers, Q. R., T. P. Taylor, and J. G. Morris. 1998. Optimizing dietary amino acid
patterns at various levels of crude protein for cats. J. Nutr. 128:2577S-2580S.
Romsos, D. R., and D. Ferguson. 1983. Regulation of protein intake in adult dogs. J.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 182:41-43.


===== PDF PAGE 309 =====
308
Romsos, D. R., H. J. Palmer, K. L. Muiruri, and M. R. Bennink. 1981. Influence of a
low carbohydrate diet on performance of pregnant and lactating dogs. J. Nutr.
111:678-689.
Rose, W. C., and E. E. Rice. 1939. The significance of the amino acids in canine
nutrition. Science 90:186-187.
Rubin, L. F. 1963. Atrophy of rods and cones in the cat retina. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Assoc. 142:1415-1420.
Russell, K., R. R. Murgatroyd, and R. M. Batt. 2002. Net protein oxidation is
adapted to dietary protein intake in domestic cats (Felis silvestris catus). J. Nutr.
132:456-460.
Rutherfurd, K. J., S. M. Rutherfurd, P. J. Moughan, and W. H. Hendricks. 2002.
Isolation and characterization of a felinine-containing peptide from the blood of
the domestic cat (Felis catus). J. Biol. Chem. 277:114-119.
Sanderson, S. L., K. L.Gross, P. N. Ogburn, C. Calvert, G. Jacobs, S. R. Lowry, K.
A. Bird, L. A. Koehler, and L. L. Swanson. 2001. Effects of dietary fat and L-
carnitine on plasma and whole blood taurine concentrations and cardiac function
in healthy dogs fed protein-restricted diets. Am. J. Vet. Res. 62:1616-1623.
Schaeffer, M. C., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1982a. Methionine requirement of
the growing kitten, in the absence of dietary cystine. J. Nutr. 112:962-971.
Schaeffer, M. C., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1982b. The choline requirement of
the growing kittens in the presence of just adequate dietary methionine. Nutr. Res.
2:289-299.
Schaeffer, M. C., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1989. Protein in the nutrition of
dogs and cats. Pp. 159-205 in Nutrition of the Dog and Cat, I. H. Burger and J. P.
W. Rivers, eds. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schimke, R. T. 1962. Adaptive characteristics of urea cycle enzymes in the rat. J.
Biol. Chem. 237:459-468.
Schmidt, S. Y., E. L. Berson, and K. C. Hayes. 1976. Retinal degeneration in cats fed
casein. I. Taurine deficiency. Invest. Ophthal. 15:47-52.
Schram, E., and R. Crokaert. 1957. Radiochromatographic study of substances
formed from [35S]taurine in the rat. Biochem. J. 66:20P-21P.
Schuller-Levis, G., P. D. Mehta, R. Rudelli, and J. Sturman. 1990. Immunologic
consequences of taurine deficiency in cats. J. Leuk. Biol. 47:321-331.
Scott, P. P. 1964. Nutritional requirements and deficiencies. Pp. 60-70 in Feline
Medicine and Surgery, E.J. Catcott, ed. Santa Barbara, Calif.: American Veterinary
Publications, Inc.
Shapiro, I. L. 1962. In vivo studies on the metabolic relationship between felinine
and serum cholesterol in the domestic cat. Ph.D. dissertaton, University of
Delaware.
Sibbald, I. R. 1987. Estimation of the bioavailable amino acids in feedingstuffs for
poultry and pigs: A review with emphasis on balance experiments. Can. J. Anim.
Sci. 67:221-300.


===== PDF PAGE 310 =====
309
Silvio, J., D. L. Harmon, K. L. Gross, and K. R. McLeod. 2000. Influence of fiber
fermentability on nutrient digestion in the dog. Nutr. 16:289-295.
Skare, K. L., W. K. Sietsema, and H. F. DeLuca. 1982. The biological activity of
retinotaurine. J. Nutr. 112:1626-1630.
Sleeper, M. M., P. S. Henthorn, C. Vijayasarathy, D. M. Dambach, T. Bowers, P.
Tijskens, C. F. Armstrong, and E. B. Lankford. 2002. Dilated cardiomyopathy in
juvenile Portuguese Water Dogs. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 16:52-62.
Smalley, K. A., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1983. Methionine requirement of
kittens given amino acid diets containing adequate cystine. Br. J. Nutr. 49:411-
417.
Smalley, K. A., Q. R. Rogers, J. G. Morris, and L. L. Eslinger. 1985. The nitrogen
requirement of the weanling kitten. Br. J. Nutr. 53:501-512.
Smalley, K. A., Q. R. Rogers, J. G. Morris, and E. Dowd. 1993. Utilization of D-
methionine by weanling kittens. Nutr. Res. 13:815-824.
Stekol, J. A. 1935. Metabolism of l- and dl-methionine in adult and growing dogs
maintained on diets of various protein contents. J. Biol. Chem. 109:147-157.
Stewart, P. M., M. Batshaw, D. Valle, and M. Walser. 1981. Effects of arginine-free
meals on ureagenesis in cats. Am. J. Physiol. 241:E310-E315.
Stratton-Phelps, M., R. C. Backus, Q. R. Rogers, and A. J. Fascetti. 2002. Dietary
rice bran decreases plasma and whole-blood taurine in cats. J. Nutr. 132:1745S-
1747S.
Strieker, M. J. 1991. The effect of dietary crude protein on essential amino acid
requirements of kittens. Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Davis.
Strombeck, D. R., and Q. R. Rogers. 1978. Plasma amino acid concentrations in
dogs with hepatic disease. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 173:93-96.
Stucki, W. P., and A. E. Harper. 1961. Importance of dispensable amino acids for the
normal growth of chicks. J. Nutr. 74:377-383.
Stucki, W. P., and A. E. Harper. 1962. Effects of altering the ratio of indispensable to
dispensable amino acids in the diets of rats. J. Nutr. 78:115-119.
Sturman, J. A. 1988. Taurine in development. J. Nutr. 118:1169-1176.
Sturman, J. A. 1991. Dietary taurine and reproduction and development. J. Nutr.
121:S166-S170.
Sturman, J. A. 1993. Taurine in development. Physiol. Rev. 73:119-147.
Sturman, J. A., and P. Lu. 1997. Role of feline maternal taurine nutrition in fetal
cerebellar development: An immunohistochemical study. Amino Acids 13:369-
377.
Sturman, J. A., and J. M. Messing. 1991. Dietary taurine content and feline
reproduction and outcome. J. Nutr. 121:1195-1203.
Sturman, J. A., and J. M. Messing. 1992. High dietary taurine effects on feline tissue
taurine concentrations and reproductive performance. J. Nutr. 122:82-88.
Sturman, J. A., R. C. Moretz, J. H. French, and H. M. Wisniewski. 1985. Taurine
deficiency in the developing cat: persistence of the cerebellar external granule cell
layer. J. Neurosci. Res. 13:405-416.


===== PDF PAGE 311 =====
310
Sturman, J. A., A. D. Gargano, J. M. Messing, and H. Imaki. 1986. Feline maternal
taurine deficiency: Effect on mother and offspring. J. Nutr. 116:655-667.
Sturman, J. A., T. Palackal, H. Imaki, R. C. Moretz, J. French, and H. M.
Wisniewski. 1987. Nutritional taurine deficiency and feline pregnancy and
outcome. Pp. 113-124 in The Biology of Taurine, R. J. Huxtable, F. Franconi, and
A. Giotti, eds., New York: Plenum Press.
Sugano, M., S. Goto, Y. Yamada, K. Yoshida, Y. Hashimoto, T. Matsuo, and M.
Kimoto. 1990. Cholesterol-lowering activity of various undigested fractions of
soybean protein in rats. J. Nutr. 120:977-985.
Sunvold, G. D., F. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, D. Bourquin, E. C. Titgemeyer, L.
L. Bauer, and G. A. Reinhart. 1995. Dietary fiber for cats: In vitro fermentation of
selected fiber sources by cat fecal inoculum and in vivo utilization of diets
containing selected fiber sources and their blends. J. Anim. Sci. 73:2329-2339.
Taylor, T. P. 1995. Optimizing the pattern of essential amino acids as the sole source
of nitrogen supports near-maximal growth in kittens. M.S. thesis, University of
California, Davis.
Taylor, T. P., J. G. Morris, N. H. Willits, and Q. R. Rogers. 1996. Optimizing the
pattern of essential amino acids as the sole source of dietary nitrogen supports
near-maximal growth in kittens. J. Nutr. 126:2243-2252.
Taylor, T. P., J. G. Morris, P. H. Kass, and Q. R. Rogers. 1997. Increasing
dispensable amino acids in diets of kittens fed essential amino acids at or below
their requirement increases the requirement of arginine. Amino Acids 13:257-272.
Taylor, T. P., J. G. Morris, P. H. Kass, and Q. R. Rogers. 1998. Maximal growth
occurs at a broad range of essential amino acids to total nitrogen ratios in kittens.
Amino Acids 15:221-234.
Teeter, R. G., R. H. Baker, and J. E. Corbin. 1978a. Methionine essentiality for the
cat. J. Anim. Sci. 46:1287-1292.
Teeter, R. G., R. H. Baker, and J. E. Corbin. 1978b. Methionine and cystine
requirements of the cat. J. Nutr. 108:291-295.
Tews, J. K., Q. R. Rogers, J. G. Morris, and A. E. Harper. 1984. Effect of dietary
protein and GABA on food intake, growth and tissue amino acids in cats. Physiol.
Behav. 32:301-308.
Thoai, N.-V., and Y. Robin. 1954. Metabolisme des derives guanidyles II. Isolement
de la guanidotaurine (taurocyamine) et de l’acide guanidoacetique (glycocyamine)
des vers marins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 13:533-536.
Titchenal, C. A., Q. R. Rogers, R. J. Indrieri, and J. G. Morris. 1980. Threonine
Imbalance, deficiency and neurologic dysfunction in the kitten. J. Nutr. 110:2444-
2459.
Torres, C. L., and Q. R. Rogers. 2002. Lack of regulation of plasma amino acids in
dogs fed low-protein diets. Comp. Cont. Educ. Pract. Vet. 24:79 (abs.).
Torres, C. L., S. J. Hickenbottom and Q. R. Rogers. 2003. Palatability affects the
percentage of metabolizable energy as protein selected by adult beagles. J. Nutr.
133:3516-3522.


===== PDF PAGE 312 =====
311
Trachtman, H., R. Barbour, J. A. Sturman, and L. Finberg. 1988. Taurine and
osmoregulation: Taurine is a cerebral osmoprotective molecule in chronic
hypernatremic dehydration. Ped. Res. 23:35-39.
Trautwein, E.A., and K. C. Hayes. 1991. Gender and dietary amino acid
supplementation influence the plasma and whole blood taurine status of taurine-
depleted cats. J. Nutr. 121:S173-S174.
Trippett, S. 1957. The synthesis of (±)-felinine. J. Chem. Soc. 1929-1930.
Vainisi, S. J., H. F. Edelhauser, E. D. Wolf, E. Cotlier, and F. Reeser. 1981.
Nutritional cataracts in Timber wolves. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 179:1175-1180.
Vallecalle-Sandoval, M. H., G. Heaney, E. Sersen, and J. A. Sturman. 1991.
Comparison of the developmental changes of the brainstem auditory evoked
response (BAER) in taurine-supplemented and taurine-deficient kittens. Internatl.
J. Dev. Neurosci. 9:571-579.
Vallecalle-Sandoval, M. H., G. Heaney, E. Sersen, and J. A. Sturman. 1993.
Comparison of the brainstem auditory evoked response (BAER) in taurine-
deficient and taurine-supplemented cats. Nutr. Res. 13:475-487.
Visek, W. J., J. B. Robertson, J. P. Gagnon, S. K. Clinton, and E. A. Ulman. 1976.
Dried brewers grains for mature and growing dogs. J. Anim. Sci. 43:442-452.
Vohra, P., and F. H. Kratzer. 1956. Graying of hair in rats fed a ration deficient in
lysine. Science 124:1145
Vohra, P., and F. H. Kratzer. 1957. The role of lysine in the growth and feather
pigmentation of turkey poults. J. Nutr. 63:471-476.
Wannemacher, R. W., Jr., and J. R. McCoy. 1966. Determination of optimal dietary
protein requirements of young and old dogs. J. Nutr. 88:66-74.
Ward, J. 1976. The amino acid requirements of the adult dog. Ph.D. dissertation,
Wolfson College, University of Cambridge, England.
Wergedal, J. E., and A. E. Harper. 1964. Metabolic adaptations in higher animals. IX.
Effect of high protein intake on amino nitrogen catabolism in vivo. J. Biol. Chem.
239:1156-1163.
Westall, R. G. 1953. The amino acids and other ampholytes of urine. 2. The isolation
of a new sulphur-containing amino acid from cat urine. Biochem. J. 55:244-248.
Williams, J. M., J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1987. Phenylalanine requirement of
kittens and the sparing effect of tyrosine. J. Nutr. 117:1102-1107.
Wurtman R. J., and J. Axelrod. 1967. Daily rhythmic changes in tyrosine
transaminase activity of the rat liver. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 57:594-1598.
Yu, S., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 2001. Effect of low levels of dietary tyrosine
on the hair colour of cats. J. Sm. Anim. Pract. 42:176-180.
Zicker, S. C., and Q. R. Rogers. 1990. Use of plasma amino acid concentrations in
the diagnosis of nutritional and metabolic diseases in veterinary medicine. Pp.
107-121 in Proceedings of IVth Congress of the International Society for Animal
Clinical Biochemistry, J. J. Kaneko, ed., University of California, Davis.
Zuo, Y., G. C. Fahey, Jr., N. R. Merchen, and N. L. Bajjalieh. 1996. Digestion
responses to low oligosaccharide soybean meal by ileally-cannulated dogs. J.


===== PDF PAGE 313 =====
312
Anim. Sci. 74:2441-2449.


===== PDF PAGE 314 =====
313
7
Minerals
INTRODUCTION
Experimental evidence is available for the essentiality of some 11 minerals in
dogs and cats. Several others are assumed to be essential, due to evidence of their
need in other species, and are most likely present in dog and cat foods at
concentrations sufficient to meet metabolic needs. The minerals present in a feed are
found mainly in the ash component when the feed is analyzed by use of American
Organization of Analytical Chemists (AOAC) procedures, which are the methods
recommended in the model feed bill of the Association of American Feed Control
Officials (AAFCO) for determining the guaranteed analysis of a feedstuff (AOAC,
2000; AAFCO, 2001). The ash consists of oxides, phosphates, carbonates, and
sulfates of minerals (inorganic elements) including calcium (Ca), phosphorus (P),
magnesium (Mg), sodium (Na), potassium (K), iron (Fe), copper (Cu), manganese
(Mn), and zinc (Zn). Other minerals such as chloride (Cl–), iodine (I), sulfur (S), and
selenium (Se) may be partially or totally lost in the form of gaseous compounds
during the combustion process.
Several methods have been used for classifying nutritionally essential minerals in
feedstuffs. In this discussion, minerals are divided into macrominerals and trace
minerals. Macrominerals are those that are usually expressed in grams or fractions of
grams per 1,000 kcal of metabolizable energy (ME) or as grams or fractions of grams
to one decimal place per kilogram on a dry matter (DM) basis in the diet. These
minerals include Ca, P, Mg, Na, K, and Cl–. Trace minerals consist mainly of those
minerals usually expressed in terms of milligrams or fractions of milligrams per
1,000 kcal ME or as milligrams or fractions of milligrams to one decimal place per


===== PDF PAGE 315 =====
314
kilogram on a DM basis in the diet. These minerals include Fe, Zn, Cu, Mn, I, and Se
as well as those that may be required at even lower concentrations in petfoods, such
as molybdenum (Mo), boron (B), and chromium (Cr).
Minerals serve many physiological functions in animals. In vertebrates, Ca and P
play a vital role in the rigidity of the internal skeleton as well as of teeth. Minerals
such as Ca, Mg, K, and Na are also essential for nervous impulse transmission and
muscle contraction, and they have many second messenger and cell signaling
functions, as well as playing a vital role in maintaining the acid-base balance of the
organism. In addition to its role in the skeleton, P is an essential component of
cellular and subcellular membranes and is a crucial component in energy
metabolism. It also plays an important role in DNA and RNA metabolism. The
primary roles of many minerals, especially trace minerals (e.g., Se, Cu, Mo), are in
metalloenzymes where they function in a multitude of enzymatic reactions. Minerals
such as Fe, Zn, and I play essential roles in protein and hormone structure and/or
function.
Nutritional deficiencies of many essential minerals have been produced
experimentally, and clinical signs have been described. Many such deficiencies can
also occur as clinical problems in dogs and cats, particularly those fed improperly
formulated home-prepared diets. Additionally, some minerals whose presence in the
diet is essential for the health of dogs and cats may cause clinical abnormalities when
consumed in excess.
MINERALS AND ACID-BASE BALANCE
The composition of the diet and nutrient metabolism have significant effects on
the generation of acids and bases whose physiological concentrations, under normal
conditions, are controlled by the respiratory and renal systems (Toto et al., 1996).
Catabolism of sulfur-containing amino acids results in hydrogen ion release in
conjunction with the production of sulfate anions. Cellular metabolism of neutral
phosphoproteins and phospholipids yields hydrogen ions when negatively charged
phosphate residues are neutralized by hydrogen ions or cationic amino groups (Toto
et al., 1996). The metabolism of various dietary organic cations and anions may
liberate acid and base, respectively, and mineral absorption from the intestine may
also result in the addition of acid or base to the internal milieu, depending on the
amount and composition of the mineral salts consumed (Lennon et al., 1966;
Lemann and Lennon, 1972; Toto et al., 1996). Protein metabolism can also result in
the generation of ammonia, which can contribute to urinary acid excretion. The net
amount of acid added to the extracellular fluid from the diet or from bone is referred
to as endogenous acid production (EAP), which can be either a positive or a negative
number (Lemann and Lennon, 1972). Additionally, under the conditions of
physiological steady state, this will relate directly to net urinary acid excretion
(NAE) (Zijlstra et al., 1995; Toto et al., 1996). Thus, the amount of acid excreted in
the urine, reflected by urinary pH, is directly related to the composition of the diet.


===== PDF PAGE 316 =====
315
Furthermore, feeding husbandry can have an effect, at least transiently, on acid-
base status and NAE. Food consumption, through several mechanisms, causes
hydrochloric acid (HCl) to be secreted into the stomach, which assists in the initial
steps of food digestion. The amount of HCl secreted is related to stomach fill. The
hydrogen ions secreted are produced through the action of carbonic anhydrase, and
intracellular Cl– concentration is preserved by a bicarbonate-chloride exchange
mechanism at the basolateral membrane of the parietal cell, adding net bicarbonate to
the extracellular fluid. Thus, eating is associated with a relative metabolic alkalosis,
which is referred to as the “alkaline tide” (Argenzio, 1984). Compensation includes
an increase in urinary bicarbonate excretion, causing a rise in urine pH. For example,
cats fed once per day have been shown to have a significant increase in urinary pH
for 2 to 12 hours after feeding compared to cats fed free-choice (Taton et al., 1984).
Another player in the maintenance of acid-base balance is bone. In conditions of
relative metabolic acidosis, exchangeable bone mineral in the form of calcium
carbonate provides a source of buffer (Lemann et al., 1966; Burnell and Teubner,
1971; Toto et al., 1996). The dissolution of exchangeable bone calcium phosphate
salts also contributes to this acid buffering capacity (Brosnan and Brosnan, 1982).
This buffering action is accompanied by a loss of calcium salts from bone and can
lead to osteomalacia in the face of a chronic relative metabolic acidosis (Ching et al.,
1989).
In the wild, dogs and cats consume a mainly carnivorous diet, and animal protein
sources have higher concentrations of sulfur-containing amino acids than vegetable
protein sources (Pennington, 1998). For this reason, in nature dogs and cats have a
positive EAP and NAE resulting in an acidic urinary pH (6.0-7.0). The development
of commercial petfoods, particularly dry foods, led to the inclusion of significantly
greater amounts of vegetable source ingredients as protein and energy sources in the
diet of dogs and cats (Coffman, 1995, 1997). This has been associated with increased
consumption of organic anions and mineral cations (base-forming elements), which
induces a relative metabolic alkalosis, resulting in more alkaline urine.
This is of particular importance in the cat which even under normal circumstances
produces a more highly concentrated urine than does the dog or human (Osborne et
al., 1995). This may be a factor in the significant incidence of urolithiasis, due
mainly to the spontaneous formation of struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
uroliths, that was observed in this species in the 1970s and 1980s (Willeberg, 1984;
Lawler et al., 1985). A number of studies suggested that a higher than required
dietary concentration, and thus a higher than required dietary intake, of Mg was of
etiologic significance in the development of this metabolic abnormality (Lewis et al.,
1978; Kallfelz et al., 1980; Lewis and Morris, 1984). Subsequently, it was discovered
that the Mg effect depended on urinary pH. Cats fed diets inducing an increased
NAE and an acidic urinary pH did not develop the problem, while cats fed a ration
resulting in alkaline urine did at the same concentrations of dietary Mg (Buffington
et al., 1985, 1990). It now appears that formulating cat foods so as to increase NAE
and induce a urinary pH of approximately 6.1-6.6 is an effective method of


===== PDF PAGE 317 =====
316
controlling struvite urolithiasis formation in this species, as long as dietary Mg
concentrations are not excessive (Allen et al., 1997).
Attempts have been made to estimate urinary pH from the composition of the
diet. Such approaches have been based on the concentrations of mineral cations
(Ca2+, Mg2+, Na+, and K+) and anions (phosphate [PO43–], sulfate [SO42–], and Cl–)
in the diet and subtraction of the anion total from the cation total. These techniques
have been variously referred to as dietary anion gap, base excess, or cation-anion
difference (Oetzel et al., 1988; Kienzle et al., 1991a; Kienzle and Wilms-Eilers,
1994; Toto et al., 1996). A positive value reflects a net excess of alkalinizing anions,
while a negative value reflects a net excess of acidifying cations in the diet. A close
correlation has been shown between the base excess of cat foods and the pH of urine.
Diets with base excesses between –400 and –800 mmol·kg–1 dry diet have been
shown to produce average daily urine pHs between 6.6 and 6.2 (Kienzle et al.,
1991a; Kienzle and Wilms-Eilers, 1994).
While reducing dietary Mg concentration and urinary pH has greatly reduced the
incidence of struvite urolithiasis in cats, it has not eliminated the problem of
urolithiasis or other forms of lower urinary tract disease (LUTD) in this species. For
example, a specific cause cannot be identified in a significant fraction of cats with
LUTD (Kruger et al., 1991). Even so, nonobstructive LUTD does appear to be more
prevalent in cats fed dry cat food (Buffington et al., 1997). Further, it has been
reported that the feeding of a canned, as opposed to dry, diet which induces an acid
urine may be helpful in the management of idiopathic cystitis (Markwell et al.,
1999). While there is some evidence that consumption of a canned, as opposed to
dry, diet has little effect on total water intake or urinary water output in cats, the
preponderance of evidence suggests that eating canned diets does result in a greater
total water intake by cats compared to consumption of a dry diet (Sauer et al., 1985).
Another observation has been that as the incidence of feline struvite urolithiasis
has decreased, the incidence of calcium oxalate urolithiasis has increased (Osborne
et al., 1996). The etiologic significance of dietary factors in calcium oxalate
urolithiasis is, however, unknown. Dietary manipulations to increase NAE may
increase urinary Ca excretion (Ching et al., 1989). This, as well as the more highly
concentrated urine normally produced by the cat as compared to the dog, could
promote calcium oxalate formation (Osborne et al., 1995). The ingredients used in
commercial cat foods do not contain significant amounts of oxalate. While
experimentally induced pyridoxine deficiency in kittens results in increased urinary
oxalate excretion, which may cause nephrocalcinosis, this has not been seen
clinically. Further, pyridoxine supplementation does not decrease urinary excretion
of oxalate (Gershoff et al., 1959; Bai et al., 1989). The relationship of dietary factors
to calcium oxalate urolithiasis in cats, and also in dogs, deserves further study.
MACROMINERALS


===== PDF PAGE 318 =====
317
The mineral content of common petfood ingredients is listed in Table 13-5.
Calcium
The mineral element found in the greatest abundance in mammals, including dogs
and cats, is Ca (Kienzle et al., 1991b, 1998b; Lobaugh, 1996). Using total carcass
analysis, Kienzle et al. (1998b) found that at birth puppies contain close to 6 g
Ca·kg–1 of body weight (BW), which increases to about 12 g·kg BW–1 in adults. For
cats, the values are about the same at birth but are somewhat higher, about 15 g·kg
BW–1, in adults (Kienzle et al., 1991b). In terms of Ca requirements, the greatest
need occurs during the period of active formation of bones and teeth. However, Ca
plays several other vital roles in physiology and metabolism, although such actions
require several orders of magnitude lower amounts or concentrations of Ca than that
required for bone and tooth health. For example, Ca plays essential roles in blood
coagulation, nerve impulse transmission, excitation contraction coupling, and
muscular contraction, and it serves as a second messenger in a host of intracellular
reactions.
There are various dietary sources of Ca. Dairy products such as milk and cheese
are generally good sources. Some vegetables such as broccoli and cabbage are also
reasonable sources (Pennington, 1998). Alfalfa is an excellent source of Ca for
herbivores. However, none of these are common ingredients in dog and cat foods.
Sources of Ca commonly used in petfood products include meat and bone meal, 10
percent Ca; bone meal, 31.0 percent Ca; dibasic calcium phosphate, 22 percent Ca;
monobasic calcium phosphate, 16.4 percent Ca; and calcium carbonate, 39.4 percent
Ca (Tables 13-6 and 13-8).
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Calcium in Dogs
A uniform estimate of bioavailability is desirable to establish minimum dietary
Ca concentrations in petfoods. However, as was true more than half a century ago,
this is difficult if not impossible to determine since factors such as life stage, breed
differences, and other dietary constituents modify the need for and bioavailability of
Ca (McCay, 1949). Gershof et al. (1958) estimated the apparent absorption of
ingested Ca in 8- to 12-week-old mongrel puppies fed a purified dry diet as 90, 46,
and 27 percent for diets containing an estimated 1.3, 7.0, or 13.7 g Ca·kg–1 as
calcium carbonate, DM basis, respectively. Hedhammar et al. (1980) found apparent
absorption of dietary Ca ranging from 0 to 85 percent in 8-week-old German
shepherd puppies fed dry diets (90 percent DM) with Ca concentrations of 11.1-15.6
g·kg–1 DM or frozen diets (30 percent DM) containing 8.3-25.0 g Ca·kg–1 DM
basis, the source of the Ca in these studies being unreported. More recently, using
kinetic analysis, true absorption percentages of 70-99, 28-53, and 37-50 were
observed in 13- to 25-week-old miniature poodle puppies fed dry diets containing


===== PDF PAGE 319 =====
318
0.5 or 3.3, 11.0, and 33.0 g Ca·kg–1 respectively as mixtures of almost equal
amounts of calcium carbonate and dicalcium phosphate (Nap et al., 1993). In Great
Dane puppies 14 to 26 weeks of age, Hazewinkel et al. (1991) found true Ca
absorption of 70-97, 45-66, and 23-43 percent when dry type diets containing 5.5,
11, or 33 g Ca·kg–1 as a mixture of monocalcium phosphate and calcium carbonate,
DM basis, were fed. Dietary P concentration (5 or 9 g·kg–1) did not affect Ca
absorption in this study (Hazewinkel et al., 1991). Similar true absorptions were
found by Schoenmakers et al. (1999) in Great Dane puppies 9- to 15-weeks-old that
were fed dry type diets containing 10.4 or 31 g Ca·kg–1 also as a mixture of
monocalcium phosphate and calcium carbonate, DM basis.
In adult dogs, Hedhammar et al. (1980) reported apparent Ca absorptions of 30-
50 percent and close to 100 percent in Golden retrievers fed dry type diets containing
14 g or 1.1 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis, the source of the Ca not being reported. Chanard et
al. (1980) observed true Ca absorption averaging 27 percent in 15 to 25 kg adult
mongrel dogs fed a commercial diet containing 13 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis. Beynen et
al. (2001) measured an apparent absorption of ingested Ca averaging 11.5 percent in
six adult dogs weighing 12 to 17 kg fed a commercial moist diet (35.1 percent
moisture) containing 8.5 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis. From intake and other data, the true
absorption rate can be estimated at approximately 30 percent. In another study of
young adult (1-year-old) and geriatric (10-year-old) beagle dogs fed commercial
diets containing approximately 17 g Ca·kg–1 (1.7 percent), Sheffy et al. (1985)
observed apparent absorptions of 27.4 percent and 26.9 percent, respectively. There
was no significant difference in apparent absorption between the two age groups
(Sheffy et al., 1985). More recently, net apparent absorption of Ca was found to be
indistinguishable from 0 percent when adult hound dogs were fed standard-type diets
containing 20 g Ca·kg–1 as calcium phosphate, DM basis, with various amounts of
beef and soy as the protein source (Hill et al., 2001).
Based on the above, there appears to be sufficient evidence that in dogs, Ca
availability decreases during the growth period and also with increasing dietary Ca
concentration. Hoff-Jorgensen (1945) reported that the presence of phytate in plant
material reduced Ca bioavailability in canine diets, but there are few recent data on
this effect in dogs or cats. Recent measured absorption percentages of Ca in dogs are
likely to be reasonable since the dry diets used were similar, though not identical, in
composition to contemporary commercial dry dog foods (Chanard et al., 1980;
Hazewinkel et al., 1991; Nap et al., 1993; Beynen et al., 2001). There is also
evidence that feeding diets resulting in a decrease in pH of the distal small intestine
and colon are associated with higher absorption percentages of Ca (Beynen et al.,
2001, 2002). The dietary Ca:P ratio is another factor that may affect the absorption
of Ca. However, given reasonable concentrations of both minerals in the diet, recent
studies suggest that this does not have a significant effect on Ca absorption
(Hazewinkel et al., 1991; Nap et al., 1993). Although increasing dietary fat


===== PDF PAGE 320 =====
319
concentrations have been suspected to decrease Ca absorption, Jenkins and Phillips
(1960b) found similar apparent absorption of Ca from diets containing 3 or 20
percent fat. Similarly, Hallebeek and Hazewinkel (1998) found no effect of fat at
concentrations of 33 percent compared to 11 percent on Ca absorption in 6-month-
old beagle dogs.
Calcium Deficiency in Dogs
A deficiency of dietary Ca results in a condition known as nutritional secondary
hyperparathyroidism (NSHP). The reduced input of Ca to extracellular fluid results
in a decreased concentration of ionic Ca, which stimulates an increase in the
secretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH). The increase in plasma concentration of
PTH causes increased production of calcitriol, the most active form of vitamin D,
which along with PTH stimulates increased bone resorption as a mechanism for
returning the circulating ionic Ca concentration to normal (Potts and Juppner, 1998).
Chronic dietary Ca deficiency causes major decreases in bone mineral content,
which can result in significant skeletal abnormalities including fractures.
Calcium deficiency resulting in NSHP has been recognized clinically for many
years in dogs fed commercial or home-prepared diets consisting mainly of meat.
Hazewinkel et al. (1991) described severe signs of nutritional hyperparathyroidism,
including pathological fractures, in Great Dane puppies fed dry diets with Ca
concentrations of 5.5 g·kg–1, DM basis. The experimental diets were begun when
puppies were 8 weeks old, and clinical signs became severe at approximately 5
months of age. Calcium intakes varied between 250 and 150 mg·kg BW–1·d–1
during the 18-week experiment, with true absorptions varying between 95 percent
and 75 percent, respectively (Voorhout and Hazewinkel, 1987; Hazewinkel et al.,
1991). Similarly, Goodman et al. (1998) and Lauten and Goodman (1998)
demonstrated a slower growth rate and a slight relative osteomalacia in Great Dane
puppies fed diets containing 1.2 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME compared to dogs fed diets
with higher concentrations of Ca (Goodman et al., 1998; Lauten and Goodman,
1998). More recently, Laflamme (2000) reported slow growth and decreased feed
efficiency in puppies of several medium- to large-sized breeds, including English
setters, German shepherds, Labrador retrievers, and huskies, as a result of feeding
diets containing an average of 2.2 g Ca per 1,000 kcal for a period of 5 to 10 weeks.
Neither the age nor the weight of the puppies used was reported. No skeletal
pathology was observed in these studies (Laflamme, 2000).
No abnormalities were reported in miniature poodle puppies (13 to 25 weeks of
age) fed similar diets with a Ca concentration of 3.3 g Ca·kg–1 diet, DM basis,
corresponding to a Ca intake of 140 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (Nap et al., 1993). In the same
experiment, feeding a diet containing 500 mg Ca·kg–1 diet did result in signs of
nutritional hyperparathyroidism. However, Gershoff et al. (1958) found no
abnormalities in mongrel dogs fed for more than 2.5 years, beginning at an age of 2


===== PDF PAGE 321 =====
320
months, a purified diet containing an estimated 1.3 g Ca·kg–1 diet, DM basis. The
apparent absorption of Ca was 90 percent in this study, which may be higher than
would ordinarily be expected from standard-type diets.
Henrikson (1968) and Krook et al. (1971) observed significant skeletal
abnormalities in adult beagle dogs fed a diet containing 1.2 g versus 12 g Ca·kg–1
diet, DM basis. However, Hedhammar et al. (1980) reported only a transient
decrease in mineral content of bone in adult Golden retrievers fed a dry diet
containing only 1 g Ca·kg–1 diet, providing a Ca intake of 20 mg·kg BW–1·d–1. True
Ca absorption of close to 100 percent was reported in this study. These results
support those of Gershoff et al. (1958) who found that dogs could maintain Ca
balance when fed a purified diet containing an estimated 1.3 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis.
Adverse Effects of Excessive Consumption of Calcium in Dogs
Excessive Ca intake has also been found to result in significant skeletal
abnormalities, particularly in growing puppies of giant breeds (Hedhammar et al.,
1974; Hazewinkel et al., 1985, 1991; Goedegebuure and Hazewinkel, 1986;
Voorhout and Hazewinkel, 1987). Free-choice-fed Great Dane puppies fed a diet
containing 20.4 g Ca·kg–1 (5.2 g per 1,000 kcal ME) consuming from 1,374 mg
Ca·kg BW–1·d–1to 362 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 as they grew to just over 1 year of age
developed clinical and pathological skeletal changes including osteochondrosis,
decreased bone turnover, and increased bone mineral content compared to restricted
fed animals (1,057-362 mg·kg BW–1·d–1) that developed normally (Hedhammar et
al., 1974). Great Dane puppies fed a diet containing 33 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis,
developed osteochondrosis, radius curvus, and stunted growth (Hazewinkel et al.,
1985).
Using kinetic approaches, Hazewinkel et al. (1991) demonstrated decreased
percentage intestinal Ca absorption, increased total Ca absorption, decreased bone
turnover rates, and similar pathological changes in growing Great Dane puppies fed
diets containing 8.9 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME, 33 g Ca·kg–1 diet, and 3,700 kcal
ME·kg–1, DM basis. These puppies consumed 960-1,400 mg Ca·kg BW–1·d–1,
compared to litter mates fed a diet containing 3.0 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME, 11 g
Ca·kg–1 diet, that consumed 300-460 mg Ca·kg BW–1·d–1 (Voorhout and
Hazewinkel, 1987; Hazewinkel et al. 1991). Nap et al. (1993) fed similar diets to
miniature poodle puppies, causing similar changes in Ca metabolism to those
observed in large-breed puppies; however, no significant skeletal abnormalities were
observed.
Goodman et al. (1998) and Lauten and Goodman (1998) also reported poor
conformation and skeletal lesions in Great Dane puppies fed diets containing 6.8 g
Ca per 1,000 kcal ME. In an epidemiologic study, Slater et al. (1992) found that
feeding large-breed puppies diets with Ca concentrations of ≥3.6 g per 1,000 kcal


===== PDF PAGE 322 =====
321
ME was associated with an increased risk of osteochondritis. Thus, excess dietary Ca
has been shown to cause clinically recognizable bone abnormalities in growing dogs,
but these effects appear restricted to puppies of large breeds.
Dietary Calcium Requirements and Allowances in Dogs
Requirements and Allowances for Puppies
The minimum requirement (MR) for Ca varies depending on the breed and age of
growing puppies. Hazewinkel et al. (1991) found that standard diets containing 1.5 g
Ca per 1,000 kcal ME, providing a Ca intake of 150-250 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 and a true
absorption of 120-180 mg·kg BW–1·d–1, were insufficient to support normal growth
in Great Dane puppies, even though true absorption was close to 100 percent.
However, diets containing 3.0 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME with a true absorption
percentage of 45-70 percent, providing a true absorption of 200 mg·kg BW–1·d–1,
supported normal growth. Goodman et al. (1998) and Lauten and Goodman (1998)
reported that feeding diets containing 2 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME (8.2 g·kg–1, 4,000
kcal ME·kg–1) also supported growth of Great Dane puppies. Laflamme (2000)
reported that feeding growing medium- to large-breed puppies diets containing 3.9-
5.7 g Ca per 1,000 kcal also resulted in normal growth, while feeding diets providing
2.2-2.6 g per 1,000 kcal ME resulted in poor growth even though no skeletal lesions
were observed.
While Nap et al. (1993) found that miniature poodle puppies grew normally when
fed basal dry-type diets containing only 0.9 g Ca per 1,000 kcal, DM basis, feeding
similar puppies diets containing 3.0 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME also resulted in normal
growth. Based on these observations and those of Goodman et al. (1998) and Lauten
and Goodman (1998) mentioned previously, a calcium concentration of 2.0 g Ca per
1,000 kcal ME (8.0 g Ca·kg–1, 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1) may be set as the MR of dietary
Ca that will support normal growth in puppies of both large and small breeds
although it will likely exceed MRs in other than giant breeds. Such a diet will
provide a daily Ca intake of 370 mg·kg–1 (560 mg Ca·kg BW–0.75·d–1) for a 5.5-kg
puppy consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1 (Nap et al., 1993; Lauten and Goodman,
1998). Although Laflamme (2000) suggested that this concentration of dietary Ca
may not support optimal growth in some large breeds, the diets used in these
experiments may have resulted in a lower percentage of Ca absorption than that
measured in the former studies since they were standard diets of only moderate
caloric density that may have contained ingredients that reduce the absorption of
calcium (Hoff-Jorgensen, 1945).
Regarding the recommended allowance (RA) for Ca in puppy diets, the data of
Hazewinkel et al. (1991), Schoenmakers et al. (1999), and Nap et al. (1993) suggest
that a dietary concentration of 3.0 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME (12 g Ca·kg–1, 4,000 kcal


===== PDF PAGE 323 =====
322
ME·kg–1) should be sufficient for all breeds. Such a diet would provide a Ca intake
of 545 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (680 mg Ca·kg BW–0.75·d–1) for a 5.5-kg puppy consuming
1,000 kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Adult Dogs
The data of Hedhammar et al. (1980) and Gershoff (1958) showed that adult dogs
can be maintained on diets containing concentrations of approximately 1.5 g Ca·kg–1
diet, which provided approximately 20 mg Ca·kg BW–1·d–1. Endogenous fecal
losses of approximately 20 mg Ca·kg BW–1·d–1would require almost 100 percent
true bioavailability of Ca and an apparent Ca availability of close to 0 percent
(Hedhammar et al., 1980; Hill et al., 2001). Schoenmakers et al. (1999) in Great
Dane puppies and Nap et al. (1993) in miniature poodle puppies also found
endogenous fecal losses averaging about 20 mg Ca·kg BW–1·d–1. Zero calcium
balance would require minimal losses of Ca in the urine, which has been confirmed
(Hedhammar et al., 1980; Schoenmakers et al., 1999).
These data suggest that to maintain Ca balance adult dogs must absorb
approximately 25 mg of Ca·kg BW–1·d–1. Assuming a maximal true bioavailability
of 90 percent, the MR of Ca for adult dogs would be no more than 30 mg·kg BW–
1·d–1, which could be provided by a diet containing 0.5 g per 1,000 kcal ME or 2 g
Ca·kg–1 and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1. Assuming a safety factor of 50 percent
(bioavailability of 40 percent) to account for variations in fractional absorption and
energy intake, the RA of dietary Ca for adult dogs could reasonably be set at 65
mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (130 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1). The RA for a 15-kg adult dog
consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1 would be met by a diet containing 1.0 g Ca per 1,000
kcal ME or 4.0 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis, and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Dogs
Using a factorial approach, Meyer (1984) reported RAs of Ca for pregnant
bitches as 160 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 during the last 3 weeks of pregnancy assuming a
bioavailability of 40 percent. This figure was confirmed in a subsequent study in
pregnant bitches of several breeds (Meyer et al., 1985a). The energy requirement in
late pregnancy for a 22-kg bitch would be approximately 100 kcal ME·kg BW–1·d–1
(Meyer et al., 1985a). A diet containing 1.6 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME or 6.4 g Ca·kg–1
and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1 should provide the RA of Ca for gestation.
During lactation, again using a factorial approach, Meyer et al. (1985b) calculated
the Ca allowance of a 22-kg bitch nursing eight puppies to be 360 mg·kg BW–1·d–1
assuming 50 percent bioavailability. The energy requirement for a 22-kg bitch


===== PDF PAGE 324 =====
323
nursing eight pups during late lactation may be estimated at 230 kcal ME·kg BW–
1·d–1, or approximately 5,000 kcal ME (Meyer et al., 1985b). Based on these data, a
diet containing 1.6 g Ca per 1,000 kcal or 6.5 g Ca·kg–1 and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1
should provide the recommended Ca allowance for a 22-kg lactating bitch with eight
puppies in peak lactation. Since a slightly lower energy intake and a slightly higher
Ca need were reported for giant breeds, the Ca concentration of a diet designed for
giant breeds might have to be increased slightly to about 1.9 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME
(Meyer et al., 1985b).
The requirements for lactation can also be inferred by factorial analysis using data
on milk production and milk Ca concentration. Lonnerdal et al. (1981) and
Lonnerdal (1996) reported Ca concentrations in bitch milk averaging about 1,700
mg·L–1. Ruesse (1961) and Oftedal (1984) reported peak milk production of
approximately 1,050 and 1,700 mL·d–1 in beagle and German shepherd bitches,
respectively, when they were nursing six puppies. By assuming a minimum Ca
requirement for maintenance of 30 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 at a maximal bioavailability of
90 percent, the MR for milk production would be 150-200 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 for
maintenance plus lactation. To correct for variations in availability, an average
bioavailability of 65 percent might be assumed, which would result in a RA of 200-
300 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (433-650 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) for lactating bitches. This
amount of Ca would be supplied by a diet containing 5.0 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis (1.25
g per 1,000 kcal ME), if the diet contained 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1, which is very
similar to the data of Meyer (1984).
To ensure adequate Ca for lactating bitches of all breeds, the adequate intake (AI)
and RA for Ca should be set at the level determined adequate for giant breeds, i.e.,
380 mg Ca·kg BW–1·d–1 (820 mg Ca·kg BW–0.75·d–1), which, given normal energy
intake, would require 1.9 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME or 8 g Ca·kg–1 in a diet containing
4,000 kcal ME·kg–1 (Meyer et al., 1985b). As shown above, a diet providing
sufficient Ca for lactation should be more than sufficient for gestation.
Safe Upper Limit of Calcium in Dogs
Data on adverse effects of excessive Ca consumption are available for growing
puppies of giant breeds (Hedhammar et al., 1974; Hazewinkel et al., 1985, 1991;
Goedegebuure and Hazewinkel, 1986; Voorhout and Hazewinkel, 1987). These
studies showed that feeding diets with concentrations of 21-33 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis
(4.9-8.9 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME), resulted in significant bone abnormalities in
growing dogs of giant breeds. However, Weber et al. (2000) reported no
abnormalities when diets containing 2.1-3.9 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME were fed to
Great Dane or giant schnauzer puppies for 24 weeks beginning at 10 weeks of age.
In growing puppies of medium- to large-sized breeds, Laflamme (2000) found no


===== PDF PAGE 325 =====
324
adverse skeletal effect of feeding diets containing 3.9-5.7 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME
(13-19 g Ca·kg–1) in a diet containing 3,300 kcal ME·kg–1, DM basis. Based on
these data, a safe upper limit (SUL) for Ca in growing giant-breed puppies may
reasonably be set at a minimum of 4.5 g per 1,000 kcal ME or 18 g Ca·kg–1 in a diet
containing 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1, DM basis. For puppies of large breeds with slow
growth rates, as well as those of smaller breeds and all adult dogs, the SUL will very
likely be higher.
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Calcium in Cats
Less information is available on Ca absorption in the feline compared to the
canine species. Pastoor et al. (1994b) studied the effects of calcium chloride (CaCl2)
on mineral metabolism in kittens fed purified diets containing 6.7 g Ca·kg–1 diet as
the carbonate or the chloride and 12.3 g Ca·kg–1 diet, with equal amounts from
calcium carbonate (CaCO3) and CaCl2. Balance trials were performed at 15, 21, 31,
and 39 weeks of age. Apparent absorption of Ca intake in 15-week-old kittens
averaged 45 percent when the animals were fed diets containing 6.7 g Ca·kg–1 as
either the carbonate or the chloride and 24 percent when fed diets containing 12.3 g
Ca·kg–1 with equal amounts of Ca as carbonate and chloride. This decreased
gradually to apparent absorptions of 5-10 percent for diets containing 6.7 g Ca·kg–1
as carbonate or chloride and less than 1 percent for the diet containing 12.3 g Ca·kg–
1 as carbonate or chloride in 39-week-old cats.
In adult ovariectomized cats approximately 1.5 years of age, Pastoor et al.
(1994a) found apparent absorption of intake averaging 7.5, 18.4, 5.1, and 18.2
percent in diets containing 2.5, 3.7, 7.5, and 15.2 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis, as calcium
carbonate. In a similar experiment, apparent absorptions of 5 percent were observed
when purified diets containing 7 g Ca·kg–1 were fed as either the CaCO3 or CaCl2
(Pastoor et al., 1994b). In another experiment, Pastoor et al. (1995a) found apparent
absorption of intake averaging 12.5 percent in 2.5-year-old ovariectomized cats fed a
purified diet containing 7 g Ca·kg–1 as CaCO3. Also, 3-year-old cats fed diets
containing 13 g Ca·kg–1 as CaCO3, or equal amounts of CaCO3 and CaCl2 were
observed to have apparent absorption values ranging from 0 to 9 percent.
Purified diets have been used in most studies of Ca absorption in cats (Pastoor et
al., 1994b,1994a, 1995a). However, in a study of Ca absorption in adult cats fed
basal diets with ground limestone, dicalcium phosphate, or bone meal as the source
of Ca, Hintz and Schryver (1986) reported that from any of the three sources,
positive Ca balance was attained at a dietary Ca concentration of 2 g Ca·kg–1, DM
basis, the diets having a Ca:P ratio of 1:3.5. True absorption of Ca in these studies
was estimated at 36-39 percent.


===== PDF PAGE 326 =====
325
The effect of various calcium salts on Ca absorption in cats has also been studied.
Feeding Ca as the chloride compared to the carbonate resulted in a higher percentage
of Ca absorption and a lower urinary pH (Pastoor et al., 1994b). In other studies,
however, addition of 1.5 percent ammonium chloride to a standard diet was shown to
result in a reduction in the apparent absorption of Ca intake from an average of about
12 percent to approximately 5 percent during the first several months of feeding.
However, this effect disappeared during the fifth and sixth month of feeding the diet
containing ammonium chloride (Ching et al., 1989). Recent studies in cats suggest
that alterations in the Ca:P ratio (increases in dietary P) do not significantly affect Ca
absorption in adult cats (Pastoor et al., 1995b).
Calcium Deficiency in Cats
Scott et al. (1961) described Ca deficiency in kittens fed a diet consisting mainly
of raw beef heart, which contains approximately 30 mg Ca·kg–1 diet on a DM basis.
Affected kittens demonstrated bone rarefaction, especially in the lumbar vertebrae,
which tended to curve and collapse, and in the the pelvis (Pennington, 1998; Scott et
al., 1961). Similar findings were observed in an experiment by Krook et al. (1963)
which were compatible with a diagnosis of NSHP. There was a loss of bone mineral,
evident with both radiographic and histologic evaluation. Affected animals showed
evidence of bone pain, which proceeded to pathological fractures. Wing (1967)
found in kittens that the clinical signs of Ca deficiency could be reversed by feeding
a diet containing 10 g Ca·and 5 g P·kg–1 diet. Jowsey and Gershon-Cohen (1964)
reported radiologic evidence of decreased mineral density in adult cats fed a raw beef
heart diet for 10 weeks. Decreased bone density was more pronounced after 20
weeks in cats fed the raw beef heart diet, but animals supplemented with Ca after 10
weeks showed improvement.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Calcium in Cats
There is some evidence of deleterious effects of elevated dietary Ca on kittens.
Howard et al. (1998) evaluated the Mg requirement of kittens fed a purified basal
diet containing 6 or 23 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis. Kittens fed the high- versus normal-Ca
diet had depressed food intake, decreased growth, and higher serum concentrations
of both total and ionized Ca. The high-Ca diet also increased the requirement for Mg
(Howard et al., 1998). Pastoor et al. (1994b) observed decreased apparent Ca
availability, 24 percent versus 40 percent, and increased bone mineral density, in 15-
week-old kittens fed a purified diet containing 12.3 versus 6.7 g Ca·kg–1 diet, DM
basis, respectively.
Dietary Calcium Requirements and Allowances in Cats


===== PDF PAGE 327 =====
326
Requirements and Allowances for Kittens
There is likely less breed variation in the Ca requirements of cats compared to
dogs. However, as in the dog, the Ca requirement of kittens appears to decrease with
increasing age (Pastoor et al., 1994b). Scott (1965) suggested that kittens require
between 200 and 400 mg Ca·d–1 assuming the Ca:P ratio is not too high or too low.
Pastoor et al. (1994b) reported Ca intakes of 300 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 and an apparent
percentage absorption of about 40 percent in 15-week-old kittens fed a purified diet
containing 6.7 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis. This decreased to 120 mg Ca·kg BW–1·d–1 and
an apparent percentage absorption of about 10 percent at 39 weeks of age (Pastoor et
al., 1994b). Howard et al. (1998) observed normal growth rates in 10- to 22-week-
old kittens fed a purified diet with an average daily Ca intake of 200 mg·kg BW–1·d–
1. Morris and Earle (1999) suggested that a dietary concentration of 6 g Ca·kg–1,
DM basis (approximately 1.3 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME), would meet the Ca need of
growing kittens as long as the Ca:P ratio is reasonable (approximately 1:0.6-1:1.3).
An 800-g kitten consuming 180 kcal ME would thus have a minimum Ca
requirement of 295 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (274 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) (Morris and Earle,
1999).
For a RA, accounting for reductions in Ca availability in standard diets, a true
absorption of 50 percent can be assumed (Hashimoto et al., 1996) for growing
kittens assuming an endogenous fecal Ca loss of 20 mg·kg BW–1·d–1(Hashimoto et
al., 1996; Kienzle, 1998). Assuming 75 percent true absorption of Ca in the purified
diet fed by Morris and Earle (1999), similar to that estimated by Pastoor et al.
(1994b), the recommended Ca allowance for the growing kittens may be set at 440
mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (410 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1). A diet containing 2.0 g Ca per 1,000
kcal ME would provide the recommended Ca allowance for an 800-g kitten
consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Adult Cats
Pastoor et al. (1994a) evaluated Ca balance in 1.5-year-old ovariectomized cats
and found that those fed diets with a Ca concentration of 2.5 g Ca·kg–1 were in
positive Ca balance, indicating that the diet was sufficient. In another study, Pastoor
et al. (1994b) observed apparent Ca absorption of less than 10 percent in 2.5-year-old
ovariectomized cats fed purified diets containing 7 g Ca·kg–1, suggesting that Ca
intake was greater than necessary. Kienzle (1998) used a factorial approach to
calculate the Ca requirement of lactating queens, which included an estimate of a
MR for maintenance of 21.2 mg·kg BW–1·d–1. With an estimated bioavailability of
35 percent, a maintenance allowance of 61 mg Ca· kg BW–1·d–1 was calculated.


===== PDF PAGE 328 =====
327
Adult cats are usually in zero Ca balance with urinary Ca losses of about 1 mg·kg
BW–1·d–1 and endogenous fecal losses of about 20 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (Pastoor et al.,
1994a; Kienzle, 1998). Assuming 90 percent maximal true availability, the MR of Ca
for adult cats approximates 25 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (40 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) (Pastoor et
al., 1994a, 1995a; Kienzle, 1998). A diet containing 400 mg Ca per 1,000 kcal ME
or 1.6 g Ca and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1 would thus supply the minimum Ca requirement
for a 4-kg adult cat consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1.
Assuming an average true absorption of 45 percent, similar to that measured by
Hintz and Schryber (1986) to account for variations in diet and other factors, the RA
of dietary Ca for adult cats would be 45 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (71 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1).
A diet containing 720 mg Ca per 1,000 kcal ME would provide the Ca allowance for
a 4-kg cat consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1 (Pastoor et al., 1994a; Kienzle, 1998). This
agrees well with the data of Hintz and Schryver (1986) who found that feeding basal
diets containing 2-3 g Ca·kg–1 to adult cats resulted in slightly positive Ca balance
even at a Ca:P ratio of 1:3.5.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Cats
There are no experimental data concerning the Ca requirement of queens during
gestation. However, a diet containing sufficient Ca to support the growth of kittens
(i.e., 2.0 g per 1,000 kcal ME) should provide an AI to support the Ca needs for
maintenance plus gestation as long as energy intake is sufficient. This is virtually
identical to the Ca concentration of a gestation-lactation diet successfully used by
Piechota et al. (1995) to investigate the nitrogen requirements of cats during
gestation and lactation.
There is also a paucity of experimental data on the Ca needs of lactating queens.
Using a factorial approach, Kienzle (1998) calculated a Ca requirement of queens at
peak lactation nursing four kittens of 358 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (565 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–
1) assuming Ca bioavailability of 35 percent. A 4-kg queen nursing four kittens in
peak lactation would thus require a total of 1.43 g Ca·d–1. A diet containing 2.7 g per
1,000 kcal ME would provide the RA of Ca for this purpose. This fits well with the
data of Piechota et al. (1995) if one assumes that true absorption of the Ca intake in
the purified diet used by this group was 90 percent or higher.
Safe Upper Limit of Calcium in Cats
Howard et al. (1998) reported reduced food intake and decreased growth rate in
kittens fed diets containing an estimated 4.6 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME. Pastoor et al.
(1994b) suggested that feeding diets containing 2.6 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME to
kittens resulted in increased bone density when compared to diets with half the


===== PDF PAGE 329 =====
328
concentration of Ca. Based on these data, a SUL may be set somewhere between 2.6
and 4.6 g Ca per 1,000 kcal ME; thus the SUL cannot be defined precisely.
Phosphorus
Phosphorus is the sixth most prevalent chemical element and the second (after
Ca) most prevalent mineral element in mammals, including humans (Lobaugh,
1996), dogs, and cats (Kienzle et al., 1991b, 1998b). As with Ca, the highest
proportion of P, about 86 percent, is present in bone. Phosphorus is also found in
some abundance in other tissues, the most prominent of these being muscle, which
accounts for some 8.6 percent of total body P. The P concentration in newborn
puppies is about 4.7 g·kg BW–1, which increases to 5.9 g·kg–1 in the adult (Kienzle
et al., 1998b). In cats, the concentrations in newborn and adult animals are 3.8 and
9.1 g·kg BW–1, respectively (Kienzle et al., 1991b). Like Ca, P serves a major role
as a structural element of the skeleton. It is also a structural component of DNA and
RNA, and of membranous and other phospholipids and phosphoproteins. As a
component of high-energy phosphate compounds, it serves a vital function in energy
metabolism including locomotion. It also plays a role in acid-base balance (Lobaugh,
1996).
In feedstuffs, P is more ubiquitous than Ca. For example, it is present at relatively
high concentrations in both cereal and dairy products (NRC, 1971; Pennington,
1998). However, in cereal and other vegetable products a significant fraction of P
may be present in the form of phytate (salts of hexaphosphorylated inositol), which
is less bioavailable than other forms of P (Hoff-Jorgensen, 1945; Erdman, 1979;
Graf, 1986). Fresh meat products generally contain around 0.3 percent P on a DM
basis and have a Ca:P ratio of about 1:20 (Pennington, 1998). However, parts of
animal carcasses containing bone have much higher concentrations of both P and Ca
(NRC, 1971). Commonly used P sources in dog and cat foods, in addition to meat,
include meat and bone meal, 4.46 percent P; fish meal, 3.05 percent P; bone meal,
12.86 percent P; dibasic calcium phosphate, 19.30 percent P; dibasic ammonium
phosphate, 20.6 percent P; and phosphoric acid, 31.6 percent P (Tables 13-6 and 13-
8).
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Phosphorus in Dogs
There are few data on the absorption of dietary P in dogs. Jenkins and Phillips
(1960a) reported apparent absorption of P intake of 30-76 percent in German
shepherd puppies 6 to 16 weeks of age fed diets containing 1.7-5.3 g P·kg–1, mainly
in the form of disodium phosphate. In subsequent studies in German shepherd,
cocker spaniel, and beagle puppies, apparent absorption of P intake from a standard
diet containing 3.3 g P·kg–1 was 66 percent when the Ca concentration was 6 g


===== PDF PAGE 330 =====
329
Ca·kg–1 diet (Ca:P ratio 1.8:1). When the Ca concentration was raised to 9 and 12 g
Ca·kg–1 diet (Ca:P ratios of 3-4:1), apparent absorption of P intake declined to 57
percent and 49 percent, respectively. Apparent absorption of phytate-derived dietary
P was inversely related to increasing Ca:P ratio (Jenkins and Phillips, 1960b).
Increasing dietary fat from 3 to 20 percent did not alter P absorption in diets
containing 3.3 or 4.1 g P·kg–1. In a study of P metabolism in growing Great Dane
puppies, Schoenmakers et al. (1999) fed diets containing 8.2 g P·kg–1 and 10.4 or
31.1 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis. Apparent absorptions of P of 65-70 percent and 25-50
percent were observed in 9- and 15-week-old puppies, respectively, for the two diets,
with high dietary Ca significantly reducing absorption of P (Schoenmakers et al.,
1999). However, all puppies were in positive P balance.
Sheffy et al. (1985) observed apparent absorption of P averaging 40 percent in
adult dogs 1 or 10 years of age when they were fed standard diets containing 9.9-
20.7 g P·kg–1 diet and 12.3-36.0 g Ca·kg–1.
With respect to dietary interactions, there is ample evidence that increasing the
dietary concentration of Ca decreases the absorption of P (Jenkins and Phillips,
1960b; Schoenmakers et al., 1999). This is most evident at Ca:P ratios greater than
2:1. There is also good evidence, in dogs as well as other simple-stomached animals,
that phytate P is less bioavailable than P from inorganic sources (Jenkins and
Phillips, 1960a,b). For example, apparent absorption of P has ranged from 26 percent
in diets containing all beef as protein source to as low as 13.5 percent in diets
containing a mixture of beef and soy protein, which is relatively high in phytate
content (Hill et al., 2001).
Phosphorus Deficiency in Dogs
Deficiencies of P have been reported in puppies (Table 7-1). Puppies fed diets
containing 3.3 g P·kg–1 (67 percent apparent digestibility) and 6 g Ca·kg–1 (Ca:P
ratio 1.8:1) demonstrated better growth than those fed lower concentrations of P
(Jenkins and Phillips, 1960b). Puppies fed diets with similar concentrations of P but
higher concentrations of Ca had reduced P absorption as evidence by reduced plasma
P and bone ash concentrations (Jenkins and Phillips, 1960b).
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Phosphorus in Dogs
There are very few data regarding the effects of elevated dietary P intake in dogs.
The effects of very low Ca:P ratios (i.e., nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism)
have been well described (Henrikson, 1968; Krook et al., 1971). However, this
appears to be related more to Ca deficiency than it does to P excess (Hazewinkel et
al., 1991).


===== PDF PAGE 331 =====
330
Dietary Phosphorus Requirements and Allowances for Dogs
Requirements and Allowances for Puppies
The above data suggest that the apparent absorption of P intake in young dogs fed
inorganic sources of this mineral is at least 70 percent (Jenkins and Phillips,
1960a,b). If dogs are similar to cats, endogenous fecal losses of P would be only a
few milligrams per kilogram of body weight (BW) per day (Kienzle, 1998).
However, if the Ca:P ratio exceeds 2:1 or the diet contains significant amounts of
phytate P, absorption will decrease (Jenkins and Phillips, 1960a,b; Schoenmakers et
al., 1999). A usable figure for percentage absorption of P intake in young dogs fed
standard growth diets, particularly dry diets, may reasonably be set at about 50
percent (Jenkins and Phillips, 1960a). For young dogs, a minimum absorbable P
concentration has been estimated to be about 2.6 g P·kg–1 diet, DM basis (Jenkins
and Phillips, 1960a). Therefore, a reasonable dietary P concentration for growth of
puppies could be about 5.2 g P·kg–1, DM basis.
TABLE 7-1 Clinical Signs of Phosphorus Deficiency in Dogs in Relation to
Physiological Status and Dietary Phosphorus Concentration
Schoenmakers et al. (1999) observed an apparent absorption of P intake of 70
percent when 10- to 15-week-old Great Dane puppies were fed a diet containing 0.82
percent P, or 2.2 g P·1,000 kcal ME–1 (Ca:P ratio of 1.3:1), with a net P retention of
approximately 190 mg·kg BW–1·d–1. However when the Ca:P ratio was increased to
3.6:1, net P retention decreased to 95 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 and urinary P loss was
negligible, suggesting that this may be an insufficient amount of P (Schoenmakers et
al., 1999).


===== PDF PAGE 332 =====
331
Based on these data, to ensure adequate P especially in the face of increased
dietary Ca the AI of P should be set at 2.50 g per 1,000 kcal ME. This diet will
provide 450 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (680 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) of P, or a 5.5-kg puppy
consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1, which should meet the need of a giant-breed puppy
while perhaps exceeding that of growing puppies of small- or medium-sized breeds
(Jenkins and Phillips, 1960a,b).
Requirements and Allowances for Adult Dogs
There are very few experimental data available from which to recommend a MR
or RA of P in adult dogs. Sheffy et al. (1985) reported apparent absorptions of
ingested P of 40-50 percent in young adult and old beagles fed diets containing 10.0-
25.0 g P·kg–1, DM basis. If energy consumption is normal, the P intake of these dogs
would be approximately 220 mg·kg BW–1·d–1. With a true absorption of only 40
percent, the absorbed P, 90 mg·kg BW–1·d–1, would be much higher than is
reasonable based on observed Ca requirements of adult dogs (Gershoff et al., 1958;
Hedhammar et al., 1980).
More recently, Hill et al. (2001) measured apparent absorption of ingested P in
adult dogs fed diets containing various amounts of animal and plant protein sources.
The dietary P concentration averaged 10.5 g·kg–1, DM basis, and the Ca:P ratio was
2:1. Phosphorus intake was estimated at 132 mg·kg BW–1·d–1, and apparent
absorption of P intake averaged 22 percent, resulting in a net P uptake of 30 mg·kg
BW–1·d–1. One may presume that the endogenous fecal loss of P was only a few
milligrams per kilogram of BW per day based on the data of Kienzle (1998) in cats,
so true absorption was probably no higher than 35 mg·kg BW–1·d–1. This figure is
very close to the maintenance P allowance predicted by Meyer (1984) in pregnant
bitches and suggests a true absorption of close to 30 percent. Diets with a lower Ca:P
ratio (closer to 1:1) could be expected to result in a higher percentage P absorption,
perhaps closer to the 70 percent reported by Jenkins and Phillips (1960a,b),
suggesting an AI for adult dogs of 50 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (100 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1). A
diet containing approximately 0.75 g P per 1,000 kcal would provide sufficient P for
a 15-kg adult dog consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Dogs
There are few data available on P requirements for gestation and lactation in the
bitch. Meyer et al. (1985a) recommended a P allowance for pregnant bitches during
the last 5 weeks of pregnancy of 133 mg·kg BW–1·d–1. For lactating bitches, Meyer
et al. (1985b) recommended a daily P allowance of 145-290 mg·kg BW–1·d–1. These
estimates were based on the size of the bitch and an assumed P bioavailability of 50


===== PDF PAGE 333 =====
332
percent. Extrapolating from these data, an estimated 270 mg P·kg BW–1·d–1 (580
mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) would be the AI and the RA for a 22-kg bitch in peak lactation
nursing eight puppies. If an energy intake of 5,000 kcal ME·d–1 is assumed, a diet
containing 1.2 g P per 1,000 kcal ME would provide the RA and could be used for
both gestation and lactation.
Safe Upper Limit of Phosphorus for Dogs
There are insufficient data on which to base an SUL for P in dogs.
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Phosphorus in Cats
More information is available regarding phosphorus availability in cats as
compared to that in dogs, but there are only a few studies in kittens. Pastoor et al.
(1994b) fed growing kittens, 15 to 39 weeks of age, purified diets containing 5.1 g
phosphorus·kg–1 diet as monobasic ammonium phosphate and either 6.7 or 12.5 g
calcium·kg–1 (Ca:P ratios of 1.3:1 or 2.5:1). Apparent absorption of intake P
averaged 85-70 percent for the diet with the lower concentration of Ca and 60-40
percent when the higher Ca diet was fed, the higher dietary Ca:P ratio resulting in
about a 30 percent reduction in apparent absorption of intake P (Pastoor et al.,
1994b). Later, Pastoor et al. (1995c) evaluated P metabolism in kittens aged 11 to 39
weeks fed purified diets containing 5.4 or 2.8 g P·kg–1 as monobasic ammonium
phosphate and 7.1 g Ca·kg–1 diet as the carbonate (Ca:P ratios of 1.3:1 and 2.5:1) on
a DM basis. Apparent absorption of intake P was close to 90 percent in 11- or 15-
week-old kittens fed either diet, gradually decreasing to 65-70 percent at 39 weeks of
age. Kittens fed 2.8 g P·kg–1 diet showed significant reductions in BW compared to
kittens fed 5.4 g P·kg–1 diet between 15 and 20 weeks of age, but at 39 weeks there
were no significant differences between the two groups (Pastoor et al., 1995c).
Similar results were observed in 31-week-old kittens fed a diet containing 2.8 g
P·kg–1 and 3.8 g Ca·kg–1 (Ca:P ratio of 1.4:1).
Adult cats (2.5 years of age) fed purified diets containing 5.1 g P·kg–1 (Ca:P ratio
1.4:1) and increasing concentrations of Mg (0.2-1.6 g·kg–1 diet) demonstrated
decreasing apparent percentage absorption of P from 73 percent to 63 percent. A
concentration of 0.8 or 1.6 g Mg·kg–1 diet had a small but significant negative effect
on apparent P absorption compared to a diet containing 20 mg Mg·kg–1 (Pastoor et
al., 1995a). One-year-old cats fed purified diets containing 2.8, 5.6, 11.2, and 16.9 g
P and 6.7 g Ca·kg–1 diet (Ca:P ratio 2.4-0.4:1) demonstrated increasing apparent
percentage absorption of P ranging from 67 to 77 percent as the P concentration of
the diet increased and the Ca:P ratio decreased (Pastoor et al., 1995b).


===== PDF PAGE 334 =====
333
Kienzle (1998) investigated P requirement in adult cats 1.5-6 years of age. Diets
containing 2.1, 3.8, or 4.1 g P·kg–1 were fed (Ca:P ratios varying from 1:1 to 4:1).
Feeding diets with a Ca:P ratio of 1:1 resulted in apparent P absorption averaging 50
percent when the P concentration was either 2.1 or 4.1 g·kg–1. Ca:P ratios of 2:1
significantly reduced apparent P absorption regardless of dietary concentration, and
ratios of 4:1 resulted in even more drastic reductions in P absorption, with cats fed a
diet containing 8 g Ca·kg–1 and 2 g P·kg–1 demonstrating negligible P
bioavailability. These cats developed clinical signs of P deficiency (Kienzle et al.,
1998a). The Ca:P ratio had a greater impact than dietary P concentration on apparent
percentage absorption of P in this study.
Organically bound P from animal sources, when compared to inorganic P, has
also been found to reduce apparent absorption of P from 40 percent to 20 percent in
adult cats fed a standard diet containing an estimated 16 g P·kg–1, DM basis (Finco
et al., 1989).
Phosphorus Deficiency in Cats
There is only one report of P deficiency in cats. Kienzle et al. (1998a) described
clinical signs of deficiency including hemolytic anemia, locomotor disturbances, and
metabolic acidosis in adult cats fed diets containing 2.1 g P·kg–1 and 8.3 g Ca·kg–1,
DM basis (Ca:P ratio of 4:1). In this study, P intake averaged approximately 20
mg·kg BW–1·d–1, with an apparent absorption of dietary P averaging about 20
percent (Kienzle et al., 1998a).
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Phosphorus in Cats
While Pastoor et al. (1995b) and Morris and Earle (1999) observed an inverse
relationship of dietary to plasma P concentrations (no adverse clinical signs were
noted) as dietary P intake increased from 30 to 160 mg·kg BW–1·d–1, this has since
been reported to be an artifact of experimental procedure (J. G. Morris, personal
communication, 2002). Fulton and Fruechte (1991) observed clinical signs of
depression, dehydration, metabolic acidosis, and hyperphosphatemia with excessive
supplemental P, but this study included only one observation.
Dietary Phosphorus Requirements and Allowances for Cats
Requirements and Allowances for Kittens and Adult Cats
Scott (1965) stated that kittens fed purified diets require 150-200 mg P·d–1, but
kittens fed standard diets usually consume up to 400 mg P·d–1, requiring Ca


===== PDF PAGE 335 =====
334
supplementation to attain a reasonable Ca:P ratio. Pastoor et al. (1995c) measured P
balance in 11- to 39-week-old kittens fed a purified diet containing 2.8 or 5.6 g P·kg–
1 and 7.1 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis. Although kittens fed the diet with the lower P
concentration initially grew more slowly, at 39 weeks there were no significant
differences between the two groups (Pastoor et al., 1995c). From studies of P
requirements of kittens, Pastoor et al., (1995c) concluded that feeding diets
containing 1.2 g P per 1,000 kcal ME with a Ca:P ratio of 2:1 resulted in normal P
balance. Such a diet would provide an intake of 270 mg P·kg BW–1·d–1 (251 mg·kg
BW–0.67·d–1) for an 800-g kitten consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1, which may be
considered a MR.
Pastoor et al. (1995b) evaluated P balance in 1-year-old ovariectomized cats fed
purified diets containing 2.8-16.9 g P·kg–1, DM basis, with a constant Ca
concentration of 6.7 g·kg–1 diet (Ca:P ratios of 2:1-1:2). Phosphorus balance was
maintained at the lowest concentration of dietary P (Pastoor et al., 1995b). Also in
adult cats, Kienzle et al. (1998a) determined that a dietary concentration of 2.1 g
P·kg–1, DM basis, appeared to maintain P balance if the Ca:P ratio was 2:1 or less.
In adult cats, diets containing 0.35 g P per 1,000 kcal ME should maintain P balance
(Kienzle et al., 1998a). The MR for a 4-kg adult cat consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1
would thus be 22 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (35 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1).
While the Ca:P ratio is unlikely to be so high as to interfere with P availability, in
most cat foods, particularly dry type, a portion of P probably will be present in the
form of phytate, which is less available than that from inorganic sources. Therefore,
it is prudent to account for differences in percentage absorption of dietary P and
variations in energy intake. With MRs of 270 and 22 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (251 and 35
mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) for young kittens and adult cats, respectively, RAs of 400
mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (372 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) for kittens and 40 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (63
mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) for adult cats are suggested. A diet containing 1.8 g P per 1,000
kcal ME would provide the recommended daily P allowance for an 800-g kitten
consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1. A diet containing 640 mg P per 1,000 kcal ME would
provide the RA for a 4-kg adult cat consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Cats
Piechota et al. (1995) fed a purified diet containing 1.22 g P per 1,000 kcal ME to
queens throughout gestation and lactation and reported no evidence of P deficiency.
By use of factorial analysis, however, Kienzle (1998) estimated P requirements in
lactating queens to be 100-303 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 depending on the number of kittens
(two to six) in the litter and assuming a P bioavailability of 35 percent. Based on the
data of Piechota et al. (1995), a dietary P concentration of 4.9 g P·kg–1 DM and
4,000 kcal ME·kg–1 providing 165 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (261mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) for a


===== PDF PAGE 336 =====
335
4-kg lactating queen nursing four kittens may be assumed to be the minimum P
requirement for this life stage. Using the data of Kienzle et al. (1998) a
recommended P allowance of 263 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (411 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) can
be made. A diet containing 1.9 g P per 1,000 kcal ME would thus provide the RA for
a 4-kg queen nursing four kittens and consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1.
Safe Upper Limit of Phosphorus for Cats
There is little information on which to base a SUL for dietary P intake in cats.
Pastoor et al. (1995b) fed adult cats a semipurified diet containing 3.6 g P per 1,000
kcal ME (Ca: P ratio 0.4:1.0) for 4 weeks with minimal significant effects. However,
cats fed this level of P did demonstrate a small decrease in renal creatinine clearance
and decreased plasma P concentrations, perhaps an artifact, compared to cats fed
diets with concentrations of 2.3 g P per 1,000 kcal ME or lower. Based on these data,
the SUL for dietary P concentration for adult cats might be set at between 10 and 14
g P·kg–1 in a diet containing 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1. This estimate assumes a
reasonably normal Ca:P ratio (0.5-1.5:1) and a reasonably high true absorption. If the
Ca:P ratio is significantly higher than this estimate or absorption is low due to other
factors, higher P intakes may be safe. Because of the effect of dietary Ca
concentration and other dietary factors on P absorption, it is impossible to predict a
SUL for dietary P in cats.
Magnesium
Magnesium is the second most abundant intracellular cation, after K, and is
involved in more than 300 metabolic processes. Total body Mg in newborn kittens
and adult cats has been measured as 200 mg and 400 mg·kg BW–1, respectively, and
in newborn puppies as approximately 100 mg·kg–1 (Meyer et al., 1985a; Kienzle et
al., 1991b). As a cofactor in enzyme function, it is essential for oxidative
phosphorylation and adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) activity, DNA and RNA
metabolism, and protein synthesis. It also plays vital roles in the stability of muscle
and nerve cell membranes, cell-to-cell adhesion, extracellular matrix communication,
calcium channel regulation in cardiac tissue, lymphocyte proliferation, and platelet
activation (Birk et al., 1998; de Chateau et al., 2001; McKee et al., 2002). It is
required for the secretion and function of hormones (e.g., PTH) and plays an
essential role in the mineral structure of bones and teeth (Levi et al., 1974; Khanna et
al., 1998). About 50 percent of total body Mg is found in bone. Unlike Ca, however,
bone Mg is not exchangeable. All but a small fraction of the remainder is found in
the cytoplasm of soft tissues (e.g., muscle), with only about 1 percent in the
extracellular fluid space (Favus, 1996).


===== PDF PAGE 337 =====
336
Many ingredients used in petfoods provide sources of Mg. Muscle meat generally
contains on the order of 0.1 percent Mg on a DM basis. However, meat and bone
meals may contain more than 1.9 percent Mg. Various corn products contain from
0.1 to 0.6 percent Mg and soybean meal contains about 0.3 percent (NRC, 1971).
Several inorganic sources of Mg are used as supplements in petfoods including
ground limestone, 2.96 percent Mg; magnesium chloride, 12 percent Mg;
magnesium sulfate, 9.8 percent Mg; and magnesium oxide, 9.8 percent Mg (Table
13-8).
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Magnesium in Dogs
There are few data on the absorption of dietary Mg in dogs. Beynen et al. (2001)
observed an apparent absorption of dietary Mg, in adult dogs fed a commercial moist
diet, of 23 percent which increased to 30-36 percent with added lactulose. In another
study, Beynen et al. (2002) reported that the addition of 10 g·kg–1 of oligofructose to
a basal dry diet increased the apparent absorption of Mg from 14 percent to 23
percent and suggested that this might be due to a decreased pH of the ileal ingesta
resulting in increased solubility and absorption of Mg. Increasing dietary P
concentration from 4.0 to 9.0 g·kg–1 in a low-Mg (80 mg·kg–1) diet accelerated the
appearance of clinical signs of Mg deficiency, suggesting a negative effect of P on
Mg bioavailability (Bunce et al, 1962a), whereas increasing dietary fat had no
significant effect on bioavailability (Bunce et al., 1962b). Both BW and serum Mg
concentrations were depressed in 1.5- to 7-year-old dogs fed diets containing 80 mg
Mg·kg–1 compared to 180 mg Mg·kg–1, DM basis (Bunce et al., 1962b).
Magnesium Deficiency in Dogs
Vitale et al. (1961) induced Mg deficiency in weaned mongrel puppies by feeding
a purified dry diet with no added Mg, the puppies developing hyperextension of the
carpal joints and hind-leg paralysis. Two pups were then changed to a diet containing
240 mg Mg·kg–1, DM basis, and promptly recovered, suggesting that an estimated
240 mg Mg·kg–1 diet, DM basis, is sufficient for growth of puppies (Vitale et al.,
1961).
In a series of two experiments, weanling mongrel or beagle puppies fed purified
dry diets containing less than 140 mg Mg·kg–1 developed anorexia, weight loss,
hyperextension of carpal joints, and posterior ataxia within 3 to 6 weeks of being fed
the diets (Bunce et al., 1962a). Postmortem evaluation revealed mineralization of the
thoracic aorta in the groups with clinical evidence of Mg deficiency (Bunce et al.,
1962a). In a subsequent study, increasing dietary P concentration from 4 to 9 g P·kg–
1 exacerbated the effects of low dietary Mg, while increasing dietary fat from 8 to 20
percent had no effect (Bunce et al., 1962b). Alterations in dietary Ca also did not


===== PDF PAGE 338 =====
337
appear to affect bioavailability of Mg. When 8-month-old dogs were fed diets
containing 80 or 180 mg Mg·kg–1, DM basis, serum Mg concentrations were
reduced in those fed 80 mg Mg·kg–1 and some developed clinical signs of
deficiency. In 1.5- to 7-year-old dogs, both BW and serum Mg concentration were
depressed when the dogs were fed diets containing 80 mg compared to 180 mg
Mg·kg–1.
More recently, Cronin et al. (1982) produced clinical and serum chemical signs of
Mg deficiency in adult beagle dogs by feeding a purified dry diet containing 170 mg
Mg·kg–1, DM basis. Stahlman et al. (2000) produced clinical signs of Mg deficiency,
including lameness and hyperextension of the carpi, in beagle puppies after 4 weeks
of feeding a diet containing 136 mg Mg·kg–1, DM basis. Pedersen and Mow (1998)
found a high incidence of hypomagnesmia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels that did
not appear to be altered by Mg supplementation. They suggested that an increased
probability of mitral valve prolapse might be related to the high incidence of
hypomagnesemia in this breed.
Nonetheless, short-term (6 months) feeding of diets with a concentration of 200
mg Mg·kg–1, DM basis, which is close to the MR, has been found to be effective, in
conjunction with other dietary alterations, for the dissolution of Mg-containing
uroliths in adult dogs (Osborne et al., 1985).
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Magnesium in Dogs
There are no reported adverse effects of excess consumption of Mg in dogs.
However, some natural water sources containing high concentrations of Mg salts
might pose a risk for dogs.
Dietary Magnesium Requirements and Allowances for Dogs
Requirements and Allowances for Puppies and Adult Dogs
Kienzle et al. (1985) showed that normal nursing puppies consumed 13.4 mg
mg·kg BW–1·d–1 and 185 kcal ME·kg BW–1·d–1 during the fourth week of
lactation. If energy and Mg requirements are similar after weaning, a diet containing
75.0 mg Mg per 1,000 kcal would meet the requirement for a 5.5-kg puppy
consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1. However, it is likely that requirements after weaning
are slightly lower and that the availability of Mg from standard diets is lower than
that from milk. Further, long-term feeding of milk diets has been associated with
hypomagnesemia in other species.
Data suggest that dietary Mg concentrations of 45 mg per 1,000 kcal ME provide
MRs of Mg for both puppies and adult dogs fed purified dry diets (Bunce et al.,
1962a,b; Cronin et al., 1982; Stahlmann et al., 2000). Such a diet would provide a


===== PDF PAGE 339 =====
338
Mg intake of 8.2 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (12.5 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) for a 5.5-kg puppy
and 3.0 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (5.91 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) for a 15-kg adult dog, each
consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1.
A safe estimation may be that the bioavailability of Mg in standard diets is about
half that of purified diets. Based on these data, to ensure adequate Mg content of
standard diets, a concentration of 100 mg Mg per 1,000 kcal ME would be the RA
for puppies. This would provide 18 mg Mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (27.4 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1)
for a growing puppy, a figure that agrees well with the data of Kienzle et al. (1985).
The data of Beynen et al. (2002) indicate that Mg intake of adult dogs fed a
commercial moist diet, containing an estimated 1.0 g Mg·kg–1, DM basis, was 17.2
mg·kg BW–1·d–1 and measured apparent absorption of Mg was 14.0 percent,
providing apparent absorption of 2.0 mg·kg BW–1·d–1. Hill et al. (2001) evaluated
Mg absorption in adult dogs fed diets containing 900 mg Mg·kg–1, DM basis. The
dogs in this study consumed 11.5 mg mg·kg BW–1·d–1 with an apparent absorption
of Mg intake of 7.5 percent, yielding an apparent absorption of approximately 1 mg
mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (Hill et al., 2001).
The above data suggest that the true requirement of Mg for adult dogs is
somewhat more than the 2.0 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 apparent absorption observed by
Beynen et al. (2002) or 1.0 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 observed by Hill et al. (2001), likely
very close to the endogenous losses of Mg in adult dogs of 3 mg·kg BW–1·d–1
reported by Meyer (1984) assuming zero Mg balance in adults. Using this value as
the true requirement and a bioavailability of 30 percent as suggested by Meyer et al.
(1985b), an intake of 10 mg Mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (19.7 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) would
constitute the RA of Mg for an adult dog. A diet containing 150 mg Mg per 1,000
kcal ME would provide this amount of Mg for a 15-kg adult dog consuming 1,000
kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Dogs
Summarizing several previous studies, Meyer (1984) listed recommended daily
allowances of 15 and 23 mg Mg·kg BW–1·d–1 for bitches during gestation and
lactation, respectively. Subsequently, again using a factorial approach, Meyer et al.
(1985b) revised the recommendation for Mg intake during lactation to as high as 32
mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (69 mg·kg BW–075·d–1) in bitches of medium-size breeds with
large litters. This recommendation assumed a 30 percent bioavailability of Mg. To
meet the recommended daily allowance for Mg, a 22-kg bitch in peak lactation
nursing eight puppies would require a diet containing 150 mg Mg per 1,000 kcal
ME. Such a diet would undoubtedly meet the needs for gestation as well (Meyer et
al., 1985a).


===== PDF PAGE 340 =====
339
Safe Upper Limit of Magnesium for Dogs
There is virtually no information on dietary Mg toxicity in dogs. Commercial dog
foods frequently contain Mg concentrations of 0.8-1.7 g·kg–1 diet, DM basis. In the
absence of specific information on dietary concentrations or intakes above which
abnormalities are noted, it is impossible to provide a recommendation for the SUL of
dietary Mg in dogs, other than to predict that it is >1.7 g Mg·kg–1 diet on a DM
basis.
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Magnesium in Cats
There is somewhat more information on Mg availability in cats than in dogs.
Pastoor et al. (1994b) reported apparent absorption of Mg intake ranging from 56
percent to 15 percent in kittens from 15 to 39 weeks of age fed diets containing 360
mg·kg–1 and two dietary Ca concentrations of 6.7 and 12.5 g·kg–1, respectively.
Apparent absorption of Mg intake decreased with increasing age, and there was a
tendency toward decreased absorption with higher concentration of Ca. In another
study, Pastoor et al. (1995c) reported apparent absorptions of Mg from 81 percent to
12 percent in kittens fed diets containing 340 mg Mg·kg–1, DM basis, as they aged
from 11 to 39 weeks, in diets containing 7.1 g Ca·kg–1 and either 5.4 or 2.8 g P·kg–1,
DM basis.
In adult cats, apparent percentage absorption of Mg (340 mg·kg–1of diet)
decreased from 46.15 percent to 19.18 percent as the concentration of P was
increased from 2.8 to 16.9 g P·kg–1 diet (Pastoor et al., 1995b). Decreased apparent
absorption of Mg was positively correlated with urinary Mg excretion; no signs of
Mg deficiency were reported.
Apparent percentage absorption of Mg (340 mg·kg–1 of diet) decreased from 40
percent to 26 percent as Ca concentration increased from 2.5 to 15.0 g·kg–1 (Pastoor
et al., 1994a). Apparent Mg absorption and urinary Mg excretion were inversely
correlated with dietary Ca concentration. In another study, Pastoor et al. (1994b)
again observed a decrease in apparent absorption of Mg as Ca concentration of the
diet increased. Further research by Howard et al. (1998) indicated a negative effect
of increasing dietary Ca on the bioavailability of Mg. Pastoor et al. (1995a) observed
a decrease in apparent absorption of Mg with increasing dietary Mg concentration.
Based on the above, the apparent absorption of Mg intake is negatively affected
by increasing dietary concentrations of Ca, P, or Mg (Howard et al., 1998; Pastoor et
al., 1994a,b, 1995a,b). Further, there is a negative correlation between age and
apparent Mg absorption in growing kittens (Pastoor et al., 1994b, 1995c).
Magnesium Deficiency in Cats


===== PDF PAGE 341 =====
340
Chausow et al. (1986) produced signs of Mg deficiency, including poor growth
rate and overextension of the metacarpi followed by muscular twitching and
convulsions, within 3 weeks of feeding growing kittens a diet containing
approximately 42 mg Mg·kg–1, DM basis. On postmortem evaluation, high Ca
concentrations were found in the aorta compared to kittens fed diets containing 750
mg Mg·kg–1. When kittens were fed diets containing 85 mg Mg·kg–1, no clinical
signs were observed, and growth rate was normal, but serum Mg concentrations were
consistently lower than those observed in kittens fed diets containing 370 mg·kg–1,
DM basis.
Recently, Howard et al. (1998) observed reduced total and ionized serum Mg
concentrations in growing kittens fed diets containing 100 mg Mg·kg–1, compared to
kittens fed diets with 200 mg Mg·kg–1 or higher, DM basis. When the dietary Ca
concentration was increased, reduced total and ionized serum Mg concentrations
were observed in kittens fed diets containing up to 500 mg Mg·kg–1, although
clinical signs, including absence of the blink reflex, were seen only in those fed the
diet containing 100 mg Mg·kg–1 (Howard et al., 1998). Similarly, Norris et al.
(1999) reported no clinical signs of Mg deficiency in adult castrated male cats fed
diets containing 100 mg Mg·kg–1, as magnesium sulfate, and 6 g Ca·kg–1.
Freeman et al. (1997) investigated a possible correlation between dietary Mg
reduction and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) in adult cats. The results
suggested that cats with HCM are likely to be fed Mg-restricted (but not Mg-
deficient) diets and do not appear to have altered Mg status compared to healthy
controls. While cats with HCM had lower urinary creatinine and specific gravity than
did controls, no differences in serum creatinine and Mg concentrations, urine Mg
concentration and pH, or fractional excretion of Mg were found between cats with
HCM and normal cats.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Magnesium in Cats
As mentioned earlier, there is ample evidence regarding the apparent relationship
of excess consumption of Mg to struvite urolithiasis in cats (Lewis et al., 1978;
Kallfelz et al., 1980; Lewis and Morris, 1984). Most of these studies were performed
using magnesium oxide to increase the Mg concentration from 1.5-2.0 g Mg·kg–1
diet, DM basis, the concentration found in commercial cat foods in the 1970s, to 5 g
Mg·kg–1 diet or higher. Feeding diets containing >1.0 g Mg·kg–1 was implicated in
increasing the incidence of this metabolic abnormality (Chow et al., 1975; Feldmann
et al., 1977; Kallfelz et al., 1980). However, it was subsequently shown that
decreasing the urinary pH reduced or prevented formation of struvite uroliths, and
cats fed diets inducing an alkaline urine developed struvite crystals and/or uroliths
even at low dietary Mg concentrations (Taton et al., 1984; Buffington et al., 1990). It
is now accepted that formulating cat foods to induce a urinary pH of approximately


===== PDF PAGE 342 =====
341
6.1-6.6 is the most effective means of preventing struvite urolithiasis in this species
(Allen et al., 1997). Regardless of the research illustrating that lowering urinary pH
is a major factor in reducing the incidence of struvite urolithiasis, the Mg
concentration of most contemporary cat foods is generally at or less than 1 g Mg·kg–
1 diet on a DM basis (Coffman, 1997).
Dietary Magnesium Requirements and Allowances for Cats
Requirements and Allowances for Kittens and Adult Cats
Based on the data of Chausow et al. (1986) and Howard et al. (1998), the
minimum dietary Mg requirement of 10-week-old kittens fed purified diets is
approximately 160 mg Mg·kg–1 in a diet containing approximately 4,000 kcal
ME·kg–1, assuming normal concentrations of Ca. The MR for an 800-g kitten
consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1 would thus be 9 mg Mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (8.3 mg·kg BW–
0.67·d–1).
For adult cats the MR can be estimated at 3.1 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (4.9 mg·kg BW–
0.67·d–1) (Pastoor et al., 1995a). This was determined by balance trials involving the
feeding of diets containing 50, 80, 140, and 270 mg Mg per 1,000 kcal ME and
evaluating Mg retention. These data showed that the lowest concentration of dietary
Mg was sufficient, resulting in close to 0 Mg balance. A diet containing 200 mg
Mg·kg–1 and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1 would thus provide the MR for a 4-kg adult cat
consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1. However, since this was the lowest dietary
concentration of Mg evaluated in this study, it is possible that the minimum dietary
requirement for the adult cat may be even lower.
In these and other experiments, Pastoor et al. (1994a,b; 1995a,b,c) observed
apparent absorption of Mg to average 60-80 percent in young kittens, decreasing to
20-40 percent in adult cats, depending on experimental conditions. If the higher
value in each case approaches true availability, the RA of Mg could be set at 13
mg·kg BW–1·d–1 for kittens and 4 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 for adult cats. A diet containing
60 mg per 1,000 kcal ME would provide the RA for both an 800-g kitten consuming
180 kcal ME·d–1 and a 4-kg adult cat consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1.
However, since Howard et al. (1998) determined that elevated dietary Ca (23
g·kg–1) increased the Mg requirement to >100 mg Mg per 1,000 kcal ME of diet for
growing kittens, it is prudent to recommend dietary concentrations of 100 mg Mg per
1,000 kcal ME for both kittens and adult cats in order to cover variations in diet that
might affect Mg absorption. This would provide 22 mg Mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (20 mg·kg
BW–0.67·d–1) for an 800-g kitten consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1 and 6.0 mg·kg BW–
1·d–1 (9.5 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) for a 4-kg adult cat consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1.


===== PDF PAGE 343 =====
342
These recommendations may represent a better estimate of Mg availability from
standard diets.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Cats
There is virtually no information on dietary requirements or allowances for Mg in
pregnant or lactating queens. Piechota et al. (1995) fed a purified diet containing 104
mg Mg per 1,000 kcal ME to pregnant and lactating queens and found no evidence
of Mg deficiency in either the queens or their kittens, showing that this dietary
concentration of Mg was sufficient to support these life stages. Such a diet would
provide an intake of 14 mg Mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (22 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) to a 4-kg
queen nursing four kittens and consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1. In the absence of other
experimental data, this may be considered the MR of Mg for gestation and lactation.
To account for possible lower absorption percentage in standard diets or variations in
energy intake, the RA can reasonably be established at 125 mg Mg per 1,000 kcal
ME. Such a diet would provide 20 mg Mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (32 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) to
a 4-kg cat nursing four kittens in peak lactation and consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1.
Safe Upper Limit of Magnesium for Cats
While dietary concentrations higher than approximately 1 g Mg·kg–1 on a DM
basis had previously been considered to increase the probability of struvite
urolithiasis in adult cats, this is no longer thought to be the case unless the pH of the
urine is greater than 6.6 (Allen et al., 1997). However, dietary Mg concentrations >1
g·kg–1 may still increase the probability of struvite urolithiasis if urinary pH is not
carefully controlled and maintained at or below 6.6. Based on the above, the SUL for
dietary Mg in cats is highly dependent on urinary pH, and no absolute figure can be
provided.
Sodium
Sodium is the tenth most abundant element in the body and the third most
abundant cation (after Ca and K) (Lobaugh, 1996). The Na content of the adult
mammal is about 1,250 to 1,400 mg·kg–1, or about 0.13 percent of BW. Kienzle et
al. (1991) for example reported total body Na concentrations of 1.9 g·kg–1 in kittens
decreasing to 1.4 g·kg–1 in adult cats, and Meyer et al. (1985a) measured total body
Na content as 2.0 g·kg–1 in newborn puppies. Approximately 43 percent of total
body Na is found in bone, 29 percent in interstitial fluid, and 12 percent in blood
plasma, with the remainder being found in collagenous tissues and as intracellular Na
(Briggs et al., 1996). Sodium plays major roles in regulating acid-base balance and


===== PDF PAGE 344 =====
343
extracellular volume because of its importance in the regulation of osmotic pressure.
It is also critically important in maintaining the electrical potential in excitable
tissues and in nerve impulse generation and transmission.
Sodium occurs naturally only at very low concentrations in fruits and vegetables,
generally significantly less than 1 g Na·kg–1, DM basis. In unprocessed meat and
milk products, the concentration is higher, perhaps 3 g Na·kg–1 or higher on a DM
basis. Processed foods, including some meat and cheese products, often contain
much higher concentrations of Na (Pennington, 1998). Mineral salts that may
contain very high concentrations of Na include sodium chloride (table salt), 39
percent Na; sodium carbonate, 37 percent Na; sodium bicarbonate, 27 percent Na;
and monobasic sodium phosphate, 16 percent Na (Table 13-8). Sodium chloride in
mineral premixes probably contributes the majority of the Na found in dog and cat
foods.
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary of Sodium in Dogs
The absorption of dietary Na is generally quite high; in dogs, an apparent
absorption of dietary Na close to 100 percent has been observed in several studies
(Meyer et al., 1989; Michell, 1989, Hill et al., 2001). However, feeding diets
containing significant amounts of soy-derived protein appeared to increase fecal Na
output (Meyer et al., 1989; Hill et al., 2001). Meyer et al. (1999) reported that
apparent absorption of Na intake in 11 breeds of dogs fed a canned diet averaged
only 83 percent. The data of Hill et al. (2001) suggest that a very high proportion,
perhaps as much as 80 percent, of dietary Na is absorbed in the colon. Feeding diets
with elevated concentrations of cellulose or less digestible forms of carbohydrate
such as raw starch has also been shown to decrease apparent absorption of ingested
Na, from more than 90 percent in diets with only 1.0 percent cellulose and 2.0
percent carbohydrate to less than 60 percent in diets containing 40 percent raw starch
and 20 percent cellulose. The increase in fecal Na content in these studies was
directly correlated with the total production of fresh feces (Kienzle et al., 2001).
Sodium Deficiency in Dogs
In a matter of days, Drochner et al. (1976) observed clinical signs of Na
deficiency, including restlessness, increased heart rate, water intake, urinary water
output, hematocrit, and hemoglobin concentrations and dry and tacky mucous
membranes in adult beagle dogs fed diets containing 0.16 g Na·kg–1, DM basis,
providing 3.6 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1. However, Morris et al. (1976) observed no
clinical abnormalities in adult German shepherd dogs consuming 4.4 mg Na·kg BW–
1·d–1 with 1.6 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 from the diet and an additional 2.8 mg Na·kg BW–
1·d–1 from water.


===== PDF PAGE 345 =====
344
Adverse Effects of Excessive Consumption of Sodium in Dogs
Morris et al. (1976a) reported dietary intakes ranging from 95 to 136 mg Na·kg
BW–1·d–1 in dogs consuming various types of commercial dog foods, which would
be equivalent to a maximum of approximately 10 g Na·kg–1 diet. Similarly, Allen
(1989) found that feeding diets containing 10 g Na·kg–1, DM basis, did not increase
Ca excretion in normal dogs. Gupta et al. (1981) found no abnormalities in dogs fed
285 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1 for periods exceeding 6 weeks. This would be equivalent
to a dietary concentration of approximately 18 g Na·kg–1. However, this level of Na
intake was associated with a significant increase in plasma volume compared to dogs
fed 12.6 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1 (Gupta et al., 1981). Reinhardt and Behrenbeck (1967)
reported negative K balance in adult dogs fed a diet containing approximately 20 g
Na·kg–1. However, Boemke et al. (1990) found that K balance was reestablished
after 2 weeks, albeit at a lower plasma K concentration, in dogs consuming 320 mg
Na·kg BW–1·d–1, representing a dietary concentration of slightly more than 20 g
Na·kg–1 diet, DM basis. Thus, given adequate availability of water, the normal dog
can metabolically adapt to wide variations in Na intake. However, a diet containing
an estimated 29 g Na·kg–1, DM basis, was reported to be unpalatable and to cause
vomiting in adult dogs (Zentek and Meyer, 1995).
Dietary Sodium Requirements and Allowances for Dogs
Requirements and Allowances for Puppies
Few data are available on the dietary Na requirements of growing puppies. The
data of Kienzle et al. (1985) and Meyer et al. (1985b) can be used to calculate the Na
concentration of milk and the intake of puppies during the fourth week of lactation.
Kienzle et al. (1985) reported milk intakes averaging 155 mL·d–1 in puppies (of
average size adult breeds) at 4 weeks of age. This figure closely matches that
observed by Oftedal (1984) in 4-week-old beagle puppies. Meyer et al. (1985b) and
Meyer (1984) reported the Na concentration in bitch milk during the fourth week of
lactation to be approximately 70 mg per 100 mL. Using these data, Kienzle et al.
(1985) estimated Na intake to be approximately 100 mg·d–1 (100 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–
1) in 4-week-old puppies weighing approximately 1 kg. This could be considered an
AI since data on true availability or different intakes of Na are unavailable. After
weaning (if Na and energy requirements are similar, which may somewhat
overestimate need), a diet containing 550 mg Na per 1,000 kcal would provide an AI
for a 5.5-kg puppy consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1. This figure is very close to an
unpublished value for the dietary Na requirement for growth of puppies (R. D.
Kealy, personal communication, 1993).


===== PDF PAGE 346 =====
345
Requirements and Allowances for Adult Dogs
The minimum Na requirement of the adult dog is approximately 4.4 mg Na·kg
BW–1·d–1 since beagle dogs fed diets containing 3.6 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1 developed
signs of Na deficiency whereas German shepherd dogs consuming 4.4 mg Na·kg
BW–1·d–1 did not (Drochner et al., 1976; Morris et al., 1976). This corresponded to
dietary Na concentrations of 160 mg·kg–1 and 230 mg·kg–1 diet, (including Na from
water intake), DM basis, respectively. This is in reasonable agreement with Michell
(1989) who suggested that the Na requirement for dogs lies between 4.6 and 11.5
mg·kg BW–1·d–1, which represented dietary Na concentrations of 300 mg·kg–1 and
900 mg·kg–1, DM basis, respectively.
Endogenous fecal loss of Na is quite low. Meyer et al. (1989) in a study of Na
absorption as a function of diet type reported that in most cases, Na absorption
equaled Na intake. Studies of dogs fed diets containing Na concentrations close to
MRs have resulted in measured fecal endogenous Na losses of only about 1.4-1.7
mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (Hamlin et al., 1964; Drochner et al., 1976).
Based on the estimates of Morris et al. (1976) and Michell (1989), the minimum
Na requirement can be set at approximately 5 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (9.85 mg·kg BW–
0.75·d–1). A diet containing 75 mg Na per 1,000 kcal ME would thus provide the MR
of Na for a 15-kg adult dog consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1. With a presumed true
absorption of only 40 percent to account for differences in absorption percentage of
Na or in energy intake, the RA can be estimated at 13.3 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (26.2
mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1). A diet containing 200 mg Na per 1,000 kcal would provide the
RA of Na for a 15-kg adult dog consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Dogs
Using factorial analysis to determine Na allowances for gestation and lactation,
Meyer (1985a,b) estimated RAs for Na of 105 and 145 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 for
gestation and lactation, respectively. The 145-mg Na·kg–1 figure set for a medium-
sized bitch nursing eight puppies in peak lactation included an estimate of
endogenous losses and assumed 75 percent bioavailability. Since the absorption of
Na intake is probably greater than 90 percent in most cases and endogenous losses
are minimal, the AI may be closer to 80 and 110 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1 (173 and 238
mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) for gestation and lactation, respectively (Meyer et al., 1989;
Michell, 1989; Hill et al., 2001). Based on this assumption, the recommended dietary
Na concentration for a 22-kg bitch nursing eight puppies would be 500 mg Na per
1,000 kcal ME or 2.0 g Na and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1. Although the allowance for late
gestation would be less, the above diet would be suitable for both gestation and
lactation (Meyer et al., 1985a).


===== PDF PAGE 347 =====
346
Safe Upper Limit of Sodium for Dogs
Zentek and Meyer (1995) fed adult Great Danes and beagle dogs a diet containing
an estimated 29 g Na·kg–1, DM basis. This level of Na reduced palatability and
caused vomiting in one of the dogs. Based on the data of Reinhardt and Behrenbeck
(1967) and Boemke et al. (1990) suggesting that dietary Na concentrations above 20
g·kg–1 DM basis result in increased K excretion and negative K balance in adult
dogs, the SUL of Na for dogs can reasonably be set at approximately 15 g Na·kg–1
diet, DM basis.
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Sodium in Cats
Yu and Morris (1997a) reported apparent absorption of dietary Na intake
averaging 75 percent in growing kittens fed diets with with Na concentrations
between 0.6 and 2.1 g Na·kg–1, DM basis. In these studies, fecal loss appeared to be
constant regardless of dietary Na concentration. Thus, true absorption of Na intake in
this study approached 100 percent (Yu and Morris, 1997a). In another study, Yu and
Morris (1999b) evaluated Na requirement in adult cats fed diets with concentrations
of 0.1-2.0 g Na·kg–1. In this study, as well, fecal Na was constant, suggesting almost
100 percent absorption of Na intake.
Sodium Deficiency in Cats
Clinical signs of Na deficiency (including anorexia, impaired growth, polydypsia,
and polyuria) have been described by Yu and Morris (1997a) in 12- to 15-week-old
kittens fed a purified diet containing 0.1 g Na·kg–1, DM basis. Metabolic alterations
included hemoconcentration, reduced urinary specific gravity, and elevated plasma
aldosterone concentrations (Yu and Morris, 1997a). All abnormalities were corrected
when the kittens were switched to a diet containing 2.0 g Na·kg–1, DM basis.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Sodium in Cats
There is no information on the adverse effects of excess consumption of Na in the
cat.
Dietary Sodium Requirements and Allowances for Cats
Requirements and Allowances for Kittens


===== PDF PAGE 348 =====
347
Yu and Morris (1997a) estimated the Na requirements of growing kittens by use
of the broken line technique based on plasma aldosterone concentrations. A dietary
concentration of 1.6 g Na·kg–1 was suggested as the MR. This may overstate the true
minimum dietary requirement since an increase in aldosterone is a physiological
mechanism to conserve Na and ensure normality at low intakes of this mineral.
Given the caloric content of the diet used (5,200 kcal·kg–1), the Na concentration on
a caloric basis was 310 mg per 1,000 kcal ME. The requirement for an 800-g kitten
consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1 is thus 70 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1 (65 mg Na·kg BW–
0.67·d–1).
Since the use of the aldosterone concentration probably overestimates the
minimum Na requirement, a difference between the MR and the RA is probably
unnecessary in this case. However, to account for any possible differences in
absorption that may occur as a result of the use of standard diets or circumstances
that increase fecal volume, it may be reasonable to include an allowance of 10
percent in assessing the RA (i.e., 1.4 g Na and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1). This would
supply 80 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1 (74 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) to an 800-g kitten
consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Adult Cats
Extrapolating from a study in kittens, Yu and Morris (1997a) estimated the Na
requirement of adult cats fed purified diets to be approximately 21 mg·kg BW–1·d–1.
In a subsequent study, the same authors observed the dietary Na requirement in
young adult cats to be 160 mg Na per 1,000 kcal ME (Yu and Morris, 1999b). In this
study, aldosterone concentration was used to determine the MR, which, as stated
previously, probably overstates the MR. Based on these data, however, for a 4-kg cat
consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1, the Na requirement is 10 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1 (16.0
mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1).
As for kittens, the RA of Na for adult cats may not have to be appreciably higher
than the stated MR. This is confirmed by the data of Finco et al. (1989) showing
fecal Na losses of 0.8-1.2 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1 in adult cats fed standard diets
containing varying sources of P with Na intakes of roughly 15 and 33 mg·kg BW–
1·d–1. Apparent absorption of Na was still at least 95 percent. By assuming a
minimum percentage Na absorption of 85 percent, the RA for an adult cat would be
10.6 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1 (16.7 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1). A diet containing 170 mg Na
per 1,000 kcal ME would provide the RA for a 4-kg adult cat consuming 250 kcal
ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Cats


===== PDF PAGE 349 =====
348
There is virtually no information on the dietary Na requirements for gestation in
the queen. Since the requirements for gestation are similar to those for growth, a diet
that supports the RA of Na for growth should be sufficient. A diet containing 350 mg
Na per 1,000 kcal would provide 47 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1 (74.3 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1)
for a 4-kg queen in late gestation consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1. This is close to four
times the adult maintenance requirement, which should be sufficient.
Regarding lactation, the data of Spray and Widdowson (1950) and Loveridge
(1986) may be used to suggest an AI of Na. Queens in peak lactation weighing
approximately 3.0 kg and nursing six kittens may require up to 900 kcal ME·d–1 to
support maintenance and lactation (Loveridge, 1986). However a 4-kg queen nursing
four kittens is estimated to consume only approximately 540 kcal ME·d–1, deriving
additional energy from body fat (see Chapter 3). The Na content of young kittens has
been estimated at 2,300 mg·kg BW–1 (Spray and Widdowson, 1950). During the first
6 weeks of life, kittens gain approximately 600 g, or about 100 g per week per kitten
(Loveridge, 1986). With four kittens in a litter, 400 g of weight gain will occur per
week, which will require 135 mg Na·d–1, in addition to a maintenance requirement
of 40 mg·d–1, or a total of 175 mg of bioavailable Na in the diet of the queen. At 95
percent bioavailability, the daily allowance for a 4-kg queen nursing four kittens
would be 185 mg Na·d–1 or 45 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1. A diet containing 330 mg Na
per 1,000 kcal ME would thus provide the AI of Na for a 4-kg queen nursing four
kittens and consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1. This dietary concentration of Na is close to
that found by Piechota et al. (1995) to support gestation and lactation in queens.
Dobenecker et al. (1998) however reported that a 4-kg queen at peak lactation
nursing four kittens would require approximately 300 mg Na·d–1 for milk
production. The AI of sodium including maintenance requirements and assuming 95
percent availability would thus be about 90 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1 (142 mg·kg BW–
0.67·d–1) which would be provided by a diet containing 670 mg Na per 1,000 kcal
ME, about twice that of the previous estimate. To assure adequacy, the latter value is
best used as the AI.
Safe Upper Limit of Sodium for Cats
There are very few data from which to suggest a SUL for Na intake in growing
kittens. In a study of salt preference or appetite in Na-replete or Na-depleted kittens,
Yu et al. (1997b) observed behavioral choices of diets containing varying
concentration of Na from 0.1 to 10.0 g Na·kg–1 diet, DM basis. Both Na-replete and
Na-depleted kittens showed an aversion to the diet containing 10 g Na·kg–1 when
given a choice, but consumed it in normal quantities and without ill effects when it
was the only choice. This study also revealed that kittens do not appear to
demonstrate the ability to choose Na, when deficient in this mineral, as is common in


===== PDF PAGE 350 =====
349
some other species. Thus, it would appear that as long as adequate water is available,
the SUL of dietary Na for kittens is >10 g·kg–1.
It is equally difficult to suggest a SUL for dietary Na in the adult cat. Burger
(1979) reported data on water intake of cats fed diets containing varying
concentrations of salt. No abnormalities were reported in cats consuming diets
containing more than 15 g Na·kg–1. Yet kittens are known to avoid foods containing
high concentrations of salt (Yu et al., 1997b). As long as unlimited amounts of water
are available, it is likely that cats can tolerate reasonably high concentrations of
dietary Na. For adult cats, the SUL for Na is >15 g·kg of diet.
Potassium
Potassium is the eighth most abundant element in the body. It is the second most
abundant cation after Ca (Lobaugh, 1996). About 90 percent of body K is present in
intracellular fluid with the remainder being found in bone (7.6 percent), interstitial
fluid (1.0 percent), plasma (0.4 percent), and dense connective tissue (1.0 percent)
(Tannen, 1996). Total body K concentration in both kittens and adult cats has been
reported to be 2.3 g·kg–1, while that of newborn puppies is 2.12 g·kg–1 (Meyer et al.,
1985a; Kienzle et al., 1991b). Potassium serves many functions in the body. It is
critically involved in acid-base regulation, in nerve impulse transmission, as a
cofactor in enzyme reactions, and in transport functions. Although K concentrations
in the major ingredients used in the formulation of dog and cat foods are generally
high enough to meet nutrient requirements, several supplemental sources may be
used including potassium bicarbonate, 39 percent K; potassium chloride, 57 percent
K; and potassium sulfate, 42 percent K (Table 13-8).
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Potassium in Dogs
Like Na, the percentage absorption of K from the intestine of dogs is very high,
the apparent absorption of K intake being measured at well over 90 percent in most
cases (Meyer et al., 1989; Hill et al., 2001; Kienzle et al., 2001). Unlike Na, K
absorption from the small intestine is very high (Hill et al., 2001). Tapioca starch,
potato starch, or rice reduced the apparent percentage absorption of K from diets
containing these substances in the studies of Meyer et al. (1989). A significant
reduction in apparent absorption of K from 95.2 percent in a diet containing 1
percent cellulose, 2 percent carbohydrate, and 35 percent fat to 72 percent in a diet
containing 20 percent cellulose, 40 percent raw starch, and 12.6 percent fat has been
reported (Kienzle et al., 2001). As with Na, increasing fecal K loss was directly
correlated with total output of fresh feces.
Potassium Deficiency in Dogs


===== PDF PAGE 351 =====
350
Although many reports of the effects of K deficiency on physiologic function in
dogs have been published, very few provide data on the dietary K concentrations
used in the studies or the K intakes associated with these changes. Feeding a diet that
contained about 0.1 g K·kg–1 and provided a calculated 4.0 mg K·kg BW–1·d–1,
Ruegamer et al. (1946a) observed that puppies grew very poorly and, within a few
weeks, became restless. During the seventh week, other clinical signs developed
including paralysis of the neck muscles, resulting in ventroflexion of the head,
followed by paralysis of the rear legs and generalized weakness (Ruegamer et al.,
1946a). The dietary K concentration was then increased to 3.35 g·kg–1, providing an
estimated 130 mg·kg BW–1·d–1, whereupon clinical signs disappeared and the
growth rate increased dramatically.
Abbrecht (1972) produced hypokalemia in adult bitches by feeding a diet
containing 60 mg K·kg–1 DM, providing an estimated intake of approximately 0.60
mg·kg BW–1·d–1. Although no clinical signs of K deficiency were reported, blood
pressure, cardiac output, stroke volume, and renal blood flow decreased
progressively with increasing K loss from the body. A diet containing 4.5 g K·kg–1
providing an estimated 68 mg K·kg BW–1·d–1 fed during a control period was found
to be adequate.
Serrano et al. (1964) studied the effect of K intake on pregnant beagle bitches fed
diets providing an estimated 220 mg K·kg BW–1·d–1 or the same diet without
supplemental K, but unfortunately, no total intake values were reported for either
diet. No signs of K deficiency were reported in bitches fed the K-depleted diet. At
term, both serum and muscle concentrations of K were significantly reduced in
bitches fed the K-depleted compared to the normal diet. However, the concentrations
of K in the umbilical artery and vein and in the carcasses of the fetuses were no
different between the two groups, suggesting that the canine fetus is protected from
K depletion of the dam (Serrano et al., 1964).
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Potassium in Dogs
There is virtually no information on the effects of excess consumption of K by
dogs. Abnormal clinical effects of excessive consumption of K are unlikely as long
as renal function is normal (DiBartola, 2000). Consumption of diets very high in K
salts would be likely to cause acute gastroenteritis. Should there be excessive
intestinal absorption of K associated with severe hyperkalemia, the major effects
would be on the heart, resulting in ventricular fibrillation and cardiac arrest
(DiBartola, 2000).
Dietary Potassium Requirements and Allowances for Dogs


===== PDF PAGE 352 =====
351
Requirements and Allowances for Puppies
Little evidence exists to define dietary K requirements of puppies. Ruegamer et
al. (1946a) reversed the effects of K deficiency in puppies by feeding a diet
containing an estimated 3.35 g K·kg–1 DM, providing an estimated 130 mg K·kg
BW–1·d–1 to 3- to 4-month-old puppies. Further, using the data of Kienzle et al.
(1985) regarding mineral and energy intakes of pre-weaned puppies, an estimate of
probable K intake after weaning can be made. Kienzle et al. (1985) suggested that
puppies during the fourth week of nursing consume approximately 160 mg K·kg
BW–1·d–1 and 185 kcal ME·kg BW–1·d–1. A 5.5 kg puppy consuming 1,000 kcal
ME would have an energy intake of 181 kcal ME·kg BW–1·d–1, which is very close
to the energy intake predicted for a 4-week-old nursing puppy. The two estimates of
energy intake are thus in reasonable agreement.
If a 5.5-kg puppy also requires 160 mg K·kg BW–1·d–1, which is in reasonable
agreement with the data of Ruegamer et al. (1946a), a diet containing 880 mg K per
1,000 kcal ME should meet this need. While K is almost quantitatively absorbed, a
bioavailability of 80 percent is reasonable to correct for variations in availability and
total fecal volume. Thus, the AI of K for a puppy may be estimated to be 200 mg·kg
BW–1·d–1 and 300 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1 A diet containing 1.1 g K per 1,000 kcal ME
would provide the RA for a 5.5-kg puppy consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Adult Dogs
There are no data regarding the MR of K in adult dogs. Dogs used in the study of
Abbrecht (1972) remained normal throughout a control period during which they
were consuming an estimated minimum of approximately 70 mg K·kg BW–1·d–1
(140 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1). This amount of K for a 15-kg dog consuming 1,000 kcal
ME·d–1 would be supplied by a diet containing 1.0 g K per 1,000 kcal ME.
In previous and subsequent studies, similar intakes of K by adult dogs for 3-6
weeks did not result in any observed clinical or metabolic abnormalities, suggesting
that this level of intake is sufficient (Abbrecht, 1969; Patterson et al., 1983). Since no
studies have been performed to determine the MRs or RAs of K in diets for adult
dogs, the above data must be considered an AI.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Dogs
Serrano et al. (1964) fed pregnant bitches a K-deficient diet from the day after
mating until 3-4 days before expected whelping. No clinical signs of deficiency were
reported, although serum and muscle concentrations of K decreased significantly;
however K concentrations in the umbilical blood of pups taken by cesarean section
were normal (Serrano et al., 1964). Given normal K status at the time of breeding,


===== PDF PAGE 353 =====
352
bitches can survive gestation and produce normal pups on a K-deficient diet. Other
investigators have reported K allowances of 93 and 95 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 for pregnant
bitches during the last several weeks of pregnancy, based on a presumed availability
of 80 percent (Meyer, 1984; Meyer et al., 1985a). Using energy requirements for
gestation as recommended in this report (see Chapter 3), 0.9 g K per 1,000 kcal ME
can be suggested as the RA of K for gestation.
With respect to lactation, the data of Meyer (1984) and Meyer et al. (1985b)
suggest that the dietary allowance of K for a 22-kg lactating bitch nursing eight
puppies is approximately 165 mg·kg BW–1·d–1, assuming a bioavailability of 80-85
percent. To account for possible difference in energy intake or increase in total fecal
output, the RA for K in lactating bitches should be set at 200 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (430
mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1). Thus, a diet containing approximately 0.9 g K per 1,000 kcal
would provide the RA for a 22-kg bitch nursing eight puppies and consuming 5,000
kcal ME·d–1.
Safe Upper Limit of Potassium for Dogs
There are no data on which to base a SUL for dietary concentrations or intake of
K since physiologic mechanisms (e.g., increased urinary excretion) or
pathophysiologic mechanisms (e.g., vomiting) generally prevent a life-threatening
hyperkalemia should dogs consume excess amounts of this nutrient (DiBartola,
2000). Further, due to poor palatability, dogs are unlikely to consume diets with very
high K concentrations.
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Potassium in Cats
Under normal circumstances, dietary K absorption in the cat appears to be quite
high. While there appear to be no studies of K absorption in kittens, several studies
on adult cats indicate that under normal dietary conditions, apparent absorption of K
intake is 90-95 percent or higher (Ching et al., 1989; Finco et al., 1989; Dow et al.,
1990) suggesting close to 100 percent true absorption. It is likely that percentage
absorption of K intake in kittens is equally as high.
Dow et al. (1990) reported that the addition of 0.8 percent ammonium chloride,
DM basis, caused a reduction in apparent absorption percentage of K intake from 95
percent to 80-85 percent in K-restricted adult cats being fed diets with K
concentrations of 2 g·kg–1, DM basis. Apparent absorption of K remained reduced,
and cats remained in negative K balance, compared to a group not receiving
ammonium chloride, for several weeks after the dietary K concentration was
increased to 6.6 g·kg–1, DM basis (Dow et al., 1990). On the other hand, Ching et al.
(1989) did not observe reduced apparent percentage absorption of K in adult cats fed
a K-replete diet (5.5 g K·kg–1) containing 1.5 percent ammonium chloride for a


===== PDF PAGE 354 =====
353
period of 6 months. Although negative K balance was observed, this appeared to be
due to increases in urinary loss of K.
Hills et al. (1982) reported that increasing the protein concentration of
semipurified diets fed to kittens from normal (33 percent) to high (68 percent)
increased the dietary requirement of K from 3 to 5 g·kg–1. However, the increase in
K requirement was presumed to be due to changes in renal excretion of K to balance
the additional acid load from protein, rather than to its dietary availability (Hills et
al., 1982).
Potassium Deficiency in Cats
Deficiency in Kittens
Kittens consuming a 33 percent protein diet with 1.0 or 2.0 g K·kg–1 or a 68
percent protein diet with 3.0 or 4.0 g K·kg–1 developed clinical signs of K deficiency
including anorexia, retarded growth, and neurological disorders beginning as
ventroflexion of the head and progressing to ataxia and muscular weakness, which
became so severe that the kittens were incapable of walking (Hills et al., 1982).
Similarly, clinical signs of K deficiency have been reported in 5-month-old kittens
within 2 weeks of being fed a vegetarian diet containing 0.8 or 1.1 g K·kg–1, DM
basis, whereas cats fed similar diets with K added at a concentration of 5.0 g·kg–1
remained normal (Leon et al., 1992).
Deficiency in Adult Cats
Dow et al. (1987) reported clinical cases of K deficiency occurring in nine adult
cats being fed, on a long-term basis, a commercial diet containing 3.4 g K·kg–1, DM
basis. A majority of these cats demonstrated elevated serum creatinine
concentrations and high fractional excretion percentages of K, signs suggestive of
renal disease (Dow et al., 1987). Increasing the K concentration of the diet to 6.5
g·kg–1 resulted in a gradual disappearance of clinical and biochemical abnormalities.
Subsequently, Dow et al. (1990) evaluated K depletion in adult cats fed diets
containing 2.0 g K·kg–1 during an 8-week trial. While no clinical abnormalities were
observed, plasma K concentrations fell significantly, which were exacerbated by the
addition of 0.8 percent ammonium chloride to the diet (Dow et al., 1990). Buffington
et al. (1991) also suggested that a relatively low concentration of K, 5.0 g·kg–1, in a
diet containing somewhat elevated protein (41 percent) fed to adult cats for a period
of more than 1 year might be associated with an increased incidence of hypokalemia
and renal dysfunction.


===== PDF PAGE 355 =====
354
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Potassium in Cats
There are no reports of adverse effects associated with excessive consumption of
K by cats.
Dietary Potassium Requirements and Allowances for Cats
Requirements and Allowances for Kittens
Hills et al. (1982) reported a minimum K requirement of 3.0 g K·kg–1 DM for
growth of kittens in a diet containing 33 percent protein and 5.0 g·kg–1 DM for
kittens fed a diet containing 68 percent protein. The diet containing 33 percent
protein contained an estimated 0.67 g K per 1,000 kcal ME and the higher-protein
diet, 1.1 g K per 1,000 kcal ME. If a dietary concentration of 0.67 g K per 1,000 kcal
ME is the MR for growing kittens, a diet containing approximately 2.7 g K·kg–1 and
4,000 kcal ME·kg–1 would provide a minimum required K intake of 150 mg·kg
BW–1·d–1 (140 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) for an 800-g kitten consuming 180 kcal ME·d–
1 (if dietary protein content is close to RAs). If diets with significantly higher
concentrations of protein are fed, the MR for K will be higher because of increased
K needed for anion-cation balance.
The RA should allow for variation in factors such as the metabolic effects of
elevated dietary intake of protein or of various salt additives on bioavailability. To
ensure normality, an RA of 225 mg K·kg BW–1·d–1 (209 mg K·kg BW–0.67·d–1) is
suggested for the growing kitten. A diet containing 1.0 g K per 1,000 kcal would
provide the RA for an 800-g kitten consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Adult Cats
There are insufficient data on which to base a minimum daily requirement of K in
adult cats. Feeding adult cats diets with K concentrations ranging from 0.85 to 5
g·kg–1 has been associated with clinical and/or metabolic evidence of K deficiency
(Dow et al., 1987; Dow et al., 1990; Buffington et al., 1991; Leon et al., 1992).
Ching et al. (1989) fed adult cats a standard diet containing 1.5 percent ammonium
chloride, 30 percent protein, 5.5 g K·kg–1, and an estimated 4,200 kcal ME·kg–1 for
6 months. While no clinical signs of K deficiency were observed, the cats were in
negative K balance for the first 5 months, returning to slightly positive K balance in
the sixth month. Feeding a diet containing 6.6 g K·kg–1 and an estimated 4,800 kcal
ME·kg–1 or 1.4 g K per 1,000 kcal ME reversed all signs of K deficiency in adult
cats regardless of the presence of dietary ammonium chloride (Dow et al., 1990).


===== PDF PAGE 356 =====
355
Currently, many commercial cat foods contain inorganic salts or amino acids that
induce an acidic urine (which may increase urinary K excretion) and/or relatively
high concentrations of protein (Coffman, 1997). Therefore, the AI of K for adult cats
should be set at a concentration that will ensure normality when such diets are fed.
Ching et al. (1989) measured K intake of approximately 97 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 in cats
used in her study. Based on the K concentration of the diet (5.5 g·kg–1) and an
estimated energy content of 4,200 kcal ME·kg–1, this diet contained 1.3 g K per
1,000 kcal. Feeding a diet containing 1.3 g K per 1,000 kcal ME would result in K
intakes similar to those of the repletion diet fed to adult cats by Dow et al. (1990),
which provided an estimated 80 mg K·kg BW–1·d–1 and reversed biochemical signs
of K deficiency (Ching et al., 1989; Dow et al., 1990). A diet containing 1.3 g K per
1,000 kcal ME should supply a K intake of 80 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (130 mg·kg BW–
0.67·d–1) for a 4-kg cat consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1, and may be considered the AI
for adult cats. It is probable that the MR of K for adult cats is lower than this figure,
but determination of the MR requires further experimentation.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Cats
There are no reports of minimum dietary K requirements for gestation or lactation
in queens. Given normal energy consumption for gestation and lactation, it is
probable that diets providing K in amounts recommended for growth should meet the
needs of a lactating cat and undoubtedly overestimate the need for late gestation. The
AI for a 4-kg queen nursing four kittens might thus be set at 225 mg·kg BW–1·d–1,
which would be provided by a diet containing 1.7 g K per 1,000 kcal ME. This
figure would agree with a factorial estimate combining maintenance needs and an
estimated K requirement of 4-week-old nursing kittens of approximately 100 mg
K·d–1. However, Piechota et al. (1995) reported that a diet containing 1.3 g K per
1,000 kcal ME supported both gestation and lactation in queens. Based on this, the
AI of K for lactating queens weighing 4 kg, nursing four kittens and consuming 540
kcal ME·d–1 may be established at 175 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (277 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1)
Safe Upper Limit of Potassium for Cats
There are no data available on which to predict a SUL for dietary K intake in cats.
Diets containing K concentrations exceeding those recommended above have been
fed without reported adverse effects (Buffington et al., 1991). It is unlikely that ill
effects due to voluntary intake of excessive amounts of K will occur in cats, as long
as free-choice water is available (DiBartola, 2000).
Chloride


===== PDF PAGE 357 =====
356
Chlorine, in the form of Cl–, is the most prevalent anion in the extracellular fluid
of mammalian species, constituting more than two-thirds of the anions in plasma and
extracellular fluid (De Morais, 2000). The mean plasma concentration of Cl– is
about 110 meq·L–1 in dogs and 120 meq·L–1 in cats, 1 meq constituting 35 mg Cl–.
The intracellular concentration of Cl– is only 2-4 meq·L–1 in most cells, with some
exceptions such as the erythrocyte, which can have a Cl– concentration of 60 meq·L–
1 or higher. Metabolically, Cl– is important in maintaining the osmolality of
extracellular fluid and in acid-base regulation.
Chloride is found in limited concentrations in most feedstuffs, requiring that
many animal diets be supplemented with Cl–-containing salts. Some commonly used
sources of Cl– include ammonium chloride, 66 percent Cl–; hydrated calcium
chloride, 48 percent Cl–; potassium chloride, 47 percent Cl–; and sodium chloride,
60 percent Cl– (Table 13-7). Some vitamin supplements used in petfoods are
additional sources of chloride (e.g., choline chloride).
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Chloride in Dogs and Cats
There have been few studies of absorption or bioavailability of Cl– in either dogs
or cats. The apparent absorption of ingested Cl– decreased from an average of 99
percent in diets containing high (approximately 35 percent) fat, high (approximately
47 percent) cooked starch, or high (approximately 45 percent) raw starch, to
approximately 91 percent in dogs as cellulose was increased from 1 to 20 percent,
Cl–absorption being lowest in dogs fed high raw starch and high cellulose (Kienzle
et al., 2001). The decrease in apparent absorption of ingested Cl– in this study was
inversely correlated with fecal output (i.e., fecal Cl– excretion was correlated
directly with total fresh feces production).
In one study in adult cats, adding 1.5 percent ammonium chloride to the diet was
found to increase apparent absorption of Cl– intake from approximately 90 to 96
percent in diets containing 5.1 or 16.1 g Cl–·kg–1 diet, DM basis, respectively (Ching
et al., 1989). From studies in other species as well, it appears that Cl– is almost
quantitatively absorbed, either actively or passively, in response to the electrical
gradient generated by Na transport in both the small and the large intestine (De
Morais, 2000).
Chloride Deficiency in Dogs
Only one study of Cl– deficiency in dogs has been published (Felder et al., 1987).
Two-week-old nursing puppies developed clinical and biochemical signs of Cl–
deficiency when fed a milk substitute containing 0.21 g Cl–·kg–1 and an estimated
6,140 kcal ME·kg–1 on a DM basis (34 mg Cl– per 1,000 kcal ME). The pups were


===== PDF PAGE 358 =====
357
fed milk substitute sufficient to provide a caloric intake of approximately 190 kcal
ME·kg BW–1·d–1, which resulted in an estimated intake of 6.5 mg Cl–·kg BW–1·d–
1. After being fed the diet for 2 weeks, puppies developed biochemical signs of Cl–
deficiency including hypochloremia, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis. Weight
gain ceased, and clinical signs including weakness and ataxia developed, most likely
due to the associated K deficiency. Control puppies fed a similar milk substitute
supplemented with Cl– to a concentration of 4.4 g·kg–1 (720 mg Cl– per 1,000 kcal
ME), providing an estimated 137 mg Cl–·kg BW–1·d–1, grew normally and
demonstrated no clinical or biochemical abnormalities (Felder et al., 1987).
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Chloride in Dogs
There are no studies of the effects of excess dietary consumption of Cl– by
normal dogs.
Dietary Chloride Requirements and Allowances for Dogs
Requirements and Allowances for Puppies
There have been no studies designed to determine the MR of Cl– in puppies.
Nursing puppies fed a milk substitute containing 4.4 g Cl–·kg–1, DM basis, grew
normally and demonstrated no signs of Cl– deficiency (Felder et al., 1987). The diet
used in this study contained an estimated 6,140 kcal ME·kg–1 or 0.72 g Cl– per
1,000 kcal ME. This would provide approximately 130 mg Cl–·kg BW–1·d–1 (200
mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) to a 5.5-kg puppy consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1. Kienzle et al.
(1985) recommended a Na intake of 100 mg·kg–1 in 4-week-old puppies that, if
present entirely as sodium chloride, would represent a Cl– intake of 150 mg·kg BW–
1·d–1, a figure that is in reasonable agreement with that derived by Felder. Again, it
is unlikely that all of the Na present is in the form of Cl– and as with Na, older
weaned puppies may have a lower requirement for Cl– than those that are still
nursing. However, in the absence of experimental evidence, the AI of Cl– for
puppies may be set at 0.72 g Cl–·kg–1 for a 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1 diet providing 130
mg Cl–·kg BW–1·d1 (200 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1).
Requirements and Allowances for Adult Dogs
In the absence of any data on MRs or RAs of Cl– for adult dogs, an AI can be
based only on information relative to the Na requirement. The recommended dietary
allowance for Na has been estimated at 13.3 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (Morris et al., 1976b;


===== PDF PAGE 359 =====
358
Michell, 1989). If this is present as sodium chloride, a diet supplying 20 mg Cl–·kg
BW–1·d–1 (40 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) would provide the AI for a 15-kg dog
consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1. Such a diet should contain 300 mg Cl– per 1,000 kcal
ME.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Dogs
There are no data on the Cl– requirement for gestation/lactation in dogs.
Therefore, it may again be prudent to suggest an AI based on Na allowances.
Assuming reasonable variation for absorption based on fecal volume, allowances of
110 mg Na·kg BW–1·d–1 are recommended for lactation. A diet containing 500 mg
Na per 1,000 kcal ME would provide the RA for a 22-kg bitch nursing eight puppies
and consuming 5,000 kcal ME·d–1. Based on this, Cl–intake of 165 mg·kg BW–1·d–
1 and 358 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1, which would represent the AI of Cl– for a 22-kg
bitch nursing eight puppies and consuming 5,000 kcal ME·d–1, could be met by a
diet containing 750 mg Cl– per 1,000 kcal ME. Such a diet would most likely exceed
the Cl– requirement of a similar-sized bitch in late gestation.
Safe Upper Limit of Chloride for Dogs
The SUL for dietary Na concentrations in diets for dogs is approximately 15 g
Na·kg–1 diet, DM basis (Reinhardt and Behrenbeck, 1967; Boemke et al., 1990). If
this is present as sodium chloride, in the absence of other data, the SUL for dietary
Cl– in normal dogs might be set at 22.5 g Cl–·kg–1, DM basis. However it is unlikely
that all dietary Na is in this form. Some calculolytic diets for dogs currently may
contain as much as 23.4 g Cl–·kg–1, DM basis. Although these diets are not
considered complete and balanced for long-term feeding, this is due primarily to
factors other than Na and Cl–concentrations. Thus, at present time, the SUL for
dietary Cl–of 23.5 g·kg–1 diet may be reasonable for dogs.
Chloride Deficiency in Cats
Chloride deficiency has recently been described in kittens. Serum chemical
abnormalities and some clinical signs of deficiency were observed in kittens fed diets
containing 0.1, 0.4, or 0.7 g Cl–·kg–1 (Yu and Morris, 1999a). These clinical signs
were attributable to a secondary K deficiency (Simopoulos and Bartter, 1980; Yu and
Morris, 1998). Chloride deficiency results in a decrease of Na absorption from the
loop of Henle, resulting in increased Na concentration in renal tubular fluid reaching
the distal tubule of the kidney, wherein the reabsorption of Na is accompanied by an
exchange for K, promoting excess K excretion (Simopoulos and Bartter, 1980).


===== PDF PAGE 360 =====
359
Kittens fed diets containing 1.0 g Cl–·kg–1 or higher did not develop signs of Cl–
deficiency (Yu and Morris, 1998, 1999a).
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Chloride in Cats
There is little published evidence on adverse effects of excess dietary
consumption of Cl– by cats. Several studies have been performed in which diets with
Cl– concentrations of 11.4-16.0 g·kg–1 have been fed to both kittens and cats (Ching
et al., 1989; Pastoor et al., 1994d,c). Feeding Cl– at concentrations of at least 11.4 or
11.8 g·kg–1 diet, as the calcium salt, to kittens and adult cats, respectively, providing
intakes of more than 140 mg Cl–·kg BW–1·d–1, did not result in adverse effects
(Pastoor et al., 1994d; Pastoor et al., 1994c). On the other hand, Ching et al. (1989)
reported reduced or negative Ca and K balances in adult cats fed a diet containing 16
g Cl–·kg–1 diet (approximately 250 mg Cl–·kg BW–1·d–1), mainly as the ammonium
salt during a 5-month feeding trial. However, the negative Ca and K balances may
have been due to the greater degree of metabolic acidosis that occurred when diets
were supplemented with ammonium compared to calcium chloride (Pastoor et al.,
1994c).
Dietary Chloride Requirements and Allowances for Cats
Requirements and Allowances for Kittens
Based on the study of Yu and Morris (1999a), the minimal Cl– requirement in the
diet of kittens is 1.0 g Cl–·kg–1 diet, DM basis. The purified diet used in these
studies contained 0.19 g Cl– per 1,000 kcal ME which may be considered the MR of
Cl– for kittens. Based on these data, the MR of an 800-g kitten consuming 180 kcal
ME·d–1 would be 45 mg Cl–·kg BW–1·d–1 (42 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1).
Dietary Cl– is very highly available (Ching et al., 1989); however, it may be
prudent to account for possible variability in absorption of Cl– or energy intake when
standard diets are being fed. The RA for dietary Cl– in kittens may thus be set at 50
mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (46.5 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) for an 800-g kitten consuming 180 kcal
ME·d–1. This would be supplied by a diet containing approximately 225 mg Cl– per
1,000 kcal ME.
Requirements and Allowances for Adult Cats
No studies have been reported of minimal dietary Cl– requirements for adult cats.
In the absence of experimental data, the recommended dietary Cl– allowance for


===== PDF PAGE 361 =====
360
kittens (0.9 g Cl–·kg–1, and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1) may be used as the basis for setting
the adequate dietary concentration of Cl–for the adult cat as well. Such a diet would
provide an AI of approximately 15 mg Cl–·kg BW–1·d–1 (23.7 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1)
for a 4-kg adult cat consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1. This is identical to the amount of
Cl– that would be recommended if the RA of Na for adult cats were used as the basis
for determining Cl– need (Yu and Morris, 1999b).
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Cats
No information is available on the Cl– requirement for gestation and lactation in
the cat. Therefore, it is reasonable to base Cl– recommendations on those for Na.
This may overestimate true need since all Na may not be present as Cl–, therefore,
the recommendation must be considered an AI. For gestation the AI of Na is 47 mg
Na·kg BW–1·d–1. The equivalent intake of Cl– would be 70 mg Cl–·kg BW–1·d–1
(111 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1). A diet containing 520 mg Cl– per 1,000 kcal ME would
provide the AI for a 4-kg queen in late gestation consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1. This
figure may significantly overestimate the actual chloride needs for gestation.
For a lactating queen, the RA of Na is 90 mg·kg BW–1·d–1.The equivalent intake
of Cl– would be 135 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (213 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1). A diet containing
1.0 g Cl– per 1,000 kcal ME would supply the RA for a 4-kg queen nursing four
kittens and consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1.
Safe Upper Limit of Chloride for Cats
There are no reported studies of dietary Cl– toxicity in cats. While feeding a diet
containing 16.1 g Cl–·kg–1 as the ammonium salt has been reported to result in
negative Ca and K balance, this effect was probably due more to the relative
metabolic acidosis and subsequent reduced urinary pH caused by ammonium
chloride than to the concentration of dietary Cl– (Ching et al., 1989). If Cl– is present
in the diet mainly in the form of neutral salts, it is probable that reasonably high
concentrations can be tolerated and no SUL can be defined.
TRACE MINERALS
The trace mineral content of common petfood ingredients is listed in Table 13-6.
Iron


===== PDF PAGE 362 =====
361
Iron is the most prevalent trace mineral in the animal body, comprising about
0.005 percent of total weight. Meyer (1984) reported the Fe content in newborn and
young adult dogs to be 76 and 100 mg·kg BW–1 respectively, while in both newborn
and young adult cats, Fe content has been reported to be 50-60 mg·kg BW–1
(Kienzle et al., 1991b). Approximately 67 percent of Fe is found in hemoglobin, 27
percent in macrophages, 4 percent in muscle as myoglobin, and the remainder in
various enzymes, with a small amount in the labile Fe pool. The primary role of Fe is
in the synthesis of hemoglobin and myoglobin where it functions as a transporter and
binder of oxygen. However, it also functions in a number of enzyme systems (e.g.,
cytochromes) that are important in energy metabolism (Fairbanks, 1994).
While milk is a poor source of Fe, many other ingredients used in dog and cat
foods are rich in Fe. This includes meat meals, meat and bone meals, many cereal
grains, and even major mineral supplements such as dicalcium phosphate. In addition
to the Fe present in animal source ingredients, many dog and cat foods include an Fe
source as a supplement. Some commonly used sources of Fe in dog and cat foods are
steamed bone meal, 2.8 percent Fe; dicalcium phosphate, 1.4 percent Fe; and ferrous
sulfate heptahydrate, 21.8 percent Fe (Table 13-9). Iron oxide and carbonate
demonstrate negligible bioavailability and should not be used as dietary sources of
Fe (AAFCO, 2001).
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Iron in Dogs and Cats
Iron is present in dog and cat foods in two forms: inorganic Fe and organically
bound Fe, mainly in the form of heme. Intestinal absorption of inorganic Fe is
inversely related to Fe status, to the dietary concentration of Fe, and to the dietary
concentrations of several other nutrients such as Ca, P, Zn, and Cu (Erdman, 1979;
Fernandez and Phillips, 1982; Kochanowski and McMahan, 1990; Gross et al.,
2000). Calcium supplements, for example, have been shown to decrease the apparent
absorption of Fe intake in human diets from 20 percent to 5-10 percent under various
conditions (Hallberg et al., 1991). Various fiber sources such as psyllium and pectin
have also been shown to reduce the apparent percentage absorption of inorganic Fe
intake (Erdman 1979; Fernandez and Phillips, 1982). Ferrous iron is more
bioavailable than the ferric form, and certain inorganic sources of Fe such as iron
oxide or carbonate have very poor bioavailability. The apparent percentage
absorption of ingested heme iron, on the other hand, has only been shown to be
negatively affected by increasing dietary Ca; Hallberg et al. (1991) showed that the
apparent absorption of heme iron intake was reduced from 15-20 percent to 10
percent in humans fed beef without or with a Ca supplement, respectively.
The apparent bioavailability of Fe in a standard dry-type diet fed to pregnant and
lactating bitches has been estimated to be 30 percent (Meyer et al., 1985a,b). Hill et
al. (2001) reported that apparent absorption of ingested Fe in adult dogs from diets
containing various percentages of beef and soy protein ranged from 6.2 to 14.8


===== PDF PAGE 363 =====
362
percent. On the other hand, Frost et al. (1940), based on studies in puppies fed milk
diets supplemented with Fe in the form of ferric chloride, reported apparent
absorption of ingested Fe as high as 70 percent and suggested true absorption may
approach 100 percent. Ruegamer et al. (1946b) also reported apparent absorption of
ingested Fe, in the form of ferric pyrophosphate, from diets fed to puppies to be 60
percent or higher. Thus, it appears that the absorption and bioavailability of Fe in
dogs, and presumably also in cats, can vary enormously, from close to 100 percent to
less than 10 percent depending on the ionic form of Fe in the diet, Fe status, dietary
Fe concentration, and several other factors.
Iron Deficiency in Dogs
Chausow and Czarnecki-Maulden (1987) found that weanling puppies consuming
diets containing less than approximately 80 mg Fe·kg–1 (3.3 mg Fe·kg BW–1·d–1)
developed signs of Fe deficiency including suboptimal blood hemoglobin
concentration and low hematocrit values. Clinical signs reported in Fe deficiency in
dogs include poor growth, pale mucous membranes, lethargy, weakness, diarrhea,
hematochezia, and melena (Harvey, 1998). Hematological changes include a
microcytic hypochromic anemia and a low percentage saturation of plasma
transferrin. While there are no reports on which to base a dietary concentration or
daily intake that would result in Fe deficiency signs in adult dogs, the data of Meyer
et al. (1985a) and Hill et al. (2001) suggest that this would be well below an intake
of 1 mg Fe·kg BW–1·d–1 assuming reasonable bioavailability.
Adverse Effects of Excessive Consumption of Iron in Dogs
Free Fe in the body is extremely reactive, catalyzing oxidative reactions that can
lead to tissue damage. When only a small amount of Fe is ingested it is firmly bound
to proteins such as apoferritin, transferrin, and hemosiderin in enterocytes, plasma,
and storage sites such as macrophages. Iron resulting from hemoglobin degradation
is efficiently re-utilized but is virtually always present in protein-bound form.
However, the total binding capacity of all such proteins is small and can be
overwhelmed by intake of larger amounts of Fe, resulting in the presence of toxic
amounts of free Fe in the system.
There are very few studies of toxic effects in dogs of excess Fe included in foods.
However, there are reports of toxic effects of Fe acutely administered enterally by
capsule administration, gavage, or forced feeding. D’Arcy and Howard (1962) found
that oral doses of ferrous sulfate providing as little as 12 mg Fe·kg BW–1·d–1
resulted in mild gastrointestinal damage identified at necropsy. Acute doses of 600
mg Fe·kg BW–1 were fatal. Bronson and Sisson (1960) found that acute doses of
ferrous sulfate, as low as 200 mg Fe·kg BW–1·d–1, administered directly into the


===== PDF PAGE 364 =====
363
jejunum were fatal within 6 hours. Reissman and Coleman (1955) found that doses
of ferrous sulfate (250 mg Fe·kg BW–1) were fatal within 5 to 7 hours when
administered by stomach tube or directly into the duodenum. The absorption of Fe in
the aforementioned studies was most likely very high, perhaps greater than 60
percent, as previously noted in dogs fed Fe as a supplement in a milk diet (Frost et
al., 1940).
Dietary Iron Requirements and Allowances for Dogs
Requirements and Allowances for Puppies
Initial studies of Fe requirements of puppies suggested, based on hemoglobin
response, that approximately 600 μg Fe·kg BW–1·d–1 maintained normal growth of
puppies as long as the Fe was in a readily bioavailable form such as ferric
pyrophosphate (Ruegamer et al., 1946b). Chausow and Czarnecki-Maulden (1987)
determined that the minimal requirement of Fe for puppies was 84 mg Fe·kg–1 diet,
DM basis. Based on caloric content, this can be expressed as 18 mg Fe per 1,000
kcal ME. The report provided data on food intake, which indicated that Fe
consumption at this dietary concentration averaged 3.3 mg Fe·kg BW–1·d–1 (5.0
mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1). Although the bioavailability of dietary Fe was not measured in
these studies based on the type of diet it presumably was reasonably high (Ruegamer
et al., 1946b; Chausow and Czarnecki-Maulden, 1987). To allow for lower
bioavailability of Fe in standard diets, the RA of Fe is suggested to be 4.0 mg·kg
BW–1·d–1 (6.1 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1). A diet containing 22 mg Fe per 1,000 kcal ME
would supply this amount of Fe for a 5.5-kg puppy consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Adult Dogs
There is very little available information on the Fe requirement of adult dogs,
which can undoubtedly vary a great deal depending on many factors. By use of
factorial analysis, Meyer et al. (1985b) suggested that the RA of Fe for mature
bitches is 0.36 mg·kg BW–1·d–1. This recommendation included an estimate of 30
percent bioavailability of ingested Fe and might be considered a RA. To account for
variability in absorption, a bioavailability of only 20 percent might be reasonable,
raising the AI or RA to 0.50 mg Fe·kg BW–1·d–1. Hill et al. (2001) reported apparent
absorption of ingested Fe, averaging 9.2 percent, with an average apparent
absorption of 0.30 mg Fe·kg BW–1·d–1 in adult dogs. True percentage absorption of
Fe was probably higher, but given the reasonably high Fe content of the diets (250
mg Fe·kg–1), it is possible that total Fe absorption exceeded the requirement.
Nonetheless these data are in reasonable agreement with those of Meyer. If 0.50 mg


===== PDF PAGE 365 =====
364
Fe·kg BW–1·d–1 (1.0 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) is considered the AI for Fe, a diet
containing 7.5 mg Fe per 1,000 kcal ME would provide this amount for a 15-kg adult
dog consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Dogs
Meyer et al. (1985a), using a factorial approach, recommended a daily allowance
of 2.6 mg Fe·kg BW–1·d–1 for pregnant bitches assuming the bioavailability of Fe to
be 30 percent. In medium-sized lactating bitches nursing six puppies, a diet
providing 2.6 mg Fe·kg BW–1·d–1 was also suggested, again assuming a
bioavailability of 30 percent. To allow for variations in diet and energy intake, a
bioavailability of only 20 percent should be assumed (i.e., 4 mg Fe·kg BW–1·d–1 or
8.67 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1). A diet containing approximately 17 mg Fe per 1,000 kcal
ME would thus provide the RA of Fe for a 22-kg bitch in late gestation or peak
lactation nursing eight puppies and consuming 5,000 kcal ME·d–1.
Safe Upper Limit of Iron for Dogs
While D’Arcy and Howard (1962) observed that acute doses of 50 mg Fe·kg
BW–1·d–1 resulted in signs of hemorrhage and ulceration in the gastrointestinal tract
of dogs, presumably this Fe was given as an acute dose to fasted dogs and thus may
not be comparable to Fe availability in dogs being fed standard diets. Other
investigators have reported the effects of Fe toxicity in dogs, but, in these studies as
well, Fe was administered parenterally or given by gavage as acute doses (Hoppe et
al., 1955a; Reissman and Coleman, 1955; Brown et al., 1959; Bronson and Sisson,
1960). Therefore, these data do not allow conclusions regarding a SUL of dietary Fe.
Since there are no studies of Fe toxicity in dogs being fed standard diets, no
recommendations as to a SUL of Fe in dogs can be made.
Iron Deficiency in Cats
There is only one literature report of Fe deficiency in cats. Chausow and
Czarnecki-Maulden (1987) found that feeding diets containing less than 80 mg
Fe·kg–1 to weanling kittens resulted in abnormally low blood hemoglobin and
hematocrit levels. Splenic Fe concentration was also maximized at a dietary Fe
concentration of 80 mg·kg–1, DM basis (Chausow and Czarnecki-Maulden, 1985,
1987). The clinical signs of Fe deficiency in cats are similar to those reported for
dogs (i.e., pale mucous membranes, lethargy, weakness, weight loss or lack of
weight gain, hematuria, melena) (Harvey, 1998).


===== PDF PAGE 366 =====
365
Adverse Effects of Excessive Consumption of Iron in Cats
Hoppe et al. (1955b) estimated the LD50 (median lethal dose) of an acute oral
dose of Fe in the form of ferrous sulfate heptahydrate to be greater than 500 mg·kg
BW–1. Hoppe et al. (1955a) found that acute oral doses of Fe (16-128 mg Fe·kg
BW–1) as ferrous sulfate or ferrous gluconate resulted in vomiting within 1 hour of
administration. As in dogs, most studies of Fe toxicity in cats have involved
administration of acute doses that may have little relevance to Fe concentrations in
standard diets.
Dietary Iron Requirements and Allowances for Cats
Requirements and Allowances for Kittens and Adult Cats
The data of Chausow and Czarnecki-Maulden (1985, 1987) showed that a dietary
Fe concentration of 80 mg·kg–1 of diet (17 mg per 1,000 kcal ME) was necessary for
normal Fe metabolism in weanling kittens fed purified diets. The data allowed a
determination of Fe intake, which averaged 3.42 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (3.2 mg·kg BW–
0.67·d–1). The diets used in these studies were also phytate- and fiber-free, and a
highly bioavailable source of Fe was used, suggesting that this is a minimum daily
requirement. When standard diets are fed, a higher concentration of Fe would likely
be indicated. Similarly, Harper et al. (2000) fed canned diets containing
approximately 19 mg Fe per 1,000 kcal ME (approximately 3.85 mg Fe·kg BW–1·d–
1) and observed normal growth and development, hematological and clinical
parameters remaining within normal limits during the 10-week feeding trial. To
allow for possible reduced bioavailability of Fe in dry-type diets, as well as for
variations in energy intake, the RA is suggested to be 4.5 mg Fe·kg BW–1·d–1 ( 4.2
mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1). A diet containing 20 mg Fe per 1,000 kcal would thus meet the
recommended Fe allowance for an 800-g kitten consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1.
There are no available data on Fe requirements or RAs for adult cats. In their
absence, a diet containing sufficient Fe for growth is recommended as providing an
AI of Fe for the adult cat. In such a case, the Fe intake of a 4-kg adult cat consuming
250 kcal ME·d–1 would be 1.25 mg Fe·kg BW–1·d–1 (1.98 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1).
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Adult
Cats
There is virtually no information on which to base Fe intake recommendations for
gestation and lactation in cats. Extrapolating from data in dogs and a determination
of milk production and Fe content in the milk of lactating queens, depending on litter


===== PDF PAGE 367 =====
366
size and time after queening, a factorial approach assuming 20 percent
bioavailability of dietary Fe suggests an adequate Fe intake for lactating cats of about
3 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (Meyer et al., 1985b; Dobenecker et al., 1998). Piechota et al.
(1995) found that a diet containing 20 mg Fe per 1,000 kcal ME supported gestation
and lactation in queens. On this basis, the AI of Fe for a 4-kg cat in late gestation or
lactation nursing four kittens and consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1 would be 2.7 mg
Fe·kg BW–1·d–1 (4.3 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1).
Safe Upper Limit of Iron for Cats
There are no available data on which to base a SUL of dietary Fe for cats.
Copper
The bodies of dogs and cats contain a very small amount of Cu. Meyer (1984)
reported total body content of Cu to be 3.8 and 7.3 mg·kg BW–1 for newborn and
young adult dogs, whereas Kienzle et al. (1991b) reported values of 2-3 mg Cu·kg
BW–1 in both kittens and adult cats. The majority of the body pool of Cu is found
bound to metallothionein in the liver. In food and fiber animals (e.g., cattle, horses,
sheep, goats), liver Cu content is frequently used as an indicator of Cu status of the
animal. After intestinal absorption, Cu is transported to the liver bound to plasma
albumin. In the liver, it becomes bound to ceruloplasmin, a Cu-containing δ-globulin
that is secreted into the plasma and becomes the major circulating form of Cu.
Copper is an integral component of enzymes that catalyze oxidation reactions.
These include monoamine oxidase, lysyl oxidase, ferroxidase, and cytochrome C
oxidase. Physiologically, Cu serves many functions. For example, lysyl oxidase
plays an important role in connective tissue formation. By virtue of its role in
ferroxidase enzymes, Cu is involved in Fe metabolism and hematopoiesis. It is also
essential through its role in tyrosinase for melanin pigment formation and thus for
normal hair color. Through its role in cytochrome oxidase, it is involved in myelin
formation and other aspects of central nervous system function, as well as in
oxidative phosphorylation. As a cofactor of the enzyme superoxide dismutase, Cu
also is critical for appropriate defense mechanisms against oxidative damage
(Turnlund, 1994).
Copper is not found in high concentrations in many of the ingredients used in the
manufacture of petfoods. The bran and germ portions of grains are reasonable
sources of Cu, containing up to 20 mg Cu·kg–1. Animal liver may contain similar
concentrations of Cu on a wet weight basis, although there are reports that the Cu
present in some animal liver (e.g., pork liver) may not be bioavailable (Aoyagi and
Baker, 1993a). Therefore, Cu is frequently added as a supplement to petfoods.
Several Cu supplements are available including cupric chloride, 37.2 percent Cu;


===== PDF PAGE 368 =====
367
cupric sulfate pentahydrate, 25.4 percent Cu; cupric oxide, 80 percent Cu; and
cuprous oxide, 89 percent Cu (Table 13-9). However, many animal studies, including
some of dogs and cats, have demonstrated that cupric oxide is only very slightly
bioavailable and therefore should not be used as a Cu supplement in petfoods
(Aoyagi and Baker, 1993b; Czarnecki-Maulden et al., 1993; Fascetti et al., 1998). In
one study, a Cu-lysine complex was shown to have bioavailability similar to that of
cupric sulfate, suggesting that such complexes may be usable as supplemental
sources of Cu (Baker et al., 1991).
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Copper in Dogs and Cats
Other than the studies mentioned above, there is little information on
bioavailability of dietary Cu in dogs and cats. Based mainly on clinical signs and
histopathologic findings, a recent report suggested the existence of a Zn-induced
dietary Cu deficiency in kittens (Hendriks et al., 2001). However, there is ample
evidence from studies in other species of factors that may affect bioavailability of
Cu. Excessive dietary concentrations of Fe or Zn decrease the bioavailability of Cu
(Turnlund, 1994). Zinc is a potent inhibitor of Cu bioavailability by virtue of its
stimulation of the formation of metal-binding metallothionein proteins in
enterocytes, which have a higher binding affinity for Cu than for Zn. Phytate,
however, does not seem to seriously affect Cu absorption (Graf, 1986). There are few
data on apparent or true percentage absorption of ingested Cu in dogs or cats. In
studies of the nutrient needs of pregnant and lactating bitches, Meyer (1984) and
Meyer et al. (1985a,b) reported an estimated Cu bioavailability of 30 percent. Morris
and (Fascetti 2000), from data in rats and humans, suggested that the bioavailability
of Cu may be quite high (i.e., from 55 to 75 percent).
Copper Deficiency in Puppies and Dogs
There are few published data on Cu deficiency in puppies or adult dogs. In one
study, a group of 5-week-old puppies fed a diet containing 0.2 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal
of digestible energy (DE) developed a loss of hair pigmentation after 4 months and
hyperextension in the distal phalanges (Zentek and Meyer, 1991), suggesting that
this concentration was insufficient to support growth and resulted in Cu deficiency in
puppies. Czarnecki-Maulden et al. (1993) observed that feeding diets containing 1.1
or 1.9 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal ME (copper sulfate) to puppies resulted in reduced
serum Cu concentrations. Copper deficiency has been suspected or reported in other
studies, but dietary information was not included (Hartley et al., 1963; Gumbrell,
1972; Meiser and Schulz, 1997; Uchida et al., 1997).
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Copper in Dogs


===== PDF PAGE 369 =====
368
Gubler et al. (1953) administered an acute oral dose of 165 mg Cu (as copper
sulfate)·kg BW–1 to dogs. This resulted in vomiting and death within four hours.
Total plasma copper rose from a normal concentration of ~100 mg/dL to 850 μg/dL
within 40 minutes of copper administration and then decreased gradually until death.
There is a considerable body of evidence on Cu toxicosis in several breeds of
dogs with a suspected or proven hereditary defect resulting in excessive
accumulation of Cu in the liver, including Bedlington terriers, West Highland white
terriers, and Skye terriers (Twedt et al., 1979; Johnson et al., 1982; Su et al., 1982;
Thornburg et al., 1986;). The disease has been studied predominantly in Bedlington
terriers (Twedt et al., 1979; Ludwig et al., 1980; Su et al., 1982; Brewer, 1998). Liver
Cu concentrations in affected dogs may reach several thousand micrograms per gram
compared to a normal of up to several hundred micrograms per gram (Ludwig et al.,
1980). It was initially thought that the disease in dogs may be a model for Wilson’s
disease in humans, but more recent work has shown that in dogs the disease is
caused by a different gene than that for Wilson’s disease, even though it is also due
to a defect in biliary excretion of Cu (Brewer, 1998). Anticopper therapies such as
Zn supplementation and orally administered tetrathiomolybdate have been used for
treatment of the problem in dogs, as well as feeding special diets with reduced
concentrations of Cu (Brewer et al., 1992).
Dietary Copper Requirements and Allowances for Dogs
Requirements and Allowances for Puppies and Adult Dogs
Evaluating Cu deficiency in weanling puppies, Zentek and Meyer (1991) found
that 2.5 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal ME, when fed in an available form such as cupric
sulfate, provided an AI of Cu for growing puppies. Subsequently, Czarnecki-
Maulden et al. (1993) measured Cu availability and requirement in groups of puppies
fed canned (standard) diets and found that puppies fed diets containing 2.7 mg Cu
per 1,000 kcal ME as cupric sulfate remained normal. This suggests that 2.7 mg Cu
per 1,000 kcal ME may be taken as a dietary RA for the growing puppy (Czarnecki-
Maulden et al., 1993). Such a diet would supply 0.5 mg Cu·kg BW–1·d–1 (0.76
mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) for a 5.5-kg puppy consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1.
There are very few data on the Cu requirements of adult dogs. By extrapolating
from factorial data on mineral requirements of pregnant and lactating bitches, the RA
for maintenance can be estimated at 0.1 mg Cu·kg BW–1·d–1 (0.2 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–
1), assuming an apparent bioavailability of Cu of 30 percent (Meyer, 1984; Meyer et
al., 1985a). A diet containing 1.5 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal ME would provide this
amount to a 15-kg adult dog consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation/Lactation in Dogs


===== PDF PAGE 370 =====
369
Meyer (1984) and Meyer et al. (1985a,b) have reported recommended Cu
allowances for bitches during gestation and lactation. For gestation a daily allowance
of 0.16 mg Cu·kg BW–1·d–1 was suggested and, for lactation, 0.70 mg Cu·kg BW–
1·d–1 (1.52 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1), assuming 30 percent availability of Cu in each case
(Meyer, 1984; Meyer et al., 1985a,b). A diet containing 3.1 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal
ME or 12.4 mg Cu·kg–1 and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1 would provide sufficient Cu for a
22-kg bitch in late gestation or nursing eight puppies and consuming 5,000 kcal
ME·d–1.
Safe Upper Limit of Copper for Dogs
As mentioned previously, acute Cu toxicity has been produced experimentally in
the dog, and a hereditary disorder resulting in excess Cu storage has also been
described in certain breeds. However there is no available information on a SUL of
dietary Cu in normal dogs.
Copper Deficiency in Kittens and Cats
Doong et al. (1983) observed that kittens fed diets containing less than 1.0 mg Cu
per 1,000 kcal ME demonstrated Cu deficiency as evidenced by decreased weight
gain and low liver concentrations of Cu compared to kittens fed diets with higher Cu
content. However, no other clinical or postmortem signs of Cu deficiency were
consistently noted, although histologic sections of lung and aorta appeared
morphologically immature in some kittens fed the basal diet with the lowest
concentration of Cu (0.12 mg per 1,000 kcal ME). While no biochemical data were
available, based on clinical signs of fading coat color and hind-limb ataxia and on
histopathologic changes, Hendriks et al. (2001) reported a suspected case of Cu
deficiency induced by overconsumption of Zn by 4- to 5-month-old kittens housed in
cages with galvanized iron door bars (Hendriks et al., 2001). However, other
investigators have questioned the validity of this suggestion (J. G. Morris, and A.
Fascetti, personal communication, 2002).
In adult queens, Fascetti et al. (1998, 2000) reported an effect of Cu intake on
reproductive efficiency, specifically the time between exposure to a tom and
conception, in queens that had consumed a Cu-deficient ration for 4 months. Queens
fed purified diets containing 0.8 or 1.2 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal ME demonstrated an
increased time to conceive compared to queens fed a diet containing 2.2 mg Cu per
1,000 kcal ME. In all cases, Cu was supplied by cupric sulfate. In one of these
reports, cats fed diets containing approximately 2 mg Cu·kg–1 as cupric oxide had an
even longer time to conception, demonstrating that Cu from cupric oxide has very
poor bioavailability (Fascetti et al., 1998, 2000).


===== PDF PAGE 371 =====
370
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Copper in Cats
There are no reports of adverse effects of excess consumption of dietary Cu by
normal cats.
Dietary Copper Requirements and Allowances for Cats
Requirements and Allowances for Kittens and Cats
Based primarily on weight gain, Doong et al. (1983) estimated the daily dietary
RA of Cu for weanling kittens to be between 0.9 and 1.1 mg per 1,000 kcal ME.
However, both liver and serum concentrations of Cu were higher in kittens fed diets
containing 2.1 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal ME. The concentrations of Cu in the liver and
serum of kittens fed a diet containing 2.1 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal ME were similar to
those found in adult cats fed a normal ration before a Cu depletion study (Fascetti et
al., 1998). Based on these data the MR of dietary Cu for normal growth in kittens
may be set at approximately 1.1 mg per 1,000 kcal ME. Such a diet would provide a
Cu intake of 0.25 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (0.23 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) to an 800-g kitten
consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1. Since the MR for growth does not appear to normalize
all metabolic parameters and to account for possible variations in bioavailability
from standard diets, the RA of dietary Cu (in an available form such as sulfate) for
growing kittens may be set at 2.1 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal ME. This diet would provide
a daily intake of 0.47 mg Cu·kg BW–1·d–1 (0.44 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) to an 800-g
kitten consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1.
With respect to adult cats, Fascetti et al. (1998, 2000) reported that purified diets
containing 1.2 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal ME, as the sulfate, when fed to queens after a
period of Cu depletion, resulted in normal blood and liver concentrations of Cu.
Feeding this level of Cu also resulted in a reduced number of days until conception
in breeding queens compared to feeding diets containing 0.6 mg Cu as the sulfate per
1,000 kcal ME or 2.0 mg Cu as cupric oxide per 1,000 kcal ME (Fascetti et al., 1998,
2000). Based on these data, a dietary concentration of 1.2 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal ME
may be used as an AI for the adult cat. A 4-kg queen consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1
would have an AI of 0.075 mg Cu·kg BW–1·d–1 (0.119 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1).
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Cats
With respect to gestation, Fascetti et al. (1998, 2000) fed adult queens purified
dry diets containing 0.8, 1.2, or 2.2 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal ME of diet as cupric
sulfate. The shortest time for conception after exposure of queens in estrus to a tom
was 16 days in those fed diets containing 2.2 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal ME, but there


===== PDF PAGE 372 =====
371
was no significant difference between the means for gestation onset in queens fed
diets containing 1.2 or 2.2 mg Cu per 1,000 kcal ME (Fascetti et al., 1998, 2000).
The data of Doong et al. (1983) and of Fascetti et al. (1998, 2000) suggest that
pregnant queens fed diets containing concentrations of Cu ranging from 0.6 to 12
mg·kg–1 (0.1-2.4 mg per 1,000 kcal ME), even after several months on a Cu
depletion diet, produced normal kittens with normal plasma and liver concentrations
of Cu. Further, the data of Doong et al. (1983) suggest that queens being fed a low-
Cu diet can successfully nurse litters of kittens. This implies that liver Cu stores are
sufficient to support the needs of reproducing queens for considerable periods of
time during which a Cu-deficient diet is being fed. Based on data for growing kittens
and adult cats (Fascetti et al., 1998, 2000) and in the absence of specific
experimental data, it seems reasonable to recommend as an AI a diet containing 2.2
mg Cu per 1,000 kcal ME for gestation and lactation, assuming that the dietary Cu
has a bioavailability similar to that of cupric sulfate. A 4-kg queen in late gestation
or nursing four kittens and consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1 would thus have an AI of
0.30 mg Cu·kg BW–1·d–1 (0.47 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1). This figure is in excellent
agreement with a factorial approach to the recommended Cu intake of a 4-kg queen
nursing four kittens using the data of Dobenecker et al. (1998) and Keen et al. (1982)
for milk production and milk Cu concentration and a presumed Cu bioavailability of
30 percent in a similar sized queen nursing four kittens during the fourth week of
lactation.
Safe Upper Limit of Copper for Cats
There are no available data on which to predict a SUL of dietary Cu for cats.
Zinc
Zinc is a transition metal with an atomic weight of 65.4 and a valence of +2. It is
found throughout the body, mainly as an intracellular constituent, but is present in
most tissues in relatively low concentrations. Meyer (1984) measured total body Zn
content of newborn puppies and young adult dogs as 23.1 and 9.5 mg·kg BW–1, wet
weight, respectively, while Kienzle (1991) reported total body Zn concentrations of
18 mg·kg BW–1 in newborn kittens increasing to 30 mg·kg BW–1 in young adults,
on a wet weight basis. Zinc has many essential functions in the body acting as a
cofactor or catalyst in some 200 Zn-containing enzymes that are involved in cell
replication, carbohydrate and protein metabolism, skin function, and wound healing.
Zinc is also thought to play a crucial role in the structure and function of biological
membranes as well as in the stabilization of DNA and RNA. Zinc is absorbed mainly
in the small intestine. During digestion, it is generally converted to its ionic form
where it can form complexes with various inorganic and organic ligands, such as


===== PDF PAGE 373 =====
372
amino acids, phosphate, sulfate, and so forth. Zinc-amino acid complexes, (e.g., with
methionine or lysine), have been reported to be as bioavailable as many inorganic
forms of Zn such as zinc sulfate in many species.
The sources of Zn in petfoods are quite varied. Animal sources, particularly beef
products and other red meats as well as whole grains, are reasonably good sources of
Zn. Leguminous plants are also good Zn sources. Nonetheless, most petfoods are
supplemented with Zn including zinc carbonate, 52.1 percent Zn; zinc chloride, 48
percent Zn; zinc oxide, 78 percent Zn; and zinc sulfate monohydrate, 36.4 percent Zn
(Table 13-9).
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Zinc in Dogs and Cats
The absorption of dietary Zn is largely a function of other substances in the diet
that alter its bioavailability. Most animal products and seafood are relatively free of
constituents that interfere with Zn absorption, and, as mentioned previously, amino
acids derived from meat digestion may actually improve the absorption of Zn.
Vegetable products are more likely to contain chemicals that interfere with Zn
absorption, the most notable of these being phytate; phytate is present in many plant
sources including cereals such as corn, wheat, and rice and oilseed meals such as soy,
peanut, and sesame, which may contain 1.5 percent or more phytate (Erdman, 1979).
Dietary phytate has long been known to reduce the absorption of Zn, and this effect
is exacerbated by high concentrations of dietary Ca (Graf, 1986). High
concentrations of dietary Mg may also enhance the effect of phytate on Zn
bioavailability, but this effect is not as great as that of Ca. Phytate is known to bind
Zn more strongly than it does Cu or Mn (Morris and Rogers, 1994). Although Baker
(1995) has reported that high amounts of Cu and Fe can reduce the absorption and/or
bioavailability of Zn, the amounts required to do this would be unlikely to be found
in standard petfoods. There is some evidence that extrusion cooking may inhibit the
degradation of dietary phytic acid in the gut, compared to other cooking methods,
resulting in less efficient absorption of Zn in extruded petfoods (King and Keen,
1994).
Ozpinar et al. (2001) reported apparent Zn absorption of 25 to 34 percent in
puppies. This study showed that apparent absorption of Zn appeared highest when
zinc sulfate was the source of supplemental Zn. Further, it suggested that the
apparent absorption of Zn decreased with increasing dietary Zn intake and perhaps
also with age, although this could not be proven because of study design (Ozpinar et
al., 2001). Meyer (1984) estimated bioavailability of Zn to be 25 percent in pregnant
and lactating bitches. However, in subsequent studies, Zn bioavailability of 40
percent was suggested for pregnant and lactating bitches (Meyer et al., 1985a,b).
Although several other investigators have reported data on the bioavailability of
Zn, none of these studies provided data on fractional intestinal absorption. However,
using other physiologic parameters such as hair growth, hair Zn concentration, and
plasma Zn concentration to evaluate bioavailability of various Zn compounds, a


===== PDF PAGE 374 =====
373
number of investigators have reported that Zn-amino acid, Zn-polysaccharide, or Zn-
propionate complexes are more bioavailable than zinc oxide (Brinkhaus et al., 1998;
Lowe et al., 1994; Lowe and Wiseman, 1998). On the other hand, Wedekind and
Lowry (1998) suggested that Zn in the form of zinc-propionate is probably no more
available than Zn in the inorganic form of zinc sulfate. These studies suggest that
zinc oxide may not be the preferred form for supplemental Zn. However Baker
(1995) reported the bioavailability of Zinc oxide to be similar to that of zinc sulfate
in swine.
There are no reports of absorption or bioavailability of dietary Zn in cats.
Zinc Deficiency in Puppies and Dogs
There are a few reports of experimentally induced Zn deficiency in puppies and
dogs. Robertson and Burns (1963) observed that puppies (age not stated) fed a
standard diet containing 33 mg Zn·kg–1 and 11 g Ca·kg–1 developed signs of Zn
deficiency, including decreased serum concentrations of Zn-requiring enzymes and
total serum Zn. Signs of Zn deficiency were not seen in dogs fed diets containing 3.0
g Ca·kg–1 and 33 mg Zn·kg–1 or in dogs fed diets containing 11 g Ca·kg–1 and 133
mg Zn·kg–1 (Robertson and Burns, 1963).
Subsequently, Sanecki et al. (1982, 1985) produced Zn deficiency in weanling
Pointer puppies by feeding a dry standard type diet containing 20-35 mg Zn·kg–1 (11
mg Zn per 1,000 kcal ME) and 26.4 g Ca·kg–1, DM basis, providing 2.0 mg Zn·kg
BW–1·d–1. Puppies fed this amount of Zn developed clinical signs of Zn deficiency
including very poor growth rates and significant skin lesions, which began in areas
of contact or wear such as foot pads. Control puppies fed the same diet but
supplemented to a concentration of 120 mg Zn·kg–1 (as zinc carbonate; 39 mg Zn
per 1,000 kcal ME; 7.3 mg Zn·kg BW–1·d–1) grew normally and demonstrated no
clinical signs of Zn deficiency.
In addition to experimental studies of Zn deficiency, there have been a number of
reports of naturally occurring Zn deficiency syndromes in dogs (Ohlen and Scott,
1986; Van Den Broek and Thoday, 1986; Sousa et al., 1988; Van Den Broek and
Stafford, 1988; Colombini, 1999; Colombini and Dunstan, 1997). This appears to
occur in two forms. One of them is a syndrome occurring in northern breed dogs
(e.g., Alaskan huskies or Malamutes) that is due to a genetic defect resulting in
interference with Zn absorption. Treatment requires lifelong supplementation of the
diet with significant quantities of Zn (Colombini and Dunstan, 1997). The second
syndrome has occurred in many breeds as well as in mongrels, frequently, but not
always, in young growing dogs (Ohlen and Scott, 1986; Van Den Broek and Thoday,
1986; Sousa et al., 1988; Van Den Broek and Stafford, 1988; Huber et al., 1991). In
this manifestation, clinical and biochemical signs of Zn deficiency may occur
because of feeding dogs foods that are low in Zn. In one such report, Zn deficiency


===== PDF PAGE 375 =====
374
was diagnosed in 60 puppies being fed a commercial dry diet containing 35-40 mg
Zn·kg–1 (Ohlen and Scott, 1986). More commonly it has been reported in growing
dogs being fed cereal-based, low-quality petfoods containing high concentrations of
substances that bind Zn (Huber et al., 1991; Sousa et al., 1988; Van Den Broek and
Thoday, 1986). The clinical and biochemical findings in such reports have been
virtually identical to those described in experimental cases of Zn deficiency, and, in
all cases, affected animals have responded promptly to Zn supplementation or a
change to a diet with a higher bioavailability of Zn.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Zinc in Dogs
Zinc is a relatively nontoxic substance, and dietary deficiencies of this nutrient
are more likely to occur than are dietary excesses (Gross et al., 2000). A few cases of
inadvertent excess consumption of Zn by individual dogs, mainly puppies, have been
reported in the literature (Hornfeldt and Koepke, 1984; Breitschwerdt et al., 1986;
Torrance and Fulton, 1987; Latimer et al., 1989), but these were clinical observations
of single animals not in controlled experiments with control and test subjects. In all
these cases of excess Zn consumption (e.g., from ingestion of metallic objects made
of Zn), clinical signs have included acute gastroenteritis, hemolytic anemia, and
lethargy.
Dietary Zinc Requirements and Allowances for Dogs
Requirements and Allowances for Puppies
The studies of several investigators, as noted earlier, have shown that feeding
standard diets containing 33-45 mg Zn·kg–1 to growing dogs of several breeds
resulted in clinical and biochemical evidence of Zn deficiency, particularly when the
Ca concentration of the diet was above 10 g·kg–1 (Robertson and Burns, 1963;
Sanecki et al., 1982; 1985; Ohlen and Scott, 1986). Interestingly, Robertson and
Burns (1963) found no difference between the Zn status of dogs fed diets containing
only 3 g Ca·kg–1 and 33 mg Zn·kg–1 and those fed diets containing 11 g Ca·kg–1 and
133 mg Zn·kg–1. Both groups maintained normal Zn status. Booles et al. (1991) fed
purified diets containing 50 or 200 mg Zn·kg–1 and 13 g Ca·kg–1 to Labrador
retriever puppies during the growth phase; normal growth and plasma Zn parameters
were reported in all puppies. They suggested that purified diets containing 50 mg
Zn·kg–1 maintained normal Zn status when fed to growing puppies. However, the
source of the Zn used in this study was not specified.
The studies of Sanecki et al. (1982, 1985) showed that puppies fed standard-type
diets containing 20-35 mg Zn·kg–1 and 26.4 g Ca·kg–1 developed Zn deficiency,


===== PDF PAGE 376 =====
375
while pups fed similar diets with 120 mg Zn·kg–1 remained normal. The
preponderance of available data suggests that the Ca concentration of the diet has a
significant effect on Zn bioavailability, with the dietary Zn requirement being
remarkably lower in diets containing relatively low concentrations of Ca. Further,
other dietary constituents, such as phytate, can significantly reduce Zn availability
(Graf, 1986).
Based on the data of Robertson and Burns (1963) and Booles et al. (1991),
including corrections for energy content of the diets used, the dietary MR of Zn for
puppies may be set at 10 mg Zn per 1,000 kcal. This would provide a minimum Zn
requirement of 1.8 mg Zn·kg BW–1·d–1 (2.7 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) for a 5.5-kg puppy
consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1. This requirement assumes a reasonably low dietary
concentration of Ca.
However, based on the data of Sanecki (1982, 1985) the dietary Zn concentration
may have to be as high as 40 mg per 1,000 kcal ME to prevent deficiency signs in
diets containing high concentrations of Ca (≥26 g·kg–1). It is unlikely that
contemporary standard diets for puppies would contain this high a concentration of
Ca. However, to account for variations in bioavailability of Zn such as higher dietary
concentrations of Ca (≥10 g·kg–1) or phytate, the dietary RA is reasonably set at 25
mg Zn per 1,000 kcal ME (Robertson and Burns, 1963; Sanecki et al., 1982, 1985).
The RA of Zn for a 5.5-kg puppy consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1 would thus be 4.5
mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (6.84 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1).
Requirements and Allowances for Adult Dogs
Hill et al. (2001) fed adult hound dogs four canned diets averaging 25.7 mg Zn
per 1,000 kcal ME (1.9 mg Zn·kg BW–1·d–1) and 20 g Ca·kg–1 for a total of 12
weeks with no signs relating to Zn deficiency reported. Apparent availability of Zn
was indistinguishable from zero, suggesting negligible net absorption (i.e.,
endogenous loss was equivalent to true absorption, but no data on endogenous losses
were reported). Also, in adult dogs, Meyer (1984) and Meyer et al. (1985a) reported
the RA of Zn for adult maintenance to be 1.0 mg Zn·kg BW–1·d–1, based on an
estimated bioavailability of 25 percent. Based on these data, an AI of Zn for adult
dogs may be set at approximately 1.0 mg Zn·kg BW–1·d–1 (2.0 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1).
A diet containing 15 mg Zn per 1,000 kcal ME would provide the adequate Zn intake
for a 15-kg adult dog consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Dogs
Recommended daily allowances of Zn for gestation and lactation in dogs have
been reported to be 1.22 mg and 2.7 mg Zn·kg BW–1·d–1, respectively (Meyer et al.,
1985a,b); in both cases the bioavailability of Zn was assumed to be 40 percent.


===== PDF PAGE 377 =====
376
However, other studies suggest that the bioavailability of Zn in dogs may be lower,
i.e., as low as 20 percent in puppies (Meyer, 1984; Ozpinar et al., 2001). Assuming
bioavailability of 20 percent, the allowances would increase to 2.44 and 5.4 mg
Zn·kg BW–1·d–1 (5.2 and 11.7 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1), respectively, which may be
more reasonable. A diet containing 24 mg Zn per 1,000 kcal ME would thus provide
an AI of Zn for a 22-kg bitch in late gestation or nursing eight puppies and
consuming 5,000 kcal ME·d–1.
Safe Upper Limit of Zinc for Dogs
Drinker et al. (1927) fed dogs diets containing up to 80 mg Zn·kg BW–1·d–1 in
the form of zinc oxide for several months without ill effects. However, in the same
study, cats showed no adverse effects of consuming more than 200 mg Zn·kg BW–
1·d–1, so the value for dogs is unlikely to represent a SUL. As mentioned previously,
although there are several reports of Zn toxicity in individual dogs, none of these
reports provide information on total Zn intake (Hornfeldt and Koepke, 1984;
Breitschwerdt et al., 1986; Torrance and Fulton, 1987; Latimer et al., 1989).
Therefore, there is insufficient information available on which to base a SUL of
dietary Zn for dogs.
Zinc Deficiency in Kittens and Cats
There is very little information on Zn deficiency in kittens or cats. In a brief
report, Aiken et al. (1978) reported skin lesions and growth retardation in young
kittens fed a vegetable-based diet containing 40 mg Zn·kg–1. However, neither the
source of the Zn, the concentration of Ca, nor the concentration of other constituents
of the diet was provided. Kane et al. (1981) fed kittens a soy-based basal diet
containing 8.0 g Ca·kg–1 and two concentrations of Zn as sulfate. Groups were fed
the basal diet with 15 mg Zn·kg–1, 15 mg Zn plus 6 additional g Ca·kg–1 or 67 mg
Zn·kg–1. During an 8-month trial, all kittens developed normally but kittens fed the
lower concentration of Zn had reduced serum Zn concentrations. Histopathologic
evaluation of the testicles from male kittens fed diets containing 15 mg Zn·kg–1
demonstrated significant degeneration of the seminiferous tubules. The testicular
damage resulting from feeding the low-Zn diet for 8 months was not reversed after 8
weeks of feeding the diet containing 67 mg Zn·kg–1 (Kane et al., 1981).
In a second experiment, groups of weanling kittens were fed diets containing 0.7,
52, and 4.8 mg Zn·kg–1 (EDTA-washed soy protein or crystalline amino acids as the
protein source) for a period of 8 weeks (Kane et al., 1981). Kittens fed the diet
containing soy and 0.7 mg Zn·kg–1 grew very slowly for 3 weeks and then began to
lose weight. Kittens fed the diet containing soy and 52 mg Zn·kg–1 grew linearly in a


===== PDF PAGE 378 =====
377
manner similar to those in the first experiment and gained almost 20 g·d–1. Kittens
fed the amino acid diet containing 4.8 mg Zn·kg–1 had intermediate weight gains
between the two other groups. Plasma Zn concentrations in kittens fed the diets
containing 0.7 or 4.8 mg Zn·kg–1 were similar (50 and 40 μg·dL–1, respectively),
while those in kittens fed the diet containing 52 mg Zn·kg–1 averaged 90 μg·dL–1,
which is very similar to the kittens fed diets containing 67 mg·kg–1 in the first
experiment. Two of three kittens fed the diet containing 0.7 mg Zn·kg–1 and one
kitten fed the amino acid diet with 4.8 mg Zn·kg–1 developed perioral skin lesions
compatible with parakeratosis. Liver Zn concentrations were also reduced in kittens
fed the two lower concentrations of Zn.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Zinc in Cats
There are no reports on adverse effects of excess consumption of zinc by cats.
Dietary Zinc Requirements and Allowances for Cats
Requirements and Allowances for Kittens and Cats
The experiments of Aiken et al. (1978) and Kane et al. (1981) provide some
information on which to base an AI of Zn for kittens and cats. It is unknown why
dietary Zn concentrations of only 15 mg·kg–1 resulted in normal growth in the
experiments of Kane et al. (1981), whereas kittens fed diets with 40 mg Zn·kg–1
failed to grow normally in the studies of Aiken (1978). However, differences in the
form of Zn used and the presence of competing dietary factors such as phytate and
Ca may have been involved. Further, although feeding diets containing 15 mg
Zn·kg–1 supported normal growth in kittens, such concentrations were not sufficient
to prevent testicular lesions (Kane et al., 1981).
It would appear that diets containing Zn at concentrations of 67 mg·kg–1 support
normal growth and normal liver Zn status in kittens and cats (Kane et al., 1981). The
data of Kane et al. (1981) show that kittens fed diets with this concentration of Zn
grew from an average of 800 to 2,000 g during the course of the 8-week study and
food consumption averaged 55 g·d–1. The diet contained approximately 12.5 mg Zn
per 1,000 kcal ME, which may be considered a dietary MR. This would provide a Zn
intake of 2.8 mg Zn·kg BW–1·d–1 (2.6 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) to an 800-g kitten
consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1.
To allow for variations in bioavailability and energy intake it would seem prudent
to include a safety factor of 50 percent and set the RA of Zn at 18.5 mg Zn per 1,000


===== PDF PAGE 379 =====
378
kcal ME. The RA of Zn for an 800-g kitten consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1 would thus
be 4.2 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 (3.9 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1).
Since there are no available data on Zn requirements of adult cats, the above
values may be recommended as the AI for maintenance of adult cats as well.
Therefore, a 4-kg adult cat consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1 of a diet containing 18.5 mg
Zn per 1,000 kcal ME would have an AI of 1.2 mg Zn·kg BW–1·d–1 (1.9 mg·kg
BW–0.67·d–1).
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Cats
Little information is available on Zn requirements or allowances for gestation or
lactation in cats. Piechota et al. (1995) showed that a purified diet with a Zn
concentration of approximately 10.5 mg per 1,000 kcal ME supported gestation and
lactation in queens. This is very close to the MR of Zn for growth of kittens and may
be assumed to be the MR for this life stage. This would provide a Zn intake of 1.4
mg Zn·kg BW–1·d–1 (2.2 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) for a 4-kg queen nursing four kittens
and consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1.
Kienzle (1998) reported that queens nursing four kittens produced about 8 percent
of BW per day of milk with a Zn concentration of 730 μg per dL. Using a factorial
approach with an assumption of 25 percent bioavailability a RA of 3.4 mg Zn·kg
BW–1·d–1 was suggested (Kienzle, 1998). However, based on the findings of
Piechota et al. (1995) it is likely that the bioavailability of Zn may well be higher
and/or the actual requirement may be lower than that calculated by Kienzle.
Therefore, it seems prudent to set the RA of Zn for gestation and lactation at
approximately 2.0 mg Zn·kg BW–1·d–1 (3.2 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1). If this is the case,
a diet containing 15 mg Zn per 1,000 kcal ME would provide the dietary RA for a 4-
kg queen nursing four kittens and consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1.
Safe Upper Limit of Zinc for Cats
Drinker et al. (1927) fed cats diets providing up to 230 mg Zn (as zinc oxide)·kg
BW–1·d–1 for several months and did not report any adverse effects. Sterman et al.
(1986) fed adult cats a diet containing 600 mg Zn·kg–1 for 6 weeks during a study to
determine the effects of dietary Zn intake on kindled seizure induction in cats
(Sterman et al., 1986). The blood Zn concentrations in these cats rose to 120 μg·dL–1
compared to an average of 90 μg·dL–1 in cats fed a similar diet that contained 100
mg Zn·kg–1. No other information on the composition of the diet was provided, but
no clinical abnormalities were reported. This would suggest that the SUL of dietary
Zn for adult cats, at least for short periods of time, is >600 mg·kg–1.


===== PDF PAGE 380 =====
379
Manganese
Manganese occurs in only very small amounts in animal tissues. Extrapolating
from human data, an adult dog may have a total body content of only about 3-15 mg
Mn (Hurley and Keen, 1987). Hendricks et al. (1997) found the total body content of
Mn in cats weighing 4 kg to be approximately 2.3 mg. Manganese has been reported
to be reasonably evenly distributed throughout the tissues with perhaps somewhat
higher concentrations in bone and liver. It functions mainly as an essential structural
component in metalloenzymes (e.g., arginase, pyruvate carboxylase, and manganese
superoxide dismutase) or, more commonly, as a metallic activator, either specifically
or nonspecifically, of many other enzymes such as hydrolases, decarboxylases,
kinases, and transferases (Hurley and Keen, 1987). At the tissue level, Mn is known
to be important for normal bone development and neurologic function. Petfood
ingredients that contain reasonable quantities of Mn include cereal grains and
animal, poultry, and seafood products. Nonetheless, supplementary Mn is frequently
added to petfoods, mainly in the form of inorganic salts. Some of these are
manganese carbonate, 47.8 percent Mn; manganese chloride, 43 percent Mn;
manganese oxide, 60 percent Mn; and manganese sulfate monohydrate, 32.5 percent
Mn (Table 13-9).
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Manganese in Dogs and Cats
There are no reports of absorption or bioavailability of Mn in dogs or cats, but, in
other species, manganese sulfate and chloride demonstrate similar bioavailability,
manganese-methionine or protein chelates are a bit higher, while manganese oxide
and manganese carbonate have lower bioavailability (Henry, 1995). In a report on
mineral requirements of bitches and suckling pups, Meyer (1984) estimated the
bioavailability of dietary Mn, including absorption efficiency, to be 10 percent. In
studies in rats, cattle, and humans, determinations of apparent absorption of ingested
Mn have ranged from 3-4 percent in adults to 20 percent in younger individuals
(Hurley and Keen, 1987; Henry, 1995). On the other hand, Henry (1995) reported
retention of from 75 to 90 percent of radiolabeled Mn from milk. From studies in
other species it is known that excessive Fe or Ca can negatively affect the
bioavailability of Mn, but there are no quantitative data on such interactions in dogs
and cats. Therefore, dietary Mn concentrations and Mn intake can be based only on
the assumption of normal dietary concentrations of competing nutrients.
Manganese Deficiency in Dogs and Cats
There are no clinical or experimental reports of Mn deficiency in dogs or cats.
However, from studies in other mammals, it appears that Mn deficiency is
manifested in newborn or growing animals by retarded bone growth and shortening


===== PDF PAGE 381 =====
380
and bowing of the forelegs, and in adult animals by lameness and/or enlarged joints,
poor locomotor function, and ataxia, all of which appear to be due to inhibition of
endochondral osteogenesis. A specific joint abnormality in newborn sheep, goats,
and cattle, known as arthrogryposis, may occur as the result of Mn deficiency,
although other etiologic agents can cause this problem (Radostits et al., 2000). These
bone and joint abnormalities including the classical slipped tendon or “perosis” of
poultry, appear to be due to improper bone matrix formation as a result of
dysfunction of Mn-containing enzymes required for normal cartilage formation and
turnover (Hurley and Keen, 1987). Manganese deficiency has also been reported to
have profound negative effects on reproduction, including delayed estrus, poor
conception, increased abortion rates, stillbirths, and low birth rates.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Manganese in Dogs and Cats
There are no reports of toxic effects of excess consumption of Mn in dogs or cats.
Dietary Manganese Requirements and Allowances for Dogs
Requirements and Allowances for Puppies and Adult Dogs
There are no specific reports regarding dietary requirements or allowances of Mn
for puppies. However, from data on the concentration of Mn in bitch milk and the
weight and consumption of milk by nursing puppies, an AI of Mn by puppies can be
proposed (Lonnerdal et al., 1981; Oftedal, 1984; Kienzle et al., 1985). At peak
lactation in beagles, Oftedal (1984) reported milk consumption of 175 mL per pup
per day by puppies weighing 1.2 kg. Lonnerdal et al. (1981) reported Mn
concentration of milk during peak lactation to be 0.15 μg·mL–1 on an as-fed basis.
Based on these data, the Mn intake of nursing puppies during peak lactation would
be 22 μg Mn·kg BW–1·d–1. On the other hand, from milk intake data, Kienzle et al.
(1985) estimated the Mn intake of nursing puppies to be 50 μg·kg BW–1·d–1. These
puppies had a reported energy intake of 185 kcal ME·kg BW–1·d–1 (Kienzle et al.,
1985).
Although the two estimates are in reasonable agreement, for safety purposes a
value of 35 μg Mn·kg BW–1·d–1 is suggested. Further, it is likely that the
bioavailability of ingested Mn from milk is much higher (approximately 80 percent)
than that from standard diets (Henry, 1995). If the absorption of ingested Mn from
milk is about 75 percent, while that from standard diets is only about 10 percent, the
AI of Mn for growing puppies may be estimated at 250 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 (380 μg·kg
BW–0.75·d–1). (Meyer, 1984; Henry, 1995). A diet containing 1.4 mg Mn per 1,000
kcal ME would thus provide the adequate Mn intake for a 5.5-kg puppy consuming
1,000 kcal ME·d–1.


===== PDF PAGE 382 =====
381
With regard to adult dogs, from studies of the mineral requirements of pregnant
bitches, Meyer (1984) estimated a maintenance Mn allowance (i.e., not including
that needed for fetal deposition) of 100 μg Mn·kg BW–1·d–1, which included an
estimated bioavailability, including absorption efficiency, of 10 percent. Hill et al.
(2001) fed adult hound dogs four similar diets differing only in source of protein.
These diets contained 22.4 mg Mn·kg–1 and provided 287 μg Mn·kg BW–1·d–1 (Hill
et al., 2001). Apparent percentage absorption of ingested Mn was indistinguishable
from zero, suggesting a very low true absorption. By comparing the two sets of data
an AI of 80 μg Mn·kg BW–1·d–1 (160 μg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) is suggested for an adult
dog. A diet containing 1.20 mg Mn per 1,000 kcal would provide the AI for a 15-kg
adult dog consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Dogs
Meyer (1984) estimated the Mn allowance of the pregnant bitch to be 0.14 mg·kg
BW–1·d–1. This value assumed a bioavailability of 10 percent. While there are no
reports of Mn allowances for lactating bitches, the data of Meyer (1984), Oftedal
(1984), and Kienzle et al. (1985) may be used to derive an estimate of AI. Beagle
bitches used in the studies of Oftedal (1984) had an average postpartal weight of 12.5
kg and were nursing an average of six puppies that weighed an estimated 1.2 kg each
at peak lactation (approximately 4 weeks of age). At 4 weeks of age, nursing puppies
have been estimated to have an intake of 50 μg·Mn·kg BW–1·d–1 (Kienzle et al.,
1985). Thus, the Mn needed to nurse six puppies weighing 1.2 kg each is 360 μg·d–1.
Assuming an availability of 10 percent as suggested by Meyer (1984), this would
require 3.6 mg of dietary Mn. The maintenance allowance of 80 μg Mn·kg BW–1·d–
1 would add another 1.0 mg for a total intake of approximately 4.6 mg Mn·d–1 or
about 0.40 mg Mn·kg BW–1·d–1 (0.87 mg Mn·kg BW–0.75·d–1.). If this is
considered as the AI, a diet containing 1.8 mg Mn per 1,000 kcal ME would provide
this amount of Mn for a 22-kg bitch nursing eight puppies and consuming 5,000 kcal
ME·d–1.
Safe Upper Limit of Manganese for Dogs
There are no available data that can be used to predict a SUL for Mn in dogs.
Manganese Requirements and Allowances for Cats
Because of the paucity of information, it is difficult to provide absolute
recommendations for dietary Mn allowances for kittens, for adult cats, or for
gestation and lactation. Scott (1960) reported feeding a purified diet containing 2.28


===== PDF PAGE 383 =====
382
mg Mn·kg–1 to kittens for many months without any signs of Mn deficiency.
Although no data on caloric content were provided, if this diet contained 4,000 kcal
ME·kg–1, it would have provided approximately 130 μg Mn·kg BW–1·d–1. Since
this was a purified diet, digestibility of Mn was probably quite high. For a potentially
decreased bioavailability of Mn in standard diets, as described by Henry (1995), or
decreased energy intake, an adequate dietary concentration of 4.8 mg Mn·kg–1 (1.2
mg Mn per 1,000 kcal ME) is suggested. If this is the case the AI of Mn for an 800-g
kitten consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1 would be 270 μg Mn·kg BW–1·d–1 (250 μg
Mn·kg BW–0.67·d–1).
For adult cats, Scott (1964, 1975) suggested that 200 μg Mn·d–1 (approximately
3.2 mg·kg–1 diet) provided an adequate amount of this mineral, but no supporting
data were included (Scott, 1964, 1975). Since data from other species suggest that
this estimate may be low, a correction to 4.8 mg Mn and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1 is
suggested. Such a diet would provide an AI of 75 μg Mn·kg BW–1·d–1 (119 μg
Mn·kg BW–0.67·d–1 ) for a 4-kg adult cat consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1.
With respect to gestation and lactation, the data of Keen et al. (1982) and
Dobenecker et al. (1998) provide information that can be used to estimate an AI of
Mn. Keen et al. (1982) reported the Mn concentration of queens’ milk to be 0.3
μg·mL–1 during the fourth week of lactation. Dobenecker et al. (1998) reported milk
production as a function of weeks of lactation, BW, and litter size that would be 220
mL in a 4-kg queen nursing four kittens during the fourth week of lactation. The Mn
secreted in milk would thus be 66 μg. Given 10 percent bioavailability of dietary
Mn, the cat would have to consume 660 μg Mn for milk production plus 300 μg Mn
for maintenance, or a total AI of 240 μg Mn·kg BW–1·d–1 (380 μg Mn·kg BW–
0.67·d–1). A diet containing 1.8 Mn per 1,000 kcal ME would provide the AI of a 4-
kg queen nursing four kittens and consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1. Such a diet would
also meet the AI for a 4-kg queen in late gestation.
Safe Upper Limit of Manganese for Cats
No data are available that can be used to predict a SUL for dietary Mn in kittens
or adult cats.
Selenium
Selenium is a mineral that is widely distributed in animal tissues, yet is present in
only very small amounts in any given organ or tissue. Although the highest
concentrations of Se in most species are in liver and kidney, the organ with the
greatest total amount of Se is muscle (Levander, 1986). Petfood ingredients may vary
widely in their Se content. Although cereal grains contain approximately 0.3 mg


===== PDF PAGE 384 =====
383
Se·kg–1 on average, this can vary widely depending on geographic source (i.e., the
Se content of soils in which grains were grown). Animal tissues vary in their Se
content depending on its concentration in the diets. Some fish products such as
salmon and herring meals may have concentrations of Se close to 2.0 mg·kg–1
(Levander, 1986). Because of the variability in Se content of ingredients, dog and cat
foods frequently contain supplemental forms, generally as sodium selenite, 45.6
percent Se, or sodium selenate decahydrate, 21.4 percent Se (Table 13-9).
One of the major functions of Se is its role in the Se-containing enzyme
glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px), an important antioxidant that protects the body
against free-radical and other oxidative damage. It is thought that GSH-Px functions
as an intracytoplasmic antioxidant, whereas vitamin E plays a major role as an
intramembranous antioxidant, which is one reason that deficiency diseases of these
two substances are often referred to as vitamin E-Se responsive diseases (VESRDs)
(Lannek and Lindberg, 1975; Levander, 1986). However, Se, in the form of
selenocysteine, also functions in two deiodinases that are important in the formation
and degradation of triiodothyronine, the active form of thyroid hormone (Larsen and
Berry, 1995). There are several other Se-containing proteins, whose functions are not
entirely clear. Selenium also plays an important role in support of the immune
response (Sheffy and Schultz, 1979; Lessard et al., 1993; Bowers, 1997). Finally,
there is a growing body of evidence that Se may be protective against cancer
(Levander, 1986).
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary of Selenium in Dogs and Cats
There is very little information on the absorption or bioavailability of dietary Se
specifically in dogs and cats. Using a Se-depleted chick bioassay, Wedekind et al.
(1997) found that Se bioavailability from a number of petfood ingredients averaged
only about 20 percent of that from sodium selenite. Plant sources of Se were more
bioavailable than animal sources (Wedekind and Combs, 2000). In a subsequent
study using the same model, results showed that Se bioavailability was 27 percent
for animal source products, 47 percent for plant-derived ingredients, 30 percent for
canned petfoods, and 53 percent for dry extruded petfoods (Wedekind et al., 1998).
At the end of an 8-week repletion study in a Se-depleted rat model, a number of
different meat sources, bread, and seafood were reported to be good sources of
bioavailable Se, resulting in an increase in GSH-Px activity to levels as high as or
higher than those in control animals (Wen et al., 1995). In the rat, Se has been
reported to be efficiently absorbed from the intestine, mainly the duodenum. Both
inorganic sources such as sodium selenite and organic sources such as
selenomethionine and selenocystine are over 90 percent absorbed (Levander, 1986).
However, the results of these studies may not be applicable to Se from mixed diets.
Windisch et al. (1998) reported apparent absorption of ingested Se, as sodium
selenate, in rats to be 82 percent, while that from selenocysteine and


===== PDF PAGE 385 =====
384
selenomethionine was 90 percent or higher. However, they concluded that the
organic forms of Se were mainly incorporated into protein (in amino acids) and not
available for metabolic functions of Se.
The Se bioavailability reported from the experiments of Wedekind et al. (1997,
1998) using the chick model are somewhat lower than those of Wen et al. (1995)
using the rat model with respect to Se availability from animal sources. The reasons
for this are not clear. Reasbeck et al. (1985) found that organic forms of Se were
more rapidly absorbed in the jejunum of dogs, probably through the active transport
of Se-containing amino acids, whereas sodium selenite appeared to be absorbed by
diffusion, although total absorption of Se was not evaluated in these studies.
The results of these studies suggest that many forms of Se are bioavailable in
dogs and cats. There appears to be little homeostatic control of Se absorption, the
absorption percentage being high regardless of the dietary concentration of this
mineral. The bioavailability of Se from different sources may differ for different
physiologic purposes (Levander, 1986; Wedekind and Combs, 2000). There is a
dearth of information on interaction of Se with other minerals at the level of
intestinal absorption. However, Houpt et al. (1988) suggested that dietary Se may be
protective, perhaps through a competitive effect on absorption, against the effects of
mercury toxicity in cats.
Selenium Deficiency in Dogs and Cats
Only one paper reports experimentally produced clinical signs of Se deficiency in
dogs; there are no reports for cats. Van Vleet (1975) observed clinical signs of
vitamin E-Se responsive disease when puppies were fed a basal Se and vitamin E-
deficient diet (0.01 mg Se·kg–1). Clinical signs appearing within 6 to 8 weeks
included anorexia, depression, dyspnea, and coma. At necropsy, ventral edema,
generalized skeletal muscular pallor and edema with scattered white streaking,
brownish-yellow discoloration of intestinal muscle, and a chalky white deposit at the
renal corticomedullary junction were noted. Histopathologic changes included
muscular degeneration, focal subendocardial necrosis in the cardiac ventricular
musculature, intestinal liopfuscinosis, and renal mineralization (Van Vleet, 1975).
Puppies fed the basal diet supplemented with 0.5 mg Se·kg–1 demonstrated mild
skeletal muscle myopathy.
Using serum Se data, Wedekind and Combs (2000) found that purified diets with
less than 0.21 mg Se·kg–1 fed to 9-week-old beagle puppies did not support normal
serum Se concentrations. Because of the role of Se in deiodinases, the effects of
these diets on thyroid hormone concentrations were also measured, with the results
suggesting that Se deficiency may not be a major factor in the development of canine
hypothyroidism (Wedekind et al., 2001). In 10-week-old kittens, breakpoint analysis
of serum GSH-Px concentration indicated that diets containing less than 0.12 mg
Se·kg–1 were inadequate to maintain normal circulating concentrations of this


===== PDF PAGE 386 =====
385
enzyme (Wedekind and Combs, 2000; Wedekind et al., 2000). Other parameters
measured demonstrated breakpoints at lower concentrations, emphasizing differing
needs of Se for different physiological functions (Wedekind and Combs Jr., 2000;
Wedekind et al., 2000). Yu et al. (2001) evaluated the effect of a low-Se diet (0.02
mg·kg–1) on thyroid function in kittens. Compared to kittens fed a diet containing
0.4 mg Se·kg–1 as sodium selenate, kittens fed the Se-deficient diet demonstrated
reduced plasma Se concentration and GSH-Px activity, although no gross clinical
signs of Se deficiency were observed. Plasma concentration of thyroxine increased,
while that of 3,5,3′-tri-iodothyronine decreased significantly in kittens fed the Se-
deficient diet. However, the concentration of thyroxine did not exceed the normal
range nor did the concentration of 3,5,3′-triiodothyronine fall below the normal range
in either group (Yu et al., 2001). The results suggested that Se does play a role in
thyroid hormone metabolism but agree with previous data suggesting that Se status
may not play a major role in the development of hypothyroidism in cats (Wedekind
et al., 2001). However, this experiment lasted only 8 weeks, so more work in this
area is needed.
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Selenium in Dogs and Cats
There is little evidence regarding adverse effects of excess consumption of dietary
Se by dogs and cats. Summarizing older studies, Levander (1988) reported that
excess consumption of Se by dogs (e.g., diets containing 5.0 mg·kg–1 diet) resulted
in a microcytic, hypochromic anemia, progressing in severity with time, and severe
liver damage including necrosis and cirrhosis.
Dietary Selenium Requirements and Allowances for Dogs
Requirements and Allowances for Puppies and Dogs
In a study of experimentally induced vitamin E and Se deficiency in puppies, the
data of Van Vleet (1975) suggest that feeding diets containing at least 0.5 mg Se·kg–
1 prevented clinical signs of selenium deficiency. However, the diet used was
vitamin E-deficient, which may have increased the Se requirement. Using breakpoint
analysis of serum Se concentrations, a minimum dietary requirement for beagle
puppies of 0.21 mg Se·kg–1 diet has been determined (Wedekind and Combs, 2000).
Using a chick bioassay system, a bioavailability factor of 30 percent was suggested
for Se in standard diets, and a RA of 0.5 mg Se·kg–1 diet was suggested (Wedekind
et al., 1998).
No information on caloric content of the diets was provided in the above studies.
If, however, it was reasonably close to 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1, the MR of dietary Se for
puppies would be 52.5 μg per 1,000 kcal ME, which would provide 9.5 μg Se·kg


===== PDF PAGE 387 =====
386
BW–1·d–1 (13.7 μg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) to a 5.5-kg puppy consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–
1. From bioavailability studies of Se in petfoods, Wedekind and Combs (2000)
suggested 0.5 mg Se·kg–1, DM basis, as the RA for puppies. However, since many
petfoods are now supplemented with inorganic Se salts, which are more highly
bioavailable, a recommended dietary concentration of 0.35 mg Se per 4,000 kcal
ME·kg–1 is more reasonable, agreeing reasonably well with the data of Van Vleet
(1975) assuming diets with adequate vitamin E. Such a diet would contain 87.5 μg
Se per 1,000 kcal ME and would provide 16.5 μg Se·kg BW–1·d–1 (25.1 μg·kg BW–
0.75·d–1) to a 5.5-kg puppy consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1.
There are no data on the Se needs of adult dogs. Therefore, it may be assumed
that a diet containing sufficient Se to support the growth of puppies (i.e., the RA of
0.35 mg Se·kg–1 and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1), represents an AI for the adult dog. A 15-
kg adult dog consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1 would thus have an AI of 6 μg Se·kg
BW–1·d–1 (11.8 μg·kg BW–0.75·d–1).
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Dogs
There are no data available regarding Se requirements and allowances for
gestation or lactation in the dog. It can only be assumed, as stated above, that dietary
concentrations sufficient to support the RA for growth (i.e., 0.35 mg Se·kg–1 and
4,000 kcal ME·kg–1) would provide an AI for reproduction as well. Assuming this to
be the case, a 22-kg bitch in late gestation or nursing eight puppies and consuming
5,000 kcal ME·d–1 would have an AI of 20 μg Se·kg BW–1·d–1 (43 μg·kg BW–
0.75·d–1).
Safe Upper Limit of Selenium for Dogs
While Levander (1986) reported that a dietary Se concentration of 5 mg·kg–1
resulted in Se toxicity in dogs, no data are available on an acceptable SUL for dietary
Se in dogs although for regulatory purposes, a maximum standard of 2.0 mg Se·kg–1
has been suggested (AAFCO, 2001).
Dietary Selenium Requirements and Allowances for Cats
Requirements and Allowances for Kittens and Adult Cats
Using breakpoint analysis for several variables, the highest Se requirement, for
serum GSH-Px activity, occurred at an estimated 0.12 mg Se·kg–1 diet fed to 10-
week-old kittens, which can therefore be considered the minimal Se requirement for


===== PDF PAGE 388 =====
387
kittens (Wedekind and Combs, 2000; Wedekind et al., 2000). Based on Se
bioavailability studies in cat foods using the chick model, Wedekind et al. (1998)
extrapolated a bioavailability factor of 0.3 that may be applied to arrive at a
recommended dietary allowance of 0.4 mg Se·kg–1 (Wedekind et al., 1998, 2000;
Wedekind and Combs, 2000). However, it is likely that bioavailability of Se in cat
foods, especially those supplemented with inorganic Se salts, may be somewhat
higher than measured in the above studies, so a recommended dietary allowance of
0.3 mg Se·kg–1 is suggested.
No data on dietary caloric content were provided in these studies. However, if
caloric density is assumed to be close to 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1, the MR and daily RA,
respectively, of dietary Se in growth foods for kittens can be estimated at 0.03 mg
and 0.075 mg Se per 1,000 kcal ME. An 800-g kitten consuming 180 kcal ME·d–1
would thus have a MR and a RA of 6.75 μg and 17 μg Se·kg BW–1·d–1 (6.23 and
15.8 μg·kg BW–0.67·d–1), respectively.
There are no reports of the Se requirement of adult cats. Therefore, it may be
assumed that diets with Se concentrations adequate to support growth (i.e., 0.3 mg
Se·kg–1 and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1) will provide an AI for adult cats as well. The AI of
a 4-kg adult cat consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1 would therefore be estimated at 4.7 μg
Se·kg BW–1·d–1 (6.95 μg·kg BW–0.67·d–1).
Requirements for Gestation and Lactation in Cats
There are no data on which to base a MR or RA of Se in pregnant or nursing
queens. Therefore, a dietary concentration of Se that is adequate for growth (i.e., 0.3
mg Se·kg–1 and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1) is assumed to be adequate for reproduction, as
well. A 4-kg queen nursing four kittens and consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1 would
accordingly have an AI of 10 μg Se·kg BW–1·d–1 (16 μg·kg BW–0.67·d–1).
Safe Upper Limit of Selenium for Cats
There are no data available that can be used to predict a SUL of dietary Se for
cats.
Iodine
Iodine is an essential nutritional element that is required by animals in only very
small amounts. Its biological significance is that it is a major constituent of the
thyroid hormones thyroxine (T4) and 3,5,3′-triiodothyronine (T3), the latter being
considered the active form of the hormone. Thyroid hormone plays a major role in
cell differentiation, growth, and development in growing animals and in the


===== PDF PAGE 389 =====
388
regulation of metabolic rate in adults. The bodies of healthy dogs and cats contain
only a few milligrams of I, the vast majority of which is located in a protein-bound
form in the thyroid gland, although much smaller amounts occur in other organ
systems. Iodine circulates in the blood in both inorganic and organic forms, with
blood inorganic I concentration being related to the I status of the animal (Hetzel and
Maberly, 1986).
The amount of I in foodstuffs varies widely. Meat, for example, contains very low
concentrations while seafood is generally very high in I (Scott et al., 1961; Hetzel
and Maberly, 1986). Iodine content of foodstuffs also varies due to natural
differences in environmental I, with foodstuffs from geographic areas close to salt
water having higher I content than those from inland sources. Iodine supplements are
frequently added to petfoods in the form of inorganic I, the most common
supplements being potassium iodide, 68.2 percent I; cuprous iodide, 67 percent I;
calcium iodate, 65.1 percent I; and calcium periodate, 28-31 percent I (Table 13-8).
Nonetheless, the I content of petfoods can apparently vary considerably (Johnson et
al., 1992; Losher et al., 2000; Castillo et al., 2001a).
Absorption and Bioavailability of Dietary Iodine in Dogs and Cats
Iodine exists in food ingredients and water mainly in the inorganic form, and it is
generally quantitatively absorbed from all levels of the gastrointestinal tract. A small
amount of organically bound I also may be ingested, mainly in the form of iodinated
amino acids, and a small amount of I in this form may appear in the feces. The major
source of I excretion is the kidney. Inorganic I is filtered in the glomerulus, and there
is no tubular mechanism for conservation (Hetzel and Maberly, 1986). There is little
evidence to suggest significant interference of other minerals with the absorption of
I, but high concentrations of dietary Ca and K have been suggested as possibilities
(Gross et al., 2000).
Iodine Deficiency in Dogs and Cats
There are a few reports of clinical cases of I deficiency in mature dogs
(Thompson, 1979; Nuttall, 1986). In all cases, the diagnosis was based on a history
of the dogs being fed an all-meat diet and responding to I treatment. Clinical signs
consisted of goiter (enlargement of the thyroid gland), alopecia, dry sparse overall
hair coat, and weight gain. Reduced concentrations of circulating thyroid hormones
were measured in some, but not all, of these cases.
Norris et al. (1970) evaluated the response to long-term feeding (more than 1
year) of a diet containing an estimated 80 μg I per 1,000 kcal equivalent to a diet
containing 0.3 mg I·kg–1 and 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1 and providing about 5.2 μg I·kg
BW–1·d–1. During the first 9 months the thyroid glands became hyperplastic and
hypertrophic indicating a state of I deficiency. This was accompanied by significant


===== PDF PAGE 390 =====
389
increases in thyroid uptake of test doses of 131I and rapid loss of the radiolabel after
the time of maximum uptake (Norris et al., 1970). However, during succeeding
months, the thyroid glands decreased in size and returned to a normal histological
appearance despite continued increased uptake of radiolabeled I. These results
suggest that dogs can adapt over time to significant reductions in I intake. In a 5-
month study, dogs with daily I intakes of ≤ 7.5 μg I·kg BW–1·d–1 (≤ 112 μg I per
1,000 kcal ME) demonstrated significant changes in several parameters of I
metabolism and thyroid function, suggesting that these intake levels were insufficient
to maintain normalcy, although no clinical signs of I deficiency occurred (Belshaw et
al., 1975).
There is very little information available on I deficiency in cats. Scott et al.
(1961) fed 10- to 14-week-old kittens diets of raw beef or sheep heart for 8 weeks or
more. The I concentration of the diet averaged 0.45 mg·kg–1, DM basis, which
provided 5-40 μg I·d–1 to each kitten. Other kittens were fed a stock diet providing
200-300 μg I·d–1. Although no clinical signs directly attributable to I deficiency
were described, on autopsy the thyroid glands from the kittens fed the raw heart diet
were enlarged and demonstrated histological changes compatible with I deficiency.
Kittens fed raw heart supplemented with 100 μg I·d–1 remained normal, but
supplements of 50 μg I·d–1 (equivalent to a diet containing about 1.1 mg I·kg–1 and
4,000 kcal ME·kg–1) did not prevent some signs of thyroid gland hyperplasia. More
recently, Smith (1996) reported that feeding adult cats diets with concentrations of
less than 2.4 I mg·kg–1 resulted in metabolic changes compatible with I deficiency
although no clinical abnormalities were observed (Smith, 1996; Gross et al. 2000).
Ranz et al. (2002) investigated a potential role of I deficiency as an etiological
factor in feline hyperthyroidism by comparing the I content of cat foods and the
incidence of thyroid disease in cats in Germany. Although the results were
inconclusive, a possible relationship between reduced I intake and thyroid disease
was suggested (Ranz et al., 2002). Reduced I intake has also been reported to result
in increased clinical incidence of thyroid disease and thyroid tumors in dogs in I-
deficient areas of Germany (Prange, 2001a,b).
Adverse Effects of Excess Consumption of Iodine in Dogs and Cats
Excessive I intake can lead to significant abnormalities in many domestic animal
species. Clinical signs may include excessive lacrimation, salivation, nasal discharge,
and a flaky and dry skin and hair coat. Goiter can occur in foals of mares that have
ingested excessive amounts of I. This appears to be due to a negative effect of high
plasma concentrations of I on production of thyroid hormones (Radostits et al.,
2000). High concentrations of dietary I, up to 14 mg·kg–1, in cat food have been
shown to result in transient decreases in thyroid hormone levels (Tarttelin et al.,
1992; Kyle et al., 1994; Tarttelin and Ford, 1994).


===== PDF PAGE 391 =====
390
A similar response to increased dietary I (5.6 mg I·kg–1, DM basis) has been
reported in puppies. This amount of dietary I was also shown to decrease uptake of
radioiodine by the thyroid gland (Castillo et al., 2001a). More recently, Castillo et al.
(2001b) reported findings of bone abnormalities in puppies fed diets containing high
concentrations of I, which resulted in I intakes of up to 775 μg·kg BW–1·d–1. While
excessive dietary I in cat food has been investigated as a potential cause of feline
hyperthyroidism, epidemiologic studies have not identified a relationship between
dietary I and functional adenomas or adenocarcinomas of the thyroid gland in the cat
(Scarlett, 1994).
Dietary Iodine Requirements and Allowances for Dogs
Requirements and Allowances for Puppies and Adult Dogs
There are no reports of I requirements of growing puppies. Norris et al. (1970)
fed 11-month-old beagle dogs’ diets containing 50-75 μg I·d–1. Provided these dogs
were close to mature weight and consumed normal amounts of energy, they would
have an intake of approximately 5 μg I·kg BW–1·d–1, which would be equivalent to
a dietary concentration of 75 μg I per 1,000 kcal ME (Norris et al., 1970). The dogs
in this study did not develop clinical signs of I deficiency, but they did show
metabolic and histological alterations of the thyroid glands compatible with
hypothyroidism during the first 9 months of feeding the test diet. By the end of 1
year on the diet however, thyroid gland histology had returned to normal and most of
the metabolic changes had normalized, suggesting adaptation to this level of I intake
(Norris et al., 1970). Belshaw et al. (1975) found that intakes of 140 μg I·d–1 or
higher in adult beagles, corresponding to 175 μg I per 1,000 kcal ME and a
consumption of 12 μg I·kg BW–1·d–1 (23.6 μg·kg BW–0.75·d–1) were required to
maintain normalcy in all metabolic, kinetic, and histological parameters evaluated.
To correct for variation in energy intake and goitrogenic substances in the diet, an
allowance of 25 percent is recommended. Thus, the RA of dietary I for adult dogs
may be set at 220 μg I per 1,000 kcal. The recommended daily allowance of I for a
15-kg dog consuming 1,000 kcal ME would be 15 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 (29.6 μg·kg
BW–0.75·d–1). Assuming that this concentration of I in food also supports growth, a
5.5-kg puppy consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1 would have an AI of 40 μg I·kg BW–
1·d–1 (61.0 μg·kg BW–0.75·d–1).
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Dogs
There are no available data on I requirements for reproduction in the dog.
However, based on the data of Norris et al. (1970) and Belshaw et al. (1975)


===== PDF PAGE 392 =====
391
suggesting that adult dogs can adapt to reasonably low intakes of dietary I, it is likely
that the recommended dietary concentration of I for adult dogs may support the
needs of reproduction as well. If this is the case, the AI for a 22-kg bitch in late
gestation or nursing eight puppies and consuming 5,000 kcal ME·d–1 is 50 μg I·kg
BW–1·d–1 (108 μg·kg BW–0.75·d–1).
Safe Upper Limit of Iodine for Dogs
In the course of their studies, Belshaw et al. (1975) measured I concentrations in
several commercial brands of dog food. The results corresponded to concentrations
ranging, at a minimum, from 400 to 1,275 μg I per 1,000 kcal ME, providing
estimated daily intakes of 27-85 μg I·kg BW–1·d–1 in adult dogs (Belshaw et al.,
1975). Apparently these foods were fed without any clinical abnormalities in dogs
consuming them. On the other hand, Castillo et al. (2001a) reported evidence of
depressed thyroid gland function, evidenced by reduced plasma concentrations of
thyroid hormones and bone abnormalities, in puppies fed diets containing an
estimated maximum I content of 1,400 μg I per 1,000 kcal ME, providing an
estimated 250 μg I·kg BW–1·d–1. Based on this information an absolute figure for a
SUL of dietary I cannot be predicted for adult dogs.
Dietary Iodine Requirements and Allowances for Cats
Requirements and Allowances for Kittens and Adult Cats
There are very few data available on which to base a recommendation for I
requirements and allowances in cats. Scott et al. (1961) produced I deficiency in
kittens by feeding a raw beef heart diet containing approximately 0.4 mg I·kg–1 for a
period of 8 weeks beginning at 12 weeks of age. The diet contained a reported 4,400
kcal ME·kg–1, and at the end of 8 weeks the kittens were consuming an estimated
140 kcal ME·kg BW–1·d–1, providing about 12.7 μg I·kg BW–1·d–1. Subsequent
supplementation with 100 μg I·d–1 for an additional 6 weeks, providing conservative
estimated daily intakes of 45 μg I·kg BW–1·d–1, reversed all signs of I deficiency in
these kittens. The kittens were about 26 weeks of age at the end of the experiment
and weighed an estimated 2.5 kg (Loveridge, 1987). At this age, the kittens were
consuming an estimated 110 kcal·kg BW–1·d–1, which resulted in an I intake
equivalent to that from a diet containing 410 μg I per 1,000 kcal.
Adding an allowance of 10 percent to account for variations in energy intake and
possible reduced availability of I in standard diets, the adequate dietary I
concentration would be 450 μg per 1,000 kcal ME. This diet would provide an I


===== PDF PAGE 393 =====
392
intake of 100 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 (93 μg·kg BW–0.67·d–1) to an 800-g kitten consuming
180 kcal ME·d–1.
An adult 4-kg cat consuming 250 kcal ME·d–1 of an equivalent diet would have
an AI of 28 μg I·kg BW–1·d–1. Recent preliminary information reported by Smith
(1996) indicates that diets with concentrations of less than 2.4 mg I·kg–1 fed to adult
cats may result in metabolic alterations compatible with I deficiency or suboptimal I
intake. This implies that the suggested AI of I for adult cats is reasonable (Smith,
1996).
However, Ranz et al. (2002) concluded from feeding trials of various
concentrations of dietary I to adult cats that bioavailability of dietary I approximates
100 percent, that fecal endogenous I loss was a constant 13 μg I·kg BW–1·d–1
regardless of I intake, and renal endogenous loss was 6 μg I·kg BW–1·d–1 at zero I
intake for a total mandatory endogenous loss of 20 μg I·kg BW–1·d–1 (31.6 μg·kg
BW–0.67·d–1). They concluded that an intake of this amount of dietary I should be
suffiecient to maintain zero I balance in the adult cat. A diet containing 320 μg I per
1,000 kcal ME would thus provide the dietary MR of iodine for a 4 kg adult cat
assuming a caloric intake of 250 kcal ME·d–1. To correct for possible variations in
energy intake or the unlikely possibility of reduced bioavailability, a safety factor of
10 percent can reasonably be applied, suggesting a dietary RA of 350 μg I per 1,000
kcal ME for adult maintenance.
Requirements and Allowances for Gestation and Lactation in Cats
There is no information available on I requirements or allowances for
reproduction in cats. By assuming that a diet, adequate for growth, would supply the
needs for reproduction as well, a 4-kg cat in late gestation or nursing four kittens and
consuming 540 kcal ME·d–1 would have an AI of 61 μg I·kg BW–1·d–1 (96 μg·kg
BW–0.67·d–1).
Safe Upper Limit of Iodine for Cats
Kyle et al. (1994) evaluated thyroid function in cats fed a diet containing 21.1 mg
I·kg–1, DM basis, for 5 months. No clinical abnormalities were reported. Further,
free thyroxine concentrations remained in the normal range throughout the study
(based on monthly sampling), suggesting that consumption of a diet with this I
concentration had no negative effects on thyroid function at least during the time
frame studied. However, Tarttelin and Ford (1994) did report significant depression
in serum free thyroxine concentrations when a diet containing 13.8 mg I·kg–1 DM
basis was fed for a period of only two weeks. Based on the results of these


===== PDF PAGE 394 =====
393
experiments, it is not possible to define a safe upper limit for iodine consumption in
cats.
OTHER MINERALS
Arsenic
Although arsenic (As) is often thought of as toxic, it appears that only certain As-
containing compounds (e.g., trimethylarsenic) are highly toxic, while organic
arsenical compounds, such as those found in crustacean seafood, are quite safe when
ingested (Anke, 1986). From studies in chickens, hamsters, goats, miniature pigs,
and rats, it appears that As is an essential nutrient for these species, though it is
required in amounts of only a few hundred nanograms per gram of diet (Anke, 1986;
Nielsen, 1994b).
Arsenic deficiency in these species has been associated with clinical signs of
reduced growth rate, impaired fertility, and increased perinatal mortality. At the
microscopic level, myocardial damage has been noted in As-deficient goats, most
specifically at the level of the mitochondrion where membrane damage and rupture
have been described (Nielsen, 1994b). Anke (1986), summarizing several studies,
indicated that As deficiency is also associated with abnormal function of several
enzyme systems that may be involved in amino acid metabolism and protein
synthesis.
There is insufficient information to make any recommendations regarding As
allowances for dogs or cats. Research in this area would be useful.
Boron
There is an increasing body of evidence suggesting that B is an essential nutrient
for both humans and animals (Nielsen, 1986, 1994b). Boron deprivation depresses
growth and causes increased plasma alkaline phosphatase concentrations in vitamin
D-deficient chicks. Studies in rats suggest that B influences parathormone activity
and, indirectly, the metabolism of Ca, P, Mg, and vitamin D and, therefore, is of
importance in Ca homeostasis and bone metabolism. Boron also has an effect on
brain electrical activity, perhaps secondary to its effects on Ca and Mg metabolism
(Nielsen 1986, 1994b).
Data from rats and chicks demonstrate that feeding diets containing 0.3 mg B·kg–
1 may result in signs of altered Ca and Mg metabolism (Nielsen 1986). Thus, higher
dietary levels may be indicated. Data from human studies suggest the possibility of a
B requirement of 0.5 mg B per 1,000 kcal (Nielsen, 1994b).
There is insufficient information to make any recommendations regarding B
allowances for dogs or cats. Research in this area would be useful.


===== PDF PAGE 395 =====
394
Chromium
Chromium has been recognized as an essential nutrient for about 50 years, since
studies in rats identified it as being essential for normal glucose tolerance (Anderson,
1987; Nielsen 1994a). Subsequently, signs of Cr deficiency in humans and several
animal species have been found to include impaired glucose tolerance, elevated
plasma insulin, hyperglycemia, impaired growth, elevated plasma triglycerides,
neuropathy, encephalopathy, corneal lesions, and decreased fertility and sperm count
(Anderson, 1987). Chromium has also been shown to be involved in lipid
metabolism, protein synthesis, and nucleic acid metabolism.
There are few data on Cr intakes in species other than humans. For technical
reasons, only recent estimates are assumed to be valid (Nielsen, 1994a). Even recent
estimates vary widely depending on many factors, but it would appear that a Cr
intake of 40-50 μg·d–1 is average for the adult human. Requirements may increase
with stress such as intense physical exercise.
Little is known about Cr absorption, although it appears to be absorbed mainly in
the jejunum. The chemical form of Cr may affect bioavailability. However, data on
the bioavailability of Cr from inorganic sources such as chloride or various organic
sources such as nicotinate or picolinate are inconsistent (Spears et al., 1998b). In
several studies in both animals and humans, apparent Cr absorption of between 0.4
and 3 percent have been reported (Anderson, 1987).
A few studies have been published regarding the effect of supplemental Cr,
generally in the form of chromium tripicolinate, on aspects of glucose metabolism,
insulin sensitivity, reproduction and growth, and immune responsiveness in dogs
(Spears et al., 1998a,b; Lindemann et al., 2000). Gestation and lactation in bitches, as
well as growth of puppies, were little affected by Cr supplementation at a
concentration of 0.2 mg·kg–1 diet. The Cr concentration of the basal diet was not
reported (Lindemann et al., 2000). A small but significant decrease in blood glucose
concentration was observed in dogs supplemented with Cr at a concentration of 0.3
mg·kg–1 diet; however, no differences in immune function were noted between dogs
supplemented with 0.15 or 0.3 mg Cr·kg–1 diet compared to unsupplemented dogs
(Spears et al., 1998a). In this study, the Cr content of the control diet was stated as
approximately 0.7 mg·kg–1. Schachter et al. (2001) concluded that, while Cr
supplementation of diabetic dogs at the level of 2.5-7.5 μg Cr·kg BW–1·d–1 for
several months was safe, there was no effect of the additional Cr on glycemic
control. Cohn et al. (1999) reported that, although supplementation with 100
μg·Cr·d–1 was safe, the added Cr had no effect on glucose tolerance in either obese
or normal cats. The Cr concentration in the basal diet was not reported.
If the basal diet used by Spears et al. (1999a) contained 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1 (175
μg Cr per 1,000 kcal ME), a 15-kg adult dog consuming 1,000 kcal ME·d–1 of this
diet would have an intake of 12 μg Cr·kg BW–1·d–1. Nielsen (1994a) summarized


===== PDF PAGE 396 =====
395
the results of several studies and suggested that the Cr intake of adult humans may
be 50-200 μg·d–1. The 70-kg standard human would thus be consuming between 0.7
and 3.0 μg Cr·kg BW–1·d–1. It is likely that dogs have a Cr requirement lower than
12 μg·kg BW–1·d–1, and until further information is available, no definite
recommendation can be made.
There is insufficient information to make any recommendations regarding Cr
allowances for cats. Research in this area would be useful.
Molybdenum
Although an elevated dietary intake of Mo is often considered a potential
contributor to Cu deficiency in ruminants, it has been shown to be an essential
nutrient for humans and several animal species (Mills and Davis, 1987; Nielsen,
1994b). There are several Mo-containing metalloenzymes including xanthine
oxidase, which is critical for normal nucleic acid metabolism (i.e., conversion of
purines and similar compounds to uric acid). Molybdenum is also present in a few
other enzymes including aldehyde oxidase and sulfite oxidase (Mills and Davis,
1987).
Numerous effects of Mo deficiency have been described in poultry, including
decreased viability and hatchability of eggs and feathering defects. In goats, diets
providing less than 60 μg Mo·kg BW–1·d–1 resulted in decreased rates of conception
and increased rates of abortions, as well as poor growth and increased mortality rate
of kids (Mills and Davis, 1987). While a deficiency has not been described in dogs
and cats, it is virtually certain that Mo is an essential nutrient for these species.
Molybdenum is present in many ingredients used in petfoods including soybean
meal, which may contain up to 10 mg·kg–1, and cereal grains in which the
concentration is only 0.2-0.4 mg·kg–1. Most meat products are very low in Mo, but
organ meats such as liver may contain from 2 to 10 mg·kg–1 (Mills and Davis,
1987). Molybdenum appears to be highly absorbable in both organic and inorganic
forms. While few competitors of Mo absorption have been reported, one major
exception is sulfate, which—particularly in simple-stomached animals where it is not
converted to sulfide—is a potent inhibitor of Mo absorption, perhaps competing for a
common carrier at the site of absorption.
Since a deficiency of Mo has not been reported in dogs or cats, it is almost certain
that commercial petfoods contain sufficient Mo to meet their metabolic needs. It is
quite likely that the need is significantly less than the 60 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 reported to
be insufficient for the goat, a ruminant, since estimates of normal intakes for adult
humans range from 40 to 460 μg Mo·d–1, which represents about 1-7 μg Mo·kg
BW–1·d–1 (Mills and Davis, 1987).
There is insufficient information to make any recommendations regarding Mo
allowances for dogs and cats. Research in this area would be useful.


===== PDF PAGE 397 =====
396
Silicon
Silicon (Si) is a ubiquitous element in the environment and was found in animal
tissues from the beginnings of the science of nutrition. That it is absorbed and
excreted by dogs is proven by the occurrence of Si-containing urinary calculi in this
species (Ehrhart and McCullagh 1973; Aldrich et al., 1997). The first reports of Si as
an essential nutrient were published in the mid-1970s from studies in chickens and
rats (Nielsen, 1994b). It is now clear from studies in experimental animals that Si is
an essential nutrient that plays a role in the calcification and maturation of bone. It
helps enhance the early calcification of bone, since the concentration of Si is highest
in young forming bones and decreases thereafter. Silicon also appears to be a
cofactor in prolyl hydrase activity, which is involved in collagen synthesis (Carlisle,
1986). Signs of Si deficiency are related mainly to aberrant development of
connective tissue and bone.
With respect to dietary sources, Si is found in highest concentration in plant
source food ingredients and is lowest in animal source ingredients (Nielsen, 1994b).
The MR of Si has not been determined with certainty for any species. It has been
suggested that the Si requirement for humans may be around 30 mg·d–1, or
approximately 400 μg·kg BW–1·d–1, but the evidence is not conclusive.
There is insufficient information to make any recommendations regarding Si
allowances for dogs and cats. Research in this area would be useful.
Nickel
The trace element nickel (Ni) was first mentioned as a nutritionally essential
element in the 1930s, but most of the knowledge of its nutritional and physiological
role has been obtained since the beginning of the last quarter of the twentieth century
when appropriate methods for such study became available (Nielsen, 1987a,b).
Summarizing studies in rats and goats, Nielsen (1994b) reported signs of Ni
deficiency including poor growth and reproductive performance, reduced serum
glucose concentration, and altered distribution of other mineral elements including
Ca, Fe, and Zn.
There has been no description of a specific biochemical function for Ni in
animals, including humans. However, because of the discovery of several Ni-
containing enzymes (e.g., jack bean urease) in plants and microorganisms, Ni may
play a role in metalloenzymes in higher organisms as well.
Studies in animals suggest that very little dietary Ni is absorbed from the
intestine; more than 90 percent of ingested Ni appears in the feces and most absorbed
Ni is excreted in the urine. Additionally, in those monogastric animals studied, the Ni
requirement is quite low, probably less than 200 μg·kg–1 diet (Nielsen, 1994b).
Regardless of its nutritional essentiality, there is ample evidence of the toxic
effects of significant Ni ingestion (Nielsen, 1987a). Toxicity of ingested Ni is


===== PDF PAGE 398 =====
397
generally reflected by signs of gastrointestinal irritation. However, in piglets, Ni
toxicity has been reported to result in depressed growth and coarse, shaggy hair coats
in addition to gastrointestinal disturbances such as diarrhea and melena.
There is insufficient information to make any recommendations regarding Ni
allowances for dogs and cats. Research in this area would be useful.
Vanadium
Numerous vanadium (V) deprivation and other studies have been published
suggesting the possibility of an essential nutritional role. However, as of yet no signs
of V deficiency have been consistently reproducible (Nielsen, 1987b). In a large
number of V deprivation studies in chicks and rats (Nielsen, 1987b), numerous
abnormalities were observed but there was no variable that was consistently affected.
Suggested roles for V have included Na pump regulation, regulation of
phosphoryl transferase enzymes, adenylate cyclase regulation, a regulatory role in
reduced nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide (NADH) oxidation, a role in glucose
metabolism by altering or mimicking insulin activity, and a possible role in Ca
metabolism at the intracellular level as well as in calcification of bone and teeth.
However, an essential role for this mineral has not been proven (Nielsen, 1994b).
If there is a requirement for V it is undoubtedly very low since the V content of
most foods is very low; fruits and vegetables contain less than 1-5 ng·g–1 and
seafood, meats, and dairy products contain 5-30 ng·g–1. Some herbal seeds, however,
may contain much higher concentrations of V.
Although no essential metabolic function has been identified, V toxicity has been
described (Nielsen, 1987b). Dietary V concentrations of 25 μg·g–1 have been shown
to cause depressed growth in chicks, and concentrations of more than twice that
amount resulted in mortality. However, other dietary constituents can affect the
toxicity of V.
There is insufficient information to make any recommendations regarding V
allowances for dogs and cats. Research in this area would be useful.
Miscellaneous Minerals
While there are a number of other minerals present in the environment and some
have been suggested to be essential in other species, there is no reproducible
evidence that any of them are essential for metabolic functions in dogs and cats
(Mertz, 1986; Nielsen, 1986, 1994b). However, it is possible, indeed likely, that
future research will result in additional mineral elements being identified as essential
nutrients for these two species.
REFERENCES


===== PDF PAGE 399 =====
398
Abbrecht, P. 1969. Effects of potassium deficiency on renal function in the dog. J.
Clin. Investig. 48:432-442.
Abbrecht, P. 1972. Cardiovascular Effects of Chronic Potassium Deficiency in the
Dog. Am. J. Physiol. 223:555-560.
Aiken, T., L. Schnepper, R. Forbes, and J. Corbin. 1978. The effect of a low-zinc diet
on the growth and skin condition in cats. Proceedings of the 112th Annual
Meeting of the American Society of Animal Science Midwest Section, January 5-
6.
Aldrich, J., G. Ling, A. Ruby, D. Johnson, and C. Franti. 1997. Silica-containing
urinary caliculi in dogs (1981-1993). J. Vet. Int. Med. 11:288-295.
Allen, T. 1989. The effect of dietary sodium on urinary calcium excretion in normal
dogs. J. Vet. Int. Med. 3:128.
Allen, T., J. Barteges, L. Cowgill, C. Kirk, G. Ling, J. Lulich, C. Osborne, Q.
Rogers, A. Ruby, S. Vaden, and L. Ulrich. 1997. Colloquium on Urology. Feline
Pract. 25(suppl.):1S-32S.
American Organization of Analytical Chemists (AOAC). 2000. Official Methods of
Analysis of AOAC International, 17th Edition. Arlington, Va.: AOAC.
Anderson, R. 1987. Chromium. Pp. 225-244 in Trace Elements in Human and
Animal Nutrition, 5th edition, W. Mertz, ed. San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press.
Anke, M. 1986. Arsenic. Pp. 347-372 in Trace Elements in Human and Animal
Nutrition, 5th edition, W. Mertz, ed. Orlando, Fla.: Academic Press.
Aoyagi, S., and D. Baker. 1993a. Estimates of copper bioavailability from liver of
different animal species and from feed ingredients derived from plants and
animals. Poult. Sci. 72:1746-1755.
Aoyagi, S., and D. Baker. 1993b. Bioavailability of copper in analytical-grade and
feed-grade inorganic copper sources when fed to provide copper at levels below
the chick’s requirement. Poult. Sci. 72.
Argenzio, R. 1984. Secretory functions of the gastrointestinal tract. Pp. 290-300 in
Duke’s Physiology of Domestic Animals, M. Swenson, ed. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press.
Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). 2002. Official
Publication. Harrisburg, Pa.
Bai, S., D. Sampson, J. Morris, and Q. Rogers. 1989. Vitamin B-6 requirement of
growing kittens. J. Nutr. 119:1020-1027.
Baker, D. 1995. Zinc bioavailability. Pp. 367-398 in Bioavailability of Nutrients for
Animals: Amino Acids, Minerals, Vitamins, C. Ammerman, D. Baker, and A.
Lewis, eds. New York: Academic Press.
Baker, D., J. Odle, M. Funk, and T. Wieland. 1991. Research note: Bioavailability of
copper in cupric oxide, cuprous oxide, and in a copper-lysine complex. Poult. Sci.
70:177-179.
Belshaw, B., T. Cooper, and D. Becker. 1975. The iodine requirement and influence
of iodine intake on iodine metabolism and thyroid function in the adult Beagle.
Endocrinology 96:1280-1291.


===== PDF PAGE 400 =====
399
Beynen, A., H. Kappert, and S. Yu. 2001. Dietary lactulose decreases apparent
nitrogen absorption and increases apparent calcium and magnesium absorption in
healthy dogs. J. Anim. Physio. Anim. Nutr. 85:67-72.
Beynen, A., P. Baas, P. Hoekmeijer, H. Kappert, M. Bakker, J. Koopman, and A.
Lemmens. 2002. Faecal bacterial profile, nitrogen excretion and mineral
absorption in healthy dogs fed supplemental oligofructose. J. Anim. Physio.Anim.
Nutr. 86:298-305.
Birk, D., R. Cohen, B. Geiger, D. Goodenough, B. Gumbiner, R. Hynes, L.
Reichardt, E. Ruoslahti, R. Trelstad, F. Walsh, and P. Yurchenco. 1998.
Extracellular matrix receptors on animal cells: The integrins. Pp. 995-1000 in
Molecular Biology of the Cell, B. Alberts, D. Bray, J. Lewis, K. Roberts, and J.
Watson, eds. New York: Garland Publishing.
Boemke, W., U. Palm, G. Kaczmarczyk, and H. Reinhardt. 1990. Effect of high
sodium and high water intake on 24-h- potassium balance in dogs. J. Exper. Anim.
Sci. 33:179-185.
Booles, D., I. Burger, A. Whyte, R. Anderson, G. Carlos, and I. Robinson. 1991.
Effects of two levels of zinc intake on growth and trace element status in Labrador
puppies. J. Nutr. 121(suppl.):79S-80S.
Bowers, T. 1997. Nutrition and immunity. Part 2: The role of selected micronutrients
and clinical significance. Vet. Clin. Nutr. 4:96-101.
Breitschwerdt, E., P. Armstrong, C. Robinette, R. Dillman, M. Karl, and E. Lowry.
1986. Three cases of acute zinc toxicosis in dogs. Vet. Human Tox. 28:109-117.
Brewer, G. 1998. Wilson disease and canine copper toxicosis. American J. Clin.
Nutr. 67(suppl.):1087S-1090S.
Brewer, G., R. Dick, W. Schall, V. Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan, T. Mullaney, C. Pace, J.
Lindgren, M. Thomas, and G. Padgett. 1992. Use of zinc acetate to treat copper
toxicosis in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assn. 201:564-568.
Briggs, J., I. Singh, B. Sawaya, and J. Schnermann. 1996. Disorders of salt balance.
Pp. 3-62 in Fluids and Electrolytes, J. Kokko and R. Tannen, eds. Philadelphia:
W.B. Saunders.
Brinkhaus, F., J. Mann, C. Zorich, and J. Greaves. 1998. Bioavailability of zinc
propionate in dogs. J. Nutr. 128(suppl.):2596S-2597S.
Bronson, W., and T. Sisson. 1960. Studies on acute iron poisoning. American Journal
of Diseases of Children 99:18-26.
Brosnan, J., and M. Brosnan. 1982. Dietary protein, metabolic acidosis, and calcium
balance. Adv. Nutr. Res. 44:77-105.
Brown, E., D. Smith, R. Dubach, and C. Moore. 1959. Lethal iron overload in dogs.
J. Lab. Clin. Med. 53:591-606.
Buffington, C., Q. Rogers, J. Morris, and N. Cook. 1985. Feline struvite urolithiasis:
Magnesium effect depends on urinary pH. Feline Pract. 15:29-33.
Buffington, C., Q. Rogers, and J. Morris. 1990. Effect of diet on struvite activity
product in feline urine. Am. J.Vet. Res. 51:2025-2030.


===== PDF PAGE 401 =====
400
Buffington, C., S. DiBartola, and D. Chew. 1991. Effect of low potassium
commercial nonpurified diet on renal function of adult cats. J. Nutr.
121(suppl.):91S-92S.
Buffington, C., D. Chew, M. Kendall, P. Scrivani, S. Thompson, J. Blaisdell, and B.
Woodworth. 1997. Clinical evaluation of cats with nonobstructive urinary tract
diseases. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assn. 210:46-50.
Bunce, G., K. Jenkins, and P. Phillips. 1962a. The mineral requirements of the dog.
3. The magnesium requirement. J. Nutr. 76:17-22.
Bunce, G., Y. Chiemchaisri, and P. Phillips. 1962b. The mineral requirements of the
dog. 4. Effect of certain dietary and physiologic factors upon the magnesium
deficiency syndrome. J. Nutr. 76:23-29.
Burger, I. 1979. Water balance in the dog and cat. Pedigree Digest 6:10-11.
Burnell, J., and E. Teubner. 1971. Changes in bone sodium and carbonate in
metabolic acidosis and alkalosis in the dog. J. Clin. Investig. 50:327-331.
Carlisle, E. 1986. Silicon. Pp. 373-390 in Trace Elements in Human and Animal
Nutrition, 5th edition, W. Mertz, ed. Orlando, Fla.: Academic Press.
Castillo, V., J. Lalia, M. Junco, G. Sartorio, A. Marquez, M. Rodriguez, and M.
Pisarev. 2001a. Changes in thyroid function in puppies fed a high iodine
commercial diet. Vet. J. 161:80-84.
Castillo, V., M. Pisarev, J. Lalia, M. Rodriguez, R. Cabrin, and A. Marquez. 2001b.
Commercial diet induced hypothyroidism due to high iodine. A histological and
radiological analysis. Vet. Q. 23:218-223.
Chanard, J., W. Rutherford, A. Greenwalt, R. Coquis, and E. Slatopolsky. 1980. A
simplified technique for the measurement of intestinal absorption of calcium in the
dog: Effects of PO4 depletion and 25(OH)D3 in uremia. Calcified Tissue
International 30:199-203.
Chausow, D., and G. Czarnecki-Maulden. 1985. Estimation of dietary requirement
for the weanling kitten. J. Anim. Sci. 61:296.
Chausow, D., and G. Czarnecki-Maulden. 1987. Estimation of dietary iron
requirement for the weanling puppy and kitten. J. Nutr. 117:928-932.
Chausow, D., R. Forbes, G. Czarnecki-Maulden, and J. Corbin. 1986.
Experimentally-induced magnesium deficiency in growing kittens. Nutr. Res.
6:459-468.
Ching, S., M. Fettman, D. Hamar, L. Nagode, and K. Smith. 1989. The effect of
chronic dietary acidification using ammonium chloride on acid-base and mineral
metabolism in the adult cat. J. Nutr. 119:902-915.
Chow, F., D. Hamar, I. Dysart, and L. Rich. 1975. Feline urolithiasis/cat foods:
Concentration of calcium, magnesium, phosphate and chloride in various cat foods
and their relationship to feline urolithiasis. Feline Pract. 5:15-19.
Coffman, H. 1995. The Dry Dog Food Reference. Nashua, N.H.: PigDog Press.
Coffman, H. 1997. The Cat Food Reference. Nashua, N.H.: PigDog Press.
Colombini, S. 1999. Canine zinc-responsive dermatosis. Veterinary Clinics of North
America: Sm. Anim. Pract. 29:1373-1383.


===== PDF PAGE 402 =====
401
Colombini, S., and R. Dunstan. 1997. Zinc-responsive dermatosis in northern-breed
dogs: 17 cases (1990-1996). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assn. 211:451-453.
Cohn, L., J. Dodam, D. McCaw, and D. Tate. 1999. Effects of chromium
supplementation on glucose tolerance in obese and nonobese cats. Am. J. Vet. Res.
60:1360-1363.
Cronin, R., E. Ferguson, W. Shannon, Jr., and J. Knochel. 1982. Skeletal muscle
injury after magnesium depletion in the dog. Am. J. Physiol. 243:F113-F120.
Czarnecki-Maulden, G., R. Rudnick, and D. Chausow. 1993. Copper bioavailability
and requirement in the dog: Comparison of copper oxide and copper sulfate.
FASEB J. 7:A305.
D’Arcy, P., and E. Howard. 1962. The acute toxicity of ferrous salts administered to
dogs by mouth. J. of Pathology and Bacteriology 83:65-72.
de Chateau, M., S. Chen, A. Salas, and T. Springer. 2001. Kinetic and mechanical
basis of rolling through an integrin and novel Ca+2-dependent rolling and Mg+2-
dependent firm adhesion modalities for the alpha 4 beta 7-MAdCAM-1
interaction. Biochemistry 40:13972-13979.
De Morais, H. 2000. Disorders of chloride. Pp. 73-82 in Fluid Therapy in Small
Animal Practice, S. DiBartola, ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
DiBartola, S. 2000. Disorders of Potassium. Pp. 83-107 in Fluid Therapy in Sm.
Anim. Pract., S. DiBartola, ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Dobenecker, B., B. Zottmann, E. Kienzle, and J. Zentek. 1998. Investigations on
milk composition and milk yield in queens. J. Nutr. 128:2618S-2619S.
Doong, G., C. Keen, Q. Rogers, J. Morris, and R. Rucker. 1983. Selected features of
copper metabloism in the cat. J. Nutr. 113:1963-1971.
Dow, S., M. Fettman, R. LeCouteur, and D. Hamar. 1987. Potassium depletion in
cats: Renal and dietary influences. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assn. 191:1569-1575.
Dow, S., M. Fettman, K. Smith, D. Hamar, L. Nagode, K. Refsal, and W. Wilke.
1990. Effects of dietary acidification and potassium depletion on acid-base
balance, mineral metabolism and renal function in adult cats. J. Nutr. 120:569-578.
Drinker, K., P. Thompson, and M. Marsh. 1927. An investigation of the effect of
long-continued ingestion of zinc, in the form of zinc oxide, by cats and dogs,
together with observations upon the excretion and storage of zinc. Am. J. Physio.
80:31-64.
Drochner, W., U. Kersten, and H. Meyer. 1976. Auswirkungen einer Na-depletion
und anschlie Benden Repletion auf den stoffwechsel von beaglehunden. J. Vet.
Med. Series 23A:739-753.
Ehrhart, L., and K. McCullagh. 1973. Silica urolithiasis in dogs fed an atherogenic
diet. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine 143:131-
132.
Erdman, J. 1979. Oilseed phytates: Nutritional implications. Journal of the American
Oil Chemists’ Society 56:736-741.
Fairbanks, V. 1994. Iron in medicine and nutrition. Pp. 185-213 in Modern Nutrition
in Health and Disease, M. Shils, J. Olson, and M. Shike, eds. Philadelphia: Lea


===== PDF PAGE 403 =====
402
and Febiger.
Fascetti, A., J. Morris, and Q. Rogers. 1998. Dietary copper influences reproductive
efficiency of queens. J. Nutr. 128(suppl.):2590S-2592S.
Fascetti, A., Q. Rogers, and J. Morris. 2000. Dietary copper influences reproduction
in cats. J. Nutr. 130:1287-1290.
Favus, M. 1996. Primer on the Metabolic Bone Diseases and Disorders of Mineral
Metabolism. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven.
Felder, C., J. Robillard, S. Roy III, and P. Jose. 1987. Severe chloride deficiency in
the neonate: The canine puppy as an animal model. Pediatric Research 21:497-
501.
Feldmann, B., B. Kennedy, and M. Schelstraete. 1977. Dietary mineral and the feline
urological syndrome. Feline Pract. 7:39-45.
Fernandez, R., and S. Phillips. 1982. Components of fiber impair iron absorption in
the dog. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 35:107-112.
Finco, D., J. Barsanti, and S. Brown. 1989. Influence of dietary source of phosphorus
on fecal and urinary excretion of phosphorus and other minerals by male cats. Am.
J. Vet. Res. 50:263-266.
Freeman, L., D. Brown, W. Smith, and J. Rush. 1997. Magnesium status and the
effect of magnesium supplementation in feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Canadian J. Vet. Res. 61:227-231.
Frost, D., C. Elvehjem, and E. Hart. 1940. Iron utilization in dogs on milk diets. J.
Nutr. 19:311-320.
Fulton, R., and L. Fruechte. 1991. Poisoning induced by administration of a
phosphate-containing urinary acidifier in a cat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assn. 198:883-
885.
Gershoff, S., M. Legg, and D. Hegsted. 1958. Adaptation to different calcium intakes
in dogs. J. Nutr. 64:303-312.
Gershoff, S., F. Faragalla, D. Nelson, and S. Andrus. 1959. Vitamin B-6 deficiency
and oxalate nephrocalcinosis in the cat. Am. J. Med. 27:72-80.
Goedegebuure, S., and H. Hazewinkel. 1986. Morphological findings in young dogs
chronically fed a diet containing excess calcium. Vet. Path. 23:594-605.
Goodman, S., R. Montgomery, R. Fitch, J. Hathcock, S. Lauten, N. Cox, S. Kinkaid,
P. Rumph, W. Brawner, H. Baker, A. Lepine, and G. Reinhart. 1998. Serial
orthopaedic examinations of growing Great Dane puppies fed three diets varying
in calcium and phosphorus. Pp. 3-12 in Recent Advances in Canine and Feline
Nutrition, Vol. 2, Iams Nutrition Symposium Proceedings, G. Reinhardt, and D.
Carey, eds. Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Graf, E. 1986. Phytic Acid: Chemistry and Applications. Minneapolis, Minn.: Pilatus
Press.
Gross, K., K. Wedekind, C. Cowell, W. Schoenherr, D. Jewell, S. Zicker, J.
Debraekeleer, and R. Frey. 2000. Nutrients. Pp. 66-80 in Small Animal Clinical
Nutrition, M. Hand, C. Thatcher, R. Remillard, and P. Roudebush, eds. Marceline,
Mo.: Walsworth Publishing.


===== PDF PAGE 404 =====
403
Gubler, C., M. Lahey, G. Cartright, and M. Wintrobe. 1953. Studies on copper
metabolism. IX. The transportation of copper in blood. J. Clin. Investig. 32:405-
414.
Gumbrell, R. 1972. Suspected copper deficiency in a group of full sib Samoyed
dogs. New Zealand Vet. J. 20:238-240.
Gupta, B., R. Linden, D. Mary, and D. Weatherill. 1981. The influence of high and
low sodium intake on blood volume in the dog. Q. J. Experi. Physio. 66:117-128.
Hallberg, L., M. Brune, M. Erlandsson, A. Sandberg, and L. Rossander-Hulten.
1991. Calcium: Effect of different amounts on nonheme- and heme-iron
absorption in humans. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 53:112-119.
Hallebeek, J., and H. Hazewinkel. 1998. Effect of isoenergetic substitution of dietary
fat (beef tallow) for carbohydrates (wheat starch) on calcium absorption in the
dog. J. Anim. Physio. Anim. Nutr. 78:60-66.
Hamlin, R., R. Smith, C. Smith, and T. Powers. 1964. Effects of a controlled
electrolyte diet, low in sodium, on healthy dogs. Vet. Med./Small Animal
Clinician 59:748-751.
Harper, E., H. Skinner, C. Charlton, and B. Smith. 2000. Iron requirements for
growth and development in kittens. FASEB J. 14:A227.
Hartley, W., J. Kater, and A. Mackay. 1963. Goitre and low copper status in a litter of
meat-fed pups. New Zealand Vet. J. 11:1-5.
Harvey, J. 1998. Iron deficiency anemia in dogs and cats. Proceedings of the North
American Veterinary Conference, Florida 12:336-338.
Hashimoto, M., M. Funaba, M. Abe, and S. Ohshima. 1996. Effect of chronic high
protein intake on magnesium, calcium, and phosphorus balance in growing cats.
Exper. Anim. 45:63-70.
Hazewinkel, H., S. Goedegebuure, P. Poulos, and W. Wolvekamp. 1985. Influences
of chronic calcium excess on the skeletal development of growing Great Danes. J.
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assn. 21:377-391.
Hazewinkel, H., W. van den Brom, A. Van’t Klooster, G. Voorhout, and A. Van
Wees. 1991. Calcium metabolism in Great Dane dogs fed diets with various
calcium and phosphorus levels. J. Nutr. 121(suppl.):99S-106S.
Hedhammar, A., F. Wu, L. Krook, H. Schryver, A. de Lahunta, J. Whalen, F.
Kallfelz, E. Nunez, H. Hintz, B. Sheffy, and G. Ryan. 1974. Overnutrition and
skeletal disease: An experimental study in growing Great Dane dogs. Cornell Vet.
64:9-160.
Hedhammar, A., L. Krook, H. Schryver, and F. Kallfelz. 1980. Calcium balance in
the dog. Pp. 119-127 in Nutrition of the Dog and Cat, R. Anderson, ed. Oxford,
UK: Pergamon Press.
Hendriks, W., F. Allan, M. Tarttelin, M. Collett, and B. Jones. 2001. Suspected zinc-
induced copper deficiency in growing kittens exposed to galvanised iron. New
Zealand Vet. J. 49:68-72.
Henrikson, P. 1968. Peridontal disease and calcium deficiency: An experimental
study in the dog. Acta Odontologica Scandinavica 26:9-132.


===== PDF PAGE 405 =====
404
Henry, P. 1995. Manganese bioavailability. Pp. 239-256 in Bioavailability of
Nutrients for Animals: Amino Acids, Minerals, and Vitamins, C. Ammerman, D.
Baker, and A. Lewis, eds. New York: Academic Press.
Hetzel, B., and G. Maberly. 1986. Iodine. Pp. 139-208 in Trace Elements in Human
and Animal Nutrition, Vol. 2, W. Mertz, ed. Orlando, Fla.: Academic Press.
Hill, R., C. Burrows, G. Ellison, and J. Bauer. 2001. The effect of texturized
vegetable protein from soy on nutrient digestibility compared to beef in cannulated
dogs. J. Anim. Sci. 79:2162-2171.
Hills, D., J. Morris, and Q. Rogers. 1982. Potassium requirement of kittens affected
by dietary protein. J. Nutr. 112:216-222.
Hintz, H., and H. Schryver. 1986. Comparison of calcium metabolism in the cat and
horse. Proceedings Cornell Nutrition Conference for Feed Manufacturers, Ithaca,
N.Y.
Hoff-Jorgensen, E. 1945. The influence of phytic acid on the absorption of calcium
and phosphorus. Biochem. J. 40:189-192.
Hoppe, J., G. Marcelli, and M. Tainter. 1955a. An experimental study of the toxicity
of ferrous gluconate. Am. J. Med. Sci. November:491-498.
Hoppe, J., G. Marcelli, and M. Tainter. 1955b. Progress of medical science
therapeutics: A review of the toxicity of iron compounds. Am. J. Med. Sci.
230:558-571.
Hornfeldt, C., and T. Koepke. 1984. A case of suspected zinc toxicity in a dog.
Veterinary and Human Toxicology 3:214.
Houpt, K., L. Essick, E. Shaw, D. Alo, J. Gilmartin, W. Gutenmann, C. Littman, and
D. Lisk. 1988. A tuna fish diet influences cat behavior. Journal of Toxicology and
Environmental Health 24:161-172.
Howard, K., Q. Rogers, and J. Morris. 1998. Magnesium requirement of kittens is
increased by high dietary calcium. J. Nutr. 128(suppl.):2601S-2602S.
Huber, T., D. Laflamme, L. Medleau, K. Comer, and P. Rakich. 1991. Comparison of
procedures for assessing adequacy of dog foods. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assn. 199:731-
734.
Hurley, L., and C. Keen. 1987. Chapter 6: Manganese. Pp. 185-223 in Trace
Elements in Human and Animal Nutrition, 5th edition, Vol. 1, W. Mertz, ed. San
Diego, Calif.: Academic Press.
Jenkins, K., and P. Phillips. 1960a. The mineral requirements of the dog. 1.
Phosphorus requirement and availability. J. Nutr. 70:235-240.
Jenkins, K., and P. Phillips. 1960b. The mineral requirements of the dog. 2. The
relation of calcium, phosphorus and fat levels to minimal calcium and phosphorus
requirements. J. Nutr. 70:241-246.
Johnson, G., D. Zawie, S. Gilbertson, and I. Sternlieb. 1982. Chronic active hepatitis
in Doberman Pinschers. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assn. 180:1438-1442.
Johnson, L., H. Ford, M. Tarttelin, and C. Feek. 1992. Iodine content of
commercially-prepared cat foods. New Zealand Vet. J. 40:18-20.


===== PDF PAGE 406 =====
405
Jowsey, J., and J. Gershon-Cohen. 1964. Effect of dietary calcium levels on
production and reversal of experimental osteoporosis in cats. Proceedings of the
Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine 116:437-441.
Kallfelz, F., J. Bressett, and R. Wallace. 1980. Urethral obstruction in random source
and SPF male cats induced by high levels of dietary magnesium or magnesium
and phosphorus. Feline Pract. 10:25-35.
Kane, E., J. Morris, Q. Rogers, P. Ihrke, and P. Cupps. 1981. Zinc deficiency in the
cat. J. Nutr. 111:488-495.
Keen, C., B. Lonnerdal, M. Clegg, L. Hurley, J. Morris, Q. Rogers, and R. Rucker.
1982. Developmental changes in composition of cats milk: Trace elements,
minerals, protein, carbohydrate and fat. J. Nutr. 112:1763-1769.
Khanna, C., E. Lund, M. Raffe, and P. Armstrong. 1998. Hypomagnesemia in 188
dogs: A hospital population-based prevalence study. Journal of Veterinary Internal
Medicine 12:304-309.
Kienzle, E. 1998. Factorial calculation of nutrient requirements in lactating queens.
J. Nutr. 128(suppl.):2609S-2614S.
Kienzle, E., and S. Wilms-Eilers. 1994. Struvite diet in cats: Effect of ammonium
chloride and carbonates on acid-base balance of cats. J. Nutr. 124(suppl.):2652S-
2659S.
Kienzle, E., H. Meyer, C. Dammers, and H. Lohrie. 1985. Milk intake, weight gain,
milk digestibility and nutrient retention in suckling puppies. Adv. in Anim. Physio.
and Anim. Nutr. 16:26-50.
Kienzle, E., A. Schuknecht, and H. Meyer. 1991a. Influence of food composition on
the urine pH in cats. J. Nutr. 121 (suppl.):S87-S88.
Kienzle, E., B. Stratmann, and H. Meyer. 1991b. Body composition of cats as a basis
for factorial calculation of energy and nutrient requirements for growth. J. Nutr.
121(suppl.):122S-123S.
Kienzle, E., C. Thielen, and C. Pessinger. 1998a. Investigations on phosphorus
requirements of adult cats. J. Nutr. 128(suppl.):2598S-2600S
Kienzle, E., J. Zentek, and H. Meyer. 1998b. Body composition of puppies and
young dogs. J. Nutr. 128(suppl.): 2680S-2683S.
Kienzle, E., B. Dobenecker, and S. Eber. 2001. Effect of cellulose on the digestibility
of high starch versus high fat diets in dogs. J. Am. Physio. Anim. Nutr. 85:174-
185.
King, J., and C. Keen. 1994. Zinc. Pp. 214-230 in Modern Nutrition in Health and
Disease, M. Shils, J. Olson, and M. Shike, eds. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger.
Kochanowski, B., and C. McMahan. 1990. Inhibition of iron absorption by calcium
in rats and dogs: Effects of mineral separation by time and enteric coating. Nutr.
Res. 10:219-226.
Krook, L., R. Barrett, K. Usui, and R. Wolke. 1963. Nutritional secondary
hyperparathyroidism in the cat. Cornell Vet. 53:224-240.
Krook, L., L. Lutwak, P. Henrikson, F. Kallfelz, C. Hirch, B. Romanus, L. Belanger,
J. Marier, and B. Sheffy. 1971. Reversibility of nutritional osteoporosis:


===== PDF PAGE 407 =====
406
Physicochemical data on bones from an experimental study in dogs. J. Nutr.
101:233-246.
Kruger, J., C. Osborne, S. Goyal, S. Wickstrom, G. Johnston, T. Fletcher, and P.
Brown. 1991. Clinical evaluation of cats with lower urinary tract disease. J. Am.
Vet. Med. Assn. 199:211-216.
Kyle, A., M. Tarttelin, R. Cooke, and H. Ford. 1994. Serum free thyroxine levels in
cats maintained on diets relatively high or low in iodine. New Zealand Vet. J.
42:101-103.
Laflamme, D. 2000. Effect of breed size on calcium requirements for puppies.
Compend. Contin. Educ. Pract. Vet. 23:66-69.
Lannek, N., and P. Lindberg. 1975. Vitamin E and selenium deficiencies (VESD) of
domestic animals. Adv. Vet. Sci. and Comp. Med. 19:127-164.
Larsen, P., and M. Berry. 1995. Nutritional and hormonal regulation of thyroid
hormone deiodinases. Annual Review of Nutrition 15:323-352.
Latimer, K., A. Jain, H. Inglesby, W. Clarkson, and G. Johnson. 1989. Zinc-induced
hemolytic anemia caused by ingestion of pennies by a pup. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assn.
195:77-80.
Lauten, S., and S. Goodman. 1998. Growth and body composition of the large breed
puppy as affected by diet. Pp. 63-70 in Recent Advances in Canine and Feline
Nutrition, Vol. 2 Iams Nutrition Symposium Proceedings, G. Reinhardt and D.
Carey, eds. Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Lawler, D., D. Sjolin, and J. Collins. 1985. Incidence rates of feline lower urinary
tract disease in the United States. Feline Pract. 15:13-16.
Lemann, J., and E. Lennon. 1972. Role of diet, gastrointestinal tract and bone in
acid-base homeostasis. Kidney International 1:275-279.
Lemann, J., J. Litzow, and E. Lennon. 1966. The effects of chronic acid loads in
normal man: Further evidence for the participation of bone mineral in the defense
against chronic metabolic acidosis. J. Clin. Investig. 45:1608-1614.
Lennon, E., J. Lemann, and J. Litzow. 1966. The effects of diet and stool
composition on the net external acid balance of normal subjects. J. Clin. Investig.
45:1601-1607.
Leon, A., S. Bain, and W. Levick. 1992. Hypokalaemic episodic polymyopathy in
cats fed a vegetarian diet. Aust. Vet. J. 69:249-254.
Lessard, M., W. Yang, G. Elliott, N. Deslauriers, G. Brisson, J. Van Vleet, and R.
Schultz. 1993. Suppressive effect of serum from pigs and dogs fed a diet deficient
in vitamin E and selenium on lymphocyte proliferation. Vet. Res. 24:291-303.
Levander, O. 1986. Selenium. Pp. 209-279 in Trace Elements in Human and Animal
Nutrition, 5th edition, W. Mertz, ed. Orlando, Fla.: Academic Press.
Levi, J., S. Massry, J. Coburn, F. Llach, and C. Kleeman. 1974. Hypocalcemia in
magnesium-depleted dogs: Evidence for reduced responsiveness to parathyroid
hormone and relative failure of parathyroid gland function. Metabolism 23:323-
335.


===== PDF PAGE 408 =====
407
Lewis, L., and J. Morris. 1984. Feline urologic syndrome: Causes and clinical
management. Vet. Med. 79:323-327.
Lewis, L., F. Chow, G. Taton, and D. Hamar. 1978. Effect of various dietary mineral
concentrations on the occurrence of feline urolithiasis. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assn.
172:559-563.
Lindemann, M., A. Lepine, and M. Hayek. 2000. Evaluation of chromium
supplementation on several insulin-controlled parameters in Beagles. Recent
Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition, Vol. 3. Iams Nutrition Symposium
Proceedings 3:243-254.
Lobaugh, B. 1996. Blood calcium and phosphorus regulation. Pp. 395 in Calcium
and Phosphorus in Health and Disease, J. Anderson and S. Garner, eds. Boca
Raton, Fla.: CRC Press.
Lonnerdal, B. 1996. Lactation in the dog and cat. Pp. 79-86 in Recent Advances in
Canine and Feline Nutrition Research: Proceedings of the 1996 Iams International
Nutrition Symposium. Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Lonnerdal, B., C. Keen, L. Hurley, and G. Fisher. 1981. Developmental changes in
the composition of Beagle dog milk. Am. J. Vet. Res. 42:662-666.
Losher, S., D. Ranz, M. Tetrick, W. Kraft, and W. Rambeck. 2000. Investigation of
iodine supply in dogs in Munich. Tierarztl. Prax. 28:285-288.
Loveridge, G. 1986. Bodyweight changes and energy intake of cats during gestation
and lactation. Animal Technology 37:7-15.
Loveridge, G. 1987. Some factors affecting kitten growth. Animal Technology 38:9-
18.
Lowe, J., and J. Wiseman. 1998. A comparison of the bioavailability of three dietary
zinc sources using four different physiologic parameters in dogs. J. Nutr.
128(suppl.):2809S-2811S.
Lowe, J., J. Wiseman, and D. Cole. 1994. Zinc source influences zinc retention in
hair and hair growth in the dog. J. Nutr. 124(suppl.):2575S-2576S.
Ludwig, J., C. Owen, Jr., S. Barham, J. McCall, and R. Hardy. 1980. The liver in the
inherited copper disease of Bedlington terriers. Laboratory Investigation 43:82-87.
Markwell, P., C. Buffington, D. Chew, M. Kendall, J. Harte, and S. DiBartola. 1999.
Clinical evaluation of commercially available urinary acidification diets in the
management of idiopathic cystitis in cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assn. 214:361-365.
McCay, C. 1949. Nutrition of the Dog. Binghamton, N.Y.: Comstock Publishing.
McKee, M., S. Cecco, J. Niemela, J. Cormier, C. Kim, S. Steinberg, N. Rehak, R.
Elin, and S. Rosenberg. 2002. Effects of interleukin 2 therapy on lymphocyte
magnesium levels. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 139:5-12.
Meiser, H., and R. Schulz. 1997. Zinc poisoning and copper deficiency in the dog—
An expanded case study. Berliner und Muenchner Tieraerzliche Wochenschrift
110:284-287.
Mertz, W. 1986. Chapter 8: Lithium. Pp. 391-397 in Trace Elements in Human and
Animal Nutrition, 5th edition, W. Mertz, ed. Orlando, Fla.: Academic Press.


===== PDF PAGE 409 =====
408
Meyer, H. 1984. Mineral metabolism and requirements in bitches and suckling pups.
Pp. 13-24 in Nutrition and Behaviour in Dogs and Cats, R. Anderson, ed. Oxford,
UK: Pergamon Press.
Meyer, H., C. Dammers, and E. Kienzle. 1985a. Body composition of newborn
puppies and the nutrient requirement of pregnant bitches. Adv. Anim. Physio.
Anim. Nutr. 16:7-25.
Meyer, H., E. Kienzle, and C. Dammers. 1985b. Milk production and milk
composition of the bitch including feed intake and weight changes ante and
postpartum. Adv. Anim. Physio. Anim. Nutr. 16:51-72.
Meyer, H., T. Behfeld, C. Schunemann, and A. Muhlum. 1989. Intestinal metabolism
of water, sodium, and potassium. Pp. 109-119 in Beitrage zur
Verdauungsphysiologie des Hundes, H. Meyer, ed. Hamburg: Verlag Paul Parey.
Meyer, H., J. Zentek, H. Habernoll, and I. Maskell. 1999. Digestibility and
compatibility of mixed diets and faecal consistency in different breeds of dog. J.
Vet. Med. Series A 46:155-165.
Michell, A. 1989. Salt intake, animal health and hypertension. Should sleeping dogs
lie? Pp. 275-292 in Nutrition of the Cat and Dog, Waltham Symposium Number 7,
I. Burger and J. Rivers, eds. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Mills, C., and G. Davis. 1987. Molybdenum. Pp. 429-463 in Trace Elements in
Human and Animal Nutrition, 5th edition, W. Mertz, ed. San Diego, Calif.:
Academic Press.
Morris, J., and K. Earle. 1999. Growing kittens require less dietary calcium than
current allowances. J. Nutr. 129:1698-1704.
Morris, J., and A. Fascetti. 2000. Bioavailability of copper and zinc for dogs and
cats. Compend. Contin. Educ. Pract. Vet. 22(suppl.):12-16.
Morris, J., and Q. Rogers. 1994. Assessment of the nutritional adequacy of pet foods
through the life cycle. J. Nutr. 124:2520S-2534S.
Morris, M., R. Patton, and S. Teeter. 1976. Low sodium diet in heart disease: How
low is low? Vet. Med. 71:1225-1227.
Nap, R., H. Hazewinkel, and W. van den Brom. 1993. 45Ca kinetics in growing
miniature poodles challenged by four different dietary levels of calcium. J. Nutr.
123:1826-1833.
National Research Council (NRC). 1971. Atlas of Nutritional Data on United States
and Canadian Feeds. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Nielsen, F. 1986. Chapter 10: Other elements: Sb, Ba, B, Br, Cs, Ge, Rb, Ag, Sr, Sn,
Ti, Zr, Be, Bi, Ga, Au, In, Nb, Sc, Te, Tl, W. Pp. 415-463 in Trace Elements in
Human and Animal Nutrition, 5th edition, W. Mertz, ed. Orlando, Fla.: Academic
Press.
Nielsen, F. 1987a. Nickel. Pp. 245-273 in Trace Elements in Human and Animal
Nutrition, 5th edition, W. Mertz, ed. San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press.
Nielsen, F. 1987b. Vanadium. Pp. 275-300 in Trace Elements in Human and Animal
Nutrition, W. Mertz, ed. New York: Academic Press.


===== PDF PAGE 410 =====
409
Nielsen, F. 1994a. Chromium. Pp. 264-268 in Modern Nutrition in Health and
Disease, M. Shils, J. Olson, and M. Shike, eds. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger.
Nielsen, F. 1994b. Ultratrace minerals. Pp. 269-286 in Modern Nutrition in Health
and Disease, M. Shils, J. Olsen, and M. Shike, eds. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger.
Norris, C., M. Christopher, K. Howard, and R. Nelson. 1999. Effect of magnesium-
deficient diet on serum and urine magnesium concentrations in healthy cats. Am.
J. Vet. Res. 60:1159-1163.
Norris, W., T. Fritz, and J. Taylor. 1970. Cycle of accommodation to restricted
dietary iodide in thyroid gland of the Beagle dog. Am. J. Vet. Res. 31:21-33.
Nuttall, W. 1986. Iodine deficiency in working dogs. New Zealand Vet. J. 34:72.
Oetzel, G., J. Olson, C. Curtis, and M. Fettmen. 1988. Ammonium chloride and
ammonium sulfate for prevention of parturient paresis in dairy cows. J. Dairy Sci.
71:3302-3309.
Oftedal, O. 1984. Lactation in the dog: Milk composition and intake by puppies. J.
Nutr. 114:803-811.
Ohlen, B., and D. Scott. 1986. Zinc-responsive dermatosis in puppies. Canine Pract.
13:6-10.
Osborne, C., D. Polzin, S. Abdullahi, J. Leininger, C. Clinton, and D. Griffith. 1985.
Struvite urolithiasis in animals and man: Formation, detection, and dissolution.
Adv. Vet. Sci. Comp. Med. 29:1-101.
Osborne, C., J. Stevens, J. Lulich, L. Ulrich, K. Bird, L. Koehler, and L. Swanson.
1995. A clinician’s analysis of urinalysis. Pp. 960 in Canine and Feline
Nephrology and Urology, C. Osborne and D. Finco, eds. Baltimore: Williams and
Wilkins.
Osborne, C., J. Lulich, R. Thumchai, L. Ulrich, L. Koehler, K. Bird, and J. Barteges.
1996. Feline urolithiasis—Etiology and pathophysiology. Veterinary Clinics of
North America: Sm. Anim. Pract. 26:217-232.
Ozpinar, H., I. Abas, T. Bilal, and G. Demirel. 2001. Investigation of excretion and
absorption of different zinc salts in puppies. Lab. Anim. 35:282-287.
Pastoor, F., A. Van’t Klooster, J. Mathot, and A. Beynen. 1994a. Increasing calcium
intakes lower urinary concentrations of phosphorus and magnesium in adult
ovariectomized cats. J. Nutr. 124:299-304.
Pastoor, F., R. Opitz, A. Van’t Klooster, and A. Beynen. 1994b. Dietary calcium
chloride vs. calcium carbonate reduces urinary pH and phosphorus concentration,
improves bone mineralization and depresses kidney calcium level in cats. J. Nutr.
124:2212-2222.
Pastoor, F., A. Van’t Klooster, and A. Beynen. 1994c. Calcium chloride as urinary
acidifier in relation to its potential use in the prevention of struvite urolithiasis in
the cat. Vet. Q. 16(suppl.):37S-38S.
Pastoor, F., R. Opitz, A. Van’t Klooster, and A. Beynen. 1994d. Substitution of
dietary calcium chloride for calcium carbonate reduces urinary pH and urinary
phosphorus excretion in adults cats. Vet. Q. 16:157-160.


===== PDF PAGE 411 =====
410
Pastoor, F., A. Van’t Klooster, B. Opitz, and A. Beynen. 1995a. Effect of dietary
magnesium on urinary and faecal excretion of calcium, magnesium and
phosphorus in adult, ovarectomized cats. Br. J. Nutr. 74:77-84.
Pastoor, F., A. Van’t Klooster, J. Mathot, and A. Beynen. 1995b. Increasing
phosphorus intake reduces urinary concentrations of magnesium and calcium in
adult ovariectomized cats fed purified diets. J. Nutr. 125:1334-1341.
Pastoor, F., R. Opitz, A. Van’t Klooster, and A. Beynen. 1995c. Dietary phosphorus
restriction to half the minumum required amount slightly reduces weight gain and
length of tibia, but sustains femur mineralization and prevents nephrocalcinosis in
female kittens. Br. J. Nutr. 74:85-100.
Patterson, R., M. Haut, C. Montgomery, H. Lowensohn, C. McQuilken, Y. Djuh, A.
Huott, and R. Olsson. 1983. Natural history of potassium-deficiency myopathy in
the dog: Role of adrenocorticosteriod in rhabdomyolysis. J. Lab. Clin. Med.
102:565-576.
Pedersen, H., and T. Mow. 1998. Hypomagnesemia and mitral valve prolapse in
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. J. Vet. Med. Series A 45:607-614.
Pennington, J. 1998. Bowes & Church’s Food Values of Portions Commonly Used.
Philidelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.
Piechota, M., Q. Rogers, and J. Morris. 1995. Nitrogen requirement of cats during
gestation and lactation. Nutr. Res. 15:1535-1546.
Potts, J., Jr., and H. Juppner. 1998. Parathyroid hormone and parathyroid hormone-
related peptide in calcium homeostasis, bone metabolism, and bone development:
The proteins, their genes, and receptors. Pp. 52-83 in Metabolic Bone Disease and
Clinically Related Disorders, L. Avioli, ed. San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press.
Prange, H. 2001a. Schilddrusenproliferate beim hund im mitteldeutschen
jodmangelgebiet Teil 1: Epidemiologische daten, hormonwerte und jodgehalte der
schilddrusen. Tierarztl. Prax. 29:236-242.
Prange, H. 2001b. Schilddrusenproliferate beim hund im mitteldeutschen
jodmangelgebiet Teil 2: Klassiferzierung und biologische eigenschaften. Tierarztl.
Prax. 29:298-306.
Radostits, O., C. Gay, D. Blood, K. Hinchcliff, J. Arundel, D. Jacobs, K. Leslie, B.
Ikede, R. McKenzie, and R. Bildfell. 2000. Diseases caused by deficiencies of
mineral nutrients. Pp. 122, 577, 1480-1514 in Veterinary Medicine: A Textbook of
Diseases of Cattle, Sheep, Pigs, Goats and Horses, O. Radostits, C. Gay, D. Blood,
and K. Hinchcliff, eds. London: W.B. Saunders.
Ranz, D., M. Tetrick, B. Opitz, E. Kienzle, and W. Rambeck. 2002. Estimation of
iodine status in cats. J. Nutr. 132:1751S-1753S.
Reasbeck, P., Fracs, G. Barbezat, F. Weber, M. Robinson, and C. Thomson. 1985.
Selenium absorption by canine jejunum. Digestive Diseases and Sciences 30:489-
494.
Reinhardt, H., and D. Behrenbeck. 1967. Untersuchungen an waachen Hunden ueber
die Einstellung der Natriumbilanz I. Die Bedeutung des Extracellulaerraumes fuer
die Einstellung eder Natrium-Tagesbilanz. Fluegers Archiv. 295:266-279.


===== PDF PAGE 412 =====
411
Reissman, E., and T. Coleman. 1955. Acute intestinal iron intoxication. II.
Metabolic, respiratory and circulatory effects of absorbed iron salts. Blood 46:46-
51.
Robertson, B., and M. Burns. 1963. Zinc metabolism and the zinc-deficiency
syndrome in the dog. Am. J. Vet. Res. 24:997-1002.
Ruegamer, W., C. Elvehjem, and E. Hart. 1946a. Potassium deficiency in the dog.
Proc. Soc. for Exper, Bio. and Med. 61:234-238.
Ruegamer, W., L. Michaud, and E. Hart. 1946b. The use of the dog for studies on
iron bioavilability. J. Nutr. 32:101-111.
Ruesse, I. 1961. Die laktation der hundin. Zentralblatt fur veterinarmedizin 8:252-
281.
Sanecki, R., J. Corbin, and R. Forbes. 1982. Tissue changes in dogs fed a zinc-
deficient ration. Am. J. Vet. Res. 43:1642-1646.
Sanecki, R., J. Corbin, and R. Forbes. 1985. Extracutaneous histologic changes
accompanying zinc deficiency in pups. Am. J. Vet. Res. 46:2120-2123.
Sauer, L., D. Hamar, and L. Lewis. 1985. Effect of diet composition on water intake
and excretion by the cat. Feline Pract. 15:16-21.
Scarlett, J. 1994. Epidemiology of thyroid diseases of dogs and cats. Veterinary
Clinics of North America: Sm. Anim. Pract. 24:477-486.
Schachter, S., R. Nelson, and C. Kirk. 2001. Oral chromium picolinate and control of
glycemia in insulin-treated diabetic dogs. J. Vet. Intl. Med. 5:379-384.
Schoenmakers, I., H. Hazewinkel, and W. van den Brom. 1999. Excessive Ca and P
intake during early maturation in dogs alters Ca and P balance without long-term
effects after dietary normalization. J. Nutr. 129:1068-1074.
Scott, P. 1960. Some aspects of the nutrition of the dog and cat. 2. The cat. Vet.
Record 72:6-9.
Scott, P. 1964. Nutritional requirements and deficiencies. Pp. 60-70 in Feline
Medicine and Surgery, E. Catcott, ed. Wheaton, Ill.: American Veterinary
Publications.
Scott, P. 1965. Minerals and vitamins in feline nutrition. Pp. 75-89 in Canine and
Feline Nutritional Requirements, O. Graham-Jones, ed. Oxford, UK: Pergamon
Press.
Scott, P. 1975. Nutrition and disease. Pp. 131-144 in Feline Medicine and Surgery, E.
Catcott, ed. Santa Barbara, Calif.: American Veterinary Publications.
Scott, P., J. Greaves, and M. Scott. 1961. Nutrition of the cat. 4. Calcium and iodine
deficiency on a meat diet. Br. J. Nutr. 15:35-51.
Serrano, C., M. Talbert, and L. Welt. 1964. Potassium deficiency in the pregnant dog.
J. Clin. Investig. 43:27-31.
Sheffy, B., and R. Schultz. 1979. Influence of vitamin E and selenium on immune
response mechanisms. Federation Proceedings 38:2139-2143.
Sheffy, B., A. Williams, J. Zimmer, and G. Ryan. 1985. Nutrition and metabolism of
the geriatric dog. Cornell Vet. 75:324-347.


===== PDF PAGE 413 =====
412
Simopoulos, A., and F. Bartter. 1980. The metabolic consequences of chloride
deficiency. Nutrition Reviews 38:201-205.
Slater, M., J. Scarlett, S. Donoghue, R. Kaderly, B. Bonnett, J. Cockshutt, and H.
Erb. 1992. Diet and exercise as potential risk factors for osteochondritis dissecans
in dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 53:2119-2124.
Smith, T. 1996. Establishment of the minimum iodine requirement in the adult cat. P.
79 in Veterinary Clinical Sciences. New York: Kansas State University.
Sousa, C., A. Stannard, P. Ihrke, S. Reinke, and L. Schmeitzel. 1988. Dermatosis
associated with feeding generic dog food: 13 cases (1981-1982). J. Am. Vet. Med.
Assn. 192:676-680.
Spears, J., T. Brown, Jr., M. Hayek, and G. Sunvold. 1998a. Effect of dietary
chromium on the canine immune response. Recent Advances in Canine and Feline
Nutrition Vol. 2. Iams Nutrition Symposium Proceedings 2:555-564.
Spears, J., T. Brown, G. Sunvold, and M. Hayek. 1998b. Influence of chromium on
glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity. Recent Advances in Canine and Feline
Nutrition, Vol. 2. Iams Nutrition Symposium Proceedings 2:103-112.
Spray, C., and E. Widdowson. 1950. The effect of growth and development on the
composition of mammals. Br. J. Nutr. 4:332-353.
Stahlmann, R., S. Kuhner, M. Shakibaei, J. Flores, J. Vormann, and D. van Sickle.
2000. Effects of magnesium deficiency on joint cartilage in immature Beagle
dogs: Immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, and mineral concentrations.
Archives of Toxicology 73:573-580.
Sterman, M., M. Shouse, M. Fairchild, and O. Belsito. 1986. Kindled seizure
induction alters and is altered by zinc absorption. Brain Research 383:382-386.
Su, L., C. Owen, Jr., P. Zollman, and R. Hardy. 1982. A defect of biliary excretion of
copper in copper-laden Bedlington terriers. Am. J. Physio. 242:G231-G236.
Tannen, R. 1996. Potassium disorders. Pp. 111-200 in Fluids and Electrolytes, J.
Kokko and R. Tannen, eds. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Tarttelin, M., and H. Ford. 1994. Dietary iodine level and thyroid function in the cat.
J. Nutr. 124:2577S-2578S.
Tarttelin, M., L. Johnson, R. Cooke, H. Ford, and C. Feek. 1992. Serum free
thyroxine levels respond inversely to changes in levels of dietary iodine in the
domestic cat. New Zealand Vet. J. 40:66-68.
Taton, G., D. Hamar, and L. Lewis. 1984. Evaluation of ammonium chloride as a
urinary acidifier in the cat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assn. 184:433-436.
Thompson, T. 1979. Iodine-deficiency goitre in a bitch. New Zealand Vet. J. 27:113.
Thornburg, L., D. Shaw, M. Dolan, M. Raisbeck, S. Crawford, G. Dennis, and D.
Olwin. 1986. Hereditary copper toxicosis in West Highland White Terriers. Vet.
Path. 23:148-154.
Torrance, A., and R. Fulton. 1987. Zinc-induced hemolytic anemia in a dog. J. Am.
Vet. Med. Assn. 191:443-444.
Toto, R., R. Alpern, J. Kokko, and R. Tannen. 1996. Metabolic acid-base disorders.
Pp. 201-266 in Fluids and Electrolytes, 3rd edition. Philidelphia: W.B. Saunders.


===== PDF PAGE 414 =====
413
Turnlund, J. 1994. Copper. Pp. 231-240 in Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease,
M. Shils, J. Olson, and M. Shike, eds. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger.
Twedt, D., I. Sternlieb, and S. Gilbertson. 1979. Clinical, morphological, and
chemical studies on copper toxicosis of Bedlington Terriers. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Assn. 175:269-275.
Uchida, Y., A. Moon-Fanelli, N. Dodman, M. Clegg, and C. Keen. 1997. Serum
concentrations of zinc and copper in Bull Terriers with lethal acrodermatitis and
tail-chasing behavior. Am. J. Vet. Res. 58:808-810.
Van Den Broek, A., and W. Stafford. 1988. Diagnostic value of zinc concentrations
in serum, leukocytes and hair of dogs with zinc-responsive dermatosis. Res. Vet.
Sci. 44:41-44.
Van Den Broek, A., and K. Thoday. 1986. Skin disease in dogs associated with zinc
deficiency: A report of five cases. Journal of Sm. Anim. Pract. 27:313-323.
Van Vleet, J. 1975. Experimentally induced vitamin E-selenium deficiency in the
growing dog. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assn. 166:769-774.
Vitale, J., E. Hellerstein, N. Nakamura, and B. Lown. 1961. Effects of magnesium-
deficient diet upon puppies. Circulation Research 9:387-394.
Voorhout, G., and H. Hazewinkel. 1987. A radiographic study on the development of
the antebrachium in Great Dane pups on different calcium intakes. Veterinary
Radiology 28:152-157.
Weber, M., L. Martin, H. Dumon, V. Biourge, and P. Nguyen. 2000. Growth and
skeletal development in two large breeds fed 2 calcium levels. J. Vet. Inter. Med.
14:388.
Wedekind, K., and G. Combs, Jr. 2000. Selenium in petfoods: Is bioavailability an
issue? Compend. Contin. Educ. Pract. Vet. 22(suppl.):17-22.
Wedekind, K., and S. Lowry. 1998. Are organic zinc sources efficacious in puppies.
J. Nutr. 128(suppl.):2593S-2595S.
Wedekind, K., C. Cowell, and G. Combs, Jr. 1997. Bioavailability of selenium in
petfood ingredients. FASEB J. 11:A360.
Wedekind, K., R. Beyer, and G. Combs, Jr. 1998. Is selenium addition necessary in
petfoods? FASEB J. 12:A823.
Wedekind, K., K. Howard, R. Backus, and Q. Rogers. 2000. Current AAFCO and
NRC recommendations for selenium (Se) are too low for kittens. FASEB J.
14:A295.
Wedekind, K., C. Kirk, R. Nachreiner, and S. Yu. 2001. Effect of varying selenium
(Se) intake on thyroid hormone metabolism in dogs. FASEB J. 15:A953.
Wen, H., B. Shi, and J. Spallholz. 1995. Selenium bioavailability from meats,
poultry, seafoods, bread, and mushrooms in rats. FASEB J. 9:A159.
Willeberg, P. 1984. Epidemiology of naturally occurring feline urological syndrome.
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Sm. Anim. Pract. 14:455-469.
Windisch, W., S. Gabler, and M. Kirchgessner. 1998. Effect of selenite, seleno
cysteine and seleno methionine on the selenium metabolism of 75Se labeled rats. J.
Am. Physio. Anim. Nutr. 78:67-74.


===== PDF PAGE 415 =====
414
Wing, P. 1967. The reversibility of nutritional osteitis fibrosa. Dissertation Abstracts
27:3735B-3736B.
Yu, S., and J. Morris. 1997. The minimum sodium requirement of growing kittens
defined on the basis of plasma aldosterone concentration. J. Nutr. 127:494-501.
Yu, S., and J. Morris. 1998. Hypokalemia in kittens induced by a chlorine-deficient
diet. FASEB J. 12:A219.
Yu, S., and J. Morris. 1999a. Chloride requirement of kittens for growth is less than
current recommendations. J. Nutr. 129:1909-1914.
Yu, S., and J. Morris. 1999b. Sodium requirement of adult cats for maintenance
based on plasma aldosterone concentration. J. Nutr. 129:419-423.
Yu, S., Q. Rogers, and J. Morris. 1997. Absence of salt (NaCl) preference or appetite
in sodium-replete or depleted kittens. Appetite 29:1-10.
Yu, S., K. Howard, K. Wedekind, J. Morris, and Q. Rogers. 2001. A low-selenium
diet increases thyroxine and decreases 3,5,3′-triiodothyronine in the plasma of
kittens. J. Am. Physio. Anim. Nutr. 86:36-41.
Zentek, J., and H. Meyer. 1991. Investigations on copper deficiency in growing dogs.
J. Nutr. 121(suppl.):83S-84S.
Zentek, J., and H. Meyer. 1995. Normal handling of diets—Are all dogs created
equal? J. Sm. Anim. Pract. 36:354-359.
Zijlstra, W., A. Langbroek, J. Kraan, P. Rispens, and A. Nijmeijer. 1995. Effect of
casein-based semi-synthetic food on renal acid excretion and acid-base state of
blood in dogs. Acta Anesthesiologica Scandinavica 107(suppl.):179-183.


===== PDF PAGE 416 =====
415
8
Vitamins
INTRODUCTION
Vitamins are organic compounds, essential at low concentrations in the diet, that
are required to sustain metabolic functions: Either they are not synthesized from
precursors in the diet, or, under certain conditions, their rate of synthesis is
suboptimal. Vitamins participate in a wide range of metabolic functions, and neither
the names of the vitamins nor the numerical subscripts give insights into their
functional roles. Dietary vitamin deficiencies produce a range of clinical
abnormalities that reflect the diverse metabolic functions of vitamins. When the diet
is inadequate in a vitamin, the tissues are frequently depleted at variable rates and
have different sensitivities to the deficiency. This produces a progression of clinical
signs, depending on the severity of the deficiency, and many vitamin deficiencies
follow a defined chronology.
Alleviation of clinical signs of deficiency following supplementation with the
isolated vitamin provides strong presumptive evidence that the vitamin was lacking in
the diet. However, this approach is time consuming and not suited to clinical practice.
While the recognition of a vitamin deficiency is frequently based on clinical signs,
confirmation of the diagnosis and severity may be assessed by one of the following
four procedures:
1. Measurement of the concentration of the vitamin in biological fluids, such as
plasma, or tissues such as liver.
2. Oral administration of the vitamin to the dog or cat and measurement of the
urinary excretion of the vitamin or one of its metabolic products as an index of
the saturation of body tissues.


===== PDF PAGE 417 =====
416
3. Measurement of a compound in a biological fluid that requires the vitamin for
its metabolism, either with or without loading of the precursor.
Formiminoglutamic acid and methyl malonic acid are such examples used for
the assessment of folate and cobalamin status.
4. Enzyme stimulation tests in which the rate of a reaction is measured before and
after the addition of the vitamin, which is a coenzyme in the reaction (e.g.,
erythrocyte glutathione reductase activity test for riboflavin, transketolase test
for thiamin, aminotransferase stimulation tests for vitamin B6).
Vitamin deficiencies were first recognized in dogs about 75 years ago, and dogs
played a seminal role in the discovery and differentiation of vitamins A and D. They
were also used for the assay of human foods for niacin. Despite this long history,
quantitative requirements for many of the vitamins either have not been determined or
have been determined for only one physiological state. The contribution of
ingredients in foods for dogs and cats to the total vitamin intake is often not known.
This latter situation is exacerbated by the commercial practice of adding a common
vitamin premix to many diets and neglecting the contribution from the major food
ingredients. Adverse effects have been observed when dietary ingredients naturally
contain high levels of certain vitamins. However, unlike many other essential
nutrients, moderate excesses of vitamins (up to 10 times the requirement for most
vitamins) do not compromise the animal.
Vitamins are arbitrarily divided into those that are soluble in lipids and those that
are soluble in water. While this subdivision has little to do with functional roles, it
does have relevance to absorption from the gut. Fat-soluble vitamins are absorbed
along with food lipids and often are associated with them. Any disturbance of normal
lipid absorption negatively impacts on uptake of fat-soluble vitamins from the gut. At
high concentrations, most water-soluble vitamins are absorbed by passive diffusion,
but at low concentrations absorption frequently occurs by Na+-dependent adenosine
triphosphatase (ATPase) saturable active transport systems.
The vitamin nutrition of dogs is similar to that of most other mammals, and dogs
served as models for humans in many early studies on vitamins. Dogs played an
important role in the demonstration that pellagra in humans was due to niacin
deficiency, rather than a transmissible disease (Carpenter, 1991). In distinction to
dogs, cats possess a number of idiosyncrasies in their vitamin nutrition, particularly
with respect to vitamins A and D and niacin (Morris, 2002).
In establishing the nutritional requirement for a vitamin, some index (e.g.,
maximal enzyme activity or minimal excretion of a compound) specific for that
vitamin has to be assessed. A precise requirement requires a response curve generated
from supplementation with various concentrations of vitamin. For a broken-line
response curve, a minimum of four concentrations (two below and two above the
requirement) is required. There are few examples in which such responses have been
generated to estimate a vitamin requirement for dogs or cats.


===== PDF PAGE 418 =====
417
In this chapter, the basis on which a vitamin requirement is derived is stated.
However, too frequently this is a relatively crude criterion (e.g., body weight [BW]
gain) rather than a specific function of the vitamin, such as the activity of an enzyme
for which the vitamin plays an integral role as a coenzyme. Much of the research on
vitamins in dogs, and to a lesser degree in cats, was done with the objective of
understanding the function of the vitamin, rather than of determining a requirement
for that species. In addition, the preponderance of the research was done in the early
and middle parts of the last century, often when purified vitamins and modern
analytical tools were not available.
In humans, as many as one-third of the mutations in a gene result in the
corresponding enzyme having an increased Michaelis constant (Km) or a vitamin-
derived coenzyme or substrate resulting in a lower rate of reaction (Ames et al.,
2002). When the coenzyme is derived from a vitamin, high-dose vitamin therapy
stimulates the variant enzyme. There are indications that similar genetic
abnormalities, especially in relation to cobalamin, may occur in dogs and cats, but a
discussion of these is outside the scope of this chapter.
In many early studies on vitamin A, thiamin, and riboflavin requirements for dogs,
the vitamins were administered on a BW basis. Where BW data have been available,
these vitamins were corrected to a dietary energy basis. In Tables 15-2 through 15-14,
the minimal requirement (MR), recommended allowance (RA), adequate intake (AI),
and presumed safe upper limit (SUL) of each vitamin are listed. The values have been
calculated from the primary source using a standard dog or cat with an assumed fixed
energy intake. Because vitamin requirements are related to metabolic BW and energy
intake, expression of vitamin requirements on a direct BW basis can introduce large
errors (Rucker and Steinberg, 2002). Thus requirements listed on a direct BW basis in
the aforementioned tables are appropriate only for the BW of the animal defined. The
minimal allowances for many of the vitamins are similar to those proposed by the
National Research Council (1985, 1986), meaning that no significant studies since
then permit another value to be proposed. The allowances in this publication are also
similar to many of those proposed by Burger (1993) and ABGE (1989) for dogs.
The proposed minimal concentrations and amounts of the vitamins in Tables 15-2
through 15-14 are the total bioavailable forms of the vitamins present in the diet
(contributed by natural ingredients and vitamin premixes) at the point of
consumption. Because the natural forms of some vitamins have low bioavailabilities,
the proposed amounts will generally be adequate when the majority of the vitamin is
from a vitamin premix. However, when a vitamin is contributed mainly by food
ingredients, the minimal concentration in the tables should be modified by a suitable
factor to account for bioavailability. For a discussion of the bioavailability of vitamins
from various foods, refer to Baker (1995).
When comparing analytical values of vitamins in a diet with concentrations given
in the tables, the source of the vitamin and its bioavailability must also be evaluated.
To propose a single value for a vitamin that would account for its bioavailability from
all food ingredients is only misleading and gives a false assurance of adequacy, but


===== PDF PAGE 419 =====
418
could lead to gross overformulation. The RAs provide about 1.25 times the
requirements to allow for individual animal variation.
VITAMIN A
In nature, all of the vitamin A ingested by animals originates from carotenoids
synthesized by plants. The conversion of carotenoids to vitamin A requires oxidative
cleavage of the carotenoid molecule. Although the existence of the enzyme β-
carotene 15,15′-dioxygenase that catalyzes the symmetrical cleavage has been known
for more than 40 years, the enzyme has not been isolated to date. Recently the gene
for β-carotene 15,15′-dioxygenase was cloned from chicks and mice (Wyss et al.,
2000, 2001). Also the complementary DNA (cDNA) from mice encoding the
dioxygenase that catalyzes the asymmetrical oxidative cleavage at the 9′,10′-double
bond has been identified (Kiefer et al., 2001). This enzyme catalyzes the formation of
β-apo-10′-carotenal and β-ionone. In addition to carotenoids, the enzyme also cleaves
lycopene.
Nearly a century ago, Mellanby (1919) used dogs to distinguish between “an
antirachitic factor that is either fat-soluble A, or has a somewhat similar distribution
to fat soluble A”—the functional roles of vitamins A and D present in cod liver oil.
Although the zoological classification of dogs and cats places then both in the
Carnivora, only dogs have the ability to use carotenoid precursors of vitamin A
(Ahmad, 1931; Rea and Drummond, 1932; Gershoff et al., 1957). Turner (1934)
showed that dogs given 150 g of fresh carrots in addition to a basal diet had higher
concentrations of vitamin A in their livers and kidneys than dogs given the basal diet
alone and similar concentrations to dogs given the basal diet with added cod liver oil.
Cats are unable to convert β-carotene or any other carotenoids to vitamin A, whether
they are present in the diet or administered parenterally. Ferrets, another carnivore
species more closely related to cats than dogs, inefficiently utilize β-carotene as a
precursor of vitamin A. The retinol equivalent of β-carotene for ferrets is less than
one-fifteenth that of retinol on a weight basis (Lederman et al., 1998).
Absorption, Transport, and Storage
Vitamin A contained in animal tissues and other foods is released from proteins in
the stomach through the action of pepsin and becomes associated with lipid
aggregates. (See Chapter 5 for a discussion of fat digestion and absorption.) In the
small intestine, dietary retinyl esters are hydrolyzed by pancreatic lipase and the
intestinal brush border enzyme phospholipase B (Harrison and Hussain, 2001). Free
retinol is taken up by enterocytes, probably by a protein-mediated diffusion and
passive diffusion at physiological concentrations. The overall absorption of vitamin A
is of the order of 80-90 percent (Olsen, 2001). After uptake by the enterocyte, free
retinol is sequestered by cellular retinol-binding proteins (CRBPs), which are fatty
acid-binding proteins, to form a complex. Two CRBPs have been identified and


===== PDF PAGE 420 =====
419
purified that bind all-trans retinol, but it appears that CRBP-II is the one mainly
involved in the intestinal mucosa. Retinol attached to CRBP-II may either undergo
esterification to form a retinyl ester or be oxidized to retinal.
Carotenoid absorption has an absolute requirement for bile salts independent of its
dispersion in a suitable micelle. The efficiency of absorption of carotenoids in food by
humans is of the order of 50-60 percent and decreases markedly with dose (Olsen,
2001). Cats are able to absorb orally administered β-carotene but are not able to
convert it to retinol (Schweigert et al., 2002). In species that utilize carotenoids, these
carotenoids, along with preformed retinol from the diet, are largely converted to
retinyl esters in the small intestinal mucosal cells. These cells then release
chylomicrons into the lymph that contain a mixture of triacylglycerols,
apolipoproteins, and retinyl esters along with unesterified retinol. In their passage into
the general circulation, chylomicrons are stripped of their triacylglycerols by
lipoprotein lipase, and the remnants that contain retinyl esters, cholesterol esters, and
several apolipoproteins are taken up by endocytosis into the liver and, to a lesser
extent, other tissues. Within the liver, retinyl esters are hydrolyzed, and free retinol is
translocated by a cellular retinol-binding protein 1 (CRBP-I) to the endoplasmic
reticulum. The endoplasmic reticulum contains both lecithin:retinol acyltransferase
(LRAT) and acylcoenzyme A:retinol acyltransferase (ARAT), which results in
synthesis of retinyl esters—primarily stearate, oleate, and linoleate. These esters are
stored within parenchymal cells in vitamin A-containing globules.
Liver is the main storage site for vitamin A in both cats and dogs. While the
kidneys of cats contain much higher vitamin A concentrations than other species
(Lowe et al., 1957; Moore et al., 1963), the quantitative storage in kidneys is small
compared to hepatic storage. However, renal vitamin A may be held more tenaciously
during vitamin A depletion than that in liver. In most species including humans and
rats, vitamin A in the liver is released in combination with retinol-binding protein
(RBP). Pre-RBP is synthesized in parenchymal cells of the liver, and after removal of
a 3,500-Da (dalton) polypeptide, the resulting apo-RBP binds all-trans retinol, and
the complex (holo-RBP) is secreted into the plasma. In humans approximately 90
percent of the RBP is saturated with retinol and largely complexed with transthyretin,
which also binds thyroid hormones. The half-life of RBP in dogs and cats has not
been measured, but in humans it is 11-16 hours.
In most species including humans and rats, circulating retinyl compounds in
plasma are in the form of holo-RBP, and only in toxic states are retinyl esters
significantly elevated. In most carnivores including dogs and cats, a large proportion
of the total plasma retinyl activity occurs as retinyl esters, particularly retinyl
palmitate and stearate (Schweigert et al., 1990a,b). In canines and mustelids, 40-99
percent of the total vitamin A in plasma may be due to retinyl esters (Schweigert et
al., 1990a), and similar values can occur in cats (Freytag et al., 2003). The exceptions
to this generalization are the family Hyaenidae and suborder Pinnipedia that have
only retinol in their plasma. Retinyl esters are transported in plasma combined with
low-density lipoproteins.


===== PDF PAGE 421 =====
420
Two mechanisms have been proposed for the uptake of vitamin A by cells from
the plasma: one involves a cell surface receptor on the exterior of the cell in contact
with the plasma that strongly binds holo-RBP; the other does not. The first
mechanism proposes the binding of holo-RBP to the receptor and receptor-mediated
endocytosis internalizes the holo-RBP. Apo-RBP is split from retinol and released
into the cytoplasm. In the second proposed mechanism demonstrated in keratinocytes,
retinol dissociates from RBP and is taken up directly by the lipid membrane into the
cell. Presumably in dogs and cats, cells take up retinol combined with RBP.
Besides the RBP in plasma, and CRBP-I and CRBP-II, a number of other binding
proteins of retinoids have been identified. These include the cellular retinoic acid-
binding proteins (CRABP) type I and II and the cellular retinaldehyde-binding protein
(CRALBP), the interphotoreceptor retinol-binding protein, and epididymal retinoic
acid binding protein (E-RABP). The retinoid-binding proteins have a number of
functional roles including sequestering retinoids in hydrophobic cavities and
protecting them from undesirable reactions such as oxidation; serving as transport
proteins for retinoids; and acting as coligands for enzymatic transformation of the
retinoids.
The efficiency of absorption of dietary vitamin A has not been measured in cats
and dogs but, in other species, is of the order of 0.8 to 0.9 depending on the presence
and digestibility of fat in the diet. Of the vitamin A that is absorbed, about 0.3 to 0.6
is stored and the remainder is either conjugated or oxidized and excreted in feces and
urine. Morgan and Bentley (1943) were the first to show that dogs excrete vitamin A
in urine. Excretion of 15 to 63 percent of the ingested vitamin A occurs in urine
(mainly as retinol and lesser amounts of retinyl palmitate or oleate (Schweigert et al.,
1990c; Schweigert and Bok, 2000). Much smaller amounts are excreted in the urine
of cats (Freytag et al., 2003).
In most literature on dogs and cats, vitamin A requirements have been expressed
in terms of the international unit (IU). This terminology does not account for the
ability of dogs to utilize carotenoids as precursors for vitamin A, just as humans do.
For humans, the use of IU has been largely discontinued in favor of the expression of
vitamin A potency in terms of retinol equivalents (RE) (WHO, 1966). When vitamin
A activity is expressed as RE, 1 RE is equal to 1 μg of all-trans retinol. In contrast, 1
IU of vitamin A is equivalent to 0.344 μg of pure all-trans retinyl acetate (0.3 μg all-
trans retinol). 1 IU is equal to 0.3 RE.
The efficiency of utilization of dietary carotenoids is species-dependent. Even
though dogs appear to utilize β-carotene from carrots efficiently (Turner, 1933;
Bradfield and Smith, 1938), a retinol equivalency has not been defined. In humans, 21
μg of β-carotene is required to provide 1 RE (West, 2000). For cats, there is no retinol
equivalency for β-carotene, therefore, 1 RE for cats is equal to 1 μg of all-trans
retinol.
Because retinol is highly susceptible to oxidation, it is not used directly in
commercial dog and cat foods but is esterified to protect the free hydroxyl group. An
ester (acetate or palmitate) is then formed into beadlets for further protection. In one


===== PDF PAGE 422 =====
421
procedure, the retinyl ester (as an oil) is emulsified in a gelatin-starch-glycerin matrix
(often with antioxidant added) and formed into a beadlet by spraying the matrix into a
tower in which there is an updraft of cold air and starch. By addition of a sugar to the
emulsion, cross-linking with the gelatin occurs, which reduces the water solubility of
the beadlet and allows it to sustain higher temperatures and friction during expansion,
drying, and enrobing processes. The losses in these processes are related directly to
the temperature of expansion and drying. Losses of vitamin A potency also occur
with storage, requiring manufacturers to overformulate with vitamin A to ensure
adequate concentrations when the product is consumed. The industry-average
monthly losses on storage have been given as retinyl acetate (oil), 35 percent; non-
cross-linked beadlet, 30 percent; cross-linked beadlet, 8 percent (Anonymous, 1998).
Biological Function
Five primary functions of vitamin A have been identified: vision, growth, cellular
differentiation, morphogenesis, and immune function. All of these functions can be
maintained with dietary retinol, retinal, or retinaldehyde since these compounds are
interconvertable by animals. Retinal is readily oxidized to retinoic acid, but animals
cannot reduce retinoic acid; so, functions that require retinol, such as vision and
reproduction cannot be satisfied by retinoic acid. However, retinoic acid is capable of
supporting all other functional roles of vitamin A.
Vision
The involvement of vitamin A in vision has been extensively studied and recently
reviewed by Saari (1994). The cascade of the visual cycle begins with 11-cis retinal,
attached as a protonated Schiff’s base of a lysine residue of rhodopsin, receiving a
photon of light, which leads to a series of conformational changes resulting in the
production of metarhodopsin II. Metarhodopsin II reacts with transducin, a G protein,
leading to an activation of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)
phosphodiesterase, which in turn hydrolyzes cGMP to GMP. The reduction in cGMP,
which maintains open sodium channels in the cell membrane, leads to
hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane and generation of a nerve impulse.
Because retinoids are efficiently recycled in the visual process, the vitamin A
requirement for vision is only a small fraction of the total daily requirement for the
vitamin.
Growth
The earliest assays for vitamin A were based on the growth of rats given a purified
diet to which various “fat-soluble A”-containing foods were added. The subsequent
availability of retinoic acid, which maintained growth but not vision (or reproduction


===== PDF PAGE 423 =====
422
in most species), indicated that these were separate functions of vitamin A. Rats can
be maintained on low doses of retinoic acid, and when dosing is withheld, growth
ceases due to a loss of appetite that occurs 1-2 days after withdrawal of retinoic acid.
Presumably the failure of growth in vitamin A-deficient cats and dogs is due to the
same mechanism.
Cellular Differentiation
One of the earliest recognized histopathologies of vitamin A deficiency was the
replacement of columnar mucus-secreting cells lining the respiratory, gastrointestinal,
and reproductive tracts with keratinized squamous cells. Subsequently, it was
demonstrated that the addition of vitamin A to vitamin A-deficient keratinizing cells
in tissue culture induced their differentiation to mucus-secreting cells. These changes
in cells are produced by retinoids through the oxidation of all-trans retinol associated
with the CRBP to all-trans retinoic acid. Similarly it is proposed that retinol bound to
CRBP can be isomerized to 9-cis retinol and in turn oxidized to 9-cis retinoic acid.
The all-trans or 9-cis retinoic acid is transported to the nucleus where it is bound to
either a retinoic acid receptor (RAR) or a retinoid X receptor (RXR). The hormone
response elements in the DNA for RXR and RAR have been identified as the same
consensus sequence. RXR and RAR also have close similarities to other nuclear
hormone receptors. Of the two receptors, RXR has the broadest action and in the
absence of 9-cis retinoic acid forms heterodimers with the vitamin D receptor (VDR),
the thyroid receptor (TR), and RAR but only when the latter are charged with their
respective ligands, namely, 1α,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D, triiodothyronine, and all-
trans or 9-cis retinoic acid (Olson, 2001). Genes for several proteins including
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, have been identified that contain response
elements for retinoid receptors.
Morphogenesis
Retinoids play a major role in morphogenesis through retinoid receptors and
cellular retinoid-binding proteins that are expressed in the developing fetus in a
temporally dependent manner in various parts of the embryo (Olson, 2001). Most
research on vitamin A and embryonic development has been done with
nonmammalian species, but retinoic acid has been shown to be a powerful morphogen
in mammals (Maden, 1994). Retinoids not only induce normal development of the
fetus but in large amounts induce fetal abnormalities. Therefore, both a lack and an
excess of vitamin A in the diet during pregnancy can lead to fetal abnormalities.
Immune Response


===== PDF PAGE 424 =====
423
Many nutrient deficiencies are associated with a reduction in, or delayed
immunological response to, various antigens. In rats the primary immune response to
protein antigens is markedly reduced in vitamin A deficiency, but the immunological
memory required for a secondary response is not adversely affected (Ross and
Hammerling, 1994). The immunological response to some viruses is impaired in
vitamin A deficiency and restored on repletion
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
Vitamin A deficiency in dogs was one of the first vitamin deficiencies identified
and studied. Clinical signs in dogs are similar to those produced in other species.
These signs include anorexia, body weight loss, ataxia, xerophthalmia, conjunctivitis,
corneal opacity and ulceration, skin lesions, metaplasia of the bronchiolar epithelium,
pneumonitis, and increased susceptibility to infections (Steenbock et al., 1921;
Stimson and Hedley, 1933; Frohring, 1935a,b, 1937; Crimm and Short 1937; Russell
and Morris, 1939; Singh et al., 1965). In young growing dogs, defective remodeling
of the cranial foramina produces stenosis of the cochlear nerve; degeneration of
cochlear neurons, accompanied by bony growth in the modiolus; overgrowth of the
internal periosteal layer of the capsule; and degeneration of the organ of Corti and
sensory epithelium of the semicircular canals, resulting in deafness (Mellanby, 1938).
Prolonged experimental deficiency may also result in similar damage to the optic and
trigeminal nerves.
Requirements
Fat-soluble A was one of the first vitamin deficiencies intentionally induced in
dogs (by Mellanby in 1918) at a time when the existence of the two fat-soluble
vitamins A and D was not known. Steenbock et al. (1921) demonstrated that a diet
deficient in fat-soluble “vitamine” produced ophthalmia in dogs that could be
prevented or cured by cod liver oil. Later, Frohring (1935a) demonstrated that the
addition of carotene to a vitamin A-free diet allowed normal growth and cured
xerophthalmia in puppies, indicating that dogs utilize carotene as a precursor of
vitamin A. The same author (Frohring, 1935b, 1937) calculated that the minimal
curative dose of vitamin A that effected a definite increase in body weight of depleted
puppies was 200 USP (United States Pharmacopeia) units (as carotene)·kg BW–1·d–1
for growing dogs. Using a similar depletion approach, Crimm and Short (1937)
estimated that the minimal vitamin A requirement (from cod liver oil) of adult dogs
was 22 to 47 IU (7 to 14 RE)·kg BW–1·d–1. Bradfield and Smith (1938) used the
minimal curative dose of Frohring of 200 IU kg BW–1·d–1 and found that this intake
supported normal growth and some storage in the liver of puppies. Higher intakes of


===== PDF PAGE 425 =====
424
120, 300, and 600 RE·kg BW–1·d–1 resulted in higher concentrations of vitamin A in
the liver. These authors also found that 200 IU·kg BW–1·d–1 from carrots and
carotene in oil gave similar liver concentrations as 200 IU·kg BW–1·d–1 from cod
liver oil.
There do not appear to have been any quantitative studies on the vitamin A
requirements of dogs that used a purified source of vitamin A and measured the
concentrations of vitamin A in dogs’ liver. Therefore, further refinement of the
adequate intake suggested by the NRC (1985) of 303 RE per 1,000 kcal for growing
puppies and adult dogs is not warranted. This dietary concentration is equivalent to
about 40 RE·kg BW–0.75·d–1 for adult dogs at maintenance and twice that value for
growing puppies. No published experimental studies were found on the retinol
requirements for pregnancy and lactation so the same dietary concentration for
growth (303 RE per 1,000 kcal) is recommended for bitches during pregnancy and
lactation.
Hypervitaminosis
Dietary carotenoids are assumed to have a low toxicity for dogs. Toxicity from the
ingestion of excessive amounts of retinoids may be acute or chronic or produce
teratological changes. The unit of vitamin A used in this review of hypervitaminosis
is micrograms of retinol (1 IU vitamin A has the same activity as 0.3 μg retinol).
Hendricks et al. (1947) examined the effects of optimal and excess vitamin D in
the presence of optimal and excess vitamin A. These authors reported no adverse
effects in three weaned cocker spaniel puppies given a diet containing 3,030 μg
retinol·kg BW–1·d–1 in the presence of normal intakes of vitamin D for about 10
months. However, only one dog was necropsied and radiographs of the other dogs
were not taken. Over the 10-month period, 40 percent of the oral intake of vitamin A
by the dogs given 3,030 μg·kg BW–1 was stored.
Maddock et al. (1949) gave a litter of 2-month-old greyhound puppies a diet of
milk, bread, horsemeat, and dog chow with an occasional supplement of cod liver oil
(amount and frequency not stated). Three puppies acted as controls, and two puppies
received 90,000 μg retinol (300,000 IU of vitamin A)·kg BW–1 6 days a week. After
30 days, the treated dogs showed inappetance and a marked decline in body weight.
Both dogs exhibited hyperesthesia of the skin, pain on palpation of the epiphyses of
the front legs, and a reluctance to stand and moderate exophthalmia. Radiography of
the long bones of the treated dogs showed a marked narrowing of the epiphyseal
cartilage and a reduction in the density and thinning of the cortices of the femur, tibia,
radius and ulna. Histological examination of the bones showed an imbalance in the
normal remodeling processes. Degenerative lesions were found in arteries and veins
of the tissues examined.
Cho et al. (1975) gave Labrador retriever puppies (about 6 kg BW at the beginning
of the test) a commercial diet and either vitamin A palmitate alone or in a


===== PDF PAGE 426 =====
425
combination vitamin A, D, and E preparation by either oral or parenteral
(intramuscular injection) routes. Treatments were as follows: group I, a control diet;
group II, 30,000 μg retinol·kg BW–1 once a week parenterally for 10 weeks, then oral
90,000 μg retinol·kg BW–1·d–1 for 88 days; group III, 60,000 μg retinol·kg BW–1
once a week parenterally for 14 weeks; group IV, 30,000 μg retinol·kg BW–1 once a
week parenterally in a vitamin A-D-E combination; group V, 60,000 μg retinol·kg
BW–1 once a week parenterally in a vitamin A-DE combination (also supplying 3,750
mg of vitamin D2 and 100 IU of vitamin E). One dog from group I was given the
control diet for 72 days and then 90,000 μg retinol·kg BW–1·d–1 orally for 48 days.
By the 11th week, all puppies in groups II, III, IV, and V were dehydrated and had
central nervous system depression. Bloody diarrhea, vomiting, and ocular discharge
were occasionally observed in dogs in groups II and V. By the 14th week, dogs from
group II were severely dehydrated, emaciated, depressed, and reluctant to walk and
had roughened coats. They also exhibited severe pain responses in the regions of the
carpal and tarsal joints. Fatty liver was the only gross pathologic finding. Main
radiographic and histologic findings related to the bones. Long bones were decreased
in length and thickness because of premature closure of the epiphyseal plate.
Epiphyseal plates were markedly narrowed or had disappeared in the long bones,
particularly the tibia and radius. Osteoporosis of the diaphysis, particularly involving
the radius and ulna was also present. Dogs given the vitamin A-D-E combination
appeared less severely affected than dogs given the vitamin A alone, although they
were euthanized earlier than those dosed with oral vitamin A.
Cline et al. (1997) reported no adverse changes in the tibia bone measured by
computer tomography resulting from feeding diets containing 4,500, 15,000, 34,800,
or 67,500 μg retinol per 1,000 kcal ME to adult dogs for 1 year. The authors
concluded that a dietary concentration of 67,500 μg retinol per 1,000 kcal ME was not
detrimental to normal bone health in adult dogs for one year, and canines appear less
sensitive to excess vitamin A in the diet than do some other mammals.
Goldy et al. (1996) gave 10- to 12-month-old beagles either a basal diet containing
600 μg retinol·kg–1 diet or diets with an additional 9,000 15,000, 30,000, 60,000, or
120,000 μg retinol·kg–1 diet added (analysis of the diet gave values of 180 to 37,500
μg retinol per 1,000 kcal ME). Sufficient amounts of the diet were given to maintain
ideal body weight (amounts not stated) for 26 weeks. Hepatic concentrations of
retinol at 26 weeks were linearly related to the dietary concentration of retinol. Dogs
receiving the diet containing 37,500 μg retinol per 1,000 kcal had significantly higher
plasma concentrations of retinol, RBP, and prolonged activated prothrombin times.
The authors did not report the concentrations of retinyl esters in plasma, or possible
adverse effects of the high intakes of vitamin A on bone, but suggested a vitamin A
tolerance of 60,000 μg retinol·kg–1 diet for dogs at maintenance.
As dogs efficiently store excess vitamin A in the liver, (Hendricks et al., 1947) an
as the concentration of vitamin A in the liver of dogs (and cats) increases with time of
exposure to diets with excessive levels (Goldy et al., 1996), only lifetime studies will


===== PDF PAGE 427 =====
426
demonstrate a SUL. The study by Cline et al. (1997) indicated a SUL for tibial bone
health of adult dogs for a relatively short period (1 year) in the total life of some dogs
of 67,500 μg retinol per 1,000 kcal of diet, while the study by Goldy et al. (1996)
indicated that a diet containing a lower concentration of vitamin A (37,500 μg per
1,000 kcal) given to dogs for half the time (26 weeks) induced prolonged activated
partial prothromboplastin times and elevated retinol binding protein concentrations.
These authors suggested a dietary vitamin A tolerance of about 16,000 μg per 1,000
kcal ME or 64,000 μg·kg–1 diet of 4 kcal·g–1.
Two reviews (Kwacho, 1989; Power and Ihrke, 1990) on retinoids in veterinary
dermatology provide information on therapeutic considerations and on effects of oral
retinoid therapy. These reviews, however, provide limited insight into maximal safe
levels as defined in this report.
The NRC (1987) proposed a presumed maximal safe level for a number of species
including dogs of 10 times the requirement (i.e., 12,120 μg retinol·kg–1 diet for dogs).
Because carnivores appear to have a higher tolerance for excessive intakes of vitamin
A even though a SUL has not been defined, it is suggested that an upper limit of
15,000 μg retinol·kg–1 diet of 4 kcal·g–1 be used for puppies. For adult non-breeding
dogs, it is proposed a safe upper limit of 64,000 μg retinol·kg–1 diet (4 kcal·g–1) be
adopted. It is recognized that dogs appear to be less sensitive to excessive intakes of
vitamin A than non-carnivores or the toxicity has not been as well documented as in
humans. Consumption by human adults of 7,500 to 15,000 μg retinol·d–1 for several
months or more can produce multiple adverse effects. Adverse effects occur in
children with intakes as low as 450 μg retinol·kg–1·d–1 and maternal intakes as low as
7,500 μg retinol were associated with birth defects (Hathcock et al., 1990).
There is little information on the effect of excess vitamin A on pregnancy in dogs
other than the study of Wiersig and Swenson (1967), which reported that 37,500 μg
retinol·kg BW–1·d–1 administered for days 17 through 22 of pregnancy induced
teratological changes in puppies. Until a study is undertaken in which bitches are
continuously exposed before and through pregnancy to elevated vitamin A intakes, a
SUL for reproduction cannot be defined. In the interim, the level proposed for
puppies (15,000 μg retinol·kg–1 diet of 4 kcal·g–1) is also suggested for breeding
bitches.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Scott et al. (1964) reported conjunctivitis, xerosis with keratitis and
vascularization of the cornea, photophobia, delayed pupillary response to light,
formation of cataracts, and retinal degeneration in cats given purified diets based on
casein as a protein source for 6 to 20 months. Supplementation of these diets with


===== PDF PAGE 428 =====
427
vitamin A did not reverse the clinical signs and the authors concluded that “the
continual feeding of casein made it difficult for the cat to utilize vitamin A.” These
diets were deficient in taurine, and the observed retinal degeneration was undoubtedly
a consequence of taurine deficiency rather than of vitamin A. In another study, Scott
et al. reported that in vitamin A deficiency induced by a diet containing meat, no
retinal degeneration occurred, although conjunctivitis generally appeared. Retinal
degeneration was probably the basis for higher estimates of the vitamin A
requirements of cats than other mammals by workers such as Scott (1971).
Gershoff et al. (1957) also used a casein-based diet and reported that the time
required for appearance of clinical signs of deficiency was related to the age of the cat
when the deficient diet was fed. The reported early clinical signs of vitamin A
deficiency were weight loss, a serosanguinous exudate about the eyes, and muscle
weakness. Squamous metaplasia of tissues appeared in the following order:
conjunctiva, salivary glands, endometrium of the uterus, and respiratory tract.
Subpleural cysts lined with squamous epithelium, without bronchial communication,
were also observed. Metaplasia of the trachea and bronchi were observed after
exposure of more than 6 months to the deficient diet. Extensive infectious sequelae
were common in the lung and occasionally in the conjunctiva and salivary glands.
Marked hypoplasia of the seminiferous tubules with complete absence of
spermatocytes was found in young male cats given the deficient diet. In 6 of the 15
deficient cats, the acinar tissue of the pancreas had loss of zymogen granules and/or
cytoplasmic basophilia.
A detailed study of changes in retinal function of cats given a diet (containing
adequate concentrations of taurine, vitamin E, and retinoic acid) but deficient in
vitamin A during depletion and recovery has been reported by Kemp et al. (1989).
These authors reported that extended vitamin A deficiency led to an abnormal
appearance in the tapetal fundus with the formation of a dark brown streak centered in
the area centralis. At the time the condition occurred, the sensitivity of the rods was
reduced by more than 2 log units and the visual pigment was reduced by more than 90
percent. After vitamin A supplementation, rapid increase and partial recovery of both
rhodopsin concentration and sensitivity occurred and the brown color of the fundus
faded.
A range of reproductive and developmental disorders in queens including
abortions, resorption of fetuses, premature birth, birth of hairless kittens, and cleft
palates was observed by Morris (personal communication) in queens given purified
diets containing 600 to 1,200 μg retinol·kg–1.
Requirements
Because cats do not utilize carotenoids, they require preformed retinoids in the
diet. Therefore, the vitamin A requirement of cats is given in terms of micrograms of
retinol rather than RE. Within the range of 1 to 26 percent fat in the diet, absorption of
vitamin A as indicated by serum concentrations appears to be positively related to the


===== PDF PAGE 429 =====
428
level of dietary fat (Gershoff et al., 1957). Scott (1971) estimated that the vitamin A
requirement of cats (presumably breeding queens) was 300 to 600 μg retinol·d–1. This
would be equivalent to a dietary concentration of 2,667 to 5,334 μg retinol·kg–1 diet
(4 kcal·g–1). Unpublished data (K. Knox, University of Connecticut) suggested that
20 μg retinol·kg BW–1·d–1 maintained adequate plasma concentrations (>40 μg·dL–
1) in weaned kittens. If these kittens had a body weight of 0.8 kg and consumed 180
kcal·d–1, the concentration in the diet would be 89 μg retinol per 1,000 kcal. The next
highest concentration used (256 μg retinol·kg BW–1) appeared to be more than
required. In a long-term study, Morris and Rogers (personal communication) found
that 1,200 μg retinol·kg–1 diet (267 μg retinol per 1,000 kcal) supported conception in
queens but did not support normal fetal development since some of the kittens were
born hairless or with cleft palates. The next increment used (1,800 μg retinol·kg–1
diet (4.5 kcal·g–1 or 400 μg retinol per 1,000 kcal) prevented deformities and
supported normal kitten development and growth during nursing. These studies
indicate that 89 to 400 μg retinol per 1,000 kcal would be adequate for the growth of
kittens and 400 μg retinol per 1,000 kcal would be required for pregnancy and
lactation. The NRC (1986) proposed a value of 1 mg retinol·kg–1 diet (5.0 kcal·g–1)
or 200 μg retinol per 1,000 kcal for growing kittens. No new studies have been found
since this recommendation was made, and it is proposed as an AI for growth and for
maintenance. For pregnancy and lactation, a value 400 μg retinol per 1,000 kcal is
proposed. A dietary concentration of 200 μg retinol per 1,000 kcal is equivalent to an
intake of 20 μg retinol·kg BW–0.67 for adult cats at maintenance and about twice the
value for growing kittens on the same basis. A strong positive relationship between
the age of cats given commercial diets and liver concentration of vitamin A can be
demonstrated. Although the effects, if any, of these high hepatic concentrations of
vitamin A are unknown, it would be prudent not to greatly exceed the RAs for
vitamin A.
Hypervitaminosis
Naturally occurring cases of hypervitaminosis A have occurred almost exclusively
as a consequence of feeding a diet largely or totally of liver to growing kittens
(Seawright et al., 1970). The quantity of vitamin A supplied by liver that induced
skeletal lesions ranged from 17 to 35 μg retinol·g BW–1·d–1. The addition of 15 μg of
vitamin A (as palmitate)·g BW–1·d–1 to an all-meat diet over a period of 41 weeks
did not induce the skeletal lesions. The next higher level of supplementation (30 μg
retinol·g–1 BW–1·d–1) produced lethargy after 10 weeks and spondylosis in 24 weeks.
The primary lesion of vitamin A excess in growing kittens is extensive
osseocartilagenous hyperplasia of the first three cervical vertebrae. These outgrowths


===== PDF PAGE 430 =====
429
restrict movement and affected cats are unable to effectively groom and have
unkempt fur (Seawright et al., 1967).
Clark et al. (1970a,b) and Clark (1970, 1973) confirmed these observations and
verified that the lesions could be produced with diets containing excessive vitamin A
but adequately supplied with calcium. These authors demonstrated that the long bones
of affected cats were shorter than normal and osteoporotic, and the epiphyseal plates
were damaged. Seawright and Hrdlicka (1974) described a proliferative gingivitis,
retarded development of osseous alveolar processes and tooth loss due to excess
vitamin A.
Freytag (2001) and Freytag et al. (2003) investigated the teratogenic effect of
excess amounts of vitamin A in queens continually exposed to diets containing either
6,000 (control), 306,000, or 606,000 μg retinol/kg diet. Neither of the high-vitamin A
diets affected pregnancy rate, nor the number of kittens born per litter. Queens
receiving the diet containing 306,000 μg retinol·kg–1 had a low incidence of fatal
malformations in their kittens. When the dietary concentration was 606,000 μg
retinol·kg–1, there was a significant increase in fatal malformations that included cleft
palates and other teratogenic defects associated with vitamin A toxicity in mammalian
species.
Three of the 15 queens that began exposure to the 306,000-μg retinol diet from 10
to 11 months of age and four of the 15 queens given the 606,000 μg retinol·kg–1 diet
that were exposed from 2 to 3 years of age had skeletal lesions primarily of the
cervical vertebrae. No lesions occurred in the control queens. As a safe upper dietary
concentration of vitamin A for queens has not been defined, and, as 306,000 μg
retinol·kg–1 diet produced pathological changes, it is suggested that queens should
not be exposed to dietary concentrations greater than 100,000 μg retinol·kg–1. As
these cats were adults, it is suggested that this upper limit also apply to maintenance.
A diet that supplied 17 μg retinol·g BW–1 from liver (a likely source of excess
vitamin A in the diet; equivalent to 302,000 μg retinol·kg–1 diet) induced skeletal
pathology in kittens (Seawright et al., 1970). As growing kittens are at least equally
vulnerable as adults to hypervitaminosis A it is suggested that a safe upper dietary
concentration for kittens should also not exceed 20,000 μg retinol per 1,000 kcal. This
value is 100 times the proposed adequate intake of retinol for kittens.
VITAMIN D
Vitamin D is a generic descriptor for a group of related secosteroids derived from
the cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene ring that have antirachitic activity. The two
most important members of this group are cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) and
ergocalciferol (vitamin D2). Vitamin D is not the active form of the vitamin but has to
undergo two hydroxylation reactions to the biologically active form of the steroid
hormone. Vitamin D functions along with two peptide hormones (parathyroid


===== PDF PAGE 431 =====
430
hormone and calcitonin) in the homeostatic control of calcium, which is essential for
the normal functioning of a range of physiological processes including muscle
contraction, blood clotting, nerve conduction, intracellular signal induction, and so
forth. Vitamin D also plays an important role in phosphorus homeostasis.
Absorption, Transport, and Storage
Vitamin D in the diet is absorbed from the small intestine, and absorption is aided
by bile salts. Taurine supplementation is reported to increase vitamin D absorption in
preterm human infants (Zamboni et al., 1993). No absorption studies have been
reported on dogs and cats, but in rats, baboons, and humans, vitamin D is absorbed by
the enterocytes and secreted into the lymphatics associated with chylomicrons
(Collins and Norman, 2001). For most animals, vitamin D is a conditional nutrient,
synthesized during ultraviolet B radiation of the skin from 7-dehydrocholesterol, an
intermediate in one of the pathways of cholesterol synthesis. For these animals,
vitamin D is needed in the diet only when exposure to ultraviolet light is limited.
Vitamin D produced in the skin is transported to the liver by a vitamin D-binding
protein (DBP) where it, along with vitamin D absorbed from the diet, undergoes
hydroxylation in the 25-position to 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OHD). The 25-
hydroxylase is a P450-like enzyme that is poorly regulated in most animals, making
circulating levels of 25-OHD the appropriate index of vitamin D status in the normal
and toxic range. Also, 25-OHD is the major circulating vitamin D metabolite, which
facilitates its measurement. From the liver, 25-OHD is transported on DBP to the
kidney where a second hydroxylation occurs to give the active form of the hormone
1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1α,25-(OH)2D). The 1α,25-hydroxylase is located in the
mitochondria of the proximal tubules of the kidney and belongs to the mixed oxidase
class of enzymes. The concentration of 1α,25-(OH)2D in plasma is tightly controlled,
mainly through the activity of 1α,25-hydroxylase in the kidney, which in turn is under
positive and negative feedback regulation primarily through parathyroid hormone
(PTH), but also serum concentrations of 1α,25-(OH)2D, calcium and phosphorus.
PTH released in response to low serum calcium stimulates the activity of the 1α,25-
hydroxylase and decreases the activity of the 24-hydroxylase. While there is some
debate on the role of 24, 25-(OH)2D in mineralization of bone and eggshell
production, it has been shown to act negatively on PTH production and is one of the
excretory products of vitamin D metabolism.
Biological Function
Responses produced by 1α,25-(OH)2D are mediated by its action on nuclear
receptors and nongenomic pathways such as calcium channeling. Many nuclear
receptors for 1α,25-(OH)2D have been identified in target tissues not related to


===== PDF PAGE 432 =====
431
calcium homeostasis (Collins and Norman, 2001). The nuclear receptor for 1α,25-
(OH)2D is a DNA-binding protein that binds 1α,25-(OH)2D with a high affinity.
The classical target tissues of 1α,25-(OH)2D are those that regulate mineral status.
When there is a decrease in serum calcium, the parathyroid gland increases secretion
of PTH, which stimulates the 1α,25-hydroxylase to increase synthesis of 1α,25-
(OH)2D. These two hormones (PTH and 1α,25-(OH)2D) in concert increase
resorption of bone and restore serum ionic calcium concentration. Receptors to 1α,25-
(OH)2D have been found in osteoblasts but not osteoclasts, so it is suggested that
osteoclastic activity is stimulated through osteoblasts or by nongenomic signal
transduction pathways such as opening calcium-gated channels. Dissolution of bone
contributes both calcium and phosphorus to the plasma, but the rise in phosphorus is
blunted by its larger pool and augmentation of renal excretion induced by elevated
PTH levels.
Mellanby (1925) exposed dogs and their diets to mercury vapor lamps and
sunlight as sources of ultraviolet radiation. He found only a slight beneficial effect of
exposing dogs with their backs shaved to UV light. It was apparent that the response
he obtained to UV radiation of dogs was not the large response recorded in humans
by Huldschinsky (1919). Similarly, Mellanby found that “some part of the rickets
producing influence of oatmeal could be eliminated by direct exposure to UV
radiation.” Exposure of dogs (Hazewinkel et al., 1987) and cats (Morris, 1999) to UV
light results in ineffective synthesis in these species; they are virtually entirely
dependent on diet for vitamin D. The skins of dogs (How et al., 1994) and cats (How
et al., 1994; Morris, 1999) have low concentrations of 7-dehydrocholesterol compared
to species capable of synthesizing vitamin D. However, administration of an inhibitor
of the enzyme 7-dehydrocholes-terol Δ7-reductase to cats allowed vitamin D
synthesis to occur (Morris, 1999). These observations suggest that the metabolic basis
for cats and dogs having a dietary requirement for vitamin D is that 7-
dehydrocholesterol is rapidly converted to cholesterol, due to the high activity of the
enzyme 7-dehydrocholesterol Δ7-reductase.
In most species, cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) is used with equal or greater
efficiency than is ergocalciferol (vitamin D2). The differential utilization has not been
investigated in dogs, but, in cats, cholecalciferol is utilized more efficiently than is
ergocalciferol to maintain plasma concentrations of 25-OHD (Morris, 2002b). Similar
differences between the two forms of the vitamin have also been reported in humans
(Trang et al., 1998). Cholecalciferol is also more toxic at an equivalent dose than
ergocalciferol. The mechanism of toxicity has not been established, but ectopic
calcification of arteries, kidneys, and other soft tissues is believed to be responsible.
Cholecalciferol is generally added to commercial dog and cat foods as beadlets,
although spray-dried and drum-dried products are also available. Recoveries after
extrusion, drying, and enrobing of vitamin D are much higher than vitamin A and
losses on storage much less. Cross-linked beadlets give the highest recovery in
processing and lowest rate of loss on storage.


===== PDF PAGE 433 =====
432
Dietary concentrations of vitamin D were often expressed in terms of IUs, where 1
IU = 0.025 μg of cholecalciferol (vitamin D3), or 40 IU = 1 μg of cholecalciferol.
Since the substitution value of ergocalciferol for cholecalciferol has not been
established for dogs, requirements are given in term of micrograms of cholecalciferol.
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
Since calcium, phosphorus, and vitamin D nutrition interact in the maintenance of
normal mineral status and skeletal integrity, there are similarities in the gross clinical
signs resulting from a deficiency of any one of these nutrients. Defective
mineralization of the skeleton and lameness are clinical sign common to both calcium
and vitamin D deficiencies.
Dogs played a major role as experimental animals in elucidation of the nutritional
basis of endemic rickets in children, which was primarily a problem of inadequate
vitamin D. Mellanby (1921), in a summary of his studies on rickets (in which nearly
400 puppies were used), stated that rickets occurred more rapidly in fast-growing than
slow-growing dogs. Dogs with rickets became lethargic and had a general loss of
muscular tone, which did not allow them to run quickly. As the condition progressed,
there were large swellings of the epiphyseal ends of the bones and bending of the long
bones, the extent dependent on the degree of weight bearing. An early indication of
rickets on radiology was a change in shape of the epiphysis of the distal ulna. This
became flattened, with a wavy and indefinite outline, and there was an increase in the
width of the epiphyseal cartilage and the adjacent newly calcified bone lost contrast.
Malik et al. (1997) reported a case of rickets in a litter of greyhounds that
exhibited listlessness, profound muscle weakness, lameness, lateral bowing of the
antebrachii, and focal hard swellings proximal to the tarsi and carpi. Radiological
examination showed osteopenia, axial and radial thickening of the growth plates, and
“cupping” of the adjacent metaphyses. Vitamin D deficiency was confirmed by
subnormal 25-OHD concentrations in serum samples.
Requirements
Even though Mellanby (1918) reported nearly a century ago that rickets in dogs
could be prevented by inclusion of butter or cod liver oil (but not cottonseed oil) in a
rachitogenic diet, there have been no definitive studies to define the minimal vitamin
D requirements of puppies. The requirement to prevent adverse clinical signs depends
on calcium and phosphorus concentrations in the diet, physiological state of the dog,
and size at maturation. Growing animals, because of high demand for calcification of
the skeleton, are most sensitive to a dietary deficiency of vitamin D, whereas mature
dogs are relatively resistant.


===== PDF PAGE 434 =====
433
Arnold and Elvehjem (1939a) reported two experiments on the vitamin D
requirements of Great Danes. In one experiment, vitamin D was supplied from
canned dog food and measured by the chick assay (cholecalciferol); in the other
experiment it was supplied as irradiated yeast (ergocalciferol) and measured by a rat
assay. The authors proposed a vitamin D requirement of 20 IU per 100 g food of
about 3.8 kcal·g–1 (5.3 μg·kg–1 diet of 4 kcal·g–1) for growing puppies given a diet
containing 9.0 g calcium and 7.5 g phosphorus per kilogram. When 15 g calcium
carbonate was added to the diet of one dog, appetite declined after 20 days and it
developed rickets. The authors concluded that a Ca:P ratio of 2:1 was less favorable
for calcification thatn 1.2:1. The recommendation of 10 to 20 IU vitamin D·kg BW–
1·d–1 was later made by Michaud and Elvehjem (1944).
Campbell and Douglas (1965) gave three groups of 6- to 10-week-old mongrel
pups a basal diet (0.08 to 0.1 percent calcium and 0.13 to 0.15 percent phosphorus)
that was composed mainly of meat and unfortified bread. To this basal diet, bone meal
was added (group A, control), giving a mineral content of 0.5 percent calcium and 0.3
percent phosphorus; group B received the basal diet alone; and group C received the
basal diet plus a daily supplement of either 2.5 μg vitamin D (five pups) or 25 μg
vitamin D (two pups). It was not stated whether the vitamin D was in the form of
ergocalciferol or cholecalciferol. Control dogs and those in group B had satisfactory
body weight gains, but those in group C had decreased food consumption, which was
more marked in dogs receiving the higher level of vitamin D. Dogs in group B
developed lameness, rachitic changes or bending of the legs, plantigrade stance, and
enlargement of the epiphyses. Dogs in group C had similar skeletal changes and
persistent lameness. Radiographs of dogs in group B indicated marked osteoporosis.
In group C, pathological fractures of the femur, tibia, and pelvis occurred in dogs
given both the low and the high vitamin D intakes. Dogs given the control diet
maintained plasma calcium in the normal range, but those given the low-calcium diet
without vitamin D developed marked hypocalcemia by 12 weeks. Less depression of
plasma calcium occurred in dogs given the low, and even less in dogs given the high
level of vitamin D supplementation. Plasma phosphorus concentrations were not
altered, but alkaline phosphatase was elevated in all groups but control dogs. While
this study does not help define vitamin D requirements, it demonstrates that for a
calcium-deficient diet, vitamin D facilitates the maintenance of normal plasma levels
of calcium.
Kealy et al. (1991) reported a study in which 28 weanling puppies were divided
into two groups and given a diet formulated from natural dog food ingredients for 102
weeks. The diet of one group had 60.5 μg cholecalciferol·kg–1 added, while the other
diet was unsupplemented. No differences between the groups in any of the parameters
measured (which included growth, serum calcium, phosphorus, and alkaline
phosphatase) were found. This study indicated that natural food ingredients may at
times provide adequate vitamin D for growing dogs without supplementation. The
NRC (1985) proposed a vitamin D requirement of 2.75 μg of vitamin D per 1,000
kcal for growing dogs. This value is consistent with a recent study (Tryfonidou 2002)


===== PDF PAGE 435 =====
434
which reported no adverse bone pathology in Great Dane puppies given a diet
containing 12.5 μg cholecalciferol·kg diet–1. Since no information was found on the
requirements for adult dogs and pregnant or lactating bitches, the same dietary
concentrations are recommended, 2.75 μg per 1,000 kcal equivalent to 0.36 μg·kg
BW–0.75·d–1 in adult dogs at maintenance.
Hypervitaminosis
Morgan and Shimotori (1943) gave cocker spaniel puppies that had been deprived
of vitamin D a single dose of 500 μg of vitamin D (from either tuna liver oil,
irradiated ergosterol, or activated animal sterol). A transient hypercalcemia was
observed at 4 hours postdosing, and vitamin D was detected in the blood for 3 days to
5 months postdosing. No adverse effects were noted at 12 to 14 months of age, at
which time the dogs were given a second dose of 5 mg of ergocalciferol (irradiated
ergosterol) or cholecalciferol (animal sterol). Vomiting and diarrhea were observed
within 3 days, along with anorexia, lassitude, and weakness. Serum calcium initially
declined then rose along with serum phosphorus. In another study, Shimotori and
Morgan (1943) gave dogs a single oral dose of either 5,000 μg irradiated ergosterol or
5,000 μg irradiated animal sterol per kilogram of body weight along with radioactive
phosphorus, which produced diarrhea and vomiting on the third day after dosing and
required the dogs be euthanized. The authors concluded that a massive dose of
vitamin D decreased phosphorus turnover in soft tissues but gave a twofold increase
in phosphorus turnover in bone.
Hendricks et al. (1947) gave cocker spaniel puppies 5 to 8 weeks of age 250 μg
cholecalciferol·kg BW–1·d–1 for 8 to 10 months. The puppies had reduced growth
rates, transient hypercalcemia, calcification of soft tissue, and excessive
mineralization of long bones with an increased diameter of the shafts. In these studies,
irradiated ergosterol (vitamin D2) produced less toxic effects than irradiated animal
sterols.
Spangler et al. (1979) reported a study in which 18 dogs were given doses of either
500 or 1,000 μg·kg BW–1 of ergocalciferol per day for 6 to 21 days. Food
consumption decreased markedly by the 8th day, and the second week of treatment
was marked by general loss of condition, dehydration, dry and brittle hair, and
muscular atrophy. Two dogs showed severe depression, an inability to rise from the
resting position, and eventual coma. Serum calcium and urea nitrogen increased
during this period, but serum phosphorus remained within the normal range. Plasma
renin increased markedly, but blood pressure showed only a mild increase. Gross and
microscopic examination of the kidneys suggested vascular-oriented changes with an
ischemic basis. Glomerular vascular poles showed hypertrophy and hyperplasia of
juxtaglomerular cells.
Howerth (1983) reported a case of a breeder of toy Pomeranian puppies having 16
of 24 puppies from six different litters die within a month of birth. Affected puppies


===== PDF PAGE 436 =====
435
stopped nursing and became lethargic at 2-3 weeks of age, which was followed by
death within 3 days. Necropsy performed on two puppies revealed renal, pulmonary,
and vascular calcification. The dams had received a supplement containing 2.25 μg
vitamin D (probably cholecalciferol) and 270 μg of retinol (vitamin A), 667 mg
calcium lactate, and 167 mg calcium glycerophosphate per day in addition to vitamins
present in the dog food (not measured but suggested as 66 μg of retinol and 0.55 μg of
vitamin D·kg BW–1·d–1). After the supplement was discontinued, there were no
further problems in puppies in subsequent lactations.
Dzanis et al. (1991) reported that administration of pharmacological amounts (0.03
to 0.05 μg·kg BW–1) of 1,25-(OH)2D3 per os to renally impaired adult dogs resulted
in depression in appetite, body weight, and renal function, as well as bone and
parathyroid cell atrophy, but without hypercalcemia. Administration of 1,25-(OH)2D3
to dogs with normal renal function resulted in a marked elevation of serum calcium.
Gunther et al. (1988) investigated the toxicity in dogs of cholecalciferol-
containing rodenticides. They gave a rodenticide that supplied either 10 mg or 20 mg
cholecalciferol·kg BW–1 to each of two dogs. The time taken for onset and temporal
progression of clinical signs was similar in all dogs. The dogs became less active 30
hours after consumption; lethargic, weak, and anorectic by 48 hours; recumbent at 60
to 70 hours; and died soon after. Serum calcium and phosphorus were both elevated.
Histological findings were in general similar to those reported by Spangler et al.
(1979), with the exception of acute hemorrhage of the superficial mucosa of the
stomach and small intestine, and foci of necrosis and mineralization of myocytes of
the myocardium.
Growing Great Dane dogs given diets containing moderately high concentrations
of vitamin D3 (100 μg cholecalciferol·kg–1) were reported to have lower fractional
absorption of calcium than dogs given a diet containing 12.5 μg cholecalciferol·kg–1,
despite both diets having the same concentration of calcium (Tryfonidou et al., 2002).
These authors reported that dogs receiving the moderately high vitamin D diet had
similar concentrations of 25-OHD3 and 1,25-(OH)2D3 in their plasma but higher
concentrations of 24,25-(OH)2D3 than dogs given the diet with the 12.5 μg of
cholecalciferol·kg–1. They suggested that the turnover rates of 25-OHD3 and 1,25-
(OH)2D3 were increased, and the elevated concentration of 24,25-(OH)2D3 in plasma
may down-regulate the absorption of calcium from the gut in growing Great Dane
puppies.
In another experiment (Tryfonidou, 2002) Great Dane puppies were given a diet
containing excessive (but sublethal) concentration of cholecalciferol (1,350 μg·kg–1),
the plasma concentration of 25-OHD3 was 30 to 75 times greater, and 24,25-(OH)2D3
16 to 18 times greater than in control dogs given a diet containing 11 μg
cholecalciferol·kg–1. Plasma concentrations of 1,25-(OH)2D3 were greatly decreased
in dogs receving 1,350 μg cholecalciferol·kg–1 diet due to increased activity of renal


===== PDF PAGE 437 =====
436
and small intestinal 24-hydroxylase, and enhanced clearance of 1,25-(OH)2D3. The
ability to upregulate the activity of 24-hydroxylase appears to be critical in large-
breed dogs to ameliorate the effects of high, but sublethal intakes of vitamin D. The
plasma concentration of 25-OHD3 appears to be a less reliable index of vitamin D
intake at moderate concentrations than in cats (Morris et al., 1999).
In studies with growing Great Dane puppies (Tryfonidou, 2002), the diet
containing 1350 μg cholecalciferol·kg–1 promoted similar growth rates as the control
diet containing 11 μg of cholecalciferol·kg–1, but produced irregular growth plates
and severely disturbed endochondrial ossification. Puppies given the diet containing
100 μg cholecalciferol·kg–1 (about 25 μg per 1,000 kcal), also had similar growth
rates as control dogs, but had lowered bone turnover and impaired endochondrial
ossification on histological examination of the growth plates.
In most species, cholecalciferol is 10 to 20 times more toxic than is ergocalciferol
at comparable doses (NRC, 1987), and the same could be expected in dogs. The
recommendations of the NRC (1987) of a SUL for long-term (>60 days) feeding for
most species was 4 to 10 times the requirement, which is equivalent to 11 to 27.5 μg
cholecalciferol per 1,000 kcal. The upper range of 27.5 μg cholecalciferol per 1,000
kcal is greater than the concentration shown by Tryfonidou (2000) to be associated
with lowered bone turn-over and impaired endochondrial ossification. It is suggested
that a dietary concentration of cholecalciferol should not exceed 20 μg per 1,000 kcal
for growing dogs. In the absence of long-term studies on dogs at maintenance and
pregnant and lactating dogs it is suggested that these upper dietary concentrations be
also applied to these dogs. These values are consistent with the general
recommendation of the NRC (1987) that mammals not be exposed to diets containing
more than 55 μg cholecalciferol·kg–1 for periods longer than 60 days. If a
metabolizable energy (ME) value of 4,000 kcal·kg–1 is assumed for these diets, this
would be equivalent to 14 μg cholecalciferol per 1,000 kcal.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Gershoff et al. (1957) reported that severe rickets occurred in kittens given vitamin
D-deficient diets containing either 1 percent calcium and 1 percent phosphorus or 2
percent calcium and 0.5 percent phosphorus. Weight gain was less with the latter diet,
but rickets were less severe. These authors reported that alkaline phosphatase
concentration in plasma increased in the third month, and peaked in the fifth to
seventh months, and decreased through the 21st month. Serum calcium and inorganic
phosphorus concentrations decreased markedly during the severe phase of rickets in
kittens given the 1 percent calcium and 1 percent phosphorus diet.


===== PDF PAGE 438 =====
437
Morris (1999) found that the time taken for clinical signs of vitamin D deficiency
to appear in kittens given a purified vitamin D-free diet (0.8 percent calcium and 0.6
percent phosphorus) depended on the kittens’ initial stores of vitamin D. Kittens from
queens receiving a diet containing a high level of vitamin D (400 μg
cholecalciferol·kg–1) during pregnancy and lactation were able to complete their
growth phase without clinical signs of vitamin D deficiency, whereas those from
queens receiving a lower intake of cholecalciferol (about 25 μg·kg–1 diet) had clinical
signs of vitamin D deficiency in periods as short as 6 weeks. Similarly when kittens
were given a vitamin D-free purified diet containing 14 g calcium·kg–1, clinical signs
of deficiency were either delayed or not expressed. Presumably this is due to non-
vitamin D-mediated calcium absorption (Lee et al., 1991).
Morris et al. (1994) and Morris (1999) reported that the initial clinical signs of
vitamin D deficiency in kittens were a reluctance to move, followed by a progressive
posterior paralysis that was initially apparent as a short-stilted gait and progressed to a
broad-based gait with marked ataxia and eventual quadriparesis in severely affected
cases. About one-third of kittens exhibited enlargement of the metatarsal joints. There
was a lack of grooming and eventual reduction in food intake and body weight.
Cranial reflexes and positional reflexes were not affected except for depressed
conscious proprioception in severely affected cats. In advanced cases of vitamin D
deficiency, kittens developed hypocalcemia, often associated with fasciculations of
major muscle groups, and had grossly elevated plasma concentrations of intact
parathyroid hormone and creatine phosphokinase activity. Cats with posterior
paralysis had a reduction in the subarachnoid space of the C2 to C5 vertebrae
associated with Wallerian degeneration of axons in the ventral, dorsal, and
dorsolateral columns of the spinal cord. These changes were consistent with
compression degeneration of neurons resulting from disproportional growth of the
spinal cord in relation to the rate of resorption of bone from the foramina of the
cervical vertebrae.
Histology of the epiphyses of the femur and humerus showed two types of
changes: classical rickets with enlarged growth plates and osteomalacia and fibrous
osteodystrophy, or no enlargement of the growth plate but generalized osteopenia.
Requirements
Gershoff et al. (1957) reported that twice weekly oral supplementation with 6.25
μg of cholecalciferol per kitten would prevent the development of rickets in growing
kittens given a semipurified diet from 3-6 months of age to 21 months of age. The
remission of clinical signs in cats given a vitamin D-deficient diet that survived
longer than 12 months suggested that older cats have a lower requirement.
Morris et al. (1999) gave six groups each of seven kittens purified diets containing
either 0.0, 3.125, 6.25, 12.5, 18.75, or 25.0 μg cholecalciferol·kg–1 diet. (The queens
of the kittens had been given a low-vitamin D diet during pregnancy and lactation to


===== PDF PAGE 439 =====
438
reduce the body reserves of vitamin D in the kittens.) All kittens received the diets
from 9 to 21 weeks of age, and two groups (0.0 and 3.125 μg) continued to receive
the diets until 34 weeks of age. Plasma concentration of 25-OHD in the kittens was
linearly related to the dietary concentration of cholecalciferol. The concentration of
25-OHD in kittens given the 0.0 diet declined significantly from the 9-week values,
whereas those of kittens receiving the 3.125-μg diet were significantly greater at 22
and 34 weeks than at 9 weeks of age. Although 3.125 μg of cholecalciferol appeared
adequate, the authors suggested a dietary concentration of 6.25 μg·kg–1 to provide a
margin of safety. In another experiment, Morris and Earle (1999) gave growing
kittens a purified diet containing 3.125 μg cholecaliferol·kg–1, and calcium
concentrations that varied from 3.8 to 8.1g·kg–1 diet with a constant Ca:P ratio.
Kittens maintained similar, adequate concentrations of 25-OHD in plasma as in the
previous experiment.
Morris (2002b) compared the ability of cholecalciferol and ergocalciferol to
elevate 25-OHD concentrations in the plasma of cats when given in the diet or by
intravenous injection as an oil emulsion. Independent of the route of administration,
the same quantity of cholecalciferol maintained higher concentrations of 25-OHD in
plasma than ergocalciferol.
A minimal concentration of 3.125 μg of cholecalciferol·kg–1 diet (~4.5 kcal·g–1),
or 0.7 μg per 1,000 kcal, appears adequate for growing kittens. However, a
concentration of 6.25 μg cholecalciferol·kg–1 diet (1.4 μg cholecalciferol per 1,000
kcal) is recommended to provide a margin of safety and is suggested as the
recommended allowance. This dietary concentration also appears adequate to support
pregnancy and lactation. As the requirements for adult cats at maintenance have not
been studied, it is suggested that the same dietary concentration of cholecalciferol
(1.4 μg cholecalciferol per 1,000 kcal) be applied for maintenance.
Hypervitaminosis
Reports of hypervitaminosis D in cats have resulted from either accidental
ingestion of rodenticides containing cholecalciferol as the active ingredient,
consumption of diets based on fish (particularly fish viscera), or errors in diet
formulation. These excesses have been associated with cholecalciferol, rather than
ergocalciferol, which at least in some species results in lower toxicity at comparable
doses than cholecalciferol (Harrington and Page, 1983).
Moore et al. (1988) reported hypercalcemia in three cats that had eaten a
rodenticide containing cholecaliferol. Clinical signs included lethargy, anorexia,
vomiting, and polydipsia. Similar findings were reported on a single cat by Peterson
et al. (1991).
An outbreak of vitamin D toxicosis in cats following consumption of a
commercial dry cat food that contained tuna viscera and experimentally induced
toxicity were reported by Haruna et al. (1992), Sato et al. (1993), and Morita et al.


===== PDF PAGE 440 =====
439
(1995). Tuna livers have extremely high concentrations of cholecalciferol, and the cat
food was reported to contain 1,300 to 1,600 μg vitamin D·kg–1 dry matter (DM).
Haruna et al. (1992) reported that mainly young cats were affected and exhibited
dyspnea, anorexia, vomiting, depression, and renal failure. Unusual calcification was
found in the blood vessels, lungs, trachea, digestive tract, kidneys, and osseous tissue.
Similar calcification was reported in four affected cats by Sato et al. (1993) who also
reported hypercalcemia, and elevated plasma concentrations of 25-OHD, blood urea,
and creatinine. Morita et al. (1995), in addition to the above pathology, reported
oxalate crystals in the kidneys.
The possible role of high intakes of vitamin D in the production of oxalate
urolithiasis in cats was investigated by Sih et al. (2001). These investigators gave 4-
month-old kittens and queens purified diets containing either 118 or 846 μg
cholecalciferol·kg–1 for 18 months. There were no apparent adverse effects of the
high-vitamin D3 diet and no cases of renal pathology were found in biopsy samples.
Plasma concentrations of cholecalciferol and 25-OHD3 were markedly elevated in the
queens (424 and 588 nmol·L–1, respectively). The authors concluded that cats are
more resistant than other species to cholecalciferol toxicosis when the diet is
otherwise complete and balanced.
Price et al. (2001a,b) reported that treatment of rats with biphosphonate following
ingestion of toxic amounts of cholecalciferol prevented clinical and pathological signs
of toxicity. Although this treatment has not been used with cats or dogs, it would
appear to offer a better prognosis than furosemide-corticosterone therapy.
The only study allowing an estimate of the presumed safe maximal dietary
concentration of vitamin D for cats is the study of Sih et al. (2001). These authors
reported that kittens and adult cats did not exhibit any adverse clinical signs when
given a diet containing 846 μg cholecalciferol·kg–1 for 18 months. If an ME value of
4,500 kcal·kg–1 is assumed for this diet, it is equivalent to a concentration of 188 μg
per 1,000 kcal. This concentration is about nine times the SUL suggested for growing
dogs.
VITAMIN E
Vitamin E is a generic descriptor for tocol and tocotrienol derivatives exhibiting
the biological activity of α-tocopherol. The term “tocopherols” is used to describe all
mono-, di-, and trimethyltocols and tocotrienols but is not synonymous with the term
“vitamin E” (Chow, 2001). All eight naturally occurring tocopherol compounds
isolated from plants have a 6-chromanol ring, with an isoprenoid (phytyl) side chain
at carbon 2. Tocopherols have a saturated phytyl side chain, whereas tocotrienols have
an unsaturated isoprenoid side chain. There are four naturally occurring tocopherols
designated as α, β, γ, and δ according to the number of methyl groups on carbons 5, 7,
and 8 of the phenolic ring of the 6-chromanol. α-Tocopherol has methyl groups at
carbons 5, 7, and 8; β-tocopherol, at carbons 5 and 8, γ-tocopherol at carbons 7 and 8;


===== PDF PAGE 441 =====
440
and δ-tocopherol has only one methyl group at carbon 8. In addition, there are four
chiral centers from the phytyl chain (at positions 2, 4′, and 8′), making a total of 8
stereoisomers. Modern terminology for the tocopherols uses the RS system of
nomenclature of chiral centers instead of the older DL terminology. Naturally
occurring α-tocopherol (formerly known as D-α-tocopherol) is now designated as
RRR-α-tocopherol. This stereoisomer of α-tocopherol is 2D, 4′D, 8′D. Synthetic α-
tocopherol (previously known as DL-α-tocopherol) is a mixture of eight
stereoisomers and has been designated as all-rac α-tocopherol (rac = racemic). These
eight stereoisomers are 2D, 4′D, 8′D (RRR); 2L, 4′D, 8′D (SRR); 2L, 4′L, 8′D (SSR);
2D, 4′D, 8′L (RRS); 2L, 4′D, 8′L (SRS); 2D, 4′L, 8′D (RSR); 2D, 4′L, 8′L (RSS), and
2L, 4′L, 8′L (SSS).
The biologically active site on the tocopherol molecule is the 6-hydroxyl group on
the phenolic ring, which is capable of donating a hydrogen in reactions with free
radicals. In normal metabolism, α-tocopherol is reversibly oxidized to the α-
tocopheryl chromanoxy radical and reduced by agents such as glutathione and
ascorbate. The α-tocopheryl chromanoxy radical may also form a dimer or trimer or
be further oxidized to the α-tocopheryl quinone in the liver. Subsequent reduction of
the quinone to a hydroquinone and coupling with glucuronate occurs before excretion
in the bile. Alternatively, the hydroquinone can be oxidized to α-tocopheronic acid
and, after coupling with glucuronate, excreted in urine or the phytyl side chain may
undergo oxidation.
In common with other fat-soluble vitamins, the major route of elimination of
tocopherols from the body is via bile and excretion in the feces. In some species, there
is significant urinary excretion of α-tocopheronic acid, which is assumed to be
produced in the liver.
Absorption
In humans, the majority of α-tocopherol is absorbed via the lymphatics and a small
portion is absorbed by the portal system. Absorption occurs primarily in the upper
and middle third of the small intestine along with the lipid components of the diet.
Absorption is non-carrier mediated and nonsaturable. Factors affecting fat
emulsification, such as pancreatic lipase and bile secretion also affect the efficiency of
vitamin E uptake from the intestine. Absorption occurs as micelles, and tocopheryl
esters (e.g., tocopheryl acetate) are hydrolyzed to free tocopherol during the
absorptive process. After the micelle crosses the brush border into the enterocyte, it is
incorporated into chylomicrons and secreted into the intracellular space and into the
lymphatics. There appears to be no discrimination between the various tocopherols up
to chylomicron formation. After the chylomicrons are taken up by the liver, the
tocopherols are repackaged into very low density lipoproteins (VLDLs) before
secretion into the plasma. At this stage, RRR-α-tocopherol is preferentially secreted
with the VLDLs to SRRα-tocopherol and RRR-γ-tocopherol (Chow, 2001). Secretion
of various forms of vitamin E into these lipoproteins and subsequent delivery of the


===== PDF PAGE 442 =====
441
vitamin E to the tissues by these lipoproteins depends on the transfer of vitamin E
across membranes. Within cells, a cytosolic protein (α-tocopherol-binding protein)
selectively facilitates the incorporation of RRR-α-tocopherol into nascent VLDLs,
which results in discrimination between the various tocopherol analogues. The
relative binding of β-, γ-, and δ-tocopherols to the α-tocopherol binding protein,
compared to RRRα-tocopherol as 1.0, is 0.38, 0.09, and 0.02, respectively (Hosomi et
al., 1997).
During the conversion of VLDLs to low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), there is a
transfer of tocopherols, and similar exchange occurs with the high-density lipoprotein
(HDL) fraction. Exchange also takes place between lipoproteins, liposomes, and
erythrocytes. Parenchymal cells that have a large storage capacity primarily take up
tocopherols, but the mechanism of uptake by these cells has not been elucidated.
While plasma concentrations of α-tocopherol decrease when animals and humans are
given low-tocopherol diets, in humans the concentration can be raised only about
two- to threefold, regardless of the duration and amount of supplementation. The lack
of response does not appear to be a lower efficiency of absorption of large doses, but
newly absorbed vitamin E in part replaces the α-tocopherol in circulating lysosomes
and there is an increased rate of plasma disappearance with increasing dose (Traber et
al., 1998).
Biological Function
Vitamin E is the major lipid-soluble antioxidant present in plasma, erythrocytes,
and tissues where it functions as a scavenger of free radicals and thus prevents free-
radical or oxidative damage to polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) in thiol-rich
proteins of membranes and nucleic acids. Tocopherols act as donors of hydrogen from
the 6-OH group for the reduction of free radicals. Free-radical reactions are
ubiquitous in biological systems and are associated with energy metabolism,
biosynthetic reactions, natural defense mechanisms, detoxification, and intra- and
intercellular signaling pathways. Support for the antioxidant role of vitamin E in vivo
also comes from observations that synthetic antioxidants can either prevent or
alleviate certain clinical signs of vitamin E deficiency diseases.
There are many potential adverse effects of oxygen and its reactive products, and
cells have developed a number of defensive enzymatic and nonenzymatic systems.
These systems include (1) direct interaction of ascorbic acid, glutathione, and other
reducing agents with oxidants; (2) scavenging of free radicals and singlet oxygen by
vitamin E, ascorbic acid, carotenoids, superoxide dismutase, and other systems; (3)
reduction of hydroperoxides by glutathione peroxidase and catalase; (4) binding or
removal of transition metals by proteins such as ferritin, transferrin, ceruloplasmin,
albumin, and other chelators; (5) separation or prevention of reactive oxygen species
from reaching specific sites; and (6) repair of oxidative damage by dietary nutrients
and metabolic activities (Chow, 2001).


===== PDF PAGE 443 =====
442
In cells, α-tocopherol with its high lipid solubility preferentially partitions into the
membrane bilayer where there is the highest concentration of PUFAs. Because of the
high biological activity of tocopherols as antioxidants, they are uniquely successful in
the protection of PUFAs in cell membranes. First, α-tocopherol reacts with the most
prevalent free radical in membranes, the peroxy radical; second, it reacts rapidly and
hence competitively. Free radicals in the cytosol are quenched by compounds soluble
in this aqueous medium such as glutathione peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, and
ascorbate. Some of these compounds also play an important role in regeneration of
the tocopherol molecule after oxidation. Tocopherol, on reacting with a free radical, is
converted to the tocopherol radical and is regenerated by ascorbate, glutathione, and
possibly ubiquinone by reduction of the α-tocopheryl chromanoxy radical to
tocopherol. The quantity of vitamin E required in the diet depends on the rate of
production of free radicals, the PUFA composition of membranes (a function of diet),
and other dietary compounds such as selenium (for synthesis of glutathione
peroxidase) that are involved in protection from free-radical damage. Many of the
PUFAs in the diet such as those from fish undergo peroxidation during processing and
storage before ingestion. Therefore, it is not only the amount of PUFAs in the diet but
also the degree of peroxidation that determines the vitamin E requirement.
Nonoxidant roles have also been proposed for vitamin E. These include
modulation of prostaglandin synthesis, down-regulation of protein kinase activity, and
synthesis of xanthine oxidase. However, the prevention of free-radical damage and
lipid peroxidation appears to be its major role.
Tocopherols occur mainly as free alcohols in plants, but many tocopherol-rich
plant oils such as soybean oil have about half of the tocopherols as γ-tocopherol,
which has a biological activity only 0.1 that of α−tocopherol. Since the majority of
tocopherols in plants are not α-tocopherol, tocopherol mixtures isolated from plants
are often methylated and referred to as “natural” α-tocopherol.
RRR-α-Tocopherol has the greatest biological activity of all the tocopherols, which
suggests that the most favorable configuration of the phytyl side chain is RRR.
Because nonα-tocopherol compounds have vitamin E activity, it is necessary to be
able to express the total tocopherol activity of a mixture of tocopherols and
tocotrienols. One tocopherol equivalent (TE) is equal to 1 mg of RRR-α-tocopherol.
The other isomers are converted to TE by multiplying each milligram of isomer by
the following relative activity factors: β-tocopherol, 0.5; γ-tocopherol, 0.1; α-
tocotrienol, 0.3.
The relative values of various forms of tocopherol when expressed in IUs per mg
relative to all-rac-α-tocopheryl acetate = 1 are all-rac-α-tocopherol = 1.10, RRR-α-
tocopheryl acetate = 1.36; RRR-α-tocopherol = 1.49; all-rac-αtocopheryl succinate =
0.89; and RRR-α-tocopheryl succinate = 1.21 (United States Pharmacopeia, 1985).
These values were largely based on the prevention of fetal resorption by rats during
gestation (Scott, 1978). Recent studies with humans, pigs, and guinea pigs in which
the elevation of plasma concentrations was measured indicated that the biopotency of
RRR-α-tocopherol compared to all-rac-α-tocopherol was closer to 2:1 than 1.36:1


===== PDF PAGE 444 =====
443
(Acuff et al., 1994; Lauridsen et al., 2002; Hidiroglow et al., 2003). Use of this index
of bioavailability has been challenged by Hoppe and Kennrich (2000) on the basis
that it does not indicate a biological function. These authors suggest that rat bioassay
values should be maintained. Table 8-1 lists vitamin E activities for various
tocopherols in the prevention of fetal resorption and hemolysis in rats.
Biopotencies of the tocopherols have not been measured in dogs or cats. Traber et
al. (1993) reported that vitamin E-replete and vitamin E-deficient dogs both
preferentially increase the concentration of RRR-α-tocopherol over all racα-
tocopherol in plasma when given both forms of the vitamin. Vitamin E deficiency
apparently did not increase the apparent function of the hepatic tocopherol-binding
protein, which is hypothesized to preferentially incorporate RRR-α-tocopherol into
plasma.
The concentration of vitamin E in the diet necessary to protect against
peroxidative deterioration of polyunsaturated phospholipids in cell membranes
depends on the concentration of fat in the diet, the proportion of polyunsaturated fatty
acids (Table 8-2), the degree of peroxidation of these fatty acids, the presence of other
antioxidants, and the concentration of selenium. In many species, the requirement for
vitamin E is inversely dependent on the selenium concentration and resulting activity
of glutathione peroxidase. Although this interaction has not been demonstrated in
dogs and cats, there is no reason to doubt its presence.
TABLE 8-1 Relative Vitamin E Activity of Various Tocopherols in Preventing Fetal
Resorption and Hemolysis
Structure Fetal Resorption Hemolysis
RRR-α-Tocopherol 100 100
RRR-β-Tocopherol 25-50 15-27
RRR-γ Tocopherol 8-19 3-20
RRR-δ-Tocopherol 0.1-3 0.3-2
RRR-α-Tocotrienol 21-50 17-25
RRR-β- Tocotrienol 4-5 1-5
RRR-γ-Tocotrienol — —
RR-δ-Tocotrienol — —
RRR-α-Tocopheryl acetate 91 —
all-rac-α-Tocopherola 74 —
all-rac-α-Tocopheryl acetatea 67 —
aMixture of eight stereoisomers.
SOURCE: Chow, 2001.


===== PDF PAGE 445 =====
444
TABLE 8-2 Estimated Minimal Requirement of Vitamin E Needed to Compensate for
the Elevated Vitamin Demand Caused by Some Common Unsaturated Fatty Acids
SOURCE: Muggli, 1994.
Witting and Horwitt (1964) measured the time for onset of creatinuria in
tocopherol-deficient rats given specially prepared fats of constant total unsaturation,
but differing in composition with respect to PUFAs. They found that the relative
quantities of tocopherol needed to protect 1 mol of mono-, di-, tri-, tetra, penta-, and
hexaenoic acids were in the ratio of 0.3:2:3:4:5:6. These ratios are consistent with the
observed rate of autooxidation of PUFAs in vitro, which increases according to the
number of double bonds present (Cosgrove et al., 1987). Harris and Embree (1963)
proposed a ratio between tocopherol in the diet (milligrams) and the PUFAs (grams)
and suggested that this should be 0.6. For mixtures of PUFAs in the diet, Muggli
(1994) proposed the formula:
Mvit E = 0.2 × 10–3 (0.3m1 + 2m2 + 3m3 + 4m4 + 5m5 + 6m6),
where Mvit E = moles of RRR-α-tocopherol and mn = moles of unsaturated fatty acids
with n double bonds.
When vitamin E is added to dog and cat foods as tocopherol (alcohol), recoveries
following extrusion and drying are low and rate of loss on subsequent storage is high.
With esters such as tocopheryl acetate, higher recoveries are obtained on extrusion
and drying and storage losses are reduced. Many factors beside the form of the
vitamin interact in determining its retention in petfoods. Among these are free-radical
production, efficiency of the antioxidant system used, stability of the fat, and presence
of free metal catalysts. These are discussed further at the end of this chapter.
Dogs


===== PDF PAGE 446 =====
445
Signs of Deficiency
A wide range of clinical signs of vitamin E deficiency in dogs has been reported.
These include degeneration of skeletal muscles associated with muscle weakness and
reproductive failure in both males (degenerative changes of the testicular germinal
epithelium leading to aspermia) and females (birth of weak and dead puppies).
Retinal degeneration has been described in dogs given vitamin E-deficient diets
(Hayes et al., 1970; Riis et al., 1981; Davidson et al., 1998). In addition to muscular
weakness, Van Vleet (1975) reported subcutaneous edema, anorexia, depression,
dyspnea, and eventual coma in vitamin E-deficient dogs. Microscopically these dogs
exhibited extensive skeletal muscle degeneration and regeneration, focal endocardial
necrosis in the ventricular myocardium, intestinal lipofuscinosis, and renal
mineralization. No changes in nerve conduction velocities or histology were found in
vitamin E-depleted dogs (Pillai et al., 1993). Pillai et al. (1992) compared four
erythrocyte fragility tests as indicators of vitamin E deficiency in dogs. The dialuric
acid hemolysis test was the most sensitive in vitro assay, and the osmotic fragility and
detergent sensitivity tests did not change in response to vitamin E deficiency. In the
dialuric acid hemolysis assay, 50 percent hemolysis occurred when plasma α-
tocopherol concentration declined to 1.7 mg·L–1. Plasma concentrations of α-
tocopherol in dogs given a vitamin E-deficient diet follow a linear decline when
expressed on a log concentration-time basis (Pillai et al., 1993).
Requirements
Many of the earlier studies of the vitamin E requirement of dogs preceded
recognition of its interrelation with other antioxidant systems and the effect of the
levels of PUFAs in the diet. A requirement for vitamin E in dogs was demonstrated by
Anderson et al. (1939) who showed that muscular dystrophy in fox terrier puppies
given a diet based on evaporated milk could be reversed by supplementation with dlα-
tocopherol. Using a similar basal diet, Elvehjem et al. (1944) demonstrated that 25
mg α-tocopherol per week (about 0.6 mg α-tocopherol·kg BW–1·d–1 ) did not support
normal reproduction; 1 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 supported reproduction, but one pup out of
four from a bitch receiving this level developed mild muscular dystrophy.
Hayes et al. (1969) demonstrated that in the presence of large amounts of PUFAs
in the diet, 100 mg α− tocopherol·kg–1 diet may be inadequate to prevent lipofuscin
formation in dogs. Van Vleet (1975) gave four groups of beagle dogs a basal selenium
and vitamin E-deficient diet (0.01 mg selenium and 1 mg α−tocopherol·kg–1 diet)
based on dried Torula yeast and tocopherol-stripped lard. To the basal diet, either 30
mg α−tocopherol, 0.5 mg selenium, or 1 mg selenium was added per kilogram.
Puppies given the basal diet alone developed progressive clinical signs of muscular
weakness, anorexia, and elevated creatine phosphokinase and aspartate
aminotransferase activities. No gross clinical signs occurred in supplemented dogs,


===== PDF PAGE 447 =====
446
but on necropsy the 0.5 mg selenium-supplemented dogs had mild skeletal myopathy.
These observations with dogs are consistent with those in other species showing that
in vitamin E-selenium responsive diseases, supplementation of the diet with either
selenium or vitamin E can ameliorate the clinical signs. Therefore, the requirement of
vitamin E is conditional based on the selenium content of the diet.
Although no dietary requirement for ascorbic acid has been demonstrated in dogs,
ascorbate is sometimes given to dogs under clinical conditions. High intakes of
ascorbate have been shown to increase the vitamin E requirements of rats (Chen,
1981), indicating that caution should be exercised in the amount of ascorbate given to
dogs.
The NRC (1985) suggested an allowance for growing puppies of 22 IUs of
vitamin E·kg–1 diet supplying 3.67 kcal·g–1 (24 IUs per 4,000 kcal) and containing
not more than 1 percent linoleic acid and at least 0.2 ppm of selenium. In the absence
of data to the contrary, it is suggested that this value be maintained as an AI for
growing puppies, adult dogs at maintenance, and pregnant and lactating bitches. To
allow for the use of higher levels of PUFAs in the diet, it is suggested that a ratio of
α−tocopherol (milligrams) to PUFAs (grams) of at least 0.6 be maintained.
Hypervitaminosis
High doses of vitamin E given to several species of animals have been shown to
be relatively nontoxic. However, there are reports of extreme intakes interfering with
the absorption or metabolism of vitamins D and K. There is no information on
vitamin E toxicity in dogs. Hall et al. (2003) gave dogs 447 mg all-rac-tocopheryl
acetate for 17 weeks and reported no adverse effects. The NRC (1987) suggested a
maximum tolerable level in the range of 1,000 to 2,000 IU·kg–1 diet and a tentative
use level of 75 IU·kg BW–1·d–1.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Vitamin E deficiency in cats has been associated with depression and anorexia,
hyperesthesia on palpation of the ventral abdomen, and nodular adipose tissue. On
gross pathology, enlargement of the spleen and orange or orange-tan colored adipose
tissue (Cordy, 1954; Coffin and Holzworth, 1954) were the most significant findings.
Microscopic examination of the adipose tissue revealed foci of steatitis, neutrophilic
infiltration, and accumulation of ceroid pigment as globules and as peripheral rings in
the adipocytes. The ceroid pigment is acid-fast and insoluble in fat. Interstitial
myocarditis, focal myositis of skeletal muscles, periportal mononuclear infiltration of
the liver, and steatitis were also reported (Gershoff and Norkin, 1962).


===== PDF PAGE 448 =====
447
Requirements
Because of the nature of the diets consumed by cats, they are more susceptible
than dogs to vitamin E deficiency. Cat diets, especially canned, are typically higher in
fat than dog diets and are frequently based on fish products, especially tuna,
containing long-chain PUFAs that are prone to lipid peroxidation. Cordy (1954)
reported that 20 or 40 mg of allrac-α-tocopherol per day protected kittens given a
commercial cat food composed mainly of fish from the development of steatitis,
whereas 10 mg of all-rac-α−tocopherol was inadequate. Gershoff and Norkin (1962)
gave kittens a basal purified diet containing 200 g·kg–1 of vitamin E-free lard without
vitamin E supplementation. Steatitis was not observed in any of the kittens receiving
this basal diet, even in the absence of vitamin E. However, on histological
examination, four of the six kittens were found to have focal myositis of the skeletal
muscles and myocarditis. Supplementation of the basal diet with 17 IUs of d-α-
tocopherol·kg–1 decreased the incidence of myositis to one cat in four, whereas
addition of 34 or 68 IUs of vitamin E·kg–1 prevented lesions in all cats. When 50 g of
tuna oil was substituted for lard in the diet, cats without vitamin E supplementation
developed severe steatitis. When 34 IUs of vitamin E·kg–1 were added to the tuna oil-
supplemented diet, the severity of steatitis was diminished and it was totally absent
when 136 IUs of vitamin E were added to the tuna oil diet.
Because of the demonstrated relationship between vitamin E requirement and
quantity of PUFAs in the diet, it is infeasible to give a single minimal value that will
be adequate for all diets. The NRC (1986) suggested 30 mg of α− tocopherol·kg–1 for
a diet relatively low in fat (<10 percent of the dry weight) containing antioxidants and
an adequate level of selenium (0.12 mg selenium·kg–1 diet). This concentration
represents 6 mg per 1,000 kcal and is proposed as an adequate intake. High-PUFA
diets, especially those containing fish oils subject to peroxidation, may require four or
more times this level for the prevention of steatitis. In the absence of definitive
information, an allowance of 24 mg α-tocopherol·kg–1 diet is recommended for low-
fat (<10 percent) diets and 120 mg·kg–1 for diets with a high concentration of
PUFAS. A ratio of at least 0.6 mg of tocopherol per gram of PUFA in the diet should
be maintained.
Hypervitaminosis
While vitamin E is generally regarded as one of the least toxic fat-soluble
vitamins, excessive intake in chickens and rats has produced effects that appear
antagonistic to the functions of vitamins D and K. Intakes of 2,200 IU of all-rac-α-
tocopheryl acetate·kg–1 diet have been associated with growth depression, increased
prothrombin time, and depressed bone calcification when chickens were given
calcium- or vitamin D-deficient diets (March et al., 1973). Phelps (1981) gave kittens
from birth to 3 weeks of age intramuscular or subcutaneous injections of dl-α-


===== PDF PAGE 449 =====
448
tocopherol (E-alcohol) or dl-α-tocopheryl acetate (E-acetate) equivalent to about 50 to
1,000 mg·kg BW–1·d–1. Toxicity was dose related, no mortality occurred at 5 mg of
vitamin E-alcohol per day (approximate 20 mg·kg–1·d–1), but significant mortality
occurred at doses equivalent to 100 to 200 mg· kg–1· d–1. A dose of 1,000 mg of
vitamin E-alcohol·kg–1·d–1 caused death in all kittens.
Cats given salmon- and tuna-based diets fortified with vitamin E exhibited
prolonged clotting time, which was restored by vitamin K therapy (Strieker et al.,
1996). The data do not allow for a safe upper limit of vitamin E to be defined.
VITAMIN K
The term vitamin K is a generic descriptor of 2-methyl-1,4-napthoquinone and all
derivatives of this compound that exhibit antihemorrhagic activity in animals fed a
vitamin K-deficient diet (Suttie, 2001). The naturally occurring compound 2-methyl-
3-phytyl-1,4-napthoquinone, which is widely distributed in plants (especially leaves)
and frequently designated vitamin K1, is preferentially called phylloquinone. The
compound originally isolated from putrefied fish meal and called vitamin K2, which
is one of a series of vitamin K compounds with unsaturated side chains, called
multiprenyl menaquinones, is found in animal tissue and bacteria. Vitamin K2 is the
term used to encompass a series of menaquinones having between 4 and 13 prenyl
groups.
The parent compound of the vitamin K series is 2-methyl-1,4-napthoquinone,
known as menadione. This compound was previously known as vitamin K3, but it
does not have biological activity until a side chain is added either by microorganisms
in the gut or by tissue alkylating enzymes. Plants and bacteria synthesize the
napthoquinone ring structure from shikimic acid, but animals cannot; so, this portion
of the vitamin has to be provided in the diet or be synthesized by intestinal microbes.
For many species, intestinal synthesis meets the total requirement.
Absorption, Metabolism, and Excretion
Absorption of phylloquinones from the gut requires incorporation into micelles
whose formation is facilitated by the presence of bile salts and pancreatic secretions.
The efficiency of absorption of vitamin K from foods has not been studied in either
dogs or cats but has been shown in other species to be variable and to depend on the
food source. Defective fat absorption reduces the uptake of vitamin K from the gut,
and animals with steatorrhea and persistent diarrhea are likely to have poor
absorption. Once the micelle is taken up by the enterocyte, it passes into the
lymphatic system and is transported by chylomicrons and other LDLs in the plasma.
In rats, the liver is the main site of storage of phylloquinones; about half of a 10-µg
dose was found in the liver after 3 hours. However, the half-life of phylloquinone in


===== PDF PAGE 450 =====
449
rat liver is only 10-15 hours; so, liver concentration is highly dependent on recent
absorption.
Synthetic menadione may be absorbed from both the small intestine and the colon
by a passive process. Absorption of menadione in chicks is dependent on the presence
of lipid in the diet. The water-soluble form, menadione sodium bisulfite, which is
more stable than menadione, is used commercially in some dog and cat foods. While
menadione is not biologically active, it is alkylated to biologically active
menaquinones either by microorganisms in the gut or by the tissues of the animals.
Studies with 2-methyl-1, 4-naphthoquinone substituted at the 3-position have shown
that polyisoprenoid side chain substitutes are the most effective.
The metabolism of phylloquinones has not been studied in either dogs or cats, but,
in humans, 40 to 50 percent of the radioactivity from a dose of phylloquinone
appeared in feces and 20 percent in urine (Shearer et al., 1974). Menadione is
metabolized and excreted rapidly, and only a minor portion of this synthetic form of
the vitamin is converted to biologically active menaquinone-4 (MK-4). When
anticoagulant therapy is given, the disappearance of radiolabeled vitamin K from
plasma is not markedly altered, but there is greatly increased urinary excretion and
decreased fecal excretion of the radiolabeled vitamin K.
Biological Function
The unique function of vitamin K is to facilitate carboxylation of the glutamic acid
residues of proteins that require this for activation. These proteins form three groups:
vitamin K-dependent clotting factors, vitamin K-dependent skeletal proteins, and
other vitamin K-dependent proteins. The vitamin K-dependent step in prothrombin
synthesis results in the uptake and fixation of CO2 in γ-carboxyglutamic acid residues
in the fragment 1 region of prothrombin. The reaction takes place on the luminal side
of the rough endoplasmic reticulum of the microsomal fraction of liver, which is rich
in carboxylases. Suttie (2001) proposed the following mechanism for the reaction.
Oxygen interacts with the reduced form of vitamin K, forming an oxygenated
intermediate, which is sufficiently basic to abstract the γ-hydrogen of the glutamyl
residue. The product of this reaction would be vitamin K epoxide and a glutamyl
carbanion. ATP is not required for this reaction, and the energy needed appears to
come from the oxidation of reduced vitamin K.
The second group of proteins that requires vitamin K for their function is
associated with bone, of which the first isolated was named bone Gla protein or
osteocalcin. This protein is synthesized in bone, and small amounts circulate in the
plasma. Higher levels occur in the plasma of children than adults, and the level in
plasma has been used as an indicator of bone formation. Osteocalcin from cats has
been sequenced (Shimomura et al., 1984), and an antibody to cat osteocalcin was
used by Morris and Earle (1999) to determine concentrations in the plasma of kittens.
Two similar proteins have been isolated from bone, matrix Gla protein and protein S.


===== PDF PAGE 451 =====
450
The third group of Gla-containing proteins comes from various tissues and has not
been extensively studied.
Anticoagulants of the 4-hydroxycoumarin class are effective antithrombotic drugs
and are also used as rodenticides. When warfarin is administered to animals, there is
an increase in the 2,3-epoxide of vitamin K, which was thought to inhibit normal
recycling of the vitamin. It is now thought that warfarin inhibits the recycling of
vitamin K to its enzymatically active form and therefore limits the action of the
carboxylases (Suttie, 2001).
Phylloquinones are not generally used to supplement petfoods because of their
cost. The stability of menadione from petfoods after extrusion, drying, and enrobing
is low; so, the following menadione derivatives (in order of increasing recovery) are
used: menadione sodium bisulfite, menadione sodium bisulfite complex, menadione
dimethylpyrimidinol bisulfite, and menadione nicotinamide bisulfite.
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
Naturally occurring vitamin K deficiency in the absence of anticoagulants has not
been reported in normal dogs. Deficiencies may occur secondary to chronic liver
disease and prolonged cholestasis and result in a prolongation of clotting times and
excessive bleeding. Accidental ingestion by dogs of rodenticides containing
analogues of dicumarol as anticoagulants has resulted in a decrease in prothrombin
times to 10 percent of normal (Clark and Halliwell, 1963).
Requirements
The dietary requirement for vitamin K depends on the extent of intestinal
synthesis, the efficiency of absorption, and the presence of antagonistic factors such
as dicumarols. Determination of a requirement is complicated by the insensitivity of
the prothrombin time assay. Anderson and Barnhart (1964) demonstrated the
metabolic need of dogs for vitamin K for prothrombin synthesis. By the use of
fluorescent antibodies, they showed that prothrombin was synthesized only in the
parenchymal cells of the liver. In normal dogs, there was a cyclic activity of these
cells, which is markedly asynchronous, and only 10 to 20 percent of the parenchymal
cells contain significant amounts of prothrombin. All parenchymal cells could be
synchronized to produce prothrombin by treatment with vitamin K1. In dogs rendered
prothrombin-deficient by treatment with dicumarol, synthesis of prothrombin could
be visualized in the parenchymal cells within 1 hour after administration of vitamin
K1, and by 4 hours at least 80 percent of the parenchymal cells were fluorescent. In
these dogs, prothrombin times also returned to control levels within 4-6 hours.


===== PDF PAGE 452 =====
451
Quick et al. (1962) induced vitamin K deficiency in puppies by
cholecystonephrostomy (diversion of the bile into the pelvis of the kidney) and
determined the intravenous vitamin K1 requirement to maintain normal prothrombin
time. For growing puppies, this varied between 5 and 15 μg·kg BW–1·d–1. In dogs
that had reached weight maintenance, the requirement was 2 to 5 μg·kg BW–1·d–1.
There are a number of reports of accidental ingestion by dogs of rodenticides
containing vitamin K antagonists. In a controlled study, Clark and Halliwell (1963)
administered 2.2 mg of warfarin (a synthetic analogue of dicumarol)·kg BW–1 to
adult dogs daily for 3 days, which reduced prothrombin times to 10 percent of
normal. Prothrombin times could be restored to 70 percent of normal within 4 hours
with an intravenous dose of 2.2 or 4.4 mg vitamin K1· kg BW–1, but doses had to be
repeated to maintain prothrombin levels. Lower doses gave a lower response in
prothrombin values, and intramuscular administration gave a more prolonged
response. Intravenous administration of menadione phosphate did not produce a
response and is unsuited for this route of administration because it results in
hemolysis. Bratt et al. (1965) reported suspected vitamin K deficiency in newborn
puppies, but they did not report any measurement of clotting times or factors nor did
they have any controls.
Many commercial dog foods do not contain supplemental vitamin K, and there is a
lack of reports of dogs fed these diets having prolonged clotting times. Whether there
is a need for supplemental vitamin K in the absence of compounds that interfere with
bacterial synthesis and absorption of the vitamin or vitamin K antagonists is not
known. However, as a precaution the NRC (1985) suggested that 22 μg menadione·kg
BW–1·d–1 be added to diets of adult dogs and 44 μg menadione·kg BW–1·d–1 to diets
of growing puppies. These would be more than supplied by a dietary concentration of
0.97 and 1.32 mg menadione·kg–1 (4 kcal·g–1) for growing puppies and adult dogs at
maintenance respectively. No recommendations were given for pregnant and lactating
bitches. For diets suspected of providing inadequate intestinal synthesis of vitamin K,
1.3 mg menadione·kg–1 (4 kcal·g–1) is suggested.
Hypervitaminosis
No studies of vitamin K excess have been made in dogs. The naturally occurring
phylloquinones have not been shown to be toxic to any species by any route of
administration. The toxic level of menadione in the diet is at least 1,000 times the
dietary requirement (NRC, 1987). Menadione should not be administered by the
parenteral route because it is toxic in doses from a few hundred milligrams per
kilogram of body weight to as low as 2 to 8 mg·kg BW–1 in horses (NRC, 1987).
Cats


===== PDF PAGE 453 =====
452
Signs of Deficiency
Prolonged clotting times have been recorded in cats that have accidentally
ingested dicumarol-based rodenticides. A number of clinical conditions such as
hepatic lipidosis, inflammatory bowel disease, cholangiohepatitis, and enteritis result
in malabsorption of lipids and induce a secondary deficiency of vitamin K. These
conditions are generally associated with an increase in proteins involved with vitamin
K absence (PIVKAs) and respond to vitamin K therapy (Edwards and Russell, 1987;
Center et al., 2000).
A congenital deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation factors has
been reported in the Devon Rex breed of cats (Maddison et al., 1990; Soute et al.,
1992; Littlewood et al., 1995). Soute et al. (1992) demonstrated that this coagulation
abnormality was accompanied by a defective γ-glutamyl carboxylase.
Cats, like other higher animals, have a metabolic requirement for vitamin K to
carboxylate glutamyl residues in specific proteins. Strieker et al. (1996) attempted to
produce vitamin K deficiency in kittens by giving purified diets with various
additions to simulate commercial diets based on fish that had resulted in prolonged
clotting times. The additions included antibiotics, salmon oil, high levels of herring
oil, high levels of α-tocopherol, and retinyl palmitate, but neither the purified diet
alone nor the diet with additional compounds increased clotting times. One of the
purified diets contained 4 μg of vitamin K1·kg–1.
Diminished factor VII activity has been reported in cats with liver disease
(Lisciandro et al., 1998). Center et al. (2000) found that 21 of 24 cats that had
abnormal PIVKA tests responded to parenteral vitamin K therapy. Of these 21 cats,
seven had hepatic lipidosis, four had severe inflammatory bowel disease, and five had
cholangiohepatitis.
Requirements
Many commercial cat foods do not contain supplemental vitamin K, relying on the
contribution of the dietary ingredients and intestinal synthesis. Since there have been
no reports of diets (except those containing significant amounts of fish) in which
vitamin K supplementation is indicated, it appears that supplementation is not
generally required. Strieker et al. (1996) reported clinical signs of vitamin K
deficiency in cats receiving two commercial canned diets high in salmon or tuna in
protocol tests. Several of the queens and kittens given these diets died of
hemorrhages, and the surviving cats had prolonged clotting times that responded to
vitamin K1. These fish diets contained 60 μg vitamin K·kg–1, which was insufficient
to provide the vitamin K need of cats under these conditions. The vitamin K
requirement of cats given diets that do not contain fish may be met by microbial
synthesis in the intestine. Cats given fish-based diets may require supplemental
vitamin K in addition to that provided by microbial synthesis in the gut. Diets


===== PDF PAGE 454 =====
453
containing a high proportion of fish should have menadione added. There is no
information available on the amount of vitamin K required in these diets. A dietary
allowance of 1.0 mg menadione·kg–1 (4 kcal·g–1) is suggested as an adequate intake.
Hypervitaminosis
Phylloquinone, the natural form of vitamin K has not shown toxic effects when
administered to animals by any route (NRC, 1987). The toxic level of menadione in
the diet is at least 1,000 times the dietary requirement of animals other than cats.
Menadione should not be given by the parenteral route because it causes hemolysis
and toxicity in low doses.
THIAMIN (VITAMIN B1)
Thiamin was the first of the water-soluble vitamins to be isolated and was given
the trivial name vitamin B1. Thiamin is not synthesized in the tissues of cats and dogs
but is synthesized de novo by some microorganisms and plants. Some microbes
synthesize thiamin only when the pyrimidine and thiazole moieties are present.
Although thiamin occurs widely in foods of both animal and plant origin, it is
abundant in only a few. Rich sources of thiamin are yeast, wheat germ, kidney, liver,
and legume seeds. In cereals, the concentration of thiamin is highest in the germinal
portion of the grain and lowest in the endosperm. Most of the thiamin in plants is
present in nonphosphorylated forms, whereas in animal tissue it is mostly (80-85
percent) present as thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP), with lesser amounts of the
monophosphate (TMP) and triphosphate (TTP) (Tanphaichitr, 2001).
Nonphosphorylated forms of thiamin in animal tissues are only 2 to 5 percent of total
thiamin.
Foods may contain compounds that have antithiamin properties (known as
thiaminases), which are heat labile. Thiaminases are present mainly in the viscera of
some freshwater fish and in a limited number of marine fish and certain bacteria.
Thiaminases of fish and some bacteria are classified as thiaminase I and catalyze a
nucleophilic displacement of the methylene group of the pyrimidine moiety of
thiamin. Carp and saltwater herring contain thiaminases, but perch, catfish, butterfish,
and spots apparently do not (Smith and Proutt, 1944). The other heat-labile
thiaminase (thiaminase II) is present in some bacteria and catalyzes the hydrolysis of
thiamin. Both thiaminase I and thiaminase II are inactivated by cooking.
The other class of antithiamin compounds is heat stable, and includes the ortho
and para polyphenolics such as tannins. These compounds are not generally included
in significant amounts in dog and cat diets and are of little concern.
Thiamin is quite stable to heat and oxidation when the pH is below 5. Above this
pH, inactivation of thiamin is accelerated by increasing pH and heat. In strongly
alkaline solutions, thiamin is oxidized to thiochrome, which is fluorescent and used in


===== PDF PAGE 455 =====
454
the analytical determination of thiamin. In the heat processing of dog and cat foods,
large losses of thiamin can occur. Canned foods often contain gelling agents that
increase the pH of the food and in combination with prolonged heat during retorting
result in extensive inactivation of thiamin.
Sulfites, which are often used for food preservation, cleave the thiamin molecule
at the methylene bridge, and thiamin deficiency associated with the feeding of meat
preserved by sulfur dioxide has been reported in cats and dogs (Studdert and Labuc,
1991).
Cats are more susceptible to thiamin deficiency than dogs because they require
about four times as much thiamin in the diet. Also, fish-based diets that contain active
thiaminases before processing can destroy thiamin added to these diets and frequently
are given to cats, but rarely to dogs. These factors may account for persistence of
reports of thiamin deficiency in cats fed commercial foods (Davidson, 1992).
Absorption
Thiamin is absorbed from the small intestine mainly in the jejunum and ileum by
both an active and a passive process. Active absorption occurs at concentrations less
than 2 μM, requires Na+, and is inhibited by ouabain, which blocks ATPase, and
implicates a specific thiamin transporter. At thiamin concentrations greater than 2
μM, there is passive absorption. Most of the thiamin in mucosal cells is
phosphorylated, but, on passage through the cells and appearance at the serosal side,
it is dephosphorylated and appears as free thiamin in the plasma. In humans, 20-30
percent of the thiamin in plasma is protein bound and taken into erythrocytes by a
facilitated diffusion process and into other cells by active transport. In these cells,
about 80 percent of thiamin is present as TPP, 10 percent as TTP, and the remainder
as TMP and thiamin. Thiamin pyrophosphokinase catalyzes the phosporylation of
free thiamin to TPP, which in turn may be phosphorylated to TTP by phosphoryl-
transferase.
A large number of metabolites of thiamin have been identified in urine, which is
the main route of excretion; very little appears in the feces.
Biological Function
TPP is the major coenzymatic form of thiamin, and its synthesis from thiamin
involves Mg2+ and ATP, and is catalyzed by thiamin pyrophosphate kinase. The
substituted pyrimidyl portion of the molecule is involved in apoenzyme recognition
and binding, and the thiazole moiety contains the reactive center. TPP is a coenzyme
in two types of active aldehyde transfer reactions: oxidative decarboxylation of α-
ketoacids (such as pyruvate and α-ketoglutarate) and branched-chain α-keto acids,
and transformation of αketols (transketolase reaction). In these reactions, the carbon
between the nitrogen and sulfur of the thiazole ring ionizes and readily adds to


===== PDF PAGE 456 =====
455
carbonyl groups of α-ketoacids, which results in loss of CO2. These reactions have
particular significance in energy and carbohydrate metabolism. A number of
nonenzymatic functions have been proposed for thiamin especially in neural tissue. In
these functions, such as activation of ion channels, thiamin is involved as TPP.
The measurement of erythrocyte transketolase stimulation by TPP has been used
in the diagnosis of thiamin deficiency in cats and dogs (Brin and Vincent, 1965; Noel
et al., 1971; Deady et al., 1981a,b; Read and Harrington, 1982; Grimm et al., 1988).
However, a decrease in concentration of TPP in the blood of rats precedes a change in
erythrocyte transketolase activity (ETKA) (Warnock et al., 1978). Thiamin and its
phosphorylated esters may be measured by high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC; Ishii et al., 1979; Lynch et al., 1997). The plasma must be treated with a
phosphatase to obtain total thiamin concentration. Most methods use ultraviolet or
fluorescence detection, the latter requiring either pre-column or post-column
oxidation of thiamin to thiochrome (Lynch and Young, 2000). The HPLC method is
precise and yields results that correlate well with ETKA (Talwar et al., 2000).
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
Because of the body′s limited storage of thiamin, clinical signs of deficiency
appear in a shorter time after exposure to a thiamin-deficient diet than for most other
vitamins. Clinical signs of thiamin deficiency were induced by Read and Harrington
(1981) who gave 2- to 5-month-old beagle puppies a thiamin-deficient diet (20 to 30
μg thiamin·kg–1). These authors reported three stages of the disease: an initial short
(18 ± 8 days) induction period in which the dogs appeared healthy but grew slowly,
followed by an intermediate stage of variable duration (59 ± 37 days) of inappetence,
failure to grow, body weight loss, and coprophagia. This was followed by a terminal
period (8 ± 6 days) of neurological involvement or sudden death. Neurological
abnormalities included central nervous system depression, sensory ataxia, paraparesis,
torticollis, circling, tonic-clonic convulsions, profound muscular weakness, and
recumbency. In these deficient dogs ETKA was depressed.
The most consistent pathological lesions of thiamin deficiency involve the nervous
system and heart. Acute thiamin deficiencies tend to involve the brain and produce
severe neurological signs, whereas chronic deficiencies produce pathological changes
of the myocardium and peripheral nerves (Read, 1979). Lesions in the brain include
symmetrical necrosis of the gray matter of the inferior colliculi, medial vestibular
nuclei, cerebellar nodulus, claustra, and cerebral cortex (Read et al., 1977; Read,
1979). Read and Harrington (1986) described changes in the central nervous system
of thiamin-deficient dogs. They described two topographical patterns in the brain: one
involved only the caudal colliculi, while the other involved the suprasplenial gyri of
the caudal cortex and the claustra, caudal colliculi, cerebellar nodulus, and medial


===== PDF PAGE 457 =====
456
vestibular nuclei. The gray matter was primarily involved, and in bilateral structures
the two sides were equally affected. Histological changes associated with peripheral
neuropathy include diffuse bilateral myelin degeneration and axonal disintegration
(Voegtlin and Lake, 1919; Street et al., 1941; Read, 1979). Thiamin deficiency did not
affect the rate of hemoglobin regeneration in dogs subjected to periodic phlebotomy
(Maas et al., 1944).
Requirements
One of the earliest observations of thiamin deficiency in dogs was made by
Andrews (1912), who found that young puppies nursed by mothers whose infants had
died of beriberi developed polyneuritis. Voegtlin and Lake (1919) described
polyneuritis in dogs given a diet of meat made alkaline with sodium carbonate and
cooked for 3 hours at 120°C. Clinical signs of thiamin deficiency became apparent
after dogs received the diet for 1 month to 6 weeks. These authors reported that the
dogs became anorectic and lost body weight, had tonic convulsions that gave way to
progressive paralysis of the legs and an inability to walk, exhibited hypothermia, and
died within a few days of the initial paralysis. Cowgill (1921) used a purified diet
based on casein as the protein source, which produced polyneuritis in dogs that could
be reversed with various alcoholic extracts of wheat embryos, rice polishings, and
navy beans. Subsequently, Cowgill (1934) reported that a daily intake of 6 μg of
thiamin·kg BW–1·d–1 was adequate for the maintenance of mature dogs. Somewhat
higher levels of 8 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 were suggested for adult dogs (6 to 10 kg BW) by
Street et al. (1941) based on the apparent good health of dogs given a 25 percent fat
diet and either 6.7 or 9.4 μg of thiamin·kg BW–1. Intakes of 1.8 to 2.3 μg·kg BW–1
would keep an animal alive. Most of the diets used by early workers to determine
thiamin requirements were based on autoclaved dietary constituents to provide all B
vitamins other than thiamin. These diets often had multiple vitamin deficiencies; for
example, the dogs given the diet of Cowgill (1921) developed foul breath, which is a
clinical sign of niacin, not thiamin, deficiency in dogs. Even the later diets of Arnold
and Elvehjem (1939b) and Street et al. (1941) used autoclaved yeast. Maas et al.
(1944) used a purified diet fortified with isolated B vitamins and reported that less
than 10 μg·kg BW–1 was inadequate for weight maintenance in adult dogs.
For maintenance of food intake and growth of puppies, Arnold and Elvehjem
(1939b) reported that a concentration of 500 μg thiamin·kg–1 of nonfat constituents in
the diet was inadequate and estimated that 750 μg thiamin hydrochloride·kg–1 diet
was required to maintain food intake and growth in puppies fed a low-fat diet. For a
diet containing 56 percent “fat,” the requirement was about one-third of that amount.
The authors stated that their results “warrant the conclusion that the thiamin
requirement is best stated as a percentage of the diet” (rather than on a body weight
basis).


===== PDF PAGE 458 =====
457
In animals other than dogs, inclusion of oral antibiotics, lactose, sorbitol, and
ascorbic acid in the diet increases the thiamin requirement (Evans and Lepkovsky,
1928, 1929, 1935; Scott and Griffith, 1957; Haenel et al., 1959). Factors affecting
microbial synthesis of thiamin in the gut and the degree of coprophagy practiced may
also influence the requirement.
Noel et al. (1971) gave four groups of growing beagle puppies a purified diet
fortified with B vitamins other than thiamin. Groups of dogs were given one of four
levels of thiamin (per kg BW–1): 110, 33, or 22 μg daily or 115 μg twice weekly.
Dogs were maintained on the diet for 29 weeks, but the dose rate for the 110-μg group
was reduced to 11 μg·kg–1 and the 115-μg twice weekly group was reduced to 77 μg
for the last 8 weeks. One dog in the 22-μg·kg BW–1 group began to lose weight at 9
weeks, had transitory diarrhea and anorexia, and died at 22 weeks. The ETKA test
(Brin and Vincent, 1965) indicated that the dog was deficient in thiamin. The authors
concluded that 22 μg thiamin·kg BW–1·d–1 was inadequate for beagles in the first
year of life.
There have been no additional studies of the thiamin requirement of dogs since the
last revision of the NRC (1985) report. Therefore, it is proposed that the dietary
concentration of 270 μg thiamin per 1,000 kcal ME (1.08 mg·kg–1 diet of 4 kcal·g–1)
for growing dogs be maintained. This concentration is equivalent to 75 μg thiamin·kg
BW–0.75·d–1 for growth. Since Noel et al. (1971) demonstrated that 22 μg of
thiamin·kg BW–1·d–1 was inadequate for 22-week-old beagle dogs, it is proposed that
the requirement for maintenance be increased to 30 μg·kg BW–1·d–1, which is
equivalent to a dietary concentration of 450 μg per 1,000 kcal for a 15-kg dog. It is of
interest that the dietary concentration of thiamin needed for maintenance is greater
than that proposed for growth. No information is available regarding the requirements
for pregnancy and lactation, but it is proposed that the allowance for maintenance of
450 μg per 1,000 kcal be used.
It should be noted that these amounts and concentrations are at the point of
ingestion. Considerably higher concentrations may be required in foods to allow for
destruction resulting from thermal processing, storage losses, and antithiamin agents.
ABGE (1989) recommended daily allowances of 20 μg thiamin·kg BW–1 for
maintenance and 55 μg thiamin·kg BW–1 for growth and reproduction.
Hypervitaminosis
Studies on laboratory animals, including dogs, indicate that the parenteral
administration of thiamin hydrochloride may be the only route by which signs of
thiamin toxicity can be produced (NRC, 1987). There are no reports of toxicity
resulting from oral ingestion of thiamin by dogs. Rapid intravenous injection of 5 to
50 mg thiamin·kg BW–1 produced transient fall in blood pressure, and higher doses
resulted in more severe effects. The lethal dose is approximately 350 mg·kg BW–1


===== PDF PAGE 459 =====
458
(Neal and Sauberlich, 1980). No adverse effects were observed in dogs given daily
oral doses of 100 μg thiamin·kg BW–1 (Noel et al., 1971). However, this amount is
only about three times the requirement. If the general recommendation of the NRC
(1987) of 1,000 times the requirement for puppies is taken, this would be equivalent
to a concentration of 1.08 g thiamin·kg–1 diet for a growing dog. For rats, the median
lethal dose (LD50) for oral thiamin is 6 g·kg BW–1, but for subcutaneously
administered thiamin it is 500 mg·kg BW–1 (Molitor, 1942). The maximum safe
upper limit of thiamin in the diet of dogs has not been defined.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Three stages of thiamin deficiency in cats were described by Everett (1944). The
first stage was characterized by anorexia; the second stage, by the appearance of
neurological signs including those involving posture and short tonic convulsive
seizures; and the third or terminal stage, by progressive weakness, prostration, and
death. The first or anorectic stage frequently occurred within 1 to 2 weeks of
consumption of a deficient diet and may be accompanied by emesis (Jubb et al., 1956;
Deady et al., 1981). In the second stage, there was impairment of labyrinthine righting
reflexes, as shown by ventroflexion of the head, loss of righting reflex, and defective
conscious proprioception. Affected cats when suspended by their hind legs kept their
heads ventroflexed instead of dorsoflexed. Ventroflexion of the head caused cats to
somersault when they jumped from a table to the floor (Jubb et al., 1956; Loew et al.,
1970). Impaired vestibulolocular reflexes included decreased nystagmus time and an
impaired or slow papillary light reflex. Affected kittens often had mydriasis, were
ataxic, and held their tails erect.
Toman et al. (1945) reported that electrocardiographic changes, including sinus
bradycardia, occurred in thiamin-deficient cats as early as the second week of a
deficient diet. Thiamin therapy resulted in a prompt correction of heart rate disorders,
but changes in the ventricular complex (QRS prolongation and other changes, and T
wave) were slower to respond. When thiamin-deficient cats exhibit spontaneous
seizures they may be accompanied by brief periods of tachycardia followed by severe
bradycardia.
Thiamin deficiency induces pathological changes in the central nervous system,
which include symmetrical hemorrhages in the periventricular gray matter in severe
cases. Considerable variation in the number of nuclear masses involved has been
reported, but the main nuclei involved in order of frequency were inferior colliculi,
medial vestibular, lateral geniculate, habenular and occulomotor nuclei in the
accessory vestibular, and cuneate and red nuclei (Jubb et al., 1956; Deady et al.,


===== PDF PAGE 460 =====
459
1981a,b). Thiamin deficiency induced by a thiamin-deficient diet or the antagonist
pyrithiamin resulted in severe learning deficits in cats (Irle and Markowitsch, 1982).
Requirements
When cats were given a diet of autoclaved dog food supplemented with riboflavin,
pyridoxine, and calcium pantothenate, Everett (1944) found that daily injections of
0.5 mg thiamin prevented neurological disorders and allowed weight maintenance or
gain in adults. Loew et al. (1970) estimated that the daily thiamin requirement of
adult cats for maintenance was about 0.36 mg for a 3-kg cat, equivalent to about 2 mg
thiamin per 1,000 kcal ME. Deady et al. (1981a) gave kittens purified amino acid-
based diets that contained 4.4 mg added thiamin·kg–1 diet. When a diet containing 90
g of glutamic acid was followed by a similar diet that contained 120 g glutamic
acid·kg–1 (or vice versa), kittens developed severe neurological signs of thiamin
deficiency that responded to parenteral thiamin.
Several attempts (Carvalho Da Silva et al., 1961; Partington et al., 1964) have
been made to determine the thiamin requirements of cats by urinary excretion of
thiamin or thiochrome. Cat urine contains substances that interfere with fluorescent
measurement of thiochrome.
Purified diets containing 5 mg thiamin·kg–1 have been adequate for kitten growth
and for pregnancy and lactation (J. G. Morris and Q. R. Rogers, University of
California, Davis, personal communication).
The above studies suggested a dietary thiamin concentration of 5 mg·kg–1 diet
(approximately 4.7 kcal·g–1) for growth of kittens. As the requirement is linked to
energy metabolism, it is suggested that this requirement be extended to apply to diets
formulated for maintenance, pregnancy, and lactation. The requirements may increase
when cats are given diets with a small proportion of the energy contributed by fat.
Hypervitaminosis
There are no reports of toxicity resulting from excessive oral intakes of thiamin,
but intravenous thiamin in high doses can cause neuromuscular and ganglionic
blockade (Freye and Agoutin, 1978). A SUL of thiamin in the diet of animals
suggested by the NRC (1987) was 1,000 times the dietary requirement. For cats this
would be approximately 5 g thiamin·kg–1 diet. For most laboratory animals, the toxic
level of thiamin by parenteral administration is in the approximate range of 80 to 400
mg·kg BW–1. The safe upper conenctration of thiamin in the diets of cats has not
been defined.
RIBOFLAVIN


===== PDF PAGE 461 =====
460
Most of the riboflavin in foods occurs in the coenzyme form of flavin
mononucleotide (FMN), as flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), or as flavins
covalently bound to proteins generally at the 8-α-methyl position of the isoalloxazine
ring. Milk is an exception in that a high percentage of the riboflavin is free and not
bound. Animal products tend to be good sources of riboflavin, whereas grains are not.
Most food sources high in riboflavin are high in the other vitamins of the B complex.
A deficiency of riboflavin in the diet impacts other vitamins because flavin
coenzymes are involved in their metabolism. These vitamins include folic acid,
pyridoxine, niacin, and vitamins K and D.
Riboflavin and its coenzymes are sensitive to alkaline and acid conditions
particularly in the presence of UV light. Under acid conditions, riboflavin is degraded
to lumichrome, which is biologically inactive, and under alkaline conditions to
lumiflavin, which is also biologically inactive.
Absorption
In foods, most riboflavin is in the coenzyme form, which requires that it be
hydrolyzed in the gut prior to absorption. Flavins are absorbed in the upper
gastrointestinal tract by specialized transport involved in dephosphorylation-
rephosphorylation mechanisms rather than by passive diffusion. This process is
saturable and sodium dependent and involves ATPase (McCormick, 1990). In
riboflavin deficiency, there is enhanced uptake of riboflavin by intestinal brush border
membrane vesicles associated with an increase in Vmax rather than Km for riboflavin
(Said and Mohammadkhani, 1993). Similarly, there is down-regulation of Vmax and
no change in Km when riboflavin status is restored. Prolongation of stomach
emptying also enhances the bioavailability of pharmacological doses of riboflavin
(Forusz and Ritschel, 1996). In a number of species, riboflavin-binding proteins have
been identified in the plasma, and in their absence there is massive riboflavinuria. In
human blood, the transport of flavins involves loose binding to albumin and tight
binding to globulins especially the immunoglobulins (IgA, IgG, and IgM). Serum
binding proteins also appear to be involved in the placental transport of riboflavin.
The main route of riboflavin excretion from the body is via urine as riboflavin.
Neither FMN nor FAD is present in urine. In humans, about 60 to 70 percent of the
riboflavin excreted is in the free form, the balance being present as various
metabolites (McCormick, 1994). In dogs, urinary excretion of riboflavin and
extrarenal metabolism and/or excretion contribute almost equally to the overall
elimination rate. Since renal clearance exceeds the glomerular filtration rate in dogs
and in humans, part of the clearance of riboflavin occurs by tubular secretion (Jusko
et al., 1970).
Biological Function


===== PDF PAGE 462 =====
461
The major function of riboflavin is to serve as a precursor of the coenzymes FMN
and FAD. Synthesis of the coenzymes from riboflavin is under the control of thyroid
hormones. The initial step involves the phosphorylation of riboflavin to FMN
catalyzed by the enzyme flavokinase; this is followed by conversion of FMN to FAD.
These coenzymes catalyze a number of oxidation-reduction reactions. FAD is part of
the respiratory chain and therefore is central to energy metabolism. In addition many
kinds of oxidation-reduction reactions are catalyzed by flavoproteins, such as
dehydrogenation, hydroxylation, oxidative decarboxylation, dioxygenations, and
reduction of oxygen to hydrogen peroxide (Rivlin and Pinto, 2001). The redox
functions of riboflavin are both one-electron and two-electron transfers from substrate
to the flavin coenzyme.
While riboflavin does not have significant inherent antioxidant capacity, it plays a
key role in the glutathione redox cycle. The selenium-containing enzyme glutathione
peroxidase catalyzes the reduction of lipid peroxides to hydroxy acids before they are
metabolized, and in the process reduced glutathione is oxidized. Regeneration of
reduced glutathione is dependent on the FAD-containing enzyme glutathione
reductase.
The measurement of erythrocyte glutathione reductase activity (EGRA) is the
preferred index of riboflavin status, but few measurements have been reported in dogs
and none in cats.
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
Acute riboflavin deficiency results in anorexia, body weight loss, decreased
activity, hypothermia, decreased respiratory rate, progressive weakness, ataxia,
sudden collapse to a semicomatose state, and death (Street and Cowgill, 1939).
Chronic riboflavin deficiency has been associated with anorexia, body weight loss,
muscular weakness, flaking dermatitis of the abdomen and medial surface of the hind
legs, and ocular lesions. The ocular lesions were generally bilateral and were evident
as opacity of the cornea often associated with vascularization and watery or purulent
discharge from the eye (Street et al., 1941; Potter et al., 1942; Heywood and
Partington, 1971; Noel et al., 1972).
Requirements
Street and Cowgill (1939) gave three groups of adult dogs a purified diet based on
casein, sucrose, vegetable fat, and minerals, plus an extract from rice polishings to
supply B vitamins other than riboflavin, and cod liver oil. Group 1 dogs received the
diet alone; group 2 consisted of one dog given the same diet plus 4 to 8 μg
riboflavin·kg BW–1 ·d–1. Three of the dogs in group 3 were pair-fed the basal diet of


===== PDF PAGE 463 =====
462
dogs in group 1 and given 25 μg riboflavin·kg BW–1 ·d–1. Group 1 dogs had a
reduction of food intake 2 to 11 weeks after initially receiving the diet, and five of the
six dogs entered a collapsed state after 120 ± 8 days when they exhibited a reluctance
to walk or a staggering gait and passed into a comatose state. The dog receiving 4 to 8
μg riboflavin·kg BW–1·d–1 collapsed after 332 days. All dogs receiving 25 μg of
riboflavin maintained good health although they had restricted food intakes. The
authors concluded that 25 μg of riboflavin·kg BW–1·d–1 was adequate for
maintenance of adult dogs. Street et al. (1941) using the same purified diet confirmed
this finding and described neurological abnormalities in dogs given low intakes of
riboflavin.
Axelrod et al. (1940, 1941) gave weaned pups a purified diet plus 1, 2, or 4 mg
riboflavin·kg–1 diet. These authors concluded that for growing puppies, 2 mg
riboflavin·kg–1 diet was inadequate, but 4 mg riboflavin·kg–1 diet was adequate.
Potter et al. (1942) gave puppies a purified diet that supplied 8.6 μg of riboflavin·kg–1
and a riboflavin supplement on alternate days equivalent to 60 or 100 μg
riboflavin·kg BW–1·d–1. They concluded that the riboflavin requirement for growing
puppies lies between these values. Unlike thiamin, isocaloric substitution of sucrose
in the diet with lard had no effect on riboflavin requirement.
Spector et al. (1943) gave young and adult dogs variable levels of riboflavin and
subjected them to repeated phlebotomy. They suggested that 15 and 30 μg
riboflavin·kg BW–1·d–1 were necessary for adult and young dogs respectively for
hemoglobin production and rapid recovery from anemia. However, Heywood and
Partington (1971) reported that the proposed requirement of 30 μg· kg BW–1·d–1 was
inadequate to prevent one in four growing dogs given a purified diet from developing
corneal opacities. Noel et al. (1971) gave three groups of six (three male and three
female) 12- to 14-week-old beagles a purified diet with 120, 90, or 50 μg
riboflavin·kg BW–1·d–1 for 9 weeks. After 9 weeks the riboflavin intake of the
female dogs was reduced to 30 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 for the following 8 weeks. Dogs
given 30 μg of riboflavin·kg BW–1·d–1 from week 10-12 to week 17 lost body
weight. The authors concluded that 30 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 was too low to keep growing
beagles in good health and that 88 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 was marginally high.
Cline et al. (1996) conducted a study on the riboflavin requirement of adult dogs
using the erythrocyte glutathione reductase activity coefficient (EGRAC) as a
determinant of riboflavin requirement. These authors used diets that contained 1.7,
2.7, 3.7 4.7, and 5.7 mg riboflavin·kg–1. There was no difference in EGRAC in dogs
given diets containing 2.7 to 5.7 mg·kg–1, but dogs given 1.7 mg·kg–1 had
significantly higher EGRAC. These authors estimated that the adult dog at
maintenance had a riboflavin requirement of 67 μg·kg BW–1·d–1. It is suggested that
a daily intake of 70 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 be used for adult dogs, which is equivalent to
1.05 mg per 1,000 kcal for maintenance. In the absence of EGRAC information on


===== PDF PAGE 464 =====
463
growing puppies or pregnant and lactating bitches, the same dietary concentration is
recommended; 1.05 mg riboflavin per 1,000 kcal. These values are greater than those
proposed by the NRC (1985) for growing puppies. ABGE (1989) recommended daily
allowances of 50 and 100 μg·kg BW–1 for maintenance and growth, respectively.
Hypervitaminosis
Unna and Greslin (1942) gave four 10-week-old dogs 25 mg riboflavin·kg BW–1
for 5 months and reported normal growth and an absence of adverse clinical signs.
Macroscopic examination of the organs failed to indicate any abnormalities. These
authors also reported that dogs would tolerate a single dose of 2 g riboflavin·kg BW–
1. Riboflavin is more toxic when administered parenterally than orally. The NRC
(1987) gave estimated rat LD50 values for intraperitoneal, subcutaneous, and oral
routes of 0.56, 5, and greater than 10 g·kg BW–1, respectively. The safe upper
concentration of riboflavin in the diet of dogs has not been defined.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Gershoff et al. (1959a) reported that in acute riboflavin deficiency, cats exhibited
anorexia, loss of body weight, and periauricular alopecia with epidermal atrophy. In
chronic riboflavin deficiency, cats developed cataracts, fatty livers, and testicular
atrophy.
Requirements
Gershoff et al. (1959) studied the effect of carbohydrate level in the diet on
riboflavin requirements of cats. These authors gave 3- to 6-month-old kittens either a
high-fat diet (46 percent of ME from fat) or a low-fat (11 percent of ME from fat)
diet. The authors concluded that a high-carbohydrate, low-fat diet favored microbial
synthesis of riboflavin as indicated by a greater fecal and urinary excretion of
riboflavin than for cats given a low-carbohydrate, high-fat diet. It is likely that the
diet would have promoted extensive microbial fermentation and possibly synthesis of
riboflavin in the gut since it contained 50 percent sucrose. These authors reported that
two cats maintained excellent health for more than 34 months on the high-
carbohydrate diet plus 3 mg riboflavin·kg–1 diet and that cats were routinely reared in
their laboratory on a low-carbohydrate, high-fat diet containing 4 mg riboflavin·kg–1
for 2 years.


===== PDF PAGE 465 =====
464
Leahy et al. (1967) used a depletion-repletion study to determine riboflavin
requirements of kittens. These authors gave five groups of kittens (initial body weight
about 700 g) a riboflavin-free purified diet for 28 days, and then supplemented with 0,
25, 50, 100, or 200 μg riboflavin per kitten per day for another 28 days. A sixth group
was given 200 μg per day riboflavin for the entire period. A necropsy was performed
on all kittens at the end of the 56 days but did not reveal any gross pathological
changes. Weight gain during the first 28 days was depressed, and some kittens lost
body weight, which may have been due to poor acceptance of the purified diet. All
groups including the unsupplemented kittens gained weight from day 29 to 56, but
weight gain was maximal in the group given 100 μg riboflavin per kitten per day.
Although the authors stated that the requirement did not exceed 100 μg·d–1 or 1
mg·kg–1 diet, based on weight gain, this requirement is probably too low. A
requirement of 4 mg·kg–1 diet (5.0 kcal·g–1) was suggested by the NRC (1986) or
800 μg per 1,000 kcal of diet. In view of the limited information available, it is
suggested that this requirement be maintained as an adequate intake for growth,
maintenance, and lactation. This dietary concentration is equivalent to an intake of 79
μg·kg BW–0.67·d–1 for a 4-kg adult cat consuming 250 kcal of ME per day.
Hypervitaminosis
There are no reports of riboflavin toxicity in cats. Although riboflavin is a water-
soluble vitamin, it is not well absorbed when given in doses exceeding requirements.
Presumed safe upper concentrations were not proposed for riboflavin by the NRC
(1987). The SUL of riboflavin in the diets of cats has not been defined.
VITAMIN B6
Vitamin B6 is a generic descriptor for all 3-hydroxy-2-methylpyridine derivatives,
including pyridoxine, pyridoxal, pyridoxamine, and their phosphorylated forms. The
coenzyme form of the vitamin is pyridoxal-5′-phosphate, which is covalently bound
by a Schiff’s base to an ε-amino group of lysine of the enzyme.
Absorption, Transport, and Storage
Most vitamin B6 in foods is present as phosphorylated derivatives of pyridoxine,
pyridoxal, and pyridoxamine. The predominant forms in animal tissue foods are
pyridoxal and pyridoxamine, whereas in plant foods the major forms are pyridoxine
and pyridoxamine. In addition to phosphorylated derivatives, plant foods also contain
glycosylated forms of vitamin B6, which may have a negative effect on bioavailability
(Leklem, 2001)


===== PDF PAGE 466 =====
465
Phosphorylated forms of the vitamin are absorbed from the intestine of rats to only
a limited extent and are hydrolyzed by alkaline phosphatase before absorption.
Absorption of pyridoxine, pyridoxal, and pyridoxamine occurs by a nonsaturable
passive process (Henderson, 1985). These three nonphosphorylated forms are
converted to their respective phosphorylated forms by pyridoxine kinase. The two
phosphorylated forms pyridoxine-5′-phosphate and pyridoxamime-5′-phosphate are
converted to pyridoxal-5′phosphate by an FMN-requiring oxidase.
The liver is the primary organ for metabolism of vitamin B6, and releases the
active form of the vitamin (pyridoxal-5′phosphate, PLP) into the circulation to supply
other tissues. Low riboflavin status lead to a reduction in circulating PLP. PLP formed
in the liver and other tissues can combine with proteins via a Schiff’s base reaction.
The binding of PLP to proteins may be the major factor in determining tissue
concentrations of the vitamin. In plasma, PLP produced and released by the liver is
bound to albumin, which may protect it from hydrolysis until it is delivered to various
tissues. Uptake of vitamin B6 by cells is thought to occur by hydrolysis of the
phosphate group of PLP by phosphatases at the cell’s surface.
In muscle, most vitamin B6 is present as PLP bound to glycogen phosphorylase.
Because of this association and the large mass of muscle in the body, it has been
suggested that muscle is the main storage site for vitamin B6. However, in rats and
swine, muscle PLP is mobilized during an energy deficit, but not during a dietary
deficiency of B6. Under conditions of strenuous exercise and energy deficit, muscles
may release B6 and result in increased circulating levels of PLP.
In many species, an end product of vitamin B6 metabolism is pyridoxic acid,
which is excreted in urine. Coburn and Mahuren (1987) reported that cat urine
contained little pyridoxic acid after dosing with large amounts of pyridoxine
hydrochloride. The main metabolites were 50 percent pyridoxine 3-sulfate and 25
percent N-methylpyridoxine. At low pyridoxine intakes, the excretion of pyridoxal 3-
sulfate exceeded that of pyridoxine 3-sulfate.
Biological Function
More than 100 enzymatic reactions have been reported in which PLP is a
coenzyme, and nearly half involve transamination-type reactions (Sauberlich, 1985).
Beside transamination reactions involving the α-carbon, other reactions involving
pyridoxal phosphate include racemization, decarboxylation, oxidative deamination,
and side-chain elimination. Additional reactions include those involving the β-carbon
(replacement and elimination reactions) and the γ-carbon (replacement, elimination,
and cleavage reactions).
Because of the multiplicity of enzymatic reactions involving PLP, it follows that
PLP plays a role in a wide range of physiological processes including
gluconeogenesis, erythrocyte function, niacin synthesis, nervous system function,


===== PDF PAGE 467 =====
466
immune response, lipid metabolism, hormone modulation, and gene expression
(Leklem, 2001). In gluconeogenesis, PLP is a coenzyme in transamination reactions
and also for glycogen phosphorylase. An inadequacy of PLP in rats results in lowered
activities of alanine and aspartate aminotransferases and liver and muscle
phosphorylase. In the synthesis of hemoglobin, PLP serves as a cofactor for δ-
aminolevulinic acid synthetase, which catalyses the condensation of glycine and
succinylcoenzyme A to δ-aminolevulinic acid; this latter compound is a precursor of
heme, and vitamin B6 deficient-animals develop hypochromic microcytic anemia. In
addition, pyridoxal and PLP bind to hemoglobin, thereby changing its affinity for
oxygen.
PLP functions in at least four enzymatic reactions in the complex tryptophan-
niacin pathway. Only one reaction is in the direct pathway of conversion; the other
three are side pathways that do not lead to niacin. However, it is the direct
involvement of PLP in tryptophan metabolism that is the basis of the tryptophan
loading test for vitamin B6 deficiency.
In nervous tissue, PLP is also involved in another tryptophan pathway—the
conversion of 5-hydroxytryptophan to 5-hydroxytryptamine, which is catalyzed by
the PLP-dependent enzyme 5-hydroxytryptophan decarboxylase. Synthesis of other
neurotransmitters such as taurine, dopamine, norepinephrine, histamine, and γ-
aminobutyric acid also requires PLP. One of the main clinical signs observed in
vitamin B6 deficiency in cats is the involvement of PLP in neurotransmitter
production.
PLP serves as a coenzyme for serine transhydroxymethylase, which catalyzes the
transfer of a one-carbon moiety to tetrahydrofolate, allowing thymidylate and nucleic
acid synthesis. In some animal studies, vitamin B6 deficiency has been shown to
adversely affect lymphocyte production and antibody response.
There is evidence from studies in rats that vitamin B6 deprivation may impair the
conversion of linoleic acid to arachidonic acid. It has been suggested that linoleic
desaturation and γ-linolenic elongation may be adversely affected by vitamin B6
deficiency. This is of particular interest in cats, which have a low efficiency of
conversion of linoleic to arachidonic acid.
PLP has been shown to be a modulator of steroid action (Brandsch, 1994; Tully et
al., 1994), and to undergo reversible reactions with the receptors for estrogens,
androgens, progesterone, and glucocorticoids. PLP reacts with a lysine residue on the
steroid receptor to form a Schiff’s base.
Pyridoxal phosphate is the main form of vitamin B6 in the plasma of replete cats,
the ratio of PLP to PL being about 5:1 (Bai et al., 1989), whereas in vitamin B6-
replete rats the ratio is about 1:1 (Sampson and O’Connor, 1989).
Dogs


===== PDF PAGE 468 =====
467
Signs of Deficiency
Acute vitamin B6 deficiency in newly weaned puppies produced anorexia, body
weight loss, and death before any marked hematological changes occurred. In older
dogs and adults, clinical signs also include convulsions, muscle twitching, and
microcytic hypochromic anemia (Fouts et al., 1938, 1939; McKibbin et al., 1939,
1942). Street et al. (1941) described a range of pathological changes in addition to the
above that included ataxia, cardiac dilation and hypertrophy, congestion of various
tissues, and demyelination of peripheral nerves.
Requirements
Fouts et al. (1938) showed that a purified diet including an extract of rice
polishings (a source of vitamin B6) produced normal growth and hematology in
weaned puppies, but when the extract was not included in the diet, convulsions and
severe microcytic hypochromic anemia occurred. The rice bran extract was later
found to supply the equivalent of 60 μg of pyridoxine·kg BW–1·d–1 to adult dogs
(Fouts et al., 1939), a quantity shown by McKibbin et al. (1939) to correct anemia.
Street et al. (1941) produced vitamin B6 deficiency in adult dogs given a semipurified
diet and reported that in one dog an estimated 5 μg of pyridoxine·kg BW–1·d–1 from
a concentrate was inadequate, but 10 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 was adequate. In unpublished
experiments quoted by Michaud and Elvehjem (1944), growing dogs given 5 μg of
pyridoxine·kg BW–1·d–1 died before the appearance of anemia; 10 μg·kg BW–1·d–1
gave fairly good growth but was not as good as 60 μg·kg BW–1·d–1. The authors
suggested that 10 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 may be adequate for maintenance. There do not
appear to be any critical studies on the vitamin B6 requirement of dogs since reviewed
by the NRC (1985). Therefore, an adequate intake of 1.1 mg·kg–1 diet (3.67 kcal·g–1)
or 0.3 mg per 1,000 kcal for growing puppies is retained. This dietary concentration is
equivalent to 84 μg·kg BW0.75·d–1 for puppies for growth, and 39 μg·kg BW0.75·d–1
for adult dogs for maintenance. In the absence of futher information, it is assumed
that a dietary concentration that satisfied the requirements for growth would meet the
needs for pregnancy and lactation. These recommendations are similar to those of
ABGE (1989). For a diet with an ME of 4 kcal·g–1, these daily amounts are supplied
with approximately 1.2 mg pyridoxine·kg–1 diet.
Hypervitaminosis
Unna and Antopol (1940) reported that puppies given 20 mg of pyridoxine·kg
BW–1 for 75 or 80 days did not develop signs of toxicity, had normal hematology, and
showed no pathological changes. An acute dose of 1 g pyridoxine·kg–1 produced


===== PDF PAGE 469 =====
468
impairment of coordination and tonic convulsions. Chronic dosing with 200 mg
pyridoxine hydrochloride·kg BW–1·d–1 produced ataxia, muscle weakness, and loss
of balance between 40 and 75 days (Phillips et al., 1978). Higher doses of 250 mg·kg
BW–1·d–1 resulted in impaired coordination and ataxia within a week of treatment.
Bilateral loss of myelin and axons in the dorsal funiculi and loss of myelin in
individual fibers of the dorsal root were found on necropsy. A lesser degree of
pathological damage was found in dogs receiving 50 mg pyridoxine hydrochloride·kg
BW–1·d–1. Krinke et al. (1980) administered daily oral doses of 300 mg pyridoxine
hydrochloride·kg BW–1 to 7- to 11-month-old beagle dogs for 78 days. Locomotor
abnormalities developed within 9 days, and eventually the dogs were unable to walk
even though they did not exhibit muscular weakness. The authors concluded that
pyridoxine produced a toxic peripheral sensory neuropathy that involved neuronal
degeneration of dorsal root ganglia and sensory nerve fibers. Hoover and Carlton
(1981) administered daily doses of pyridoxine hydrochloride to beagles beginning
with 15 mg·kg BW–1. The dose was increased to 150 mg·kg BW–1 by the 15th day
and continued at that level for 85 days. Anorexia developed within 2 weeks and ataxia
within 4 weeks.
The NRC (1987) proposed presumed safe upper dietary levels for dogs of 1,000
mg pyridoxine·kg–1 diet for less than 60 days and 500 mg·kg–1 diet for periods
longer than 60 days. A safe upper concentration of pyridoxine in the diet of dogs has
not been defined.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Vitamin B6 deficiency in cats has been more recently investigated than in dogs.
Carvalho da Silva et al. (1959) reported growth depression, mild microcytic
hypochromic anemia, convulsive seizures, and kidney lesions in cats given vitamin
B6-deficient diets. These lesions of the kidney were shown by Gershoff et al. (1959)
to be due to the presence of calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals, and the urine of
vitamin B6-deficient cats contained calcium oxalate. A description of the renal lesions
resulting from vitamin B6 deficiency has been given by Blanchard et al. (1991). Bai et
al. (1989) reported clinical signs similar to those described by Carvalho da Silva et al.
and Gershoff et al. as well as elevated plasma concentrations of tyrosine in
pyridoxine-deficient cats. The total activity of the first enzyme of tyrosine
degradation (tyrosine aminotransferase, TAT) was shown by Bai et al. (1998) to be
depressed in pyridoxine-deficient cats. The apparent Km of hepatic TAT from cats for
tyrosine was similar to that of rats (2.1 vs. 1.9 mmol·L–1, respectively), but the
apparent Km of TAT from cats for PLP was much higher than that from rats.


===== PDF PAGE 470 =====
469
Requirements
Carvalho da Silva et al. (1959) reported that 1 mg of pyridoxine given orally three
times a week would prevent clinical signs of deficiency and support a normal
hemogram in 3-to 4-month-old kittens given a semipurified diet. Gershoff et al.
(1959) using 3- to 6-month-old kittens also fed a purified diet reported that 1 mg of
pyridoxine hydrochloride per kilogram of diet was inadequate, but 2 mg·kg–1 diet
resulted in normal growth and hematology. Since urinary excretion of oxalate was
greater in cats given diets of 2 mg pyridoxine hydrochloride per kilogram of diet than
those given 4 mg·kg–1, the higher level was recommended by the NRC (1986).
Subsequent depletion-repletion studies by Bai et al. (1989) using additional criteria
confirmed that a concentration of 1 mg pyridoxine·kg–1 diet was inadequate for
growing kittens, but 2 mg·kg–1 diet was adequate when the diet contained 350 g·kg–1
casein. In a further depletion-repletion study, Bai et al. (1991) demonstrated that the
vitamin B6 requirement of cats depended on protein concentration in the diet. For a
diet of 300 g casein·kg–1 the vitamin B6 requirement could be met with 1 mg
pyridoxine·kg–1 diet, whereas for a diet containing 600 g casein·kg–1 the requirement
was greater than or equal to 2.0 mg pyridoxine·kg–1 diet. To accommodate high-
protein diets up to about 500 g protein·kg–1, a minimal pyridoxine requirement of 2
mg·kg–1 diet or 500 μg per 1,000 kcal is proposed for cats of all physiological states.
This dietary concentration will provide 49 μg·kg BW–0.67·d–1 for an adult cat at
maintenance.
Hypervitaminosis
There are no reports of studies on the toxicity of vitamin B6 in cats. The presumed
SUL of pyridoxine in the diet of rats is 250 mg·kg–1 for periods of more than 60 days
(NRC, 1987). The safe upper concentration of pyridoxine in the diets of cats has not
been defined.
NIACIN
Dogs played an important role as models for study of the human disease pellagra
and in testing the antipellagra activities of preparations and foods (Harvey et al.,
1938; Carpenter, 1991). Chittenden (1907) described clinical signs of disturbances of
the gastrointestinal tract with bloody discharge and inflammation of the mucous
membranes of the mouth in a dog given a diet of bread and lard. The similarities
between these clinical signs in dogs, referred to as “black tongue,” and those of
pellagra in humans were recognized by Goldberger and colleagues (Goldberger and
Wheeler, 1920, 1928; Wheeler et al., 1922). A major contribution of Goldberger was


===== PDF PAGE 471 =====
470
the recognition that a pellagra-preventive factor (“P-P factor”) was missing in corn,
and the disease was not due to an infectious or toxic agent. Elvehjem et al. (1937,
1938) showed that the P-P factor was nicotinic acid or nicotinic acid amide, which
would cure black tongue in dogs. This observation was also confirmed by Street and
Cowgill (1937). However, analysis of corn showed that it was not particularly low in
nicotinic acid, a problem that was resolved by Laguna and Carpenter (1948) who
demonstrated that the niacin in corn was released only after prolonged exposure to
high pH and normally was poorly bioavailable. While niacin would cure pellagra, it
was also known that certain proteins such as casein would reverse pellagra in rats.
This anomaly was resolved when it was demonstrated that tryptophan could be used
with low efficiency for the synthesis of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide (NAD)
(Heidelberger et al., 1948).
Whereas dogs are able to synthesize nicotinamide endogenously from tryptophan,
cats do not produce any measurable quantities. Carvalho da Silva et al. (1952)
reported that there was no increase in urinary excretion of N-methyl-nicotinamide
after administration of a tryptophan load to cats. The extent of conversion of
tryptophan to nicotinic acid is determined by the fate of α-amino-β-carboxymuconic-
εsemialdehyde, an intermediate in tryptophan metabolism that is involved in two
competing metabolic pathways. One results in the production of acetyl-CoA and CO2
and the other, NAD. Picolinic carboxylase is the enzyme catalyzing the first step of
the degradative pathway to acetyl-CoA and CO2, and across species the dietary niacin
requirement is related directly to the hepatic activity of this enzyme (Ikeda et al.,
1965; Scott, 1986). Cats possess all the enzymes of the pathway of niacin synthesis,
but the activity of picolinic carboxylase is extremely high, the highest of all animals
studied (Sudadolnik et al., 1957; Ikeda et al., 1965), precluding any measurable
synthesis of nicotinic acid (Carvalho da Silva et al., 1952; Leklem et al., 1971). Meat
is well supplied with the NAD and NADP (nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide
phosphate) coenzymes, and while cats consume a diet of animal tissue there is no
need to produce niacin from tryptophan. The direct production of acetyl-CoA may be
energetically more efficient for cats than the oxidation of NAD or the intermediates of
the NAD pathway
Absorption
The majority of niacin in plant foods is present as nicotinic acid, but animal tissues
initially contain NAD and NADP coenzymes, which, under post mortem anaerobic
conditions, are in part converted to the reduced forms. Of the free niacin present in
animal tissues, most occurs as nicotinamide. A high proportion of the niacin in plant
foods is not available and may be in the bound form. Ghosh et al. (1963) using a
microbiological assay reported that 85 to 90 percent of the total nicotinic acid in
cereal grains was in the bound form. The nature of the binding of nicotinic acid in
wheat bran was investigated by Mason et al. (1973). These authors reported binding
of nicotinic acid to macromolecules with a molecular weight of 1,500 to 17,000 Da,


===== PDF PAGE 472 =====
471
of which about 60 percent were polysaccharides and 40 percent peptides. Carter and
Carpenter (1982) developed a rat assay for available niacin in foods and reported that
mature cooked cereals gave values of about 35 percent of the total niacin content. In
calculating the niacin content of diets for dogs and cats, the niacin contribution from
cereals should be either ignored or given an available value no greater than one-third
of the total niacin.
Synthesis of niacin by microbes occurs in the intestine of rats (Tepley et al., 1947),
and presumably some also occurs in the intestine of dogs; however the extent of
synthesis does not appear to have been quantified.
The primary site of absorption of both nicotinamide and nicotinic acid is the
proximal small intestine, although some absorption occurs in the stomach. In the
small intestine, pyrophosphatase metabolizes NAD to nicotinamide mononucleotide,
which is hydrolyzed to nicotinamide riboside and eventually to free nicotinamide
(Kirkland and Rawlings, 2000). Absorption at low concentrations of both nicotinic
acid and nicotinamide appears to occur by sodium-dependent facilitated diffusion
(Henderson, 1983) or by carrier-mediated transport using proton cotransporters and
anion antiporters (Takanga et al., 1996). At higher concentrations, both forms appear
to be absorbed by passive diffusion. Once in the enterocyte, nicotinamide may be
converted to NAD or released into the portal circulation.
Biological Function
Niacin is the general descriptor for vitamers having the biological activity
associated with nicotinamide, including nicotinamide, nicotinic acid, and a variety of
pyridine nucleotide structures (Kirkland and Rawlings, 2000). NAD and NADP are
the two natural pyridine nucleotide coenzymes derived from niacin. These coenzymes
function in numerous oxidoreductase systems usually of the dehydrogenase-reductase
type. The carbon in the C-4 position on the pyridine ring of the nucleotide moiety
participates in oxidation-reduction reactions and is the basis for hydrogen transfer
reactions in oxidative phosphorylation and in biosynthetic reactions. The
electronegativity of the amide group and the nitrogen in position 1 of the ring permit
hydride ions to readily reduce the oxidized carbon in position 4. NAD(H) (reduced
NAD) plays an essential role in energy expenditure reactions, whereas NADP(H) is
essential in many synthetic reactions including those involving energy storage.
NADP(H) is produced by reduction of NADP+ (oxidized NADP) in reactions of the
pentose phosphate pathway and during the malate shuttle across the mitochondrial
membrane. NADP(H) provides the reducing equivalents for fatty acid synthesis and
the regeneration of oxidized glutathione.
Nicotinamide coenzymes also participate in non-redox reactions that involve
mono- and poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation (ADP = adenosine diphosphate) reactions, which
are substrate rather than coenzyme functions. The high-energy glycosidic linkage
between nicotinamide and ADP-ribose participates in these reactions, and the energy
provided by breaking this bond allows for the transfer of ADP-ribose to nucleophilic


===== PDF PAGE 473 =====
472
acceptors. These include glutamate side chains and hydroxyl groups of ribose for
poly(ADP-ribose) synthesis, a variety of amino acid side chains in mono(ADP-
ribosyl)ation reactions, and an internal ribose linkage for cyclic ADP-ribose synthesis
(Kirkland and Rawlings, 2000). A number of studies have demonstrated poly(ADP-
ribosyl)ation of enzymes involved in DNA repair, transcription, and replication. In
certain human populations, an association between an inadequate intake of niacin in
the diet and the incidence of certain type of cancers has been made.
Urine is the main route of excretion of products arising from the metabolism of
nicotinic acid. In dogs these products are trigenolline (3-carboxy-1-methypyridinium)
(75-94 percent) and nicotinic acid (6 to 25 percent) (Sarett, 1942).
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
The following clinical signs have been reported in niacin deficiency in dogs:
anorexia and body weight loss; reddening of the inside of the upper lip that progresses
to inflammation and ulceration of the buccal and pharyngeal mucosa; vermilion bands
on the lips; profuse salivation with ropy, blood-stained saliva drooling from the
mouth; and a fetid odor. Dogs also developed bloody diarrhea, and intestinal
absorption of water, glucose, sodium, and potassium was reduced. Diarrhea may be a
consequence of the shortening and clubbing of villi and inflammation and
degeneration of the mucosa. Neuronal degeneration of the spinal cord and distortion
of conditioned reflexes have also been observed, along with hepatic periportal fatty
metamorphosis. No marked gross changes were observed in the gastric mucosa other
than mild hyperemia and pallor. A reduction in urinary excretion of N-
methylnicotinamide and in the concentrations of NAD and NADP in liver and, to a
lesser degree, in muscle has been reported. Uncorrected deficiencies lead to
dehydration, emaciation, and death (Dann and Handler, 1941; Sarett, 1942; Schaefer
et al., 1942; Handler, 1943; Smith et al., 1943; Layne and Carey, 1944; Nelson et al.,
1963; Belavady and Gopalan, 1965; Greengard et al., 1966; Madhavan et al., 1968;
Manson and Carpenter, 1978).
Requirements
Sebrell et al. (1938) gave 6- to 8-kg dogs (presumably adult) a corn-based diet
(modified Goldberger diet) and twice-weekly injections of nicotinic acid. On a daily
body weight basis, 126 μg nicotinic acid·kg–1 resulted in incipient signs of disease,
whereas 340 μg·kg–1 prevented black tongue. Margolis et al. (1938) produced black
tongue in adult dogs by using a modified Goldberger diet. They reported that 500 μg
or more nicotinic acid·kg BW–1·d–1 cured the disease, whereas with 200 μg nicotinic


===== PDF PAGE 474 =====
473
acid·kg BW–1·d–1 the response was delayed and 100 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 was
ineffective. Birch (1939) also used a corn-based diet and reported that while 130 μg
nicotinic acid·kg BW–1·d–1prevented signs of black tongue and permitted some body
weight gain in depleted adult dogs, 250 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 allowed for rapid weight
gain. Lower doses of 27 and 84 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 gave no protection.
Schaefer et al. (1942) were the first to attempt to define the niacin requirements of
dogs using a purified diet. The diet used was fortified with thiamin, riboflavin,
pyridoxine, pantothenic acid, and choline. The requirements they determined for adult
dogs were 200 to 225 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 and for growing dogs 250 to 365 μg·kg BW–
1·d–1. The contribution of the tryptophan in casein to the niacin equivalents of the diet
was not calculated, but a diet that contained 660 g·kg–1 of acid-washed casein would
have supplied about 7.9 g tryptophan·kg–1 diet. If dogs converted all of the
tryptophan to niacin at the same efficiency (60:1) as reported for humans (Howitt et
al., 1981), the basal diet would have contributed about 132 mg niacin equivalents per
kilogram from tryptophan.
Singal et al. (1948) gave growing dogs a semipurified niacin-free diet based on 66
percent sucrose and 19 percent casein. They reported that when 21 percent of the
sucrose in the basal diet was replaced with an equal weight of low-tryptophan
proteins (zein or gelatin), there was no change in the time for the dogs to be depleted.
However when 21 percent of the sucrose was replaced with casein, a protein high in
tryptophan, about twice as much weight gain occurred before depletion. Although
none of these diets prevented clinical signs of niacin deficiency, a diet in which 42
percent of the sucrose was replaced by casein afforded complete protection from
niacin deficiency. Similarly, complete protection from niacin deficiency was obtained
by adding 0.5 percent L-tryptophan to the basal diet.
The efficiency of utilization of the D- vs. L-isomer of tryptophan for growth by
dogs was examined by Czarnecki and Baker (1982). They reported that D-tryptophan
was used with an efficiency of only 35 percent of that of L-tryptophan and that 15
percent of D-tryptophan was recovered in the urine, whereas no measurable
tryptophan was found in the urine of dogs given L-tryptophan.
At least two factors are responsible for the association of pellagra in humans and
black tongue in dogs with the consumption of corn. First, a high proportion of the
niacin in corn is bound and of low availability (Chaudhuri and Kodichek, 1960);
second, the tryptophan concentration in corn is lower than in most other cereals. It has
also been suggested (Belavady and Gopalan 1965; Belavady et al., 1967; Gopalan et
al., 1969) that high levels of leucine in jowar (Sorghum vulgare) may be a secondary
factor in the production of pellagra in humans and black tongue in dogs. However,
workers in other laboratories (Truswell et al., 1963; Nakagawa and Sasaki, 1977;
Manson and Carpenter, 1978) were not able to reproduce niacin deficiency by using
purified diets high in leucine.
The studies of Schaefer et al. (1942) indicated niacin requirements of growing
puppies and adult dogs of 365 and 225 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 respectively. The NRC


===== PDF PAGE 475 =====
474
(1986) suggested that, for diets containing minimal quantities of tryptophan, the daily
requirement of adult dogs is met by 225 μg of niacin·kg BW–1 and of growing dogs
by 450 μg niacin·kg BW–1. In the absence of more recent information, it is proposed
that 3.4 mg niacin per 1,000 kcal ME be used for all dogs. No published values could
be found regarding the requirements for pregnancy and lactation, but the increased
food intake associated with this physiological state should ensure adequate intake if
the diet contains the requirement for growth. ABGE (1989) suggested allowances of
200 μg/kg BW–1·d–1 for maintenance and 450 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 for growth and
reproduction.
Hypervitaminosis
Chen et al. (1938) reported that repeated oral doses of 2 g of nicotinic acid per day
(133 to 145 mg·kg BW–1·d–1) produced bloody feces in two dogs by the 11th day of
dosing, followed by convulsions and death. The NRC (1987) proposed that dietary
intakes in excess of 350 mg nicotinic acid·kg BW–1·d–1 are toxic to animals in
general. In view of the report by Chen et al. (1938), it is suggested that diets for
puppies contain less than 0.5 g nicotinic acid·kg–1 (4 kcal·g–1). Adult dogs may
tolerate concentrations up to 1.0 g·kg–1 diet. The safe upper concentration of niacin in
the diet of dogs has not been defined.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Heath et al. (1940) observed anorexia, elevated body temperature, a fiery red
tongue with ulceration, and congestion in a clinical case that responded to nicotinic
acid therapy. Carvalho da Silva et al. (1952) reported that young cats given purified
diets without niacin ceased growing after 10 to 15 days, lost body weight, and died in
15 to 50 days. They exhibited unkempt hair and diarrhea, but no skin or buccal
lesions or hematological changes. None of the 21 cats given a niacin-deficient diet
was able to maintain weight gain after 20 days. Adult cats lost weight and eventually
died. An association with respiratory disease was common and contributed to early
deaths.
Requirements
Because cats are unable to convert the tryptophan to nicotinic acid, their total
requirement of niacin must be derived from the diet. Heath et al. (1940) described
feline pellagra in a clinical case of a 14-month-old cat whose lesions of the buccal
cavity and inappetence resolved in 3 days after daily doses of 80 mg nicotinic acid.


===== PDF PAGE 476 =====
475
Carvalho da Silva (1950) reported that growing cats given a purified diet containing
all vitamins (except niacin and cobalamin), with 2.5 mg nicotinic acid three times a
week, had satisfactory growth, normal hemogram, and good health over a 12-month
period. In a later report, Carvalho da Silva et al. (1952) stated that cats given a
purified diet and supplemented with 4 mg of nicotinic acid three times a week
maintained good health and referenced his earlier report (Carvalho da Silva, 1950).
These authors concluded that “doses of 1 to 3 mg of niacin are effective against the
deficiency; the optimum appears to be 10 mg or more.” Braham et al. (1962) in
relatively short-term experiments used N-methyl-nicotinamide excretion in urine as
an index of niacin availability from corn-containing diets. They found adequate
weight gains with a diet supplying 5 mg nicotinic acid per day. They also reported no
difference in the N-methylnicotinamide of cats given raw and lime-treated corn,
which could mean that the niacin was utilized to a similar extent or was not utilized
since there were no controls.
The NRC (1986) proposed a minimal requirement of 40 mg nicotinic acid·kg–1
diet (5.0 kcal·g–1) or 8.0 mg per 1,000 kcal ME. In the absence of other information,
it is suggested that this requirement be maintained. This dietary concentration is
equivalent to a daily intake of 0.8 mg·kg BW–0.67. In formulating diets, the niacin
contributed by cereals should be given a presumed bioavailability of 30 percent or
disregarded.
Hypervitaminosis
There are no reports of adverse effects from excessive concentrations of nicotinic
acid or nicotinamide in cats. A presumed safe level for all animals of 350 mg·kg BW–
1·d–1 was suggested by the NRC (1987). The SUL of niacin in the diets for cats has
not been defined.
PANTOTHENIC ACID
Pantothenic acid is an integral component of CoA, which is synthesized in animals
by a series of steps that involve the initial phosphorylation of pantothenic acid to
pantothenic acid 4′-phosphate catalyzed by pantothenate kinase, the primary
regulatory step of CoA synthesis. This is followed by condensation with cysteine in
an ATP-dependent reaction to form 4′-phosphopantothenoylcysteine, decarboxylation
to yield 4′-phosphopantetheine, anhydride addition of adenosine 5′-monophosphate,
and phosphorylation of the ribose 3′-hydroxyl group to produce CoA (Plesofsky,
2001). All of the enzymes for CoA synthesis occur in the cytosol, but mitochondria
have the highest concentration of CoA.
Absorption, Transport, and Storage


===== PDF PAGE 477 =====
476
Pantothenic acid is required by all forms of life; it is widely distributed in foods
and deficiencies are rare. Most of the pantothenic acid in foods is contained in CoA,
acylCoA synthetase, and an acyl carrier protein. Foods that are particularly high in
panthothenic acid are organ meats (liver, kidney), yeast, and egg yolk. Coenzyme A
ingested in foods is hydrolyzed in the intestine to panthothenic acid, which is carried
by a sodium-dependent transport system and absorbed by the enterocyte. Serum
contains predominantly free pantothenic acid. Most cells take up pantothenic acid by
cotransport with sodium ions. CoA is ultimately hydrolyzed in a series of steps to
yield cysteamine and pantothenate which is excreted in the urine.
Dogs absorb free pantothenate efficiently from the gut. Taylor et al. (1974)
reported that 81 to 94 percent of an oral dose of 6.68 mg of sodium [14C]pantothenate
was absorbed. Urinary excretion, principally as the β-glucuronide, represented the
major route of excretion in dogs (Taylor et al., 1972). In distinction to other animals,
little loss of the free vitamin occurs from the kidney of dogs, but excretion of the β-
glucuronide approaches the glomerular filtration rate. Pantothenic acid in dehulled
soybean meal has a bioavailability to chicks of 100 percent relative to crystalline
pantothenic acid (Southern and Baker, 1981). The bioavailability of pantothenic acid
in grains is lower, about 60 percent.
Only the dextrorotatory form of the vitamin (d-pantothenate) has vitamin activity.
It may be prepared either as the pure dextrorotatory form or the dl-mixture, which has
only half the biological potency of the dextrorotatory form. Pantothenic acid is an
unstable, viscous oil that is extremely hydroscopic and destroyed by acids, bases, and
heat. Calcium and sodium salts of pantothenic acid are the common forms of the
vitamin used in dietary supplements (1 mg of pantothenic acid is equivalent to 1.087
mg of calcium pantothenate). Pantothenol, the alcohol derivative of pantothenic acid,
is more stable than pantothenate and is used in some multivitamin preparations.
Biological Function
Coenzyme A and other pantothenate-containing molecules participate in two types
of chemical reactions: acyl group transfer and condensation reactions. The free
sulfhydryl group of CoA (derived from cysteine) is the active site of esterification of
acetate or acyl groups. In acyl group transfer, there is nucleophilic addition to the
carbonyl group thioesterified to CoA, followed by new ester bond formation and
displacement of the CoA. Condensation reactions involve the acidification of the α-
carbon of the acyl group thioesterified to CoA, and attachment of the α-carbon to an
electrophilic center, leading to carbon-carbon bond formation or cleavage (Plesofsky,
2001).
Coenzyme A plays a central role in energy metabolism in oxidation of the
products from glycolysis, β-oxidation of fatty acids, and other reactions in the
tricarboxylic acid cycle. Acetyl-CoA condenses with oxaloacetate to yield citrate,
which begins the oxidation of two-carbon residues in the cycle. Succinate feeds into
the cycle as succinyl-CoA, which can contribute to gluconeogenesis. The synthesis of


===== PDF PAGE 478 =====
477
fatty acids and many essential compounds, such as steroids, cholesterol, and vitamin
D, depend on CoA. Coenzyme A is also required through succinyl-CoA for the
synthesis of the porphyrin rings of hemoglobin, and for acetylation reactions such as
the synthesis of acetylcholine and acetylated sugars. Reactions that involve donation
of an acetate group from CoA include the N-terminal (amino terminal) acetylation of
proteins. The exposed N-terminus of 50 to 90 percent of soluble proteins is modified
by acetate donated by CoA. His-tones and α-tubulin undergo selective reversible
acetylation of the ε-amino group of lysine residues. Coenzyme A is also involved in
the acylation of a large number of proteins, principally by the addition of palmitate,
myristate, or both.
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
A pantothenic acid-deficient diet resulted in erratic food intakes of puppies within
2 to 3 weeks and adult dogs within 7 to 8 weeks (Sibler, 1944). Sudden prostration or
coma, rapid respiratory and heart rates, convulsions, and gastrointestinal signs
including gastritis, enteritis, and intussusception occurred in acutely deficient dogs
(Schaefer et al., 1942). Reduced urinary excretion of the vitamin; reduction in the
concentrations of pantothenate in blood, liver, muscle, and brain (Sibler, 1944) and
reduced antibody production (Sheffy, 1964) have also been reported. On necropsy,
Schaefer et al. (1942) reported that the livers were light colored and very high in fat
(35-55 percent on a dry basis).
Requirements
Pantothenic acid was shown to be an essential dietary nutrient for dogs by
McKibbin et al. (1939, 1940), Fouts et al. (1940), and Morgan and Simms (1940).
Schaefer et al. (1942) further demonstrated the essentiality of pantothenic acid in the
diet of dogs. These authors gave weanling puppies and adult dogs a diet of 660 g
sucrose, 190 g acid-washed casein, 80 g cottonseed oil, 30 g cod liver oil, 40 g of a
salt mixture per kilogram, and supplemented it with thiamin, riboflavin, nicotinic
acid, pyridoxine, and choline. Growth ceased in the puppies after 3 to 4 weeks, and
dogs died if not given pantothenic acid. Other litters were given graded doses of 0,
20, 40, 60, 100, and 150 μg of calcium pantothenate·kg BW–1·d–1. A daily calcium
pantothenate supplement of 60 μg·kg BW–1 was inadequate, whereas either 100 or
150 μg·kg–1·d–1prevented the development of clinical signs of deficiency.
Sheffy (1964) depleted beagle puppies of pantothenate by feeding a complete
purified diet lacking pantothenate for 4 to 5 weeks. Calcium pantothenate
supplements were then given at approximately 0, 50, 100, 200, 500, and 1,000 μg·kg


===== PDF PAGE 479 =====
478
BW–1·d–1, and the dogs were given a single inoculation of a combination attenuated
vaccine of distemper virus and infectious canine hepatitis virus. Puppies receiving the
0 and 50 μg pantothenate·kg BW–1·d–1died. There was no significant difference in
the rate of body weight gain of puppies given 200, 500, and 1,000 μg·kg BW–1·d–1.
Puppies given the highest two levels of supplementation had higher antibody titers at
7 days but not at 21 days than puppies receiving 200 μg·kg BW–1·d–1. Sheffy
concluded that the requirement for growth was between 100 and 200 μg pantothenic
acid·kg BW–1·d–1. Since a depletion-repletion protocol was followed, the higher
levels of supplementation would give a more rapid repletion and an overestimation of
the requirement.
The upper intake of 200 μg·kg BW–1·d–1 for pantothenic acid suggested by Sheffy
(1964) corresponds to an approximate dietary concentration of 1 mg per 1,000 kcal
ME. The NRC (1985) proposed a value of 2.7 mg per 1,000 kcal ME for growing
dogs. In the absence of more recent information, it is suggested that a dietary
concentration of 3.0 mg per 1,000 kcal ME be used for all physiological stages of life.
This dietary concentration is equivalent to an intake of 0.39 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1 for
an adult dog at maintenance.
Hypervitaminosis
Pantothenic acid is generally regarded as nontoxic (Omaye, 1984). No cases of
pantothenic acid toxicity in dogs have been reported. The NRC (1987) concluded that
levels of 20 g pantothenic acid·kg–1 diet can be tolerated by most species.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Gershoff and Gottlieb (1964) reported failure to grow and histological changes as
the main signs of pantothenate deficiency. The livers of kittens receiving 0, 1, or 3 mg
calcium pantothenate·kg–1 diet had moderate to marked fatty metamorphosis and
both fine and coarse vacuolar formation. Lesions of the gastrointestinal tract were
confined to the small bowel and consisted of giant blunted villi in the jejunum and
upper ileum.
Requirements
Gershoff and Gottlieb (1964) gave 3-month-old kittens a purified pantothenate
diet, which was supplemented with 0, 1, 3, 5, 10, and 20 mg of calcium
pantothenate·kg–1 diet. Kittens receiving 1 mg of calcium pantothenate died after 3.5


===== PDF PAGE 480 =====
479
to 4 months; three of four kittens receiving the 3-mg diet died after 6 months; and one
lived to 9 months. No deaths occurred in the cats given the diets of 5, 10, and 20 mg
calcium pantothenate, and they had similar growth rates. All cats received an
injection of p-aminobenzoic acid after receiving the diets for 3 months, and urinary
excretion of acetylated and total p-aminobenzoic acid was measured. Kittens
receiving the diets containing 5, 10, or 20 mg of calcium pantothenate had similar
excretion of acetylated p-aminobenzoic acid. The authors concluded that 5 mg
calcium pantothenate·kg–1 diet (or about 1.25 mg calcium pantothenate per 1,000
kcal ME) was a MR for growing kittens. In terms of pantothenic acid, this
concentration is equivalent to 4.6 mg panthothenic acid·kg–1 diet or about 1.15 mg
per 1,000 kcal ME. A dietary concentration of 1.25 mg per 1,000 kcal ME is
equivalent to a pantothenic acid intake of 0.12 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1 for an adult cat at
maintenance.
Hypervitaminosis
No cases of pantothenic acid toxicity in cats have been reported. The NRC (1987)
concluded that levels of 20 g of pantothenic acid·kg–1 diet can be tolerated by most
species (calcium pantothenate = 0.9201 pantothenic acid).
COBALAMIN (VITAMIN B12)
Cobalamin, the preferred name for the family of derivatives familiarly known as
vitamin B12 (Beck, 2000), is unique among the vitamins in that it is synthesized only
by certain microorganisms. Whenever cobalamins occur in nature, they are the result
of synthesis by bacteria or other microorganisms in the rumen, intestine, soil, or
sewage. All animals, including dogs and cats, ultimately depend on microbially
synthesized cobalamin. The chemical structure of the cobalamins consists of two
major portions: a planar group with an imperfect resemblance to a porphyrin ring and
a nucleotide that lies nearly perpendicular to the planar group. The porphyrin-like
moiety contains four reduced pyrrole rings that link to a central cobalt atom (Beck,
2000). While the intestinal flora in cats and dogs can synthesize cobalamins in the
presence of cobalt, the site of production in the gut is caudal to the absorptive site.
Therefore, the addition of cobalt as a nutrient to dog and cat foods is not warranted.
The major food sources of cobalamin in the diet are animal products, plant
products being essentially devoid of the vitamin. In animal and fermentation products,
the cobalamin is bound to protein as methylcobalamin or adenosylcobalamin. Before
the recognition of cobalamin as a vitamin, the response in performance following the
addition of animal versus plant proteins to the diet was called “animal protein factor.”
Commercially produced cobalamin is derived from fermentation, and during isolation
a cyano group is attached. This cyano group is removed in the body after ingestion.
Large doses of cobalamin have been used as an antidote for cyanide poisoning. One


===== PDF PAGE 481 =====
480
USP unit of vitamin B12 is equivalent to 1 μg of the vitamin. Cyanocobalamin is
considered very stable in foodstuffs.
Absorption
The absorption of cobalamins from food requires the presence of glycoproteins
called “intrinsic factors” (IFs), which combine with cobalamins (“extrinsic factor”)
that are released from foods in the stomach by peptic digestion. Other cobalmin-
binding proteins in gastric juice, known as R binders, form complexes with cobalmins
that are nonabsorbable. IF is only produced in the gastric mucosa in humans, but its
production is weak or absent in the gastric mucosa of dogs and cats (Hippe and
Schwartz, 1971; Okuda et al., 1973). In dogs, the pancreas is the major, and the
stomach the lesser, source of IF (Batt and Horadagosa, 1989; Batt et al., 1989;
Vaillant et al., 1990). The pancreas appears to be the sole source of IF in cats (Fyfe,
1993). The stable cobalamin-IF complex in the small intestine associates with specific
mucosal receptors on the microvilli of enterocytes (Levine et al., 1984). IF-cobalmin
binds to the receptor in preference to IF alone.
The ileum is generally regarded as the major site of cobalamin absorption in
mammals, but significant absorption was shown to occur from the jejunum of cats
and dogs (Gazet and McColl, 1967). However, Levine et al. (1984) reported
immunoreactive IF-cobalmin receptors only in the ileum of dogs, and Batt et al.
(1989) showed much lower binding of purified gastric and pancreatic IF to jejunal
than ileal vesicles. After the IF-cobalamin complex binds to the receptor, either
cobalamin slowly enters the enterocyte by pinocytosis of the whole complex and
dissociation of the cobalamin, or the IF remains outside the cell and only the
cobalmin enters. Once in the enterocyte, cobalamin binds to a macromolecule that is
immunologically similar to IF.
The plasma and extracellular fluid contain proteins that bind cobalamin. In
humans, cobalamin is transported in plasma as methylcobalamin by two proteins:
transcobalamin I (also called haptocorrin) and transcobalamin II. Transcobalamin I is
a glycoprotein, which is antigenically similar to the R binders present in tissues and
tissue fluids of many species, and in humans carries almost all of the total serum
cobalamin. Transcobalamin II is a protein composed of two subunits, without a
carbohydrate moiety. About three-quarters of the total plasma cobalamin in dogs and
cats is associated with transcobalamin II. In cats, cobalamin is mainly in the form of
adenosylcobalamin and hydroxocobalamin (Peters et al., 1971; Quadros et al., 1976).
Cat and dog plasma does not contain transcobalamin I, but another transport protein,
transcobalamin O, which carries about 10 to 15 percent of the cobalamin (Linnel et
al., 1979). The erythrocytes of cats unlike humans have higher concentrations of
methylcobalamin and hydroxocobalamin than found in plasma (Quadros et al., 1976).
Biological Function


===== PDF PAGE 482 =====
481
Cobalamin forms two coenzymes, adenosylcobalamin and methylcobalamin, that
participate in the functioning of more than a dozen enzyme systems but only two—
adenosylcobalamin-dependent methylmalonyl CoA mutase and methylcobalamin-
dependent methyltetrahydrofolate-homocysteine methyl transferase (now termed
methionine synthase)—are involved in dogs and cats. Adenosylcobalamindependent
enzymes catalyze carbon skeleton molecular rearrangements, whereas
methylcobalamin-dependent enzymes are involved in methyl transfer from a tertiary
amine.
Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase participates in the metabolism of propionate, arising
from the deamination and degradation of the amino acids and odd-chain fatty acids to
succinate. In this reaction, propionyl-CoA is carboxylated by a biotin-containing
enzyme to methylmalonyl-CoA. This epimer is then racemized to another epimer that
is the substrate for methylmalonyl-CoA mutase, which catalyzes the conversion of
methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA. When there is a deficiency of methylmalonyl-
CoA mutase, there is a reduction in succinate synthesis and methylmalonic acid
accumulates in blood and is excreted in the urine.
Methyltetrahydrofolate-homocysteine methyltransferase catalyzes the removal of
the N5-methyl group from N5methyltetrahydrofolate and its transfer to homocysteine,
producing methionine and tetrahydrofolate. This reaction is of major significance in
hematopoiesis (see folic acid).
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
In contrast to the lack of information on which to base a quantitative requirement,
there are a number of clinical reports of cobalamin deficiency in dogs. These reports
relate to either deficiencies induced by bacterial overgrowth of the intestine resulting
in decreased availability of cobalamin to the dog, or genetic abnormalities of
cobalamin metabolism.
Fyfe et al. (1991) reported a selective intestinal malabsorption of cobalamin in
giant schnauzers that was inherited as a simple autosomal recessive trait. Affected
puppies exhibited inappetence and failure to thrive beginning at 6 to 12 weeks of age,
as well as neutropenia with hypersegmentation, anemia, and megaloblastic changes of
bone marrow. Serum cobalamin concentrations were low, and methylmalonic aciduria
and homocysteinemia were present. Parenteral but not oral administration of
cyanocobalamin rapidly eliminated all clinical signs. Oral administration of
[57Co]cyanocobalamin with or without IF showed that there was a problem with
cobalamin absorption. Transcobalamin II and IF appeared normal, but the receptor for
IF-cobalamin was absent from the apical brush border microvilli of the ileum.


===== PDF PAGE 483 =====
482
Requirements
While dogs have been extensively used as models for the study of cobalamin
absorption and transport (see NRC, 1985, for references), there have been no studies
on the quantitative requirements for the vitamin. Arnrich et al. (1952) gave weanling
cocker spaniel puppies a semipurified diet containing 20 percent vitamin-free casein
for 20 weeks. No anemia was found in the puppies, and while body weight gains were
satisfactory, gains appeared to have been increased by a supplement of 50 μg
cobalamin·kg–1 diet. No measurements of blood concentrations of cobalamin, or
urinary excretion of methylmalonic acid were done. Urinary cobalamin excretion has
been reported by several investigators (Nelp et al., 1964; Coppi et al., 1970;
Silverman, 1979), but no data were presented to allow an estimate of requirements.
In the absence of experimental data, it is suggested that the requirements proposed
by NRC (1985) of 7 μg per 1,000 kcal ME be maintained as an adequate intake for all
dogs. This dietary concentration is equivalent to a cobalamin intake of 0.92 μg·kg
BW–0.75·d–1 for an adult dog at maintenance. Much higher concentrations would be
required for dogs with compromised gastrointestinal function.
Hypervitaminosis
There are no reports of toxicity resulting from ingestion of high doses of
cobalamin by dogs. Subcutaneous doses of 2 to 33 μg·kg BW–1 have been given to
dogs, and have resulted in disturbances of reflex activity.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Morris (1977) reported that weaned kittens given a cobalamin-deficient diet grew
normally for 3 to 4 months, after which there was a cessation of growth followed by
subsequent body weight loss at an accelerating rate until parenteral administration of
10 μg of cyanocobalamin per day was instigated. Following supplementation, there
was an immediate gain in body weight. The hair coat of deficient cats had the
appearance of being wet. Deficient cats also exhibited elevated basal urinary
excretion of methylmalonic acid, which was augmented by a factor of about eight
with a valine load. Probably because of the high concentrations of folate in the diet,
hemoglobin concentration, hematocrit, and bone marrow histology were normal.
Ruaux et al. (2001) reported that cats with low cobalamin concentrations in serum
exhibited elevated concentrations of methylmalonic acid and disturbances in amino
acid metabolism indicated by increased concentrations of methionine and decreased
concentrations of cystathionine and cysteine.


===== PDF PAGE 484 =====
483
Clinical cases of cobalamin deficiency in cats have been of two types: those
associated with inborn errors and those resulting from bacterial overgrowth of the
intestine. Vaden et al. (1992) reported a cat that was anorectic, failed to thrive, and
had methylmalonic acidemia and a low serum cobalamin concentration. In an in vitro
assay of hepatic methylmalonic-CoA mutase activity, the stimulation from the
addition of adenosylcobalamin was greater than in normal animals.
Simpson et al. (2001) reported subnormal concentrations of cobalamin in the
plasma of cats exhibiting weight loss, diarrhea, vomiting, anorexia, or thickened
intestines. Definitive diagnosis included inflammatory bowel disease, intestinal
lymphoma, cholangiohepatitis or cholangitis, and pancreatic inflammation. The
authors suggested that cats with subnormal absorption of cobalamin may require
parenteral administration of cobalamin every 2 weeks to maintain normal plasma
concentrations. The rate of depletion of plasma cobalamin is many times more rapid
in cats than in humans where a single injection may be adequate for many months.
The difference may be due to defective enterohepatic recirculation of cobalamin in
cats or the lack of transcobalamin 1 in plasma.
Requirements
Although the essentiality of dietary cobalamin for weaned kittens given a purified
diet has been established (Keesling and Morris, 1975; Morris, 1977), there have been
no experiments in which diets containing variable amounts of cobalamin have been
given to cats to derive a MR. In purified diets, it is known that 20 μg cobalamin·kg–1
(about 4.5 μg per 1,000 kcal ME) will maintain normal hemoglobin concentrations
during pregnancy, lactation, and growth of kittens (Kang et al., 1987). Since the
bioavailability of cobalamin does not appear to be of significant concern, these
concentrations are recommended as adequate intakes for all physiological states.
Hypervitaminosis
There are no reports of toxicity resulting from the ingestion of high doses of
cobalamin in cats. Large does of cobalamin have been given as an antidote for
cyanide poisoning in species other than cats.
FOLIC ACID
The presence of a factor in foods that prevented megaloblastic anemia and
stimulated animal growth was known in the 1930s but was not identified and
synthesized until 1946 when it was named folic acid. Originally, it was thought that
folic acid was the only factor required for the treatment of pernicious anemia in
humans, but with the later discovery of cobalamin it became clear that a second factor
was involved. Folic acid (pteroylmonoglutamic acid) consists of a pterin moiety (2-


===== PDF PAGE 485 =====
484
amino-4-hydroxypteridine) linked by a methylene group at carbon 6 to p-
aminobenzoylglutamic acid. Natural folates occur in the reduced, 7,8-dihy-dro, and
5,6,7,8-tetrahydro forms. Folates in nature occur as pteroyloligo-γ-L-glutamates
(PteGlun), where n is 1-9 or more glutamates long (Brody and Shane, 2001).
Absorption, Transport, and Storage
Folate in natural food ingredients is present mainly as pteroylpolyglutamate
derivatives that are hydrolyzed in the intestine to monoglutamates by a γ-
glutamylhydrolyase (Baugh et al., 1975). Absorption of monoglutamates occurs via a
saturable carrier-mediated process, but at high concentrations absorption by diffusion-
like processes can occur. The main site of absorption of folates is the jejunum, but
some absorption occurs throughout the intestine anterior to the ileum (Bernstein et al.,
1972). In the passage across the intestinal mucosa, most of dietary folate is
metabolized to 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-methyl-H4PteGlun), and most of the
circulating folate in plasma is in the form of 5-methyl-H4PteGlu. Mammalian tissues
do not transport polyglutamates with a chain length of 3 or more. After absorption,
folate passes into the portal circulation where much of it is taken up by the liver. In
the liver, folates are either released to pass into the circulation or converted to
polyglutamate derivatives and retained. The plasma contains low-affinity binding
proteins, principally albumin, and high-affinity proteins. Erythrocytes contain higher
concentrations of folate than plasma in both dogs (Bunch et al., 1990) and cats (Yu
and Morris, 1998). In the tissues, folate is present in both the cytosol and the
mitochondria, and accumulates through its conversion to polyglutamates, which do
not diffuse out of the cell. The relationship between dietary and serum concentrations
of folate in dogs has been reported by Davenport et al. (1994) and in cats by Yu and
Morris (1998).
Biological Function
Folates are used as cofactors and serve as donors and acceptors of one-carbon
units in a variety of reactions involving amino acids and nucleotide metabolism.
These functions of folate result from its ability to transfer one-carbon units as 5-
methyl, 5-formyl, 10-formyl, 5,10-methenyl, 5,10-methylene, and 5-formimino
groups. The majority of reactions involving folate occur in the cytosol, but folate
reactions involving single-carbon transfer between serine and glycine occur in the
mitochondria. To be coenzymatically active, the pyrazine ring of the pterin moiety
must be reduced to the tetrahydro form and the glutamate chain has to be elongated
by addition of glutamate residues. Reactions involving folate can be conveniently
grouped into four main categories: amino acid metabolism, nucleotide metabolism,
disposal of one-carbon units, and mitochondrial protein synthesis (Brody and Shane,
2001).


===== PDF PAGE 486 =====
485
In the interconversion of serine to glycine, serine hydroxy-methyltransferase
catalyzes the transfer of formaldehyde from serine to tetrahydrofolate (H4PteGlun) to
give glycine and 5,10-methylene-H4PteGlun. This reaction occurs in the
mitochondria, and the cytosol and is catalyzed by two different isoenzymes. In the
mitochondrial glycine cleavage system, glycine in the presence of NAD+ and
H4PteGlun yields carbon dioxide and ammonia, and a single carbon is transferred to
H4PteGlun as 5,10-methylene-H4PteGlun. A major pathway of single-carbon
utilization is the reduction of 5,10-methylene-H4PteGlun to 5-methyl-H4PteGlun by
5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase and transfer of the methyl group to
homocysteine to produce methionine, which regenerates H4PteGlun. The methyl
transfer reaction is catalyzed by methionine synthetase, a cobalamin-dependent
enzyme. Homocysteine is derived from the hydrolysis of S-adenosylhomocysteine
resulting when a methyl group is donated by S-adenosylmethionine.
N-Formiminoglutamic acid is an intermediary in the catabolism of histidine.
Formininotransferase catalyzes the transfer of the formimino group to H4PteGlun
resulting in the formation of 5-formimino-H4PteGlun and glutamate. This reaction is
the basis of a clinical test for folate deficiency. When folate is deficient, the
concentration of formiminoglutamic acid (FIGLU) in plasma and urine is greatly
augmented especially after a load of histidine.
Folate is not directly involved in the synthesis of pyrimidines but is required for
the synthesis of thymidylate. A one-carbon unit at the oxidation level of
formaldehyde is donated by 5,10-methylene-H4PteGlun to deoxyuridine
monophosphate (dUMP), which results in the production of deoxythymidine
monophosplate (dTMP) and the formation of dihydrofolate. This is the only reaction
of folate in which the oxidation state changes from tetrahydro- to dihydrofolate and
differs from other reactions in that it involves the transfer not only of a
hydroxymethyl group but also of a hydride. When folate is not available to perform
these functions there is disturbed DNA synthesis and megaloblastic anemia.
In purine synthesis the carbons at positions 2 and 8 of the purine ring are derived
from 10-formyl-H4PteGlun, which follows from the oxidation of 5,10-methylene-
H4PteGlun. Folate also participates in the oxidation of one-carbon moieties to carbon
dioxide. The enzyme 10-formyl-tetrahydro-folate dehydrogenase catalyzes the
oxidation of the 10-formyl group of H4PteGlun. A less quantified role of folate is in
protein biosynthesis in mitochondria, which is initiated by a special transfer RNA, N-
formylmethionyl-tRNAf met. The formyl group for this tRNA is donated by 10-
formyl-H4PteGlun.
Dogs


===== PDF PAGE 487 =====
486
Signs of Deficiency
Afonsky (1954) reported that a dog given a purified diet for 152 days exhibited
body weight loss, a decline in the hemoglobin concentration of blood, and a lowered
hematocrit. A single injection of folic acid normalized hemoglobin and hematocrit
within 14 days; thereafter hemoglobin declined, but it returned to normal after a
further injection. Sheffy (1964) reported erratic appetite and decreased weight gains
in folate-deficient puppies. In an observational study without controls, Elwood and
Colquhoun (1997) reported a decrease in the incidence of cleft palates in Boston
terrier puppies from 17.6 percent to 4.2 percent following daily supplementation of
the bitches with 5 mg folic acid from mating until the pups were 3 weeks of age. Folic
acid supplementation of women during pregnancy has been shown to reduce the
incidence of neural tube defects (Medical Research Council, 1991).
Requirements
Krehl and Elvehjem (1954) gave dogs a niacin-deficient diet without added folate
and reported that they responded poorly to the addition of nicotinic acid. However,
when a “folic acid concentrate” from liver was added to the diet, the dogs consistently
responded to the addition of nicotinic acid, indicating the essentiality of folic acid for
dogs. Folates are produced by bacteria in the gut and are absorbed, but the
contribution from this source has not been quantified. Information from other species
indicates that the type of diet will affect the amount absorbed. Bernstein et al. (1975)
reported that the gut of dogs contained at least four folate compounds including 5-
formyl- and 5-methyltetrahydrofolic acid and tetrahydrofolic acid.
Sheffy (1964) depleted 4- to 5-week-old puppies of folate by giving a purified
casein-based diet containing sulfasuxidine without added folate. After 9 weeks, the
dogs developed erratic appetites and body weight gains decreased, but there was no
change in blood hemoglobin concentration. All dogs were then given a vaccination of
distemper and infectious hepatitis antigens and divided into two groups. One group
received 27.5 μg folic acid·kg BW–1·d–1and the other group was not supplemented.
Antibodies were found in the supplemented dogs 8 days after challenge, whereas
depleted dogs did not show antibodies until 17 days after vaccination. Sheffy
suggested that the folic acid requirement was less than 13μg·kg BW–1·d–1.
The folic acid needs of dogs given diets based on natural constituents and not
containing bacteriostatic agents may be partially met by microbial synthesis in the
intestine. However, diets that are inadequate in choline, methionine, and cobalamin
may increase requirements for folic acid.
Following a review of the literature, it is suggested that the folic requirement given
by the NRC (1985) of 54 μg per 1,000 kcal ME be retained for all physiological
stages. This dietary concentration supplies 7 μg·kg BW–0.75·d–1 for adult dogs at
maintenance and over twice that for growing puppies.


===== PDF PAGE 488 =====
487
Excess Intake of Folic Acid
No adverse responses to folic acid have been documented (NRC, 1987), but a
presumed safe level of 1,000 times the requirement is suggested.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
Long-term folate deficiency in cats is associated with a decrease in growth rate
and an increase in plasma iron concentration (Carvalho da Silva et al., 1955),
megaloblastic anemia (Thenen and Rasmussen, 1978; Yu and Morris, 1998), and
greatly augmented urinary excretion of FIGLU following an L-histidine load (Yu and
Morris, 1998). Yu et al. (1999) reported in addition erythroid hyperplasia of the bone
marrow and significant elevation of plasma concentration of homocysteine, the latter
being higher in male than female kittens.
Requirements
Carvalho da Silva et al. (1955) was not able to produce folate deficiency in 2- to 3-
month-old kittens given a purified diet without added folate or cobalamin unless
sulfonamides (sulfaguanidine or sulfanilamide) were added to the diet. Assessment of
folate deficiency was based mainly on hematological parameters. Either no or slight
hematological responses to low doses of parenteral folate were obtained in kittens
receiving the sulfonamide diet without folate. The greatest responses were obtained to
supplementation with a combination of folate and cobalamin, indicating that the
authors may have produced a multiple deficiency state.
Amyes et al. (1973) reported that the folic acid concentration of cat plasma,
erythrocytes, and liver declined from birth to 32 days, but no information was given
on the dietary folate concentration. Folate deficiency was produced in weanling
kittens given a purified diet based on casein and lard without added folate by Thenen
and Rasmussen (1978). The basal diet contained 2 μg folate·kg–1 and by 10 weeks the
kittens had developed megaloblastic anemia. No evidence of anemia was present in
control kittens given the same diet with 1.36 mg folic acid·kg–1.
Yu and Morris (1998) gave 8-week-old weaned kittens a complete purified diet
(except for folate) based on gelatin and amino acids. When the kittens were 10 weeks
of age, they were given one of seven diets with folic acid concentrations varying from
0.1 to 1.2 mg·kg–1 diet. At 20 weeks of age, mean corpuscular volume and mean
corpuscular hemoglobin were elevated in groups given diets with less than 0.3 mg
folate·kg–1, but all other hematological parameters were unaffected by dietary folate
levels. Plasma, erythrocyte, and whole-blood folate levels were linearly related to


===== PDF PAGE 489 =====
488
dietary folate concentration. After a histidine load of 0.22 g of L-histidine·kg BW–1,
FIGLU excretion was elevated in kittens receiving diets containing less than 0.6 mg
folate·kg–1 diet. The authors recommended a minimal concentration of 0.6 mg folic
acid·kg–1. For a dietary concentration of 0.6 mg of folic acid·kg–1, the mean
concentrations of folate in whole blood, erythrocytes, and plasma were 5.9 ± 1.1, 17.8
± 2.3, and 3.6 ± 0.3 μg·L–1, respectively.
A concentration of 0.6 mg of folic acid·kg–1 diet (of 4 kcal ME·g–1) is equivalent
to a folate intake of 15 μg·kg BW–0.67·d–1 for an adult cat at maintenance.
Excess Folates in the Diet
There are no reports of adverse reactions resulting from the ingestion of excess
folate by either cats or dogs. The NRC (1987) stated that “administration of massive
doses of folic acid in the diet have not been reported to cause adverse effects.”
BIOTIN
The discovery of biotin as an essential nutrient for animals was intimately linked
with the demonstration that certain food extracts were able to reverse a condition
produced by the feeding of raw egg white. Egg white contains a glycoprotein avidin
that very tightly binds biotin (dissociation constant [Kd] = 10–15), is resistant to
intestinal proteolysis, and is biologically inactive. One molecule of avidin binds four
molecules of biotin, and even heat treatment (15 minutes at 100°C) releases only 0 to
10 percent of the bound biotin (Green, 1963). Spontaneous biotin deficiencies rarely
occur in dogs and cats in the absence of a diet containing raw egg white. Additionally,
biotin is well distributed among foods and microbial synthesis in the gut may provide
most if not all of the vitamin requirement (Murthy and Mistry, 1977).
Absorption
Although biotin is widely distributed in foodstuffs, the concentration is low
compared to the other water-soluble vitamins. Most of the biotin in foods, including
meats and cereal grains, is covalently bound to proteins. The form of the binding is ε-
N-biotinyl-L-lysine (biocytin). During the luminal phase of digestion, biotinidase in
pancreatic juice may release biotin (Wolf et al., 1984), or biotin attached to
oligopeptides may be released by mucosal biotinidases. In the intestine of rats, biotin
is cleaved from the protein by the enzyme biotinidase. A biotin transporter has been
demonstrated in the intestinal brush border membrane and in brush border membrane
vesicles. This transporter requires both an intact ureido group and a free carboxyl
group on the valeric acid of biotin for active transport (Bowman et al., 1989;
McCormick and Zhang, 1993). In biotin deficiency in rats, there is up-regulation of


===== PDF PAGE 490 =====
489
biotin transport by an increase in Vmax, indicating an increase in number of
transporters but no change in affinity. Carrier-mediated transport moves the biotin
from the enterocyte across the basolateral membrane. In humans, biotin in plasma is
in the free form (Mock and Malik, 1992). No studies have been done on the
absorption or transport of biotin in dogs or cats.
A biotin transport system has been identified in vesicles prepared from kidney
brush border and basolateral membranes. Since most of the biotin in plasma, at least
in humans, is in the free form, an efficient transport system is required to prevent
undue loss of biotin from the glomerular filtrate.
No studies were found on the site of absorption of biotin from the intestine of cats
or dogs. However, in rats, although maximal transport occurs in the small intestine,
absorption from the proximal colon is significant (Bowman and Rosenberg, 1987),
supporting the potential contribution of biotin synthesized by enteric microflora.
Also, this finding provides a rationale for the need to use dietary sulfonamides to
produce biotin deficiency in experimental animals.
The bioavailability of biotin in corn, soybean meal, and meat and bone meal to
chickens is high (86 to 100 percent), but in wheat, barley, triticale, and sorghum it is
only about 50 percent (Baker, 1995).
Biological Function
Biotin is a bicyclic compound; one of the rings contains a ureido group and the
other contains sulfur in a tetrahydrothiophene ring with a valeric acid side chain.
Biotin has three asymmetric carbon atoms; hence, there are eight stereoisomers of
which only one, d-(+)-biotin, which occurs naturally, is enzymatically active (Mock,
2001). Biotin serves as an essential cofactor in four carboxylase reactions in
mammals that catalyze the incorporation of bicarbonate as a carboxyl group into
substrates. In nonmammalian systems, biotin-dependent enzymes also act as
transcarboxylases and decarboxylases.
Three of the four mammalian carboxylases are mitochondrial enzymes (pyruvate,
propionyl-CoA, and methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylases) and the fourth, acetyl-CoA
carboxylase, occurs in both mitochondria and cytosol. Pyruvate carboxylase catalyzes
the incorporation of bicarbonate into pyruvate to form oxaloacetate, which in
gluconeogenic tissues such as liver and kidney can be converted to glucose.
Degradation of the amino acids isoleucine, methionine, threonine, and valine results
in the production of propionyl-CoA, which on carboxylation (catalyzed by propionyl-
CoA carboxylase), is converted to the D-isomer of methylmalonyl-CoA. After several
steps, methylmalonyl-CoA is converted to succinyl-CoA, which feeds into the
tricarboxylic acid cycle. Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase, the third mitochondrial
biotin-dependent carboxylase, is involved in the degradation of the amino acid
leucine. Acetyl-CoA carboxylase catalyses the incorporation of bicarbonate into
acetyl-CoA to form malonyl-CoA, which is a substrate for fatty acid elongation.


===== PDF PAGE 491 =====
490
In the carboxylases biotin is attached to the apocarboxylase by a condensation
reaction catalyzed by holocarboxylase synthetase, which is present in both cytosol
and mitochondria. Attachment occurs via an amide bond formed between the ε-amino
group of a lysine residue on the apocarboxylase and the valeric acid carboxylic group
of biotin.
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
There are no reports providing an adequate description of the clinical signs of
biotin deficiency in dogs. Greve (1963) reported scurfy skin (due to hyperkeratosis of
the superficial and follicular epithelia) and a marked decline in the concentration of
urinary biotin. In contrast to cats, alopecia and hypochromotrichia have not been
reported in biotin-deficient dogs.
Requirements
A reduction in the activities of pyruvate and propionyl-CoA carboxylases in liver
and kidney homogenates from beagle puppies was demonstrated by Shen et al. (1977)
in puppies that were fed raw egg white along with a diet without biotin. Greve (1963)
gave dogs a diet containing spray-dried egg white and sulfaguanidine to inhibit biotin
synthesis by enteric bacteria. These dogs produced urine with a biotin concentration
of less than 0.05 pg·mL–1 compared to a “normal” of 7 to 13 pg·mL–1. While dogs
have a metabolic requirement for biotin, a dietary requirement is not likely to be
demonstrated when egg white and antimicrobials are not present in a diet of natural
foods. ABGE (1989) recommended 2 μg biotin·kg BW–1·d–1 for maintenance and 4
μg biotin·kg BW–1·d–1 for growth and reproduction.
Hypervitaminosis
There are no reports of biotin toxicity in dogs. Studies in poultry and swine
indicate that these species can safely tolerate dietary levels of 4 to 10 times their
nutritional requirements for biotin (NRC, 1987). Since biotin is readily excreted in the
urine of many animals, the maximal tolerable level of biotin for dogs may be much
higher.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency


===== PDF PAGE 492 =====
491
Clinical signs of biotin deficiency include accumulation of salivary, nasal, and
lachrymal secretions, progressive alopecia, achromotrichia, dermatitis, body weight
loss, and diarrhea in the terminal stages of the deficiency. Hepatic propionyl-CoA
activities are depressed.
Requirements
Carey and Morris (1977) gave 3-month-old kittens a purified basal diet containing
32 percent vitamin-free casein as a protein source. No evidence of biotin deficiency
was found when the diet contained no supplemental biotin or when 2 percent
succinylsulfathiazole was added to the diet to suppress enteric synthesis. However,
when the diet contained 13.5 percent casein and 18.5 percent dried egg white, after 25
weeks the cats had accumulated dried salivary, nasal, and lachrymal secretions in the
facial region and developed a progressive alopecia that began at the extremities and
progressed over the whole body. Accompanying the alopecia was achromotrichia, a
scaly dermatitis, and body weight loss, attended by diarrhea in the terminal stages.
Asymptomatic kittens given the 32 percent casein diet without biotin supplementation
and 2 percent succinylsulfathiazole were changed to a diet of 32 percent egg white,
which was followed by an almost immediate loss of body weight and similar clinical
signs. Subcutaneous injection of 0.25 mg D-biotin on alternate days caused remission
of clinical signs. There was a marked reduction in the activity of hepatic propionyl-
CoA carboxylase in deficient cats, which was restored by parenteral biotin.
Pastoor et al. (1991) reported that a diet containing the same or higher percentage
of egg white (18.5 percent) as used by Carey and Morris (1977) produced biotin
deficiency in cats. Although these studies demonstrate that cats have a metabolic
requirement for biotin, they do not permit an estimate of the requirement. Cats
probably do not need a supplemental source of biotin in the diet except under
abnormal conditions (e.g., when the diet contains significant amounts of raw egg
white). A purified diet containing 60 μg of biotin·kg–1 supported pregnancy and
lactation in queens and normal growth in kittens. It is suggest that addition of 60 μg
biotin·kg–1 diet (4 kcal ME·g–1) may be prudent even in the absence of raw egg white
in the diet. This dietary concentration will supply approximately 1.5 μg·kg BW–
0.67·d–1 for an adult cat at maintenance, and this is given as an adequate intake.
Hypervitaminosis
There are no reports of biotin toxicity in cats. Studies in poultry and swine indicate
that these species can safely tolerate dietary levels of 4 to 10 times their nutritional
requirements for biotin (NRC, 1987). Since biotin is readily excreted in the urine, the
maximal tolerable level of biotin for cats may be much higher.


===== PDF PAGE 493 =====
492
CHOLINE
Choline is not a true vitamin in the classical sense, because many animals are
capable of synthesizing choline in the liver by methylation of ethanolamine, using
methyl groups donated by S-adenosylmethionine. Methylation occurs in two steps and
involves two methyltransferases. Because synthesis under some conditions is
inadequate, and small amounts of choline in the diet can prevent certain pathological
conditions, it has been traditional to include choline with the B vitamins. The need for
choline in the diet of dogs was shown coincidental with research on insulin, when it
was found that lecithin prevented fatty liver and death in dogs lacking a pancreas
(Best and Huntsman, 1932, 1933, 1935). The term “lipotrophic” was applied to
choline and other factors that prevented the accumulation of fat in the liver.
Choline is an integral component of the phospholipid phosphatidylcholine or
lecithin. The major role of choline is as a donor of methyl groups for methylation
reactions. Other compounds including methionine also donate methyl groups, but
choline has three methyl groups compared to only one in methionine. Since folic acid
and vitamin B12 are involved in the transfer of methyl groups, the functions of these
three compounds are interrelated. A small fraction of dietary choline is acetylated in
cholinergic neurons for acetylcholine synthesis.
Absorption
In foods, choline occurs as free choline and as phosphoesters in phospholipids
such as phosphatidylcholine and glycerophosphocholine. Choline is absorbed
primarily in the intestine, but little is known about the efficiency of choline absorption
since it is degraded by intestinal microflora to trimethylamine. The bioavailability of
choline in soybean meal to chicks for growth has been estimated in two studies to
range from 60 to 70 percent and from 85 to 90 percent compared to choline chloride
(Baker, 1995)
Biological Function
In biological tissues, choline occurs in the free form (trimethylethanolamine) and
as phospholipids (lecithin). Choline has three main roles: in phosphatidylcholine, as a
methyl donor, and as a component of acetylcholine. Phosphatidylcholine (lecithin) is
a structural element in membranes and a required component of VLDLs. The
mobilization of triacylglyerol from liver and its delivery to tissues is accomplished
mainly by VLDLs, and in choline deficiency the diminished capacity of the liver to
synthesize phosphatidylcholine results in the accumulation of lipids.
Platelet-activating factor is a choline-phospholipid, which besides activating
platelet aggregation, is involved with changes in vascular permeability, phagocytosis,
and glycogenolysis. Choline phospholipids also participate in signal transduction both


===== PDF PAGE 494 =====
493
through amplification of external signals and in the termination of signals by
production of inhibitory compounds.
The second major functional role of choline is to provide active methyl groups for
methylation reactions. These include the formation of methionine from homocysteine
involving the enzyme betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase, which uses the
choline metabolite betaine as a methyl donor. The alternative pathway of methionine
regeneration from homocysteine uses the enzyme N5-methyl-tetrahydrofolate-
homocysteine methyltransferase, and the methyl group is supplied by
methylcobalamin. A perturbation in the availability of one of the methyl donors
results in compensatory changes in the other donor. Other important synthetic
reactions involving active methyl groups are the synthesis of creatine from
guanidinoacetic acid and synthesis of trimethyllysine for carnitine synthesis. A small
fraction of the daily choline need is used for acetylation in cholinergic neurons to
produce acetylcholine.
Deficiencies of choline in species other than cats and dogs have been associated
with the development of hepatocarcinomas in the absence of a known carcinogen
(Newberne and Rogers, 1986). Choline supplementation of rat dams at two critical
times in the development of the pup’s brain have been shown to increase the ability of
offspring to perform visuospatial tasks. The two critical periods coincide with
prenatal neurogenesis of cholinergic cells and postnatal development of synaptosomes
(Fibiger, 1991).
The interaction between choline and other nutrients was appreciated following
demonstration that the choline requirement of rats could be spared by increasing the
casein content of the diet (Best and Huntsman, 1935), which Tucker and Eckstein
(1937) explained as a response to increased methionine intake. Therefore, dietary
requirements for choline are not fixed but will respond to other components of the
diet that are potential methyl donors, particularly methionine, and nutrients such as
cobalamin and folate that are involved in methyl transfer.
Dogs
Signs of Deficiency
Best and Huntsman (1935) demonstrated that choline deficiency in dogs was
associated with a loss of body weight, vomiting, an increase in fat content of the liver,
and death. McKibbin et al. (1945) also reported that a choline-deficient diet resulted
in decreased food intake and weight gain and accumulation of fat in the liver, as well
as reduced hepatic clearance of sulfobromophthalein, an elevation of blood
phosphatase, and a decrease in plasma cholesterol and cholesterol esters.
Supplementation with choline reversed these clinical signs in 5 to 10 days. Baker et
al. (1986) reported that the total choline content of the plasma of 25 dogs had a range
of 235 to 800 mg·L–1, with a median of 430 mg·L–1.


===== PDF PAGE 495 =====
494
Requirements
Best et al. (1933) reported that two depancreatized dogs weighing 12.6 and 16.7
kg, respectively, were kept in excellent health by a diet supplying 1.5 g or 2.25 g of
choline daily and that the fat content of the liver remained low. Schaefer et al. (1941)
stated that a number of workers had found that dietary choline was not required when
the diet contained 40 percent or more casein. Schaefer et al. (1941) observed that
puppies given a diet of 190 g casein·kg–1 failed to grow, but the addition of 50 to 100
mg choline·kg BW–1·d–1 resulted in a resumption of body weight gain. Fouts (1943)
also reported that puppies given a diet of 150 g casein·kg–1 developed fatty livers, but
this did not occur when the diet contained 410 g casein·kg–1. Supplementation of the
150-g casein·kg–1 diet with 100 mg choline·kg–1 gave improved weight gains but did
not resolve the accumulation of fat in the liver. Using a diet based on 300 g of
extracted peanut meal and 70 g casein·kg–1, McKibbin et al. (1944) showed that
without supplementation, weanling puppies died of acute choline deficiency in less
than 3 weeks. Supplementation with 7 g DL-methionine or 1 g choline chloride per
kilogram of diet rendered it adequate.
There appears to be no new published information on choline requirements of
dogs since the NRC (1985) that proposed a choline allowance of 340 mg per 1,000
kcal ME. It is recommended that this dietary concentration be used for all
physiological life stages. This dietary concentration of choline will supply
approximately 45 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1 for an adult dog at maintenance.
Excess Choline in the Diet
Davis (1944a) gave dogs daily oral doses of 5 g of soybean lecithin (about 150 mg
of choline), which caused a decrease in circulating erythrocytes that attained a
maximum after 12 to 25 days and persisted for at least 10 days after cessation of
dosing. Doses of 8 mg choline chloride·kg BW–1·d–1 reduced erythrocyte numbers
from a mean of about 5.7 × 106 to about 3.5 × 106 per microliter, and there was a
similar decline in hemoglobin concentration. The author suggested that choline
administration depressed erythropoiesis by increasing the oxygen supply to bone
marrow. In further studies on 15 dogs, oral dosing of choline chloride (10 mg choline
chloride·kg BW–1) with various frequencies was used (Davis, 1944b). Three daily
doses produced a 30 to 43 percent reduction in erythrocytes. In both reports, dogs
received a commercial dog chow with rolled oats (proportions not stated). No control
dogs given only this diet were used in either study, and, in the latter study, injections
of a liver extract or the feeding of a stomach preparation restored red cell numbers,
suggesting that the basal diet may have been deficient in an essential nutrient(s).
In contrast to these findings, McKibbin et al. (1944) supplemented the diet of
growing puppies with 1,500 mg choline chloride·kg–1 and reported no problems.


===== PDF PAGE 496 =====
495
Similarly, McKibbin et al. (1945) successfully used supplements of 2,000 mg·kg–1
diet with growing puppies. Concentration of 2,000 mg·kg–1 did not affect gain of pigs
during the growing and finishing phases, but decreased gain when fed from weaning
(Southern et al., 1986). In a review by the NRC (1987) of the tolerance of animals to
excess choline in the diet, only the studies of Davis (1944a,b) reported anemia. A
presumed safe maximum intake of 2,000 mg choline·kg–1diet is proposed.
The effect of supplemental choline on anion-cation balance of dogs does not
appear to have been examined. Since the metabolism of choline chloride results in a
nonmetabolizable anion (chloride) that contributes to the total (fixed) acid load, it
would be expected to decrease urine pH.
Cats
Signs of Deficiency
At suboptimal concentrations of dietary choline, food intake and body weight gain
of growing kittens is depressed (Carvalho da Silva et al., 1959; Anderson et al., 1979;
Schaeffer et al., 1982) and there is an accumulation of lipid in the liver. Mansur
Guerios and Hoxter (1962) also reported hypoalbuminemia in choline-deficient cats,
and while this was also reported by Schaeffer et al. (1982) it may have been a sign of
general inanition rather than specific to choline deficiency. Baker et al. (1986)
reported that the total choline content of the plasma of 29 cats ranged from 180 to 490
mg·L–1 with a median of 300 mg·L–1.
Requirements
Carvalho da Silva et al. (1959) gave young cats a diet that contained 420 g casein
and 240 g of hydrogenated coconut fat per kilogram supplemented with 1 g
choline·kg–1 diet and reported some growth, but with the presence of fatty infiltration
in the liver. Increasing the choline to 5 g·kg–1 diet improved growth rate and
prevented fatty liver.
Anderson et al. (1979) gave young cats an amino acid-based diet containing 4.5 g
methionine, 4.5 g cystine, and 250 g turkey fat (no bioavailable choline by chick
assay) per kilogram diet. Growth rate was maximized at 1 g of choline·kg–1 diet, but
in agreement with the previous authors, there was fatty infiltration of the liver at this
choline concentration. When the choline concentration was increased to 3 g·kg–1 diet,
there was a reduction in liver lipids to normal levels. These authors also demonstrated
that methionine was an effective methyl donor for cats, and the need for choline in the
diet could be totally supplanted by methionine on an isomethyl basis (3.7 g
methionine was isomethyl to 1 g choline) when present in excess of its requirement as
an amino acid.


===== PDF PAGE 497 =====
496
The choline requirement of growing kittens was also investigated by Schaeffer et
al. (1982), who used a basal diet containing 330 g soy protein (contributing 0.4 g
choline) per kilogram. Six levels of choline 0, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0 g·kg–1 were
added to the diet. Body weight gain was maximized with diets containing 2.0 g of
added choline. Liver lipids of kittens receiving diets containing from 0 to 2 g added
choline·kg–1 decreased linearly. The authors concluded that if choline in the basal diet
had a bioavailability of 100 percent the choline requirement of kittens was 2.4 g·kg–1
diet.
This choline requirement of 2.4 g·kg–1 diet (4.7 kcal ME·g–1) for growing kittens
is equivalent to a requirement of 510 mg per 1,000 kcal ME. In the absence of more
recent information on the choline requirements of cats it is proposed these dietary
concentrations be maintained as a MR for growing kittens and adults cats at
maintenance and during pregnancy and lactation. This dietary concentration of
choline will supply approximately 45 mg·kg BW–0.67·d–1 for an adult cat at
maintenance.
Excess Choline in the Diet
No information was found on the SUL of choline in cat diets. However, the
metabolism of choline chloride provides a nonmetabolizable anion (chloride) that
contributes to the total (fixed) acid load the kidneys excrete, which will acidify the
urine.
ASCORBIC ACID
Most animals, including dogs and cats are able to synthesize the ascorbic acid they
need for normal metabolism from glucose. Only some primates, guinea pigs, some
snakes, some fruit-eating bats, and passiformes birds are unable to undertake this
synthesis and require ascorbate in the diet. These animals lack the key enzyme L-
gulono-γ-lactone oxidase (EC 1.1. 3.8) that oxidizes L-gulonolactone to 2-keto-L-
gulonolactone, which spontaneously converts to ascorbic acid. L-Gulonolactone
oxidase is located in the kidneys of reptiles and in the liver of mammals that are able
to undertake the synthesis.
Biological Function
Ascorbic acid functions as a catalyst in many biological reactions and as a redox
cofactor and is involved in the synthesis of a number of hormones and in hormone
activation (Johnston et al., 2001). In several of the reactions in which ascorbate is an
essential cofactor, ascorbate provides electrons to enzymes that require metal ions
(e.g., Fe, Cu) in a reduced form for activity. These reactions are accelerated by
ascorbate but do not involve its direct participation. Reactions in this category include


===== PDF PAGE 498 =====
497
the hydroxylation of proline and lysine residues in the synthesis of collagen and
elastin and in the synthesis of acetylcholinesterase. Collagen is the predominant
structural protein of animals, and for stability the polypeptide chains of fibrillar
collagens must have a minimal number of prolines hydroxylated. Ascorbate also
appears to stimulate collagen synthesis independent of its role in hydroxylation by
stimulation of collagen gene expression (Geesin and Berg, 2001)
In animals that do not synthesize vitamin C, the clinical signs of ascorbate
deficiency are collectively known as scurvy. The pathology of the deficiency largely
involves the extracellular matrix and is characterized by conditions including
capillary fragility, petechial hemorrhages, bleeding and delayed wound healing.
The conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine is catalyzed by dopamine β-
hydroxylase, which depends on ascorbate for its action. Dopamine β-hydroxylase is a
tetramer containing two Cu ions per monomer. The primary function of ascorbate is
to maintain this copper in the reduced state.
Many hormones and hormone-releasing factors must be amidated by a
posttranslational step at their carboxyl terminus (C-terminus) to exhibit full activity.
Examples of hormone activation include melanotropins, calcitonin, releasing factors
for growth hormone, corticotropin and thyrotropin, pro-ACTH (adrenocorticotropic
hormone), vasopressin, oxytocin, cholecystokinin, and gastrin (Johnston et al., 2001).
Peptidylglycine-α-amidating mono-oxygenase, which is ascorbate-dependent,
catalyzes conversion of glycine-extended peptide hormone precursors to their
corresponding α-hydroxyglycine derivatives, which is the first step in the C-terminal
amidation process.
Ascorbic acid scavenges reactive oxygen and nitrogen species that are involved in
the oxidative damage of lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. These reactive radicals
include superoxide and hydroperoxyl radicals, singlet oxygen, ozone, peroxynitrite,
nitroxide radical, and hypochlorous acid. Under some experimental systems, ascorbic
acid supplementation has been associated with reduced lipid DNA and protein
oxidation.
High intake of ascorbic acid may act as a prooxidant and induce lipid
peroxidation. The mechanism proposed is through promotion of Fenton reactions, the
first step of which involves reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+ by ascorbic acid and production
of the hydroxyl radical (OH·) from molecular oxygen and ferrous ions (Fe2+). The
hydroxyl radical extracts a proton from unsaturated lipid molecules, producing a lipid
radical (L·), the first step in the initiation process. These lipid radicals in the presence
of oxygen radicals form lipid peroxide radicals (LOO·) that further react with
adjacent lipid molecules to form the hydroperoxides (LOOH) and lipid radicals (L·).
Since ascorbate enhances decomposition of lipid hydroperoxides to alkoxyl radicals
(LO·), ascorbic acid may also participate in the process referred to as propagation
(Geesin and Berg, 2001). The prooxidant effects of ascorbate can be reduced by
increasing the intake of vitamin E. Chen (1981) gave rats graded levels of all-rac-
αtocopherol (50, 60, 100, 200, and 500 IU·kg–1 diet), with and without the addition of
ascorbate (0 or 1.5 g·kg–1 diet). At the end of 1 month, rats receiving the diet of 50 IU


===== PDF PAGE 499 =====
498
vitamin E with 1.5 g ascorbate·kg–1 diet had significantly higher erythrocyte (RBC,
red blood cell) hemolysis percentages, liver thiobarbarbituric acid reducing
substances (TBARS), and reduced glutathione concentrations in RBC. The effect of
the ascorbate on these oxidative indices diminished with the level of vitamin E in the
diet.
Dogs
Requirements
Innes et al. (1931) demonstrated that unlike guinea pigs, dogs did not require a
dietary source of ascorbic acid. Puppies given a diet devoid of ascorbic acid for 147
to 154 days showed no evidence of growth impairment, or lesions of the teeth,
although the same diet fed to guinea pigs produced scurvy and death within 25 days.
The ability to synthesize ascorbate was shown to be present in the first week of
postnatal life. Naismith (1958) took litters of puppies and allocated them to three
treatments: remaining on the bitch or given milk replacer with or without ascorbic
acid. No differences occurred in blood ascorbate concentration regardless of
treatment. The milk of bitches contains about four times the concentration of
ascorbate as the blood (Naismith and Pellett, 1960). Chatterjee et al. (1975) reported
that the in vitro rate of ascorbic acid synthesis from L-gulono-1,4-lactone by
microsomes isolated from the livers of cats and dogs was one-quarter to one-tenth that
of a number of other mammals they tested. Reptiles and amphibia tested also have
higher rates of ascorbate synthesis in the kidneys than cats and dogs. Whether cats
and dogs have a lower in vivo ability to synthesize ascorbate has not been further
investigated. In hepatic disease, lower plasma concentrations of ascorbate are present
in these animals.
There have been a number of uncontrolled clinical reports purporting to identify
either scurvy in dogs or a clinical response to ascorbate supplementation of dogs
infected with canine distemper, exhibiting hypertrophic osteodystrophy, hip dysplasia,
or other conditions (Garlick, 1946; Meir et al., 1957; Ditchfield and Phillipson, 1960;
Holmes, 1962; Hunt, 1962; Sadek, 1962; Bendefy, 1965; Belfield, 1967, 1976;
Leveque, 1969; Vaananen and Wikman, 1979). Sheffy (1972) conducted a series of
controlled experiments on the protective effect of ascorbate for puppies infected with
either canine herpes virus, agents that produced the clinical syndrome of kennel
cough, or infectious canine hepatitis. In one of the two herpes virus studies, the
mortality was two out of three treated dogs and one out of three of the control dogs.
There was no difference in either experiment in the clinical signs or gross or
histopathological changes because of ascorbate supplementation. Similarly, there
were no differences found in the kennel cough study due to ascorbate treatment.
Ascorbate had no effect on the development of clinical signs of illness or
convalescence from infection with canine hepatitis virus.


===== PDF PAGE 500 =====
499
Although supplemental ascorbate has low toxicity and few side effects, caution
should be exercised in the amount administered. High intakes of ascorbate have been
shown to increase the need for vitamin E to avoid prooxidant effects in rats (Chen,
1981), and it may have similar effects in dogs.
Based on the available evidence, no requirement for ascorbate as a nutrient in the
diet of dogs is proposed. Ascorbate may improve the stability of other nutrients in the
diet and may have functions associated with protection against oxidative damage.
Cats
Requirements
Addition of ascorbate to the diet has been advocated during periods of stress, such
as during showing, breeding, or consumption of high-fat commercial diets (Kronfeld,
1989; Dodds and Donoghue, 1993). However, there is little evidence to support the
benefits of this practice. There is a paucity of information on the safety of ascorbate
supplementation of cats. Kienzle and Maiwald (1998) reported that daily oral
supplementation with 0, 200, 400, and 1,000 mg ascorbic acid resulted in progressive
reduction of the urinary pH of cats given a minced beef diet from a mean pH of about
6.9 to 6.5. There was also a dose-dependent reduction in fecal pH. However, when the
cats were given a diet of poultry meal (62 percent) and corn starch (24 percent), the
effect was even more modest. Doses of 1,000 mg ascorbic acid per day induced
diarrhea in some cats. In humans, high intakes of ascorbate were suggested as a
predisposing factor for oxalate urolithiasis, but this has not been supported by recent
studies (Wandzilak et al., 1994; Auer et al., 1998). Whether high intakes of ascorbate
are a risk factor in cats predisposing them to oxalate urolithiasis is unknown.
VITAMIN-LIKE SUBSTANCES
Periodically, since the isolation of the last recognized vitamin (cobalamin) in 1948,
claims have been made that certain compounds are essential in the diet and function
as vitamins. These claims have not been substantiated. Some claims of essentiality,
such as for inositol (an essential nutrient for some bacteria), can be demonstrated at
specific stages of development of certain animals. Inositol, like choline, is a
constituent of phospholipids, and in inositol deficiency there is an accumulation of
lipid in the liver or intestine. Normally, adequate inositol is synthesized from glucose,
but very young rats (both male and female) given an inositol-deficient diet
accumulate lipid in the liver, which is prevented by inositol supplementation
(Anderson and Holub, 1980). Older rats do not accumulate lipid even when fed an
inositol-deficient diet. Similarly, female gerbils and hamsters given a diet of coconut
oil do not synthesize adequate amounts of inositol (Hegsted et al., 1974; Holub,


===== PDF PAGE 501 =====
500
1987). Inositol is also involved in signal transduction and phospholipid assembly. No
deficiencies of inositol have been documented in either dogs or cats.
The β-oxidation of fatty acids requires that they be transported from the cytosol
into the mitochondria. Carnitine plays a carrier role in this transportation by accepting
activated fatty acids at the outer membrane of the mitochondria. Adequate amounts of
carnitine are synthesized from peptidyllysine, which is methylated to trimethyllysine,
then undergoes an ascorbic acid-dependent hydroxylation and is cleaved from the
peptide. Some breeds of dogs have an autosomal recessive defect in the carnitine
synthetic pathway, which leads to a deficiency (Katz and Siakotos 1995). These dogs
have ceroid lipofuscinoses and dilated cardiomyopathy (Keene et al., 1991b).
Supplementation with carnitine in some cases leads to a reduction in clinical signs of
the disease. There is no evidence that dogs in a normal domestic environment require
carnitine supplementation, nor is there any indication that carnitine is required in the
diet of cats.
Other potential compounds are involved in novel biological reactions that range
from oxidative deaminations to free-radical redox reactions; these include the
orthoquinone family of cofactors: pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ), tryptophan
tryptophylquinone (TTQ), trihydroxyphenylalanylquinone (TPQ), lysine
tyrosylquinone (LTQ), and the copper-complexed cysteinyltyrosyl radical. These
compounds, other than PQQ, are covalently linked to the enzyme they serve. TPQ
and LTQ are found at the active sites of copper-containing amino oxidases such as
diaminooxidase and lysyl oxidase. Other candidates include compounds such as
queuosine, coenzyme Q, and pteridines (other than folic acid) such as biopterin. None
of these compounds has been shown to be essential in the diet of either dogs or cats.
Queuosine is produced by modification of the nucleoside base queuine and
resembles guanidine structurally. Queuosine is preferentially used by some tRNAs
and is synthesized through an interaction between the intestinal microbes and the
host.
Coenzyme Q (ubiquinone) is a lipophilic substance present mainly in the
intermembrane of mitochondria with redox cycling capacity. In the mitochondria,
coenzyme Q affects electron transfers through semiquinone intermediates.
Structurally, coenzyme Q has similarities to vitamin K in that it is a 2,3-dimethoxy-5-
methylbenzoquinone. Coenzyme Q can be synthesized and is readily absorbed from
the intestine, which is analogous to the fat-soluble vitamins.
Tetrahydrobiopterin, a pteridine, is an important redox cofactor for phenylalanine
hydroxylase. A related compound is the molybdenum pteridine cofactor found in
xanthine oxidase that catalyzes the conversion of xanthine to uric acid. In animals, the
molybdenum pteridine cofactor is the basis for the essentiality of molybdenum. A
similar pteridine cofactor is also involved in sulfur oxidases.
PQQ is an anionic, water-soluble, heat-stable, quinoid compound that is capable of
continuous redox recycling (Stites et al., 2000). Under specific conditions (dams
deprived of PQQ throughout adult life), PQQ provides a growth stimulus, and it is
regarded as an essential nutrient in growing mice given a chemically defined diet


===== PDF PAGE 502 =====
501
(Killgore et al., 1989; Steinberg et al., 1994). While PQQ serves as a cofactor for
glucose dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydrogenase in bacteria, no mammalian
enzyme has been identified that uses PQQ exclusively as a cofactor. In rat brain
neurons, PQQ can generate or scavenge superoxide radical depending on its
microenvironment (Zhang and Rosenberg, 2002); it is also neuroprotective.
VITAMIN LOSSES DURING PROCESSING AND STORAGE
OF DOG AND CAT FOODS
In contrast to the relatively minor effect of processing on the bioavailability of
proteins, carbohydrates, fats, and minerals, processing can have a major effect on the
vitamins present in the final diet. This is especially evident for those vitamins that
have been added to the diet in pure form or as a concentrate. Although it is not the
committee’s intention to discuss the formulation and manufacture of commercial
petfoods, the potential losses of vitamins that occur during manufacture and storage
should be appreciated.
Depending on the vitamin, different approaches have been used to reduce the
losses in processing and storage. Changing the chemical form of the vitamin to a
more stable compound has been used with some vitamins, for example: thiamin
mononitrate in place of the free base, esters (e.g., acetate or palmitate) of retinol and
tocopherol in place of the alcohols, and ascorbyl phosphate in place of ascorbic acid.
Incorporation of the vitamin in a beadlet is another approach to greater stability and
enhances dispersion of the vitamin in the feed mixture. Typically the vitamin is
emulsified with gelatin, starch, and glycerol (often with an antioxidant) and sprayed
to form beadlets that are subsequently coated with starch. Further treatment of the
beadlet, for example, by heat to form a hardened beadlet (often referred to as a cross-
linked beadlet) gives further enhanced protection of the vitamin during processing.
Cross-linkage may be achieved by inducing a Maillard reaction or by chemical
means. The majority of vitamin A used by petfood manufacturers in the United States
is in the form of cross-linked beadlets. For many vitamins of the B complex, spray
drying is used to enhance stability and form a free-flowing powder.
The inactivation of almost all vitamins that occurs in the preparation of extruded
foods and canned foods is directly related to the temperature and duration of the
processes and the presence of free metals. Losses on drying and enrobing (adding fat
and or digest to the exterior of the dried extruded product) are similarly time and
temperature dependent. During storage the moisture content, temperature, pH, and
reactive metal ions affect the rate of vitamin loss. Having minerals in less reactive
forms such as chelates or present as oxides or carbonates can decrease the loss of
many vitamins, compared to when minerals are present as the sulfate or free metals.
Iron, copper, and zinc are especially significant in catalyzing Fenton-type reactions
and in generating free radicals. Components in the diet capable of scavenging these
free radicals reduce vitamin losses. Protection of fat in the diet from peroxidation is
an important factor in reducing free-radical generation within the diet. Chelating


===== PDF PAGE 503 =====
502
agents such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and phosphoric acid or
synthetic antioxidants such as butylated hydroxytoluene and BHTQ added to fat
reduce free-radical propagation. As previously indicated, α−tocopherol is an
important free-radical scavenger in vivo, and the other tocopherols have lower
biological activities. In contrast, in diets, mixed tocopherols (γ and δ) have a greater
capacity to scavenge free radicals than α-tocopherol.
TABLE 8-3 Recovery of Vitamins and Carotenoids Added to Extruded Petfoods and
Percentage Loss on Storage
SOURCE: Information supplied by J. W. Wilson, Roche Vitamins Inc.
Typical, as well as low and high recoveries, of vitamins incurred in the extrusion
and drying processes in the manufacture of expanded petfoods and losses in storage
are summarized in Table 8-3. Similar and more detailed information on the effect of
temperature during extrusion, drying, and storage is also available (Anonymous,
1998). The recoveries of vitamins in these processes vary widely; for some vitamins
such as nicotinic acid, recoveries are generally high, whereas for others such as
vitamin A they are consistently lower.
Losses of the vitamins during storage of extruded petfoods tend to be higher for
fat-soluble vitamins (vitamins A and D3 in cross-linked beadlets about 8 and 4
percent respectively, per month) than for B vitamins whose losses are of the order of
only 2 to 4 percent per month. Thiamin mononitrate and folic acid have the highest
rates of loss among the B vitamins (Anonymous, 1998). Data on losses of vitamins
during canned storage have not been summarized in the literature.


===== PDF PAGE 504 =====
503
REFERENCES
ABGE. 1989. Ausschuss fuer Bedarfsnormen der Gesellschaft fuer
Ernaehrungsphysiologie Energie und Naehrstoffbedarf Nr. 5 Hunde (No. 5 Dogs).
Frankfurt: DLG Verlag.
Acuff, R. V., S. S. Thedford, N. N. Hidiroglou, A. M. Pappas, and T. A. J. Odom.
1994. Relative bioavailability of RRR and all-rac-alpha-tocopheryl acetate in
humans: Studies using deuterated compounds. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 60:397-402.
Afonsky, D. 1954. Folic acid deficiency in the dog. Science 120:803-895.
Ahmad, B. 1931. The fate of carotene after absorption in the animal organism.
Biochem. J. 25:1195-1204.
Ames, B. N., I. Elson-Schwab, and E. A. Silver. 2002. High-dose vitamin therapy
stimulates variant enzymes with decreased coenzyme binding affinity (increased
Km): Relevance to genetic disease and polymorphisms. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
75(4):616-658.
Amyes, S. J., P. M. Roberts, P. P. Scott, and B. S. Suri. 1973. Post-natal changes in red
cell, plasma and liver folate concentrations of the cat, rat, rabbit and dog. J.
Physiol. 232:23P-24P.
Andersen, D. B., and B. J. Holub. 1980. Myo-inositol-responsive liver lipid
accumulation in the rat. J. Nutr. 110:488-495.
Anderson, G. F., and M. I. Barnhart. 1964. Prothrombin synthesis in the dog. Am. J.
Physiol. 206:929-938.
Anderson, H. D., C. A. Elvehjem, and J. E. Gonce. 1939. Vitamin E deficiency in
dogs. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 42:750-755.
Anderson, P. A., D. H. Baker, P. A. Sherry, and J. E. Corbin. 1979. Choline-
methionine interrelationships in feline nutrition. J. Anim. Sci. 49:522-527.
Andrews, V. L. 1912. Infantile beriberi. Phillip. J. Sci. (Philippine J. Tropical Med.)
7(B):67.
Anonymous. 1998. Keeping Current. Vitamins in pet food. Mount Olive, N.J.: BASF
Corp.
Arnold, A., and C. A. Elvehjem. 1939a. Nutritional requirements of dogs. J. Am. Vet.
Med. Assoc. 95:187-194.
Arnold, A., and C. A. Elvehjem. 1939b. Influence of the composition of the diet on
the thiamine requirements of dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 126:289-298.
Arnrich, L., E. M. Lewis, and A. F. Morgan. 1952. Growth of dogs on purified diets
plus aureomycin and/or vit. B12. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 80:401-404.
Auer, B. L., D. Auer, and A. L. Rodgers. 1998. The effect of ascorbic acid ingestion
on the biochemical and physiochemical risk factors associated with calcium oxalate
kidney stone formation. Clin. Chem. Med. 36:143-147.
Axelrod, A. E., M. A. Lipton, and C. A. Elvehjem. 1940. The production of
uncomplicated riboflavin deficiency in the dog. Am. J. Physiol. 128:703-708.
Axelrod, A. E., M. A. Lipton, and C. A. Elvehjem. 1941. Riboflavin deficiency in the
dog. Am. J. Physiol. 133:555-561.


===== PDF PAGE 505 =====
504
Baggs, R. B., A. deLaHunta, and D. R. Averill. 1978. Thiamine deficiency
encephalopathy in a specific-pathogen-free cat colony. Lab. Anim. Sci. 28:323-326.
Bai, S. C., D. A. Sampson, J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1989. The vitamin B-6
requirement of growing kittens. J. Nutr. 119:1020-1027.
Bai, S. C., D. A. Sampson, J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1991. The level of dietary
protein affects the vitamin B-6 requirement of cats. J. Nutr. 1054-1061.
Bai, S. C., Q. R. Rogers, D. L. Wong, D. A. Sampson, and J. G. Morris. 1998.
Vitamin B-6 deficiency and level of dietary protein affect hepatic tyrosine
aminotransferase activity in cats. J. Nutr. 128:1995-2000.
Baker, D. H. 1995. Vitamin bioavailability. in Bioavailability of Nutrients for
Animals. Amino Acids, Minerals, and Vitamins, Pp. 399-431. C. A. Ammerman,
D. H. Baker, and A. J. Lewis, eds. San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press.
Baker, H., S. M. Schor, D. B. Murphy, B. De Angelis, S. Fiengold, and O. Frank.
1986. Blood vitamin and choline concentrations in healthy domestic cats, dogs, and
horses. Am. J. Vet. Res. 47:1468-1471.
Batt, R. M., and N. U. Horadagoda. 1989. Gastric and pancreatic intrinsic factor-
mediated absorption of cobalamin in the dog. Am. J. Physiol. 257:G344-G349.
Batt, R. M., N. U. Horadagoda, L. McLean, D. B. Morton, and K. W. Simpson. 1989.
Identification and characterization of a pancreatic intrinsic factor in the dog. Am. J.
Physiol. 256:G517-G523.
Baugh, C. M., C. L. Krumdieck, H. J. Baker, and C. E. Butterworth. 1971. Studies on
the absorption and metabolism of folic acid. Folate absorption in the dog after
exposure of isolated intestinal segments to synthetic pteroylpolyglutamates of
various chain lengths. J. Clin. Invest. 50:2009-2021.
Baugh, C. M., C. L. Krumdieck, H. J. Baker, and C. E. Butterworth. 1975. Absorption
of folic acid poly-γ-glutamates in dogs. J. Nutr. 80-90.
Beck, W. S., 2001. Cobalamin (Vitamin B12). Pp. 463-512 in Handbook of Vitamins,
3rd edition. R. B. Rucker, J. W. Suttie, D. B. McCormick, and L. J. Machlin, eds.
New York: Marcel Dekker.
Belavady, B., and C. Gopalan. 1965. Production of black tongue in dogs by feeding
diets containing jowar (Sorghum vulgare). Lancet 2:1220-1221.
Belavady B., T. V. Madhavan, and C. Gopalan. 1967. Production of nicotinic acid
deficiency (blacktongue) in pups fed diets supplemented with leucine.
Gastroenterology 53:749-753.
Belfield, W. O. 1967. Vitamin C in the treatment of canine and feline distemper
complex. Vet. Med. Small Anim. Clin. 62:345-348.
Belfield, W. O. 1976. Chronic subclinical scurvy and canine hip dysplasia. Vet. Med.
Small Anim. Clin 71:1399-1403.
Bendefy, A. A. 1965. Recovery from barbiturate anaesthesia in whippets. Vet. Rec.
77:121.
Bernstein L. H., S. Gutstein, G. Efron, and G. Wager. 1972. Experimental production
of elevated serum folate in dogs with intestinal blind loops: Relationship of serum
levels to location of the blind loops. Gastroenterology 63:815-819.


===== PDF PAGE 506 =====
505
Bernstein L. H., S. Gutstein, G. Efron, and G. Wager. 1975. Experimental production
of elevated serum folate in dogs with intestinal blind loops: II. Nature of bacterially
produced folate coenzymes in blind loop fluid. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 28:925-929.
Best, C. H., and M. E. Huntsman. 1932. The effect of the components of lecithin upon
the deposition of fat in the liver. J. Physiol. 75:405-412.
Best, C. H., and M. E. Huntsman. 1935. Effect of choline on liver fat of rats in
various states of nutrition. J. Physiol.83:255-274.
Best, C. H., G. C. Ferguson, and J. M. Hershey. 1933. Choline and liver fat in diabetic
dogs. J. Physiol. 79:94-102.
Best, C. H., C. C. Lucas, and J. H. Redout. 1954. The lipotrophic factors. Ann. N. Y.
Acad. Sci. 57(6):646-653.
Birch, T. W. 1939. The requirements of the dog and rat for nicotinic acid. J. Nutr.
17:281-292.
Blanchard, P. C., S. C. Bai, Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1991. Pathology
associated with vitamin B6 deficiency in growing kittens. J. Nutr. 121:S77-S78.
Bowman, B. B., and I. Rosenberg. 1987. Biotin absorption by the distal rat intestine.
J. Nutr. 117:2121-2126.
Bowman, B. B., D. B. McCormick, and I. H. Rosenberg. 1989. Epithelial transport of
water-soluble vitamins. Ann Rev. Nutr. 9:187-199.
Bradfield, D., and M. C. Smith. 1938. The ability of the dog to utilize vitamin A from
plant and animal sources. Am. J. Physiol. 124:168-173.
Braham, J. E., A. Villarreal, and R. Bressani. 1962. Effect of lime treatment of corn
on the availability of niacin for cats. J. Nutr. 76:183-186.
Brandsch, R. 1994. Regulation of gene expression by cofactors derived from B
vitamins. J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol. 40:371-399.
Bratt H. M., H. M. Bratt, and E. Bratt. 1965. Suspected vitamin K deficiency in
newborn pups. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 146:1053.
Brin, M., and W. A. Vincent. 1965. The diagnosis of thiamine adequacy in the dog by
use of the erythrocyte enzyme transketolase. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 147:1649.
Brody, T., and B. Shane. 2001. Folic Acid. Pp. 427-462 in Handbook of Vitamins.
Third edition. R. B. Rucker, J. W. Suttie, D. B. McCormick, and L. J. Machlin, eds.
New York: Marcel Dekker.
Bunch, S. E., J. R. Easley, and J. M. Cullen. 1990. Hematological values and plasma
and tissue folate concentrations in dogs given phenytoin on a long term basis. Am.
J. Vet. Res. 51:1865-1868.
Burger, I. 1993. P. 122 in Waltham Book of Companion Animal Nutrition. I. Burger,
ed. New York: Permagon Press.
Campbell, J. R., and T. A. Douglas. 1965. The effect of low calcium intake and
vitamin D supplements on the bone structure in young growing dogs. Br. J. Nutr.
19:339-351.
Carey, C. J., and J. G. Morris. 1977. Biotin deficiency in the cat and the effect on
hepatic propionyl CoA carboxylase. J. Nutr. 107:330-334.


===== PDF PAGE 507 =====
506
Carpenter, K. J. 1991. The contribution of the dog to the science of nutrition. J. Nutr.
121:S1-S7.
Carter, E. G. A., and K. J. Carpenter. 1982. The available niacin values of foods for
rats and their relation to analytical values. J. Nutr. 112:2091-2103.
Carvalho da Silva, A. 1950. The domestic cat as a laboratory animal for experimental
nutrition studies. II. Comparative growth and hematology on stock and purified
diets. Acta Physiol. Lat. Am. 1:26-32.
Carvalho da Silva, A., R. Fried, and R. C. de Angelis. 1952. The domestic cat as a
laboratory animal for experimental nutrition studies. III. Niacin requirements and
tryptophan metabolism. J. Nutr. 46:399-409.
Carvalho da Silva, A., R. C. de Angelis, M. A. Pontes, and M. F. Mansur Guerios.
1955. The domestic cat as a laboratory animal for experimental nutrition studies.
IV. Folic acid deficiency. J. Nutr. 56:199-213.
Carvalho da Silva, A., M. F. Mansur Guerios, and S. R. Monsao. 1959. The domestic
cat as a laboratory animal for experimental nutrition studies. VI. Choline
deficiency. J. Nutr. 67:537-547.
Carvalho da Silva, A., R. C. de Angeles, M. A. Pontes, and A. M. Giesbrecht. 1961.
The domestic cat as a laboratory animal for experimental nutrition studies. VIII.
Thiamine deficiency. Folia Clinica et Biologica 30:42-60.
Center, S. A., K. Warner, J. Corbett, J. F. Randolph, and H. N. Erb. 2000. Proteins
invoked by vitamin K absence and clotting times in clinically ill cats. J. Vet. Intern.
Med. 14:292-297.
Chatterjee, I. B., A. K. Majumder, B. K. Nandi, and N. Subramanian. 1975. Synthesis
and some major functions of vitamin C in animals. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 258:24-
47.
Chaudhuri, D. K., and E. Kodichek 1960. The availability of bound nicotinic acid to
the rat. 4. The effect of treating wheat, rice and barley brans and a purified
preparation of bound nicotinic acid with sodium hydroxide. Br. J. Nutr 14:35-42.
Chen, K. K., C. L. Rose, and E. B. Robbins. 1938. Toxicity of nicotinic acid. Proc.
Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 38:241-245.
Chen, L. H. 1981. An increase in vitamin E requirement induced by high
supplementation of vitamin C in rats. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 34:1036-1041.
Chittenden, R. H. 1907. The Nutrition of Man. New York: F. A. Stokes.
Cho, Y., R. E. Frey, M. M. Guffy, and H. W. Leipold. 1975. Hypervitaminosis A in
the dog. Am. J. Vet. Res. 36:1597-1603.
Chow, C. K. 2001. Vitamin E. Pp. 165-197 in Handbook of Vitamins. Third edition.
R. B. Rucker, J. W. Suttie, D. B. McCormick, and L. J. Machlin, eds. New York:
Marcel Dekker.
Clark, L. 1970. Effect of excess vitamin A on longbone growth in kittens. J. Comp.
Pathol. 80:625-634.
Clark, L. 1973. Growth rates of epiphyseal plates in normal kittens and kittens fed
excess vitamin A. J. Comp. Path. 83:447-460.


===== PDF PAGE 508 =====
507
Clark, L., A. A. Seawright, and R. J. W. Gartner. 1970a. Longbone abnormalities in
kittens following vitamin A administration. J. Comp. Path. 80:113-121.
Clark, L., A. A. Seawright, and J. Hrdlicka. 1970b. Exostoses in hypervitaminotic A
cats with optimal calcium-phosphorus intakes. J. Small Anim. Pract. 11:553-561.
Clark, W. T., and R. E. W. Halliwell. 1963. The treatment with vitamin K preparations
of warfarin poisoning in dogs. Vet. Rec. 75:1210-1213.
Cline, J. L., J. Odle, and R. A. Easter. 1996. The riboflavin requirement of adult dogs
at maintenance is greater than previous estimates. J. Nutr. 126:984-988.
Cline, J. L., G. L. Czarnecki-Maulden, J. M. Losonsky, C. R. Sipe, and R. A. Easter.
1997. Effect of increasing dietary vitamin A on bone density in adult dogs. J.
Anim. Sci. 75:2980-2985.
Coburn, S. P., and J. D. Mahuren. 1987. Identification of pyrixdoxine 3-sul-fate,
pyridoxal 3-sulfate and N-methylpyridoxine as major urinary metabolites of
vitamin B6 in domestic cats. J. Biol. Chem. 262:2642-2644.
Coffin, D. L., and J. Holzworth. 1954. “Yellow fat” in two laboratory cats: Acid-fast
pigmentation associated with a fish-base ration. Cornell Vet. 44:63-71.
Collins, E. D., and A. W. Norman. 2001. Vitamin D. Pp. 51-113 in Handbook of
Vitamins. Third edition. R. B. Rucker, J. W. Suttie, D. B. McCormick, and L. J.
Machlin, eds. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Coppi, G., L. Monti, and R. Genova. 1970. Blood levels and urinary excretion of
three vitamins B12 in rat, rabbit and dog. Soc. Ital. Biol. Sper. 46:312.
Cordy, D. R. 1954. Experimental production of steatitis (yellow fat disease) in kittens
fed a commercial canned diet and prevention of the condition by vitamin E. Cornell
Vet. 44:310-318.
Cosgrove, J. P., D. F. Church, and W. A. Pryor. 1987. The kinetics of the
autooxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids. Lipids 22(5):229-304.
Cowgill, G. R. 1921. Contributions to the study of the relation between vitamin-B and
the nutrition of the dog. Am. J. Physiol. 57:420-436.
Cowgill, G. R. 1934. The Vitamin B Requirements of Man. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press.
Crimm, P. D., and D. M. Short. 1937. Vitamin A deficiency in the dog. Am. J.
Physiol. 118:477-482.
Czarnecki, G. L., and D. H. Baker. 1982. Utilization of D-and L-tryptophan by
growing dogs. J. Anim. Sci. 55:1405-1410.
Dann, W. J., and P. Handler. 1941. The nicotinic acid and coenzyme content of the
tissues of normal and blacktongue dogs. J. Nutr. 22:409-414.
Davenport, D. J. R., J. W. Ching, J. H. Hunt, D. Bruyetttte, and K. Gross. 1994. The
effect of dietary levels of folate and cobalamin on serum concentrations of folate
and cobalamin in the dog. J. Nutr. 124:2559S-22562S.
Davidson, M. G. 1992. Thiamine deficiency in a colony of cats. Vet Rec. 130: 94-97.
Davidson, M. G., F. J. Geoly, B. C. Gilger, G. J. McLellan, and W. Whitley. 1998.
Retinal degeneration associated with vitamin E deficiency in hunting dogs. J. Am.
Vet. Med. Assoc 213:645-651.


===== PDF PAGE 509 =====
508
Davis, J. E. 1944a. Depression of normal erythrocyte number by soybean lecithin or
choline. Am. J. Physiol. 142:65-67.
Davis, J. E. 1944b. The experimental production of a hyperchromic anemia in dogs
which is responsive to anti-pernicious anemia treatment. Am. J. Physiol. 142:402-
406.
Deady, J. E., B. Anderson, J. A. O’Donnell, J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1981a.
Level of dietary glutamic acid and thiamine on food intake, weight gain, plasma
amino acids, and thiamine status of growing kittens. J. Nutr. 111:1568-1579.
Deady, J. E., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1981b. Effect of high dietary glutamic
acid on the excretion of 35S-thiamine in kittens. J. Nutr. 111:1580-1585.
Ditchfield, J., and M. H. Phillipson. 1960. Achlorhydria in dogs with report of a case
complicated with avitaminosis C. Can. Vet. J. 1:396-400.
Dodds, W. J., and S. Donoghue. 1993. Interactions of clinical nutrition with genetics.
Pp. 105-117 in The Waltham Book of Clinical Nutrition of the Dog and Cat. J. M.
Wills, and J. W. Simpson, eds. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Dutra, F. R., and J. M. McKibbin. 1945. The pathology of experimental choline
deficiency in dogs. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 30:301-306.
Dzanis, D. A., C. N. Corbellini, L. Krook, and F. A. Kallfelz. 1991. Effect of 1,25-
dihydroxycholecalciferol and 24,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol in dogs with
impaired renal function. J. Nutr. 121:S70-S72.
Edwards, D. F., and R. G. Russell. 1987. Probable vitamin K-deficient bleeding in
two cats with malabsorption syndrome secondary to lymphocytic-plasmacytic
enteritis. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 1:97-101.
Elvehjem, C. A., R. J. Madden, F. M. Strong, and D. M. Woolley. 1937. Relation of
nicotinic acid and nicotinic acid amide to canine black tongue. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
59:1767-1768.
Elvehjem, C. A., R. J. Madden, F. M., Strong, and D. W. Woolley. 1938. The isolation
and identification of the anti-black tongue factor. J. Biol. Chem. 123:137-149.
Elvehjem, C. A., J. E. Gonce, and G. W. Newell. 1944. The effect of vitamin E on
reproduction in dogs on milk diets. J. Pediatr. 24:436-441.
Elwood, J. M., and T. A. Colquhoun. 1997. Observations on the prevention of cleft
palate in dogs by folic acid and potential relevance to humans. New Zealand Vet. J.
45:254-256.
Evans, H. M., and S. Lepkovsky. 1928. Sparing action of fat on the anti-neuritic
vitamin. Science 68:298.
Evans, H. M., and S. Lepkovsky. 1929. Sparing action of fat on the anti-neuritic
vitamin. J. Biol. Chem. 83:269-287.
Evans, H. M., and S. Lepkovsky. 1935. The sparing action of fat on vitamin B. VIII.
On the loss of vitamin B from the rat’s tissues. J. Biol. Chem. 108:439-455.
Everett, G. M. 1944. Observations on the behavior and neurophysiology of acute
thiamine deficient cats. Am. J. Physiol. 141:439-448.
Fibiger, H. C. 1991. Cholinergic mechanisms in learning, memory and dementia: A
review of recent evidence. Trends Neurosci. 14:220-223.


===== PDF PAGE 510 =====
509
Forusz, H., and W. A. Ritschel. 1996. The effects of triethanolamine myristate, a fatty
acid salt, on the bioavailability of riboflavin in dogs. Methods Find. Exp. Clin.
Pharmacol. 18:589-591.
Fouts, P. J. 1943. Vitamin B complex studies in dogs: Production of cirrhosis of liver.
J. Nutr. 25:217-228.
Fouts, P. J., O. H. Helmer, S. Lepkovsky, and T. H. Jukes. 1938. Production of
microcytic hypochromic anemia in puppies on synthetic diets deficient in rat
antidermatitis factor (vitamin B6). J. Nutr. 16:197-207.
Fouts, P. J., O. H. Helmer, and S. Lepkovsky. 1939. Cure of microcytic hypochromic
anemia in dogs with crystalline “factor 1.” Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 40:4-5.
Fouts, P. J., O. M. Helmer, and S. Lepkovsky. 1940. Factor II deficiency in dogs. J.
Nutr. 19:393-400.
Freye, E., and H. Agoutin. 1978. The action of vitamin B1 (thiamine) on the
cardiovascular system of the cat. Biomedicine 28:315-319.
Freytag, T. L., 2001. Vitamin A metabolism and toxicity in the domestic cat. Thesis,
University California Davis.
Freytag, T. L., S. M. Liu, Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 2003. Teratogenic effects of
chronic ingestion of high levels of vitamin A in cats. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr.
87:42-51.
Frohring, W. O. 1935a. A synthetic vitamin A-free milk suitable for vitamin A studies
in very young puppies. Proc. Soc. Exp. Med. 32:1021-1024.
Frohring, W. O. 1935b. Vitamin A requirements of growing puppies. Proc. Soc. Exp.
Biol. Med. 33:280-282.
Frohring, W. O. 1937. Vitamins and distemper. Vet. Med. 32:190-195.
Fyfe, J. C. 1993. Feline intrinsic factor (IF) is pancreatic origin and mediates ileal
cobalamin (CBL) absorption. J. Vet. Intern. Med 7:133 (abstr).
Fyfe, J. C., U. Giger, C. A. Hall, P. F. Jezyk, S. A. Klumpp, J. S. Levine, and D. F.
Patterson. 1991. Inherited selective intestinal cobalamin malabsorption and
cobalamin deficiency in dogs. Pediatr. Res. 29: 24-31.
Garlick, N. L. 1946. True scurvy in the dog. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 109:70-71.
Gaskell, C. J., A. H. Leedale, and S. W. Douglas. 1975. Pansteatitis in the cat: A
report of four cases. J. Small Anim. Prac. 16:117-121.
Gazet, J.-C., and I. McColl. 1967. Absorption of vitamin B12 from the small intestine.
Study in man, monkey, cat, and dog. Br. J. Surg. 54:128-131.
Geesin J.C., and R. A. Berg. 2001. Ascorbic acid regulation of extracellular matrix
expression. Pp. 555-568 in Handbook of Vitamins. Third edition. R. B. Rucker, J.
W. Suttie, D. B. McCormick, and L. J. Machlin, eds. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Gershoff, S. N., and L. S. Gottlieb. 1964. Pantothenic acid deficiency in cats. J. Nutr.
82:135-138.
Gershoff, S. N., and S. A. Norkin. 1962. Vitamin E deficiency in cats. J. Nutr. 77:303-
308.
Gershoff S. N., S. B. Andrus, D. M. Hegsted, and E. A. Lentini. 1957a. Vitamin A
deficiency in cats. Lab. Invest. 6:227-240.


===== PDF PAGE 511 =====
510
Gershoff, S. N., M. A. Legg, F. J. O’Connor, and D. M. Hegsted. 1957b. The effect of
vitamin D-deficient diet containing various Ca:P ratios on cats. J. Nutr. 63:79-93.
Ghosh, H. P., P. H. Sarker, and B. C. Guha. 1963. Distribution of the bound form of
nicotinic acid in natural materials. J. Nutr. 79:451-453.
Goldberger, J. 1922. The relation of diet to pellagra. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 78:1676-
1680.
Goldberger, J., and G. A. Wheeler. 1920. The experimental production of pellagra in
human subjects by means of diet. Bull. Hygienic Lab. No 120. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Public Health Service.
Goldberger, J., and G. A. Wheeler 1928. Experimental black tongue of dogs and its
relation to pellagra. U.S. Public Health Rep. 43:172-217.
Goldy, G. G., J. R. Burr, C. N. Longardner, D. A. S. Hirakawa, and S. A. Norton.
1996. Effects of measured doses of vitamin A fed to healthy Beagle dogs for 26
weeks. Vet. Clin. Nutr 3:42-49.
Gopalan, C., B. Belavady, and D. Krishnamurthi. 1969. The role of leucine in the
pathogenesis of canine blacktongue and pellagra. Lancet ii:956.
Green, N. M. 1963. Avidin. 3. The nature of the biotin-binding site. Biochem. J.
89:599-609.
Greengard, P., E. B. Sigg, I. Fratta, and S. B. Zak. 1966. Prevention and remission by
adrenocortical steroids of nicotinamide deficiency disorders and of 6-
aminonicotinamide toxicity in rats and dogs. J. Pharm. Exp. Ther. 154:624-631.
Greve, J. H. 1963. Effect of thyroid and biotin deficiencies on canine demodicosis.
Diss. Abstr. 24:1757.
Griffith, R. C., G. W. Thornton, and J. E. Willson. 1960. Pansteatitis (yellow fat) in
cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 137:126-128.
Grimm, U., K. Wulff, W. Schmidt, and H. Vogler. 1988. Animal experimental studies
on the supply of vitamins B1, B2 and B6 from a determination of erythrocyte
transketolase, glutathione reductase and aspartate aminotransferase activities
following irradiation. Radiobiol. Radiother. (Berl) 29:711-716.
Gunther, R., L. J. Felice, R. K. Nelson, and A. M. Franson. 1988. Toxicity of vitamin
D3 rodenticide to dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 193:211-214.
Haenel, H., H. Ruttloff, and H. Ackermann. 1959. Zur vitamin-sparenden Wirking
schewer resorbierbarer Kohlenhydrate (Biochemical action of difficultly resorbable
carbohydrates). Biochem. Ztsch. 331:209.
Hall, J. A., K. A. Tooley, J. L. Grandin, D. E. Jewell, and R. C. Wander. 2003. Effects
of dietary n-6 and n-3 fatty acids and vitamin E on the immune response of healthy
geriatric dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 64:762-772.
Handler, P. 1943. Use of highly purified rations in the study of nicotinic acid
deficiency. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 52:263-264.
Harrington, D. D., and E. H. Page. 1983. Acute vitamin D3 toxicosis in horses: Case
reports and experimental studies of the comparative toxicity of vitamins D2 and D3.
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 182:1358-1369.


===== PDF PAGE 512 =====
511
Harris, P. L., and N. D. Embree. 1963. Quantitative considerations of the effect of
polyunsaturated fatty acid content of the diet upon the requirement for vitamin E.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 13:385-392.
Harrison, E. H., and M. M. Hussain. 2001. Mechanisms involved in the intestinal
digestion and absorption of vitamin A. J. Nutr. 131:1405-1408.
Haruna, A., K. Kawai, T. Takaba, J. Taguchi, N. Ishiyama, N. Nawata, S. Yamagata,
T. Shimoda, H. I. Harvey, D. T. Smith, E. L. Persons, and M. V. Burns. 1938. The
effect of various fractions of liver on experimental canine black-tongue. J. Nutr.
16:153-171.
Haruna, A., K. Kawai, T. Takaba, J. Taguchi, N. Ishiyama, N. Nawata, S. Yamagata,
T. Shimoda, M. Takenaka, Y. Yamane, and T. Umemura. 1992. Dietary calcinosi in
the cat. J. Anim. Clin. Res. Found. 1:9-16.
Harvey, H. I., D. T. Smith, E. L. Persons, and M. V. Burns. 1938. The effect of
various fractions of liver on experimental canine blacktongue. J. Nutr. 16:153.
Hathcock, J. N., D. G. Hattan, M. Y. Jenkins, J. T. McDonald, P. R. Sundaresan, and
V. L. Wilkening. 1990. Evaluation of vitamin A toxicity. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 52:183-
202.
Hayes, K. C., S. W. Nielsen and J. E. Rousseau. 1969. Vitamin E deficiency and fat
stress in the dog. J. Nutr. 99:196-209.
Hayes, K. C., J. E. Rousseau, and D. M. Hegsted. 1970. Plasma tocopherol
concentration and vitamin E deficiency in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 157:64-
71.
Hazewinkel, H. A. W., K. L. How, R. Bosch, S. A. Goedegeburre, and G. Voorhout.
1987. Inadequate photosynthesis of vitamin D in dogs. In Nutrition, Malnutrition
and Dietetics in the Dog and Cat. Proceedings of an International Symposium.
Hanover, Germany. English edition edited by A. T. Edney, published by British
Veterinary Association in collaboration with Waltham Centre for Pet Nutrition.
Heath, M. K., J. W. MacQueen, and T. D. Spies. 1940. Feline pellagra. Science
92:514.
Hegsted, D. M., A. Gallagher, and H. Hanford. 1947. Inositol requirement of the
gerbil. J. Nutr. 104:588-592.
Heidelberger, C. E., P. Abraham, and S. Lepkovsky. 1948. Concerning the mechanism
of the mammalian conversion of tryptophan into nicotinic acid. J. Biol. Chem.
176:1461-1462.
Henderson, L. M. 1983. Niacin. Ann. Rev. Nutr. 3:289-307.
Henderson, L. M. 1985. Intestinal absorption of B6 vitamers. Pp. 22-23 in Vitamin
B6: Its Role in Health and Disease, R. D. Reynolds, and J. E. Leklem, eds. New
York: Alan R. Liss.
Hendricks, J. B., A. F. Morgan, and R. M. Freytag. 1947. Chronic moderate
hypervitaminosis D in young dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 149:314-332.
Hess, A. F., J. L. Unger, and A. W. Pappenheimer. 1921. The prevention of rickets in
rats by exposure to sunlight. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 19: 8-12.


===== PDF PAGE 513 =====
512
Heywood, R., and H. Partington. 1971. Ocular lesions induced by vitamin B2
deficiency. Vet. Rec. 88:251-252.
Hidiroglou, N., R. Madere, L. R. McDowell, and P. L. Toutain. 2003. Influence of
sources of dietary vitamin E on the maternal transfer of alpha-tocopherol to fetal
and neonatal guinea pigs as determined by a stable isotopic technique. Br. J. Nutr.
89:455-466.
Hippe, E., and M. Schwartz. 1971. Intrinsic activity of stomach preparations from
various animal species. Scand. J. Haematol. 8:276-281.
Holick, M. F. 1989. Vitamin D. Biosynthesis, metabolism and mode of action. Pp.
902-926 in Endocrinology, J. L. DeGroot, ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
Holmes, J. R. 1962. Suspected skeletal scurvy in the dog. Vet. Rec. 74:801-813.
Holub, B. J. 1987. The cellular forms and functions of inositol phospholipids and
their metabolic derivatives. Nutr. Rev. 45: 65-71.
Hoover, D. M., and W. W. Carlton. 1981. The subacute neurotoxicity of excess
pyridoxine HCl and clioquinol (5-chloro-7-iodo-8-hydroxyquino-line) in Beagle
dogs. 1. Clinical disease. Vet. Pathol. 18: 745-756.
Hoppe, P. P., and G. Kennrich. 2000. Bioavailability and potency of natural-source
and all-racemic alpha-tocopherol in the human: A dispute. Eur. J. Nutr. 39:183-193.
Horwitt, M. K., C. C. Harvey, W. S. Rothwell, J. L. Cutler, and D. Haffron. 1956.
Tryptophan-niacin relationships in man. J. Nutr. 60:(suppl.)1-43.
Hosomi, A., M. Arita, Y. Sato, C. Kiyose, T. Ueda, O. Igarashi, H. Arai, and K. Inoue.
1997. Affinity of α-tocopherol transfer protein as a determinant of the biological
activities of vitamin E analogs. FEBS Letters 409:105-108.
How, K. L., H. A. W. Hazewinkel, and J. A. Mol. 1994. Dietary vitamin D
dependence of cat and dog due to inadequate cutaneous synthesis of vitamin D.
Gen. Comp. Endocrin. 96:12-18.
Howerth, E. W. 1983. Fatal tissue calcification in suckling puppies. J. South Afr. Vet.
Med. Assoc. 54:21-24.
Howitt, M. K., A. E. Harper, and L. M. Henderson. 1981. Niacin-tryptophan
relationships for evaluating niacin equivalents. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 34:423-427.
Huldschinsky, K. 1919. Heilung von Rachitis dursch Künstliche Hohensonne.
Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift 45:712-713.
Huldschinsky, K. 1920. Die Behandlung der Rachitis durch Ultraviolettebestrahlung.
Dargestellt an 24 Fällen. Zeitschrift fur orthopädische. Chirurgie. 39:426-451.
Hunt, G. C. 1962. Suspected skeletal scurvy in the dog. Vet. Rec. 74:1190-1191.
Ikeda, M. H., H. Tsuji, S.Nakamura, A. Ichiyama, Y. Nishizuki, and O. Hayaishi.
1965. Studies on the biosynthesis of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides. II. Role of
picolinic carboxylase in the biosynthesis of NAD from tryptophan in mammals. J.
Biol. Chem. 240:1395-1401.
Innes, J. R. M. 1931. Vitamin C requirements of the dog. Attempts to produce
experimental scurvy. Second Report of the Director of Animal Pathology,
Cambridge.


===== PDF PAGE 514 =====
513
Irle, E., and H. J. Markowitsch. 1982. Thiamine deficiency in the cat leads to severe
learning deficits and to widespread neuroanatomical damage. Exp. Brain Res.
48:199-208.
Ishii, K., K. Sarai, H. Sanemori, and T. Kawasaki. 1979. Analysis of thiamine and its
phosphate esters by high-performance liquid chromatography. Anal. Biochem.
97:191-195.
Johnston, C. S., F. M. Steinberg and R. B. Rucker. 2001. Ascorbic acid. Pp. 529-554
in Handbook of Vitamins. Third edition. R. B. Rucker, J. W. Suttie, D. B.
McCormick, and L. J. Machlin, eds. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Jubb, K. V., L. Z. Saunders, and H. V. Coates. 1956. Thiamine deficiency
encephalopathy in cats. J. Comp. Path. 66:217–227.
Jusko, W. J., B. R. Rennick, and G. Levy. 1970. Renal excretion of riboflavin in the
dog. Am. J. Physiol. 218:1046-1053.
Kang, M. H., J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1987. Effect of concentration of some
dietary amino acids and protein on plasma urea nitrogen concentration in growing
kittens. J. Nutr. 117:1689-1696.
Katz, M. L., and A. N. Siakotos. 1995. Canine hereditary ceroid-lipofuscinosis:
Evidence for a defect in the carnitine biosynthetic pathway. Am. J. Med. Genet.
57:266-271.
Kealy, R. D., D. F. Lawler, and K. L. Monti. 1991. Some observations on the dietary
vitamin D requirement of weanling pups. J. Nutr. 121:S66-S69.
Keene, B. W., D. P. Panciera, C. E. Atkins, V. Regitz, M. J. Schmidt, and A. L. Shug.
1991. Myocardial L-carnitine deficiency in a family of dogs with dilated
cardiomyopathy. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 198:547-650.
Keesling, P. T., and J. G. Morris. 1975. Vitamin B12 deficiency in the cat. J. Anim. Sc.
41:317 (abstract 289).
Kemp, C. M., S. G. Jacobson, F. X. Borruat, and M. H. Chaitin. 1989. Rhodopsin
levels and retinal function in cats during recovery from vitamin A deficiency. Exp.
Eye Res. 49:49-65.
Kiefer, C., S. Hessel, J. M. Lampert, K. Vogt, M. O. Lederer, D. E. Breithaupt, and J.
von Lintig. 2001. Identification and characterization of a mammalian enzyme
catalyzing the asymmetric oxidative cleavage of provitamin A. J. Biol. Chem.
276:14110-14116.
Kienzle, E., and E. Maiwald 1998. Effect of vitamin C on urine pH in cats. J. Anim.
Physiol. Anim. Nutr. (Berlin.) 80:134-139.
Killgore, J., C. Smidt, L. Duich, N. Romero-Chapman, D. Tinker, K. Reiser, M.
Melko, D. Hyde, and R. B. Rucker. 1989. Nutritional importance of
pyrroloquinoline quinone. Science. 245:850-852.
Kirkland, J. B., and J. M. Rawlings. 2000. Niacin. Pp. 213-254 in Handbook of
Vitamins. Third edition. R. B. Rucker, J. W. Suttie, D. B. McCormick, and L. J.
Machlin, eds. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Krehl, W. A., and C. A. Elvehjem. 1945. The importance of “folic acid” in rations
low in nicotinic acid. J. Biol. Chem. 158:173-179.


===== PDF PAGE 515 =====
514
Krinke, G., H. H. Schaumburg, P. S. Spencer, J. Suter, P. Thomann, and R. Hess.
1980. Pyridoxine megavitaminosis produces degeneration of peripheral sensory
neurons (sensory neuronopathy) in the dog. Neurotoxicity 2:13-24.
Kronfeld, D. S. 1989. Vitamin and mineral supplementation of dogs and cats. A
monograph on micronutrients. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Veterinary Practice Publishing
Co.
Kwacho, K. W. 1989. Retinoids in dermatology. Pp 553-560 in Current Veterinary
Therapy X. R. W. Kirk, ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Laguna, J. and K. J. Carpenter. 1948. Raw versus processed corn in niacin-deficient
diets. J. Nutr. 45:21-28.
Lauridsen, C., H. Engel, S. K. Jensen, A. M. Craig, and M. G. Traber. 2002. Lactating
sows and suckling piglets preferentially incorporate RRRover all rac-α-tocopherol
into milk, plasma, and tissues. J. Nutr. 132:1258-1264.
Layne, J. A., and J. B. Carey. 1944. The effect of blacktongue-producing diet upon
the endoscopic appearance of the gastric mucosa in the dog. Gastroenterology
2:133-137.
Leahy, J. S., K. W. Shillam, C. E. Waterhouse, and H. Partington. 1967. Studies on
the riboflavin requirements of the kitten. J. Small Anim. Pract. 8:351-363.
Lederman, J. D., K. M. Overon, N. E. Hofmann, B. J. Moore, J. Thornton, and J. W.
Erdman, Jr. 1998. Ferrets (Mustela putoius furo) inefficiently convert β-carotene to
vitamin A. J. Nutr. 128:271-279.
Lee, D. B. N., M. Hu, L. H. Kayne, F. Nakhoul, and N. Jamgotchian. 1991. The
importance of nonvitamin D-mediated calcium absorption. In Calcium-Regulating
Hormones II. Calcium Transport, Bone Metabolism, and New Drugs, H. Morii, ed.
Contributions to Nephrology 91: 14-20.
Leklem, J. E. 2001. Vitamin B6. Pp. 339-396 in Handbook of Vitamins. Third edition.
R. B. Rucker, J. W. Suttie, D. B. McCormick, and L. J. Machlin, eds. New York:
Marcel Dekker.
Leklem, J. E., R. R. Brown, L. V. Hankes, and M. Schmaeler. 1971. Tryptophan
metabolism in the cat: A study with carbon-14-labeled compounds. Am. J. Vet Res.
32:335-344.
Leveque, J. I. 1969. Ascorbic acid in treatment of the canine distemper complex. Vet.
Med. Small Anim. Clin. 64:997-999.
Levine, J. S., R. H. Allen. D. H. Alpers, and B. Seetharam. 1984.
Immunocytochemical localization of the intrinsic factor-cobalamin receptor in dog-
ileum: Distribution of intracellular receptor during cell maturation. J. Cell Biol.
98:1111-1118.
Linnell, J. C., L. Collings, M. C. Down, and J. M. England. 1979. Distribution of
endogenous cobalamin between the transcobalamins in various animals. Clin. Sci.
57:139-144.
Lisciandro, S. C., A. Hohenhaus, and M. Brooks. 1998. Coagulation abnormalities in
22 cats with naturally occurring liver disease. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 12:71-75.


===== PDF PAGE 516 =====
515
Littlewood, J. D., S. C. Shaw, and L. M. Coombes. 1995. Vitamin K-dependent
coagulopathy in a British Devon Rex cat. J. Small Anim. Prac. 36:115-118.
Loew, F. M., C. L. Martin, R. H. Dunlop, R. J. Mapletoft, and S. I. Smith. 1970.
Naturally-occurring and experimental thiamine deficiency in cats receiving
commercial cat food. Can. Vet. J. 11:109-113.
Lowe, J. S., R. A. Morton, and J. Vernon. 1957. Unsaponifiable constituents of
kidneys of various species. Biochem. J. 67:228-234.
Lumeng, L., R. E. Brashear, and T. K. Li . 1974. Pyridoxal 5′-phosphate in plasma:
Source, protein-binding, and cellular transport. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 84:334-343.
Lynch, P. L., and I. S. Young. 2000. Determination of thiamine by high-performance
liquid chromatography. J. Chromatogr A881:267-284.
Lynch, P. L., E. R. Trimble, and I. S. Young. 1997. High-performance liquid
chromatographic determination of thiamine diphosphate in erythrocytes using
internal standard methodology. J. Chromatogr. B Biomed Sci. Appl. 701:120-123.
Maas, A. R., L. Michaud, H. Spector, C. A. Elvehjem, and E. B. Hart. 1944. The
relation of thiamine to blood regeneration. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 4:105-110.
Maddison, J. E., A. D. Watson, I. G. Eade, and T. Exter. 1990. Vitamin K-dependent
multifactor coagulopathy in Devon Rex cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 197:1495-
1497.
Maddock, C. L., S. B. Wolbach, and S. Maddock. 1949. Hypervitaminosis A in the
dog. J. Nutr. 39: 117-137.
Maden, M. 1994. Vitamin A in embryonic development. Nutr. Rev. 52:S3-S12.
Madhavan, T. V., B. Belavady, and C. Gopalan. 1968. Pathology of canine black
tongue. J. Path. Bacteriol. 95:259-263.
Malik, R., C. Laing, P. E. Davis, G. S. Allan, and D. I. Wigney. 1997. Rickets in a
litter of racing Greyhounds. J. Small Anim. Prac. 38:109-114.
Manson, J. A., and K. J. Carpenter. 1978. The effect of high levels of dietary leucine
on the niacin status of dogs. J. Nutr. 108:1889-1898.
Mansur Guerios, M. F., and G. Hoxter. 1962. Hypoalbuminemia in choline deficient
cats. Protides Biol. Fluids Proc. Colloq. 10:199-201.
March, B. E., E. Wong, L. Seier, J. Sim, and J. Biely. 1973. Hypervitaminosis E in the
chick. J. Nutr. 103:371-377.
Margolis, G., L. H. Margolis, and S. Gower Smith. 1938. Cure of experimental canine
blacktongue with optimal and minimal doses of nicotinic acid. J. Nutr. 16:541-548.
Mason, J. B., N. Gibson, and E. Kodicek. 1973. The chemical nature of the bound
nicotinic acid of wheat bran: Studies of nicotinic acid-containing macromolecules.
Br. J. Nutr. 30:297-311.
McCormick, D. B. 1990. Riboflavin. P. 146 in Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 6th
edition. M. L. Brown, ed., Washington, D.C.: International Life Sciences Institute.
McCormick, D. B. 1994. Riboflavin. P. 366 in Modern Nutrition in Health and
Disease. 8th edition. M. E. Shils, J. A. Olsen, and M. Shike, eds. Philadelphia: Lea
and Febiger.


===== PDF PAGE 517 =====
516
McCormick, D., and Z. Zhang. 1993. Cellular assimilation of water-soluble vitamins
in the mammal: Riboflavin, B6, biotin and C. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 202:265-
270.
McKibbin, J. M., R. J. Madden, S. Black, and C. A. Elvehjem. 1939. The importance
of vitamin B6 and factor W in the nutrition of dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 128:102-110.
McKibbin, J. M., S. Black, and C. A. Elvehjem. 1940. The essential nature of
pantothenic acid and anther alkali labile factor in the nutrition of the dog. Am. J.
Physiol. 130:365-372.
McKibbin, J. M., A. E. Schaefer, D. V. Frost, and C. A. Elvehjem. 1942. Studies on
anemia in dogs due to pyridoxine deficiency. J. Biol. Chem. 142:77-84.
McKibbin, J. M., S. Thayer, and F. J. Stare. 1944. Choline deficiency studies in dogs.
J. Lab. Clin. Med. 29:1109-1122.
McKibbin. J. M., R. M. Ferry, S. Thayer, E. G. Patterson, and F. J. Stare. 1945.
Further studies on choline deficiency in dogs. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 30:422-428.
Medical Research Council (MRC). 1991. Vitamin Study Group. Prevention of neural
tube defects: Results of the Medical Research Council Vitamin Study. Lancet
338:131-137.
Meir, H., S. T. Clark, G. B. Schnelle, and D. H. Will. 1957. Hypertrophic
osteodystrophy associated with disturbance of vitamin C synthesis in dogs. J. Am.
Vet. Med. Assoc. 130:483-491.
Mellanby, E. 1918. A further demonstration of the part played by accessory food
factors in the aetiology of rickets. Proc. Physiol. Soc. 5: liii-liv.
Mellanby, E. 1919. An experimental investigation on rickets. Lancet 4965:407-412.
Mellanby, E. 1921. Experimental rickets. Special Report, Series 61. Medical Research
Council. His Majesty’s Stationery Office. London, GB.
Mellanby, E. 1925. Experimental rickets. The effect of cereals and their interaction
with other factors of diet and environment in producing rickets. Special Report
Series. No. 93 Medical Research Council. His Majesty’s Stationery Office,
London.
Mellanby, E. 1938. The experimental production of deafness in young animals by
diet. J. Physiol. 94:380-398.
Michaud, L., and C. A. Elvehjem. 1944. The nutritional requirements of the dog.
North Am. Vet. 25:657-666.
Mock, D. M. 2001. Biotin. Pp. 397-426 in Handbook of Vitamins. Third edition. R.
B. Rucker, J. W. Suttie, D. B. McCormick, and L. J. Machlin, eds. New York:
Marcel Dekker.
Mock, D. M., and M. I. Malik. 1992. Distribution of biotin in human plasma: Most of
the biotin is not bound to proteins. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 56:427-432.
Molitor, H. 1942. Vitamins as pharmacological agents. Fed. Proc. 1:309-315.
Moore, F. M., M. Kundisch, and A. Faggella. 1988. Hypercalcemia associated with
rodenticide poisoning in three cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 193:1099-1100.
Moore, T., I. M. Sharman, and P. P. Scott. 1963. Vitamin A in the kidneys of the cat.
Res. Vet. Sci. 4:397-407.


===== PDF PAGE 518 =====
517
Morgan, A. F., and L. S. Bentley. 1943. The excretion of vitamin A in dog urine. Fed.
Proc. 2:67 (abstract).
Morgan, A. F., and N. Shimotori. 1943. The absorption and retention by dogs of
single massive dose of various forms of vitamin D. J. Biol. Chem. 147:189-200.
Morgan, A. F., and D. H. Simms. 1940. Greying of fur and other disturbances in
several species due to a vitamin deficiency. J. Nutr. 19:233-250.
Morgan, A. F., H. E. Axelrod, and M. Groody. 1947. The effect of a single massive
dose of vitamin D2 on young dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 149:333-339.
Morita, T., T. Awakura, A. Shimada, T. Umemura, T. Nagai, and A. Haruna. 1995.
Vitamin D toxicosis in cats: Natural outbreak and experimental study. J. Vet. Med.
Sci. 57:831-837.
Morris, J. G. 1977. The essentially of biotin and vitamin B12 for the cat. Pp. 15-18 in
Proceedings of the Kal Kan Symposium for the Treatment of Dog and Cat.
Morris, J. G. 1996. Vitamin D synthesis by kittens. Vet. Clin. Nutr. 3: 88-92.
Morris, J. G. 1999. Ineffective vitamin D synthesis in cats is reversed by an inhibitor
of 7-dehydrocholesterol-Δ7-reductase. J. Nutr. 129:903-909.
Morris, J. G. 2002a. Idiosyncratic nutrient requirements of cats appear to be diet-
induced evolutionary adaptations. Nutr. Res. Rev. 15:153-168.
Morris, J. G. 2002b. Cats discriminate between cholecalciferol and ergocalciferol. J.
Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 86:229-238.
Morris, J. G., and K. E. Earle. 1999. Growing kittens require less dietary calcium than
current allowances. J. Nutr. 129:1698-1704.
Morris, J. G., C. S. Kirk, and K. Burek. 1994. Vitamin D deficiency in kittens
exposed to ultraviolet light or sunlight. FASEB J. 8:A190 (1099).
Morris, J. G., K. E. Earle, and P. A. Anderson. 1999. Plasma 25-hydrox-yvitamin D in
growing kittens is related to dietary intake of cholecalciferol. J. Nutr. 129:909-912.
Muggli, R. 1994. Physiological requirements of vitamin E as a function of the amount
and type polyunsaturated fatty acid. World Rev. Nutr. Diet. 75:166-168.
Munson, T. O., J. Holzworth, E. Small, S. Witzel, T. C. Jones, and H. Luginbohl.
1954. Steatitis (“yellow fat”) in cats fed canned red tuna. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
133:563-568.
Murthy, P. N. A., and S. P. Mistry. 1977. Biotin. Prog. Food Nutr. Sci. 2:405-455.
Naismith, D. H. 1958. Ascorbic acid requirements of the dog. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 17:xlii-
xliii.
Naismith, D. J., and P. L. Pellett. 1960. The water-soluble vitamin content of blood
serum and milk of the bitch. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 19:xi.
Nakagawa, I., and A. Sasaki. 1977. Effect of excess intake of leucine, with and
without addition of vitamin B6 and/or niacin, on tryptophan and niacin metabolism
in rats. J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol. 23:535-548.
Nakano, K., Y. Sugawara, M. Ohashi, and S. Harigaya. 1986. Glucoside formation as
a novel metabolic pathway of pantothenic acid in the dog. Biochem. Pharmacol.
35:3745-3752.


===== PDF PAGE 519 =====
518
National Research Council (NRC). 1985. Nutrient Requirements of Dogs.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). 1986. Nutrient Requirement of Cats. Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). 1987. Vitamin Tolerances of Animals.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Neal, R. A., and H. E. Sauberlich. 1980. Thiamine in Modern Nutrition in Health and
Disease. 6th edition. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger.
Nelp, W. B., H. N. Wagner, R. C. Reba, P. G. Dennis, and R. E. Bower. 1964. Renal
excretion of vitamin B12 and its use in measurement of glomerular filtration rate in
man. J. Lab. Clin. Med 63:480-491.
Nelson, R. A., C. F. Code, and A. L. Brown. 1962. Sorption of water and electrolytes,
and mucosal structure in niacin deficiency. Gastroenterology 42:26-35.
Newberne, P. M., and A. E. Rogers. 1986. Labile methyl group and the promotion of
cancer. Ann. Rev. Nutr. 6:407-432.
Noel, P. R. B., H. Chesterman, D. W. Jolly, and H. Partington. 1971. Thiamine
(vitamin B1) supplementation in the dog. Vet. Rec. 89:260-266.
Noel, P. R. B., H. Chesterman, R. Heywood, D. H. Jolly, and H. Partington. 1972.
Riboflavin supplementation in the dog. Res. Vet. Sci. 13:443-450.
Okuda, K., T. Kitazaki, and M. Morokuma. 1973. Intestinal vitamin B12 absorption
and gastric juice in the cat. Digestion 8:417-428.
Olson, J. A. 2001. Vitamin A. Pp. 1-50 in Handbook of Vitamins. Third edition. R. B.
Rucker, J. W. Suttie, D. B. McCormick, and L. J. Machlin, eds. New York: Marcel
Dekker.
Omaye, S. T. 1984. Safety of megavitamin therapy. In Nutritional and Toxicological
Aspects of Food Safety, M. Friedman, ed. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 177:169-203.
Partington, H., C. E. Waterhouse, and T. Taylor 1964. The urinary excretion of
thiamine by the cat including measurement of the response to test doses of the
vitamin. J. Small Anim. Prac. 5:493-502.
Pastoor, F. J. H., A. T. H. Van’t Klooster, and A. C. Beynen. 1991. Biotin deficiency
in cats as induced by feeding a purified diet containing egg white. J. Nutr.
124S:73S-74S.
Peters, T. J., J. C. Linnell, D. A. Matthews, and A. V. Hoffbrand. 1971. Absorption of
vitamin B12 in the guinea-pig. III. The forms of vitamin B12 in ileal mucosa and
portal plasma in the fasting state and during absorption of cyanocobalamin. Br. J.
Haematol. 28:299-305.
Peterson, E. N., R. Kirby, and K. C. Bovee. 1991. Cholecalciferol rodenticide
intoxication in a cat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 199:904-906.
Phelps, D. L. 1981. Local and systemic reactions to the parenteral administration of
vitamin E. Dev. Pharmacol. Ther. 2:156-171.
Phillips, W. E. J., J. H. L. Mills, S. M. Charbonneau, L. Tryphonas, G. V. Hatina, Z.
Zawidzka, F. R. Bryce, and I. C. Munro. 1978. Subacute toxicity of pyridoxine


===== PDF PAGE 520 =====
519
hydrochloride in the beagle dog. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 44:323.
Pillai, S. R., J. E. Steiss, M. G. Traber, H. J. Kayden, and J. C. Wright. 1992.
Comparison of four erythrocyte fragility tests as indicators of vitamin E status in
adult dogs. J. Comp. Path. 107:399-410.
Pillai, S. R., M. G. Traber, J. E. Steiss, and H. J. Kayden. 1993. Depletion of adipose
tissue and peripheral nerve α-tocopherol in adult dogs. Lipids 28:1095-1099.
Plesofsky, N. S. 2001. Pantothenic acid. Pp. 317-337 in Handbook of Vitamins. Third
edition. R. B. Rucker, J. W. Suttie, D. B. McCormick, and L. J. Machlin, eds. New
York: Marcel Dekker.
Potter, R. L., A. E. Axelrod, and C. A. Elvehjem. 1942. The riboflavin requirement of
the dog. J. Nutr. 24:449-460.
Power, H. T., and P. J. Ihrke. 1990. Synthetic retinoids in veterinary dermatology.
Small Animal Practice. 20:1525-1539.
Price, P. A., J. R. Buckley, and M. K. Williamson. 2001a. The amino bisphosphonate
ibandronate prevents vitamin D toxicity and inhibits vitamin D-induced
calcification of arteries, cartilage, lungs and kidneys in rats. J. Nutr. 131:2901-
2905.
Price, P. A., S. A. Faus, and M. K. Williamson. 2001b. Bisphosphonates alendronate
and ibandronate inhibit artery calcification at doses comparable to those that inhibit
bone resorption. Arterioscler. Thromb. Biol. 21:817-824.
Pshonik, A. T., and A. A. Gribanov. 1961. The effect of vitamin B12 on the
conditioned reflex activity of dogs. Zh. Vyssh. Nervn. Deyat. 11:1026.
Quadros, E. M., D. M. Matthews, I. J. Wise, and J. C. Linnell. 1976. Tissue
distribution of endogenous cobalamins and other corrins in the rat, cat and guinea
pig. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 421:141-152.
Quick, A. J., G. E. Collentine, and C. V. Hussey. 1962. Vitamin K requirements of the
growing pup. J. Nutr. 77:28-32.
Rapazzo, M. E., and C. A. Hall. 1972. Cyanocobalamin transport proteins in canine
plasma. Am. J. Physiol. 222:202-206.
Rea, J. L., and J. C. Drummond. 1932. On the formation of vitamin A from carotene
in the animal organism. Zeitschrift für Vitaminforfchung. 1:177-183.
Read, D. H., and D. D. Harrington. 1981. Experimentally induced thiamine deficiency
in Beagle dogs: Clinical observations. Am. J. Vet. Med. Res. 42:984-991.
Read, D. H., and D. D. Harrington. 1982. Experimentally induced thiamine deficiency
in Beagle dogs: Clinicopathologic findings. Am. J. Vet. Med. Res. 43:1258-1267.
Read, D. H., and D. D. Harrington. 1986. Experimentally induced thiamine deficiency
in Beagle dogs: Pathologic changes of the central nervous system. Am. J. Vet. Med.
Res. 47:2281-2289.
Read, D. H., R. D. Jolly, and M. R. Alley. 1977. Polioencephomalacia of dogs with
thiamine deficiency. Vet. Pathol. 14:103-112.
Riis, R. C., B. E. Sheffy, E. Loew, T. J. Kern, and J. S. Smith. 1981. Vitamin E
deficiency retinopathy in dogs. Am. J. Vet Res. 42: 74-86.


===== PDF PAGE 521 =====
520
Rivlin, R. S., and J. T. Pinto. 2001. Riboflavin (Vitamin B2). Pp. 255-273 in
Handbook of Vitamins, Third edition. R. B. Rucker, J. W. Suttie, D. B.
McCormick, and L. J. Machlin, eds. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Ross, A. C, and U. G. Hammerling. 1994. Retinoids and the immune system. Pp. 521-
543 in The Retinoids: Biology, Chemistry, and Medicine. 2nd edition, M. B. Sporn,
A. B. Roberts, and D. S. Goodman, eds. New York: Raven Press.
Ruaux, C. G., J. M. Steiner, and D. A. Williams. 2001. Metabolism of amino acids in
cats with severe cobalamin deficiency. Am. J. Vet. Res. 62:1852-1858.
Rucker, R. B., and F. M. Steinberg. 2002. Vitamin requirements. Biochem. Mol. Biol.
Educ. 30:86-89.
Russell, W. C., and M. L. Morris. 1939. Vitamin A deficiency in the dog.
Experimental production of the vitamin A deficient condition. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Assoc. 95:316-320.
Saari, J. C. 1994. Retinoids in photosensitive systems. Pp. 351-385 in The Retinoids:
Biology, Chemistry, and Medicine. 2nd edition, M. B. Sporn, A. B. Roberts, and D.
S. Goodman, eds. New York: Raven Press.
Sadek, S. E. 1962. Suspected skeletal scurvy in the dog. Vet. Rec. 74:905.
Said, H. M., and R. Mohammadkhani. 1993. Uptake of riboflavin across the brush
border membrane of rat intestine: Regulation by dietary vitamin levels.
Gastroenterology 105:1294-1298.
Sampson, D. A., and D. K. O’Connor. 1989. Response of B6 vitamers in plasma.
erythrocytes and tissue to vitamin B-6 depletion and repletion in the rat. J. Nutr.
119:1940-1948.
Sarett, H. P. 1942. Studies in nicotinic acid metabolism. II. The fate of nicotinic acid
in normal and black tongue dogs. J. Nutr. 23:35-45.
Sato, R., H. Yamagishi, Y. Naito, D. Murakami, K. Oshima, H. Takagi, S. Fujita, and
J. Sasaki. 1993. Feline vitamin D toxicosis caused by a commercially available
diet. J. Japanese. Vet. Med. Assoc. 46:577-581.
Sauberlich, H. E. 1985. Interactions of vitamin B6 with other nutrients. Pp. 193-217
in Vitamin B6: Its role in Health and Disease, R. D. Reynolds, and J. E. Leklem,
eds. New York: Alan R. Liss.
Schaefer, A. E., J. M. McKibbin, and C. A. Elvehjem. 1941. Importance of choline in
synthetic rations for dogs. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 47:365-368.
Schaefer, A. E., J. M. McKibbin, and C. A. Elvehjem. 1942a. Nicotinic acid
deficiency studies in dogs. J. Biol. Chem. 144:679-685.
Schaefer, A. E., J. M. McKibbin, and C. A. Elvehjem. 1942b. Panthothenic acid
deficiency studies in dogs. J. Biol. Chem. 143:321-330.
Schaeffer, M. C., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1982. The choline requirement of
the growing kitten in the presence of just adequate dietary methionine. Nutr. Res.
2:289-299.
Schweigert, F. J. 1988. Insensitivity of dogs to the effects of nonspecific bound
vitamin A in plasma. Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res. 58:23-25.


===== PDF PAGE 522 =====
521
Schweigert, F. J., and Bok, V. 2000. Vitamin A in blood plasma and urine of dogs is
affected by the dietary level of vitamin A. Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res. 70:84-91.
Schweigert, F. J., O. A. Ryder, W. A. Rambeck, and H. Zucker. 1990a. The majority
of the vitamin A is transported as retinyl esters in the blood of most carnivores.
Comp. Biochem. Physiol A 95:573-578.
Schweigert, F. J., S. Uehlein-Harrell, and H. Zucker. 1990b. Effect of feeding on
vitamin A concentrations in blood plasma of dogs. J. Vet. Med. A 37:605-609.
Schweigert, F. J., E. Thomann, and H. Zucker. 1990c. Vitamin A in the urine of
carnivores. Int. J. Vit. Nutr. Res. 61:110-113.
Schweigert, F. J., J. Raila, B. Wichert, and E. Kienzle. 2002. Cats absorb β-carotene,
but it is not converted to vitamin A. J. Nutr. 132:1610S-1612S.
Scott, E. M., and I. V. Griffith. 1957. Comparative study of thiamine-sparing agents in
the rat. J. Nutr. 61:421-436.
Scott, M. L. 1978. Vitamin E. Pp. 133-210 in Lipid Soluble Vitamins, F. H. DeLuca,
ed. New York: Plenum.
Scott, M. L. 1986. P. 225 in Nutrition of Humans and Selected Animal Species. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Scott, P. P. 1971. Dietary requirements of the cat in relation to practical feeding
problems. Small Animal Nutrition Workshop, University of Illinois College of
Veterinary Medicine.
Scott, P. P., J. P. Greaves, and M. G. Scott. 1964. Nutritional blindness in the cat. Exp.
Eye Res. 3:357-364.
Scudi, J. V., and M. Hamlin. 1942. The effect of pantothenic acid deficiency on the
blood lipids of the dog. J. Nutr. 24:273-282.
Seawright, A. A., and J. Hrdlicka. 1974. Pathogenetic factors in tooth loss in young
cats on a high daily oral intake of vitamin A. Aust. Vet. J. 50:133-141.
Seawright, A. A., P. B. English, and R. J. W. Gartner. 1967. Hypervitaminosis A and
deforming cervical spondylosis of the cat. J. Comp. Path. 77:29-39.
Seawright, A. A., P. B. English, and R. J. W. Gartner. 1970. Hypervitaminosis A of
the cat. Advances Vet. Sci. Comp. Path. 14:1-27.
Sebrell, W. H., R. M. Onstott, H. F. Fraser, and F. S. Daft. 1938. Nicotinic acid in the
prevention of blacktongue in dogs. J. Nutr. 16:355-362.
Shearer, M. J., A. McBurney, and P. Barkham. 1974. Studies on the absorption and
metabolism of phylloquinone (vitamin K1) in man. Vitamins and Hormones
32:513-524.
Sheffy, B. E. 1964. Nutrient requirements of dogs. Pp. 159-162 in Cornell Nutrition
Conference, Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y.
Sheffy, B. E. 1972. Nutrition and infection. Pp. 55-61 in Canine Nutrition.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania.
Shen, S. C., L. Overfield, P. N. A. Murthy, J. E. Corbin, and S. P. Mistry. 1977. Effect
of feeding raw egg-white on pyruvate and propionyl CoA carboxylase activities on
tissues of the dog. Fed. Proc. 36:1169, (abstract 4750).


===== PDF PAGE 523 =====
522
Shimomura, H., Y. Kanai, and K. Sanada. 1984. The primary structure of cat
osteocalcin. J. Biol. Chem. 96:405-411.
Shimotori, N., and A. F. Morgan. 1943. Mechanism of vitamin D action in dogs
shown by radioactive phosphorus. J. Biol. Chem. 147:201-210.
Sibler, R. H. 1944. Studies of pantothenic acid deficiency in dogs. J. Nutr. 27:425-
433.
Sih, T. R., J. G. Morris, and A. Hickman. 2001. Chronic ingestion of high
concentrations of cholecalciferol in cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. 62:1500-1506.
Silverman, M. 1979. Vitamin B12 uptake in dog kidney: Its use as an extracellular
reference marker. Am. J. Physiol. 237:F25-F-33.
Simpson, K. W., J. Fyfe, A. Cornetta, A. Sachs, D. Strauss-Ayali, S. V. Lamb, and T.
J. Thomas. 2001. Subnormal concentrations of serum cobalamin (vitamin B12) in
cats with gastrointestinal disease. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 15:26-32.
Singal, S. A., V. P. Sydenstricker, and M. J. Littlejohn. 1948. The role of tryptophan
in the nutrition of dogs on nicotinic acid-deficient diets. J. Biol. Chem. 176:1051-
1062.
Singh, M. M., G. K. Sinka, and B. N. Gupta. 1965. Corneal opacity in a dog. Indian
Vet J. 42:879-880.
Smith, D. C., and L. M. Proutt. 1944. Development of thiamine deficiency in the cat
on a diet of raw fish. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 56:1-3.
Smith, S. G., R. Curry, and H. Hawfield. 1943. Nicotinic acid storage in the dog at
different dose levels of the vitamin. J. Nutr. 25:341-347.
Soute, B. A., M. M. Ulrich, A. D. Watson, J. E. Maddison, R. H. Ebberink, and C.
Vermeer. 1992. Congenital deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood
coagulation factors due to defective vitamin K-dependent carboxylase in Devon
Rex cats. Thromb. Haemost. 68:521-525.
Southern, L. L., and D. H. Baker. 1981. Bioavailable pantothenic acid in cereal grains
and soybean meal. J. Anim. Sci. 53:403-408.
Southern, L. L., D. R. Brown, D. D. Werner, and M. C. Fox. 1986. Excess
supplemental choline for swine. J Anim. Sci. 62:992-996.
Spangler, W. L., D. H. Gribble, and T. C. Lee. 1979. Vitamin D intoxication and the
pathogenesis of vitamin D nephropathy in the dog. Am. J. Vet. Res. 40:73-83.
Spector, H., A. R. Maass, L. Michaud, C. A. Elvehjem, and E. B. Hart. 1943. The role
of riboflavin in blood regeneration. J. Biol. Chem. 150:75-87.
Steenbock, H., E. M. Nelson, and E. B. Hart. 1921. Fat soluble vitamine. IX.
Incidence of an ophthalmic reaction in dogs fed fat soluble vitamine deficient diet.
Am. J. Physiol. 58:14-19.
Steinberg, F. M., E. Gershwin, and R. B. Rucker. 1994. Dietary pyrroloquinoline
quinone: Growth and immune response in ALB/c mice. J. Nutr. 124:744-753.
Stimson, A. M., and O. F. Hedley. 1933. Observation of vitamin A deficiency in dogs.
U.S. Public Health Rep. 48:455.
Stites, T. E., A. E. Mitchell, and R. B. Rucker. 2000. Physiological importance of
quinoenzymes and O-quinone family of cofactors. J. Nutr. 130:719-727.


===== PDF PAGE 524 =====
523
Street, H. R., and G. R. Cowgill. 1937. The cure of canine blacktongue with nicotinic
acid. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med 37:547-548.
Street, H. R., and G. R. Cowgill. 1939. Acute riboflavin deficiency in the dog. Am. J.
Physiol. 125: 323-334.
Street, H. R., G. R. Cowgill, and H. M. Zimmerman. 1941a. Further observations of
riboflavin deficiency in the dog. J. Nutr. 22:7-24.
Street H. R., H. M. Zimmerman, G. R. Cowgill, H. E. Hoff, and J. C. Fox. 1941b.
Some effects produced by long-continued sub-minimal intakes of vitamin B1. Yale
J. Biol. Med. 13:293-308.
Strieker, M. J., J. G. Morris, B. F. Feldman, and Q. R. Rogers. 1996. Vitamin K
deficiency in cats fed commercial fish-based duets. J. Small. Anim. Prac. 37:322-
326.
Studdert, V. P., and R. H. Labuc. 1991. Thiamine deficiency in cats and dogs
associated with the feeding of meat preserved with sulphur dioxide. Aust. Vet. J.
68:54-57.
Sudadolnik, R. J., C. O. Stevens, R. H. Dechner, L. M. Henderson, and L. V. Hankes.
1957. Species variation in the metabolism of 3-hydroxyan-thranilate to
pyridinecarboxylic acids. J. Biol. Chem. 228:973-982.
Suttie, J. W. 2001. Vitamin K. Pp. 115-164 in Handbook of Vitamins. Third edition,
R. B. Rucker, J. W. Suttie, D. B. McCormick, and L. J. Machlin, eds. New York:
Marcel Dekker.
Takanga, H., H. Maeda, H. Yabuuchi, I. Tamai, H. Higashida, and A. Tsuji. 1996.
Nicotinic acid transport mediated by pH-dependent anion antiporter and proton
cotransporter in rabbit intestinal brush-border membrane. J. Pharm. Pharmacol.
48:1073-1077.
Takenaka, M., Y. Yamane, and T. Umemura. 1992. Dietary calcinosis in the cat. J.
Anim. Clin. Res. Found. 1:9-16.
Talwar, D., H. Davidson, J. Cooney, and D. St. J. O’Reilly. 2000. Vitamin B1 status
assessed by direct measurement of thiamine pyrophosphate in erythrocytes or
whole blood by HPLC: Comparison with erythrocyte transketolase activation
assay. Clin. Chem. 46:704-710.
Tanphaichitr, V. 2001. Thiamine. Pp. 275-316 in Handbook of Vitamins. Third
edition, R. B. Rucker, J. W. Suttie, D. B. McCormick, and L. J. Machlin, eds. New
York: Marcel Dekker.
Taylor, T., D. R. Hawkins, D. E. Hathway, and H. Partington. 1972. A new urinary
metabolite of pantothenate in dogs. Br. Vet. J. 128:500-505.
Taylor, T., B. D. Cameron, D. E. Hathway, and H. Partington. 1974. The disposition
of pantothenate in dogs. Res. Vet. Sci. 16:271-275.
Tepley, L. J., W. A. Krehl, and C. A. Elvehjem. 1947. The intestinal synthesis of
niacin and folic acid in the rat. Am. J. Physiol. 148:91-97.
Thenen, S. W., and K. M. Rasmussen. 1978. Megaloblastic erythropoiesis and tissue
depletion of folic acid in the cat. Am. J. Vet. Res. 39:1205-1207.


===== PDF PAGE 525 =====
524
Toman, J. E. P., G. M. Everett, R. H. Oster, and D. C. Smith. 1945. Origin of cardiac
disorders in thiamine-deficient cats. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 58:65-67.
Traber, M. G., S. R. Pillai, H. J. Kayden, and J. E. Steiss. 1993. Vitamin E deficiency
in dogs does not alter preferential incorporation of RRRalpha-tocopherol compared
with all rac-alpha-tocopherol into plasma. Lipids 28:1107-1112.
Traber, M. G., D. Rader, R. V. Acuff, R. Ramakrishman, H. B. Brewer, and H. J.
Kayden. 1998. Vitamin E dose-response studies in humans with use of deuterated
RRR-α-tocopherol. Am J. Clin. Nutr. 68:847-853.
Trang, H. M., D. E. C. Cole, L. A. Rubin, A. Pierratos, S. Siu, and R. Veith. 1998.
Evidence that vitamin D3 increases serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D more efficiently
than does vitamin D2. Am J. Clin. Nutr. 68:854-858.
Truswell, A. S., G. A. Goldsmith, and W. N. Pearson. 1963. Leucine and pellagra.
Lancet 788.
Tryfonidou, M. A. 2002. Involvement of Vitamin D3 metabolism in calcium
homeostasis and skeltal development in growing dogs. Thesis, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University.
Tryfonidou, M. A., J. J. Stevenhagen, G. J. C. M. van den Bemd, M. A. Oosterlaken-
Dijksterhuis, H. F. DeLuca, J. A. Mol, W. E. van den Brom, J. P. T. M. van
Leeuwen, and H. A. W. Hazewinkel. 2002. Moderate cholecalciferol
supplementation depresses intestinal calcium absorption in growing dogs. J. Nutr.
132:2644-2650.
Tucker, H. F., and H. C. Eckstein. 1937. The effect of supplementary methionine and
cystine on the production of fatty livers by diet. J. Biol. Chem. 121:479.
Tully, D. B., V. E. Allgood, and J. A. Cidlowski. 1994. Modulation of steroid
receptor-mediated gene expression by vitamin B6. FASEB J. 8:343-349.
Turner, R. G. 1934. Effect of prolonged feeding of raw carrots on vitamin A content
of liver and kidneys of the dog. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 31:866-868.
United States Pharmacopeia. 1985. United States Pharmacopeial Convention.
Rockville, Md.
Unna, K. 1940. Studies on the toxicity and pharmacology of vitamin B6 (2-methyl-3-
hydroxy-4,5-bis-(hydroxymethyl)-pyridine. J. Pharmocol. Exp. Ther. 70:400-407.
Unna, K., and W. Antopol. 1940. Toxicity of vitamin B6. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med.
43:116-118.
Unna, K., and J. G. Greslin. 1942. Studies on the toxicity and pharmacology of
riboflavin. J. Exp. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 76:75-80.
Vaananen, M., and L. Wikman. 1979. Scurvy as a cause of osteodystrophy: Two case
reports. J. Small Anim. Prac. 8:491-500.
Vaden, S. L., P. A. Wood, F. D. Ledley, P. E. Cornwall, R. T. Miller, and R. Page.
1992. Cobalamin deficiency associated with methylmalonic aciduria in a cat. J.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 200:1101-1103.
Vaillant C., N. U. Horadagoda, and R. M. Batt. 1990. Cellular localization of intrinsic
factor in pancreas and stomach of the dog. Cell Tissue Res. 260:117-122.


===== PDF PAGE 526 =====
525
Van Vleet, J. F. 1975. Experimentally induced vitamin E-selenium deficiency in the
growing dog. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc 166:769-774.
Voegtlin, C., and G. C. Lake. 1919. Experimental mammalian polyneuritis produced
by a deficient diet. Am. J. Physiol. 47:458-589.
Wandzilak, T. R., S. D. D’Andre, P. A. Davis, and H. E. Williams. 1994. Effect of
high dose vitamin C on urinary oxalate levels. J. Urol. 151:834-837.
Warnock, L. G., C. R. Prudhomme, and C. Wagner. 1978. Determination of thiamine
pyrophosphate in blood and other tissues, and its correlation with erythrocyte
transketolase activity. J. Nutr. 108:421-427.
West, C. E. 2000. Meeting requirements for vitamin A. Nutr. Rev. 58:341-345.
Wheeler, G. A., J. Goldberger, and Blackstock. 1922. On the probable identity of the
Chittenden-Underhill pellagra-like syndrome in dogs and “black-tongue.” Public
Health Report, 37:1063-1069.
WHO. 1966. World Health Organization. Page 130 in Eighteenth Report of the WHO
Expert Committee on Biological Standardization: Technical Report Series No. 329.
Geneva:WHO.
Wiersig, D. O., and M. J. Swenson. 1967. Teratogenicity of vitamin A in the canine.
Fed. Proc. 26:486 (abstract).
Witting, L. A., and M. K. Horwitt. 1964. Effects of dietary selenium, methionine, fat
level and tocopherol on rat growth. J. Nutr. Dec(84):351-360.
Wolf, B., G. Heard, J. R. S. McVoy, and H. M. Raetz. 1984. Biotinidase deficiency:
The possible role of biotinidase in the processing of dietary protein-bound biotin. J.
Inherited Metab. Dis. 7:121-122
Wyss, A., G. Wirtz, W. Waggon, R. Brugger, M. Wyss, A. Friedlein, H. Bachmann,
and W. Huziker. 2000. Cloning and expression of β, β-carotene 15,15′-dioxygenase.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm. 271:334-336.
Wyss, A., G. M. Wirtz, W. D. Waggon, R. Brugger, M. Wyss, A. Friedlein, G. Riss,
H. Bachmann, and W. Huziker. 2001. Expression pattern and localization of β, β-
carotene 15,15′-dioxygenase in different tissues. Biochem. J. 354:521-529.
Yu, S., and J. G. Morris. 1998. Folate requirements of growing kittens to prevent
elevated formiminoglutamic acid excretion following histidine loading. J. Nutr.
128:2606S-2608S.
Yu, S., E. Shultze, and J. G. Morris. 1999. Plasma homocysteine concentration is
affected by folate status, and sex of cats. FASEB J. 13:A229.
Zamboni, G., G. Piemonte, A. Bolner, F. Antoniazzi, A. Dall’Agnola, H. Messner, G.
Gambaro, and L. Tato. 1993. Influence of dietary taurine on vitamin D absorption.
Acta Paediatr. 82:811-815.
Zhang, Y., and P. A. Rosenberg. 2002 The essential nutrient pyrroloquinoline quinone
may act as a neuroprotectant by suppressing peroxynitrite formation. Eur. J.
Neurosci. 16:1015-1024.


===== PDF PAGE 527 =====
526
9
Water
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Function
Water is an essential nutrient, but perhaps the least discussed with respect to
dietary requirements. Water is most often freely available to dogs and cats and
separate from the remainder of the daily ration. Also, when water is provided in
ample amounts, healthy dogs and cats can efficiently self-regulate intake to meet
their needs. As a result, its contribution to the total diet is largely ignored, and most
often it is not considered a critical component of a diet formulation. Despite these
facts, its role is vital to the functioning of all living cells.
The functions of water in the body are countless. Water serves as the solvent
wherein the vast majority of intra- and extracellular chemical processes occur. It is a
major component of most body tissues and fluids. As a principal component of
blood, water facilitates the transport of oxygen and nutrients to all parts of the body.
It is needed for normal digestion of food, thermoregulation, and excretion of waste in
the urine and feces (Case et al., 2000). The gastric emptying time of cats fed a dry
diet (5.7 percent moisture) was longer than those fed canned food (75 percent
moisture), and the gastric emptying time of cats fed dry diets decreased with
increased water intake (Goggin et al., 1998).
Regulation of Intake by Dogs and Cats


===== PDF PAGE 528 =====
527
In the dog and cat, loss of water occurs primarily as a function of respiration and
production of urine and feces. While water losses are continual throughout the day,
access to water by terrestrial animals such as dogs and cats is periodic. Thirst is
directly correlated with body water content and plasma osmolality, and intake may
not be stimulated until a mild degree of dehydration exists (Ramsey and Thrasher,
1991). Intracarotid injections of a small amount of water or larger infusions of water
intravenously into dehydrated dogs reduced voluntary consumption, indicating
response to both cellular and extracellular dehydration.
The amount of water consumed by dogs was found to be approximately
proportional to the deficit of water in the body (Adolph, 1939). Loss of 0.5 percent
of body weight (BW) stimulated voluntary consumption in dogs, independent of the
time required to achieve that degree of loss (Robinson and Adolph, 1943). The initial
consumption of water at this juncture did not wholly restore BW, but was thought to
be adequate to restore water content relative to the content of other substances in the
body.
In addition to water deprivation, increased losses also stimulate water
consumption. Exposure to heat stimulated consumption in dogs, but the timing of
consumption was associated with the same degree of water loss observed under
normal environmental conditions (Robinson and Adolph, 1943). Access to water
during heat application or after a delay did not affect the amount of water consumed.
When exercised on a treadmill, a greater stimulus to drink was observed in dogs
offered water immediately after exercise compared to those offered water after a
delay of 5-30 minutes (O’Connor, 1975). However, the difference in mean
consumption was not statistically significant. In neither case did the dogs drink
enough at that time to account wholly for evaporative losses. However, dogs allowed
access to water on multiple occasions during the run drank sufficient amounts to
meet if not exceed total evaporative losses. Administration of 10-20 mL·kg BW–1 by
stomach tube before running reduced or abolished drinking but did not cause
diuresis. A loss of 0.5-1.0 percent of body water was considered necessary to
stimulate drinking by dehydration, the same as in nonexercising dogs either at
normal environmental conditions or when exposed to heat. The added stimulus to
drink during or immediately after running could not be explained.
Dogs may drink quantities of water sufficient to restore losses within minutes
after cessation of water deprivation. Since intake ceases prior to complete
gastrointestinal absorption, factors other than restoration of body water content play
a role. Dehydrated dogs with esophageal or gastric fistulae drank volumes consistent
with existing deficits and equal to amounts consumed by intact dogs (Adolph, 1943;
Ramsay and Thrasher, 1991). Oropharyngeal metering of intake and inhibition of
vasopressin secretion serve to limit the risk of overconsumption in the short term
(Ramsay and Thrasher, 1991).
The amount and nutrient content of food affects water intake. Given constant
food composition, the intake of water is linearly correlated with food intake in dogs
(Cizek, 1959). Voluntary water intake is adjusted depending on the moisture content


===== PDF PAGE 529 =====
528
of food by both dogs and cats (Cizek, 1959; Seefeldt and Chapman, 1979).
Starvation causes a dramatic decrease in water consumption in dogs, with total intake
only one-fifth to one-third of normal (Kleitman, 1927; Gregersen, 1932), although
intake gradually increases with prolonged food deprivation (Cizek, 1959).
Dehydration occurs in fasted dogs allowed free access to water, although not as
severely as in dogs deprived of food and water, or deprived of water but consuming
protein in excess of the amount necessary for nitrogen balance (Danowski et al.,
1944).
Overfeeding of protein or carbohydrate (but not fat) causes both increased intake
and increased retention of water in dogs (Golob et al., 1984). Water intake also
increases with increasing dietary protein concentrations in cats (Funaba et al., 1996).
High salt (sodium chloride) intake increases voluntary consumption of water in dogs
up to fourfold, while salt restriction may reduce water consumption by 20 percent of
normal (Cowley et al., 1983).
The act of food intake itself also stimulates the intake of water. Drinking after
meal consumption may be stimulated by movement of gastric juice and other fluid
into the gastrointestinal tract (Gregersen, 1932). Delay in access to water until
several hours after a meal decreases 24-hour intake of water by dogs. In dogs fed
once every 24 hours, some preprandial anticipatory drinking may be observed
(Ramsay and Thrasher, 1991). Periodic versus continuous feeding of cats resulted in
lower daily consumption of both food and water (Finco et al., 1986).
Deficiency in Dogs and Cats
For most nutrients, it may take weeks, months, or sometimes even longer before
clinical signs of deficiency become evident. Further, body stores of many substances
must be seriously depleted before the situation becomes life threatening. On the other
hand, signs of water deficiency can appear within days, and with as little as a 5
percent decrease in body stores (Kirk and Bistner, 1981). Severe health
consequences may occur with losses exceeding 10 percent of normal body stores,
and death may become imminent with losses approaching 15 percent (Kirk and
Bistner, 1981; Hoskins, 1995).
Simple water deficiency can occur in any situation where ample quantities of
acceptable water are not available to the dog or cat for an extended period of time
(Seigmund and Fraser, 1979). In livestock, water deprivation is also characterized as
“salt toxicity,” although animals can tolerate large amounts of dietary sodium (up to
13 percent of the diet) provided ample water is available (Buck et al., 1976). Dogs
fed up to 4 g·kg BW–1·d–1 of salt but allowed free access to water showed no sign of
significant salt retention for up to 6 days (Ladd and Raisz, 1949). A dog suffered
seizures, hypernatremia, and death following a massive intake of sodium from “salt
flour”—finely ground salt (Khanna et al., 1997). Rapid onset of vomiting and
progression to clonictonic motor activity likely limited voluntary water intake.


===== PDF PAGE 530 =====
529
Water deficiency most often occurs as a result of poor husbandry, such as when
the water supply is interrupted or allowed to become fouled or otherwise
undrinkable. Failure to account for an increase in insensible losses (e.g., during heat
stress or increased exercise) may be a cause as well. Deficiencies also may occur as a
result of disease, either because of decreased intake due to the animal’s inability to
reach and consume water or because of increased fluid loss due to vomiting,
diarrhea, or hemorrhage. These latter conditions also lead to concurrent losses of
electrolytes and other substances that may result in various nutritional deficiencies.
The predominant initial clinical sign attributable to pure water deficiency is loss
of elasticity of the skin (Seigmund and Fraser, 1979; Kirk and Bistner, 1981). The
deficit is shared by all body tissues but early responses are made to help maintain
blood volume at the expense of intracellular water. Increased water resorption from
feces and urine also helps control losses. Regardless, tissues may become hypertonic,
adversely affecting function. Saliva production and appetite may decrease. While
this may suppress intake of both water and other nutrients, it may also serve to
mitigate insensible losses due to digestion of food and elimination of wastes. As the
degree of dehydration increases and the blood eventually becomes less dilute and
lower in volume, circulation is impaired, which in turn further affects the function of
vital organs such as heart, brain, lungs, and kidneys. In “salt toxicity,” neurologic
signs may predominate in some species (Buck et al., 1976; Khanna et al., 1997).
Death may be due to multiple organ failure.
REQUIREMENTS OF DOGS
Requirements for Maintenance
Water needs can be met by a combination of water consumed voluntarily (free
water), water as a component of food (combined water), or water produced
endogenously during the metabolism of energy-containing nutrients (metabolic
water). The amounts of water produced during the oxidation of proteins, fats, and
carbohydrates are approximately 41, 107, and 60 g per 100 g of substrate,
respectively (Rowntree, 1922). In general, 10 to 16 mL of water are produced from
the metabolism of each 100 kcal of metabolizable energy (ME) (NRC, 1985).
Several formulas have been used to estimate daily needs for maintenance of
normal water balance. The simplest is based solely on body weight and is often used
in estimating the needs of animals that are receiving parenteral fluid therapy. The
daily water need estimated by this formula is 50-60 mL·kg BW–1 (Schaer, 1989).
This is lower than the findings of English and Filippich (1980), who determined the
mean daily water intake of free, combined, and metabolic water for dogs housed
indoors at 22-25°C to be 72.9 ± 3.7 mL·kg BW–1·d–1. However, it is higher than that
estimated by O’-Connor and Potts (1969), which was only 37.5 mL·kg BW–1·d–1.


===== PDF PAGE 531 =====
530
The difference between studies may have been caused by higher activity and food
intake in the former study. Applying this formula in an example, a 10-kg adult dog
would require a minimum of 500 to 600 mL of water per day to account for
continuing insensible losses and normal urine output. However, this figure is most
useful in circumstances where the animal is sedentary and held in environmentally
favorable conditions.
Since water needs appear to be highly associated with amount of food consumed,
other formulas that estimate needs based on food intake provide for a broader range
of circumstances than one based on body weight. One formula suggests that water
intake (milliliters per day) should be double to triple the daily intake (in grams) of
dry matter (DM) (Case et al., 2000). The same 10-kg adult dog mentioned above
would consume approximately 212 g of dry matter per day by having an average-
caloric-density (3,500 kcal ME·kg–1 DM) dog food, thus requiring 424-636 mL
water per day. Another formula suggests that daily water needs on a milliliter basis
are in a 1:1 ratio with energy intake in terms of kilocalories of metabolizable energy
per day (Lewis et al., 1987). Based on this formula, the same dog would consume
approximately 742 kcal ME per day, using the formula ME = 132·kg BW0.75, and
hence would need 742 mL water per day as well. Of this amount, approximately 74
to 119 mL would be derived from metabolic water.
The amount of water derived directly from food depends on the type of food. Dry
dog food is generally 8 to 10 percent moisture, while canned food often exceeds 75
percent moisture. Therefore, an animal consuming 212 g DM per day would receive
only about 21 mL of water from dry food but 636 mL from canned food. The latter
amount, combined with the contribution of water from normal metabolism, could
meet the dog’s minimal daily need for water. Thus, provided no other extenuating
circumstances exist, a dog eating only canned food may not voluntarily consume free
water.
Requirements for Other Life Stages
Requirements for growth, gestation, and lactation are presumed to be higher than
those for adult maintenance, but data are lacking to determine minimum daily needs
at these life stages. Since the energy requirements for growth can approach twice
maintenance and those of the lactating bitch approach three times maintenance, it is
reasonable to presume that water needs increase proportionately. This is especially
true for the bitch in heavy lactation, where milk production may depend on ample
intake. Thus, estimation of water needs based on caloric intake appears most prudent.
Requirements for Work and Environmental Stress
Requirements for work above that for maintenance obviously depend on the
amount of work performed. The evaporative loss of water in sedentary dogs in a


===== PDF PAGE 532 =====
531
kennel at 15-25°C was 0.5 g·kg BW–1·h–1, while active kennel mates lost 6.7 g·kg
BW–1·h–1 (O’Connor and Potts, 1969). It was estimated that 2 hours of activity
doubled the daily loss due to evaporation. Dogs running on a treadmill at up to 10
km·h–1 experienced evaporative losses of 2-7 g·kg BW–1·h–1, compared to 0.8-1.2
g·kg BW–1·h–1 for dogs standing on the treadmill (O’Connor, 1975). Studies in sled
dogs performing long-distance racing in extreme conditions (ambient temperature –
10°C to –35°C) showed water turnover of 5.03 L·d–1 (190 ± 19 mL·kg BW–1·d–1),
as opposed to 0.91 L·d–1 (51 ± 13 mL·kg BW–1·d–1) for similarly fit dogs that were
held in the same environmental conditions but did not participate (Hinchcliff and
Reinhart, 1996; Hinchcliff et al., 1997). This is explained as largely due to increased
intake of food, with a resulting increased solute load and need for water for urine
production and elimination. Presumably, there would be increased losses through
respiration and the elimination of feces as well.
Adverse environmental conditions, particularly heat, also can affect minimum
requirements (MRs). Dissipation of excess heat from the body is accomplished
largely by evaporation of water through panting, although a small amount of loss
through perspiration may also contribute. Again, the degree of increased
requirements over maintenance depends on the degree of heat stress. A dog walked
for 5.8 hours in Boulder City, Nevada (40-42°C), consumed approximately 2.5 times
the water than it did when walked for 7.5 hours in Boston at 20-24°C (Dill et al.,
1932). Since this study was conducted on a single animal in two different locations
where factors in addition to temperature were not considered, strong conclusions
cannot be drawn. Regardless, an estimate of the increased water requirement in
response to heat derived from a more recent and controlled study on evaporative
losses in dogs exposed to various ambient temperatures is approximately 6 mL·kg
BW–0.75·d–1·°C–1 above 30°C (Baker, 1984).
On the other hand, exposure to cold does not appear to affect water requirements.
In the aforementioned study on sled dogs in extreme cold (ambient temperature of –
10°C to –35°C), dogs under racing conditions consumed more than 10,600 kcal ME
per day, or 440 kcal ME·kg BW–1·d–1(Hinchcliff and Reinhart, 1996). Since they
consumed only 190 mL·kg BW–1·d–1 of water, the water-to-calorie ratio is only
0.41, far short of the 1:1 ratio normally assumed to be required. However, the water-
to-calorie ratio of dogs held in the same environment that did not participate was also
low, only 0.49 (51 mL·kg BW–1·d–1 of water and 104 kcal ME·kg BW–1·d–1). The
authors report the energy needs of untrained sled dogs held in a thermoneutral
environment to be 55 kcal ME·kg BW–1·d–1. The water intake of these dogs was not
reported, but if the 1:1 ratio held true they would consume amounts very close to
those reported for the sedentary dogs held in colder conditions. Hence, while the
excess calories consumed in response to work increased water consumption
proportionally, the increase in calorie consumption in response to cold did not.


===== PDF PAGE 533 =====
532
REQUIREMENTS OF CATS
Requirements for Maintenance and Other Life Stages
As fundamentally desert animals, cats have developed adaptations to
accommodate periods of water unavailability. Their greater ability to concentrate
urine than dogs, humans, and many other species allows them to mitigate insensible
losses. Cats also appear to be able to tolerate dehydration better than most species
(NRC, 1986). As a result, the requirement for water may be lower for cats than for
dogs. Studies on water intake in cats did not report caloric densities of experimental
diets, but based on dry matter intake data and rough estimates of caloric content of
commercial dry foods, the water-to-calorie ratio (counting free and combined water,
but not metabolic water) was approximately 0.6 (Seefeldt and Chapman, 1978; Finco
et al., 1986). Including an estimate for metabolic water increased the ratio to
approximately 0.7. The water-to-calorie ratio for cats on commercial canned food
was somewhat higher, approximately 0.9 (1.0 when the estimate for metabolic water
is included), but since cats did not show adverse effects at lower ratios this may
reflect a relative diuresis. The same calculations used to estimate water needs for
maintenance in dogs also can be applied to cats, with the understanding that they
may have a greater tendency to overestimate true needs, and individual healthy cats
may consume much less than calculated.
There are no data to suggest that the proportional increase in needs above
maintenance to accommodate growth, gestation, and lactation would be much
different for cats than for dogs. The exception may be when comparing lactating
animals, wherein the average litter size of some breeds of dogs (and hence the need
for milk production) would be much greater than that for cats.
Finally, it is rare for cats to be held in as extreme environmental conditions as
some dogs are, and even rarer for them to be expected to perform prolonged or
vigorous exercise. Therefore, the effects of these factors are less of a consideration
for cats than for dogs. An estimate of the increased water requirement in response to
heat derived from studies on evaporative losses in cats exposed to various ambient
temperatures is approximately 8-12 mL·kg BW–0.67·d–1·°C–1 above 35°C (Adams et
al., 1970; Doris and Baker, 1981). Thus, cats kept outdoors continuously in very
warm climates may have increased needs.
Water and Feline Lower Urinary Tract Health
The ability to concentrate urine may also be a contributing factor in some aspects
of lower urinary tract health in the cat (Wills and Simpson, 1994; Case et al., 2000).
The degree of urine concentration of minerals relative to their saturation points may
affect their propensity to crystallize and fall out of solution. Although other factors


===== PDF PAGE 534 =====
533
may play a large role in the process (e.g., urine pH), ensuring water intake adequate
to prevent undue urine concentration appears prudent.
Epidemiological studies have implicated dry cat food as a risk factor for feline
lower urinary tract disease (Walker et al., 1977). Some studies suggest that cats
consuming dry foods did not voluntarily consume enough water to match the total
intake of cats offered canned foods, while others have shown no differences
(Seefeldt and Chapman, 1979; Anderson, 1982). In the latter case, although body
water content and turnover were not affected, cats fed dry food still consumed less
water per gram of dry matter intake. Another study in cats showed an increase in
mean urine volume (from 63 to 112 mL·d–1) when the moisture content of food was
increased from 10 to 75 percent, respectively (Gaskell, 1985). Thus, consumption of
canned food may cause a relative diuresis (rather than dry food resulting in
inadequate intake), although there are no known adverse effects from this excess
consumption.
Differences in water intake due to diet type may be the result of factors other than
simply the amount of moisture in food. For example, higher protein and/or mineral
content of food may increase the solute load and subsequent degree of water
consumption and urine production (Wills and Simpson, 1994; Funaba et al., 1996).
Because of the increased caloric density of higher-fat foods, total dry matter intake
may be lower; hence the total solute load and subsequent need for water may be
reduced (Thrall and Miller, 1976). Fecal DM and fecal water intake were also lower,
and hence urinary output greater, for cats fed high-fat diets. The amount and type of
dietary carbohydrate also may affect fecal losses.
RECOMMENDED ALLOWANCES
Although calculations can be performed to estimate minimal water requirements
for dogs and cats, they should not be relied upon in most practical situations. Rather,
the animal should be allowed to self-regulate its intake except for extreme
circumstances such as severe dehydration or prolonged exercise (see discussion of
toxicity, below). Thus, regardless of species, life stage, environmental conditions,
amount of work, diet type, or moisture content, the most sensible practice is to
provide water free-choice at all times. However, if discrete amounts of water must be
transported to a site where the animal is housed, a calculation of requirements may
be necessary. The 1:1 water:ME calorie ratio works well in most circumstances, with
additional needs in cases of high ambient temperatures. Provision of approximately
two times the estimated requirement for the given life stage and expected
environment and work conditions of the animal is sensible, so that all contingencies
are covered and the animal can freely regulate intake.
Title 9 of the Code of Federal Regulations dictates access to water for a minimum
of two 1-hour periods per day for dogs and cats under laboratory conditions (9 CFR
3.10). Regardless, one should strive to come as close to free-choice as possible (e.g.,


===== PDF PAGE 535 =====
534
access to water as often and as long as practical). In any case, efforts should be made
to ensure that the water remains suitable for drinking whenever it is accessible to the
animal. Minimal standards for potability of water for human consumption and
appropriate sanitation of water receptacles are desirable and required by law for
laboratory animals (9 CFR 3.10).
Water intake will vary considerably depending on conditions and diet type. Under
some circumstances, the animal, especially the cat, may appear to drink very little
water voluntarily. If the animal is healthy, water intake can be encouraged by
keeping it fresh and cool. Cats also may respond favorably to constantly moving
water. Increased dietary sodium consumption or addition of flavoring agents to water
increase water intake, but these measures should not be necessary in healthy animals
(Case et al., 2000; Osborne et al., 2000).
TOXICITY IN DOGS AND CATS
Although dogs and cats generally self-regulate consumption of water, rapid,
excessive consumption may occur in extremely thirsty animals. This is most likely to
occur after an extended period of water deprivation, vigorous exercise, or prolonged
heat exposure sufficient to cause intracellular dehydration (Blood et al., 1979).
Subsequent rapid rehydration can cause increased turgor or disruption of cells,
particularly of the brain. Therefore, most signs of intoxication are related to the
nervous system, such as ataxia, restlessness, seizures, and coma. Lysis of
erythrocytes also may occur, causing hemolytic anemia and hemoglobinuria.
REFERENCES
Adams, T., M. L. Morgan, W. S. Hunter, and K. R. Holmes. 1970. Temperature
regulation of the unanesthetized cat during mild cold and severe heat stress. J.
Appl. Physiol. 29:852-858.
Adolph, E. F. 1939. Measurement of water drinking in dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 125:75-
86.
Anderson, R. S. 1982. Water balance in the dog and cat. J. Small Anim. Pract.
23:588-598.
Baker, M. A. 1984. Cardiovascular and respiratory responses to heat in dehydrated
dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 246:R369-R374.
Blood, D. C., J. A. Henderson, and O. M. Radostits. 1979. Veterinary Medicine,
Fifth Edition. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
Buck, W. B., G. D. Osweiler, and G. A. Van Gelder. 1976. Clinical and Diagnostic
Veterinary Toxicology, Second Edition. Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall/Hunt Publishing
Company.
Case, L. P., D. P. Carey, D. A. Hirakawa, and L. Daristotle. 2000. P. 12 in Canine and
Feline Nutrition: A Resource for Companion Animal Professionals, Second


===== PDF PAGE 536 =====
535
Edition. St. Louis: Mosby.
Cizek, L. J. 1959. Long-term observations on relationship between food and water
ingestion in the dog. Am. J. Physiol. 197:342-346.
Cowley, A. W., M. M. Skelton, D. C. Merrill, E. W. Quillen, and S. J. Switzer. 1983.
Influence of daily sodium intake on vasopressin secretion and drinking in dogs.
Am. J. Physiol. 245:R860-R872.
Danowski, T. S., J. R. Elkinton, and A. W. Winkler. 1944. The deleterious effect in
dogs of a dry protein ration. J. Clin. Invest. 23:816-823.
Dill, D. B., A. V. Bock, and H. T. Edwards. 1932. Mechanisms for dissipating heat in
man and dog. Am. J. Physiol. 104:36-44.
Doris, P. A., and M. A. Baker. 1981. Effects of dehydration on thermoregulation in
cats exposed to high ambient temperatures. J. Appl. Physiol. 51:46-54.
English, P. B., and L. J. Filippich. 1980. Measurement of daily water intake in the
dog. J. Small Anim. Pract. 21:189-193.
Finco, D. R., D. D. Adams, W. A. Crowell, A. J. Stattelman, S. A. Brown, and J. A.
Barsanti. 1986. Food and water intake and urine composition in cats: Influence of
continuous versus periodic feeding. Am. J. Vet. Res. 47:1638-1642.
Funaba, M., M. Hashimoto, C. Yamanaka, Y. Shimogori, T. Iriki, S. Ohshima, and
M. Abe. 1996. Effects of high-protein diet on mineral metabolism and struvite
activity product in clinically normal cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. 57:1726-1732.
Gaskell, C. J., 1985. Nutrition in diseases of the urinary tract in the dog and cat. Vet.
Ann. 25:383-390.
Goggin J. M., J. J. Hoskinson, M. D. Butine, L. A. Foster, and N. C. Myers. 1998.
Scintigraphic assessment of gastric emptying of canned and dry diets in healthy
cats. Am. J. Vet. Res. 59:388-392.
Golob, P., W. J. O’Connor, and D. J. Potts. 1984. Increase in weight and water
retention on overfeeding dogs. Quart. J. Exp. Physiol. 69:245-256.
Gregersen, M. I. 1932. Studies on the regulation of water intake. II. Conditions
affecting the daily intake of dogs as registered continuously by a potometer. Amer
J Physiol 102:344-349.
Hinchcliff, K. W., and G. A. Reinhart. 1996. Energy metabolism and water turnover
in Alaskan sled dogs during running. Pp. 199-206 in Recent Advances in Canine
and Feline Nutritional Research: Proceedings of the 1996 Iams International
Nutrition Symposium, D. P. Carey, S. A. Norton, and S. M. Bolser, eds.
Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Hinchcliff, K. W., G. A. Reinhart, J. R. Burr, and R. A. Swenson. 1997. Exercise-
associated hyponatremia in Alaskan sled dogs: Urinary and hormonal responses. J.
Appl. Physiol. 63:824-829.
Hoskins, J. D. 1995. Fluid therapy in the puppy and kitten. Pp. 34-37 in Kirk’s
Current Veterinary Therapy XII., J. D. Bonagura, ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders
Co.
Khanna, C., H. J. Boermans, and B. Wilcock. 1997. Fatal hypernatremia in a dog
from salt ingestion. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 33:113-117.


===== PDF PAGE 537 =====
536
Kirk, R. W., and S. I. Bistner. 1981. Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and
Emergency Treatment. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., p. 582.
Kleitman, N. 1927. The effect of starvation on the daily consumption of water by the
dog. Am. J. Physiol. 81:336-340.
Ladd, M., and L. G. Raisz. 1959. Response of the normal dog to dietary sodium
chloride. Am. J. Physiol. 159:149-152.
Lewis L. D., M. L. Morris, and M. S. Hand. 1997. Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
III. Topeka, Kans.: Mark Morris Associates.
National Research Council (NRC). 1985. Nutrient Requirements of Dogs.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). 1986. Nutrient Requirements of Cats.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
O’Connor, W. J. 1975. Drinking by dogs during and after running. J. Physiol.
250:247-259.
O’Connor W. J., and D. J. Potts. 1969. The external water exchanges of normal
laboratory dogs. Quart. J. Exp. Physiol. 54:244-261.
Osborne, C. A., J. W. Bartges, J. P. Lulich, D. J. Polzin, and T. A. Allen. 2000.
Canine urolithiasis. Pp. 605-670 in Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, Fourth
Edition. Topeka, Kans.: Mark Morris Institute.
Ramsay, D. J., and T. N. Thrasher. 1991. Regulation of fluid intake in dogs following
water deprivation. Brain Res. Bull. 27:495-499.
Robinson, E. A., and E. F. Adolph. 1943. Pattern of normal water drinking in dogs.
Am. J. Physiol. 139:39-44.
Rowntree, L. G. 1922. The water balance of the body. Physiol. Rev. 2:116.
Schaer, M. 1989. General principles of fluid therapy in small animal medicine. Vet.
Clin. N. Am. Sm. Anim. Pract. 19:203-213.
Seefeldt, S. L., and T. E. Chapman. 1979. Body water content and turnover in cats
fed dry and canned rations. Am. J. Vet. Res. 40:183-185.
Seigmund, O. H., and C. M. Fraser, eds. 1979. The Merck Veterinary Manual, Fifth
Edition. Rahway, N.J.: Merck & Co., Inc.
Thrall, B. E., and L. G. Miller. 1976. Water turnover in cats fed dry rations. Fel.
Pract. 6:10-17.
Walker, A. D., A. D. Weaver, R. S. Anderson, G. W. Crighton, C. Fennel, C. J.
Gaskell, and G. T. Wilkinson. 1977. An epidemiological survey of the feline
urological syndrome. J. Small Anim. Pract. 18:283-301.
Wills, J. M., and K. W. Simpson. 1994. The Waltham Book of Clinical Nutrition of
the Dog and Cat. Tarrytown, N.Y.: Elsevier Science.


===== PDF PAGE 538 =====
537
10
Special Considerations for
Laboratory Animals
The vast majority of studies used in determining the nutrient requirements of dogs
and cats as house pets were conducted on animals kept under laboratory conditions.
If anything, the more uniform environmental conditions under which laboratory
animals are kept might minimize the degree of variability in requirements compared
to the wide range of circumstances to which pets may be subject. Hence, the nutrient
requirement recommendations for dogs and cats set forth in this publication are just
as valid, if not more so, for animals kept under laboratory conditions as for those
kept in households. Regardless, proper diet is of utmost importance to the success of
any animal study. Thus, investigators must take special care to ensure that the diet is
nutritionally appropriate and that the feeding management is sound.
REQUIREMENTS
Energy
It may initially be presumed that the caloric needs of the dog or cat in the
laboratory could be lower than those under more free-roaming living conditions, but
this is not the case. As in all dogs and cats, energy requirements depend on housing
and environmental conditions. Animals housed indoors, in cages or other limited-
size housing, or individually, may be expected to have lower requirements than those
that are group-housed, in runs, or exposed to the weather. Under Title 9 of the Code


===== PDF PAGE 539 =====
538
of Federal Regulations, dogs housed in smaller cages must be afforded exercise at
least once daily unless this conflicts with experimental protocol (9 CFR 3.8).
Regardless, even under the most restrictive situations, laboratory dogs appear to
expend energy meeting or surpassing that of the average sedentary house pet
(Wichert et al., 1999; Cottrell et al., 2000; Parkman et al., 2000). Therefore, in most
cases the daily metabolizable energy needs of the adult, nonreproducing dog in a
kennel or other laboratory setting would be estimated best by calculations designed
for the “moderately active” animal (132 kcal·kg BW0.75). The estimated energy
needs of the laboratory cat more closely approximate those of a household cat.
Nutrients Other Than Energy
Other than a possible increase in energy needs, there is a lack of data to suggest
that the nutrient requirements for laboratory dogs and cats differ from those of
animals in household situations. Increases in intake requirements for nutrients
associated with increased energy needs (e.g., B vitamins) may be anticipated, but
these should be met by the increased food consumption necessary to meet such
needs. Thus, no special considerations for laboratory dogs and cats for nutrients
other than energy are recommended.
FOOD SELECTION
General
Choosing the appropriate diet for animals in a study can be a major consideration.
In studies that are not intended to look at specific nutritional questions or to include
nutritional components, diets fed to dogs and cats most often should be “complete
and balanced,” (i.e., provide adequate quantities of all known essential nutrients to
meet recommended allowances for the appropriate life stages). In these cases, the
choice of diets is vast, since the majority of the commercial dog and cat foods sold in
the United States will meet this burden and are suitable for use in experimental
studies.
Notwithstanding a manufacturer’s assurance and documentation that a “complete
and balanced” food meets nutrient requirement recommendations set forth in this
publication, there are also regulatory standards by which to determine the suitability
of a diet for dogs and cats. For commercial products in the United States,
manufacturers of a food intended to serve as the sole source of nutrition must
substantiate the nutritional adequacy of the product by methods dictated by the
Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). This organization is an
advisory body comprised of representatives from state, federal, and foreign
regulatory agencies authorized to regulate the safety and labeling of animal feeds.


===== PDF PAGE 540 =====
539
Under AAFCO, substantiation of nutritional adequacy can be achieved either by
formulation to meet minimal and maximal nutrient levels as prescribed in the
AAFCO Dog and Cat Food Nutrient Profiles or by successful passage of animal
feeding trials following AAFCO testing protocols. Also, foods that are “nutritionally
similar” to a food that successfully passed the feeding trial may be considered
members of a “product family.” Foods meeting the product family membership
criteria need not be tested by feeding trials in order to substantiate nutritional
adequacy under AAFCO procedures. (AAFCO, 2003).
A food that is formulated to meet AAFCO nutrient profiles must contain specified
minimal and maximal levels of essential nutrients such as amino acids, vitamins, and
minerals (AAFCO, 2003). Two minimal nutrient profiles exist for both dogs and
cats, one for adult maintenance and the other for growth and reproduction (gestation
and lactation). Maximal allowed levels of some nutrients apply to both the
maintenance and the growth-reproduction profiles. Thus, foods that meet the growth-
reproduction profiles meet the maintenance profiles by default, hence qualifying for
an “all life stages” designation.
Levels stipulated in the AAFCO profiles were established largely by reliance on
recommendations of previous National Research Council (1985, 1986) publications
for these species. Adjustments were made in the levels of some nutrients as
suggested by the expert panel to account for differences in bioavailability of
commonly used ingredients and in response to other practical considerations (Dzanis,
1994). Although the AAFCO profiles may be described as “requirements” (the levels
are required to be met by the food if it is substantiated by this means), in this context
the AAFCO profiles are similar to nutrient “allowances,” rather than “requirements,”
as the terms are used in this publication.
Under the feeding trial means of substantiating nutritional adequacy, diets are
offered as the sole source of nutrition (except water) to a minimum number of
animals for a prescribed period of time (AAFCO, 2003). Animals must perform
compared to established norms or to a suitable control group in factors such as
growth or weight maintenance, critical hematologic and biochemical parameters, and
other factors depending on the intended life-stage designation (maintenance, growth,
or gestation-lactation). In addition, animals must be examined by a veterinarian at
the end of the test, with clinical observations recorded. Failure of a group or
individual to meet the specific interpretive criteria, or a finding of clinical or
pathological signs of nutritional deficiency or excess upon physical examination of
any individual animal, is sufficient to fail the test diet.
Foods that pass gestation-lactation or growth trials are presumed adequate to meet
the less rigorous needs of the adult at maintenance by default. To be designated for
all life stages, the diet must pass both a gestation-lactation trial and a growth trial
using the offspring of the initial test bitches or queens. Products substantiated by this
method are not required to meet the AAFCO profiles.
Both methods provide reasonable assurances that the commercial product will
perform as expected in providing adequate nutrition. Neither is perfect however, and


===== PDF PAGE 541 =====
540
both have their pros and cons. The nutrient profile formulation method, for example,
is conducted on paper and cannot wholly account for factors such as bioavailability
of nutrients in all possible ingredients and matrices (Morris and Rogers, 1994).
Without actual test feeding of the food, it may not be known if the combination of
ingredients in the formula was unpalatable to animals or if the food had any other
unanticipated adverse effects (e.g., gastrointestinal intolerance). The animal testing
method is far superior with regard to assessment of bioavailability and performance
factors. On the other hand, the testing method is less easy for regulators to verify,
since they cannot independently validate the results through laboratory analysis as
they can with products that meet the AAFCO nutrient profile criteria. Rather,
regulatory officials must rely on the competence and integrity of persons attesting to
successful passage of the feeding trial, so misinterpretation of results or conflicts of
interest cannot easily be assessed. Results of feeding trials also may be adversely
influenced by the pre-test status of the animals placed on the diet. For example, a
maintenance trial conducted on animals fed a diet containing inadequate amounts of
vitamin A may not show clinical evidence of deficiency over the course of the study
if the pre-test diet allowed for ample stores of the nutrient. However, the greatest
potential drawback of the feeding trial method is the exception for products that are
considered members of a product family, which may bear a feeding test label
statement but are never directly tested.
A product family is a group of products that are all nutritionally similar to the
“lead member,” which has been subject to the testing described above. To be deemed
similar, the product must be of the same processing type and moisture category (e.g.,
dry, canned), be close in metabolizable energy content (±7.5 percent), contain key
nutrients at levels that meet those in the lead, and meet the levels of other nutrients in
either the lead or the AAFCO profiles, whichever is lower (AAFCO, 2003). There
are no requirements that similar ingredients be used. Thus, since the lead is not itself
required to meet the profiles, the levels of some nutrients may be lower than the
amounts stipulated in the profiles for all members as well. Although the profiles
attempt to account for differences in bioavailability in potential ingredients, the
family method of substantiation does not.
While a tested product does not have to meet the profiles, in most cases it will.
Also, reputable manufacturers will not alter ingredient composition in a manner that
adversely affects bioavailability, at least not intentionally. Still, it may not be evident
from labeling whether a product was the lead member or not. Thus, it would be most
prudent to obtain confirmation that the product has both been formulated to meet the
AAFCO Dog or Cat Food Nutrient Profiles and passed the appropriate feeding trials.
Certified Diets
“Certified” is a common term used in the marketing of diets intended for
laboratory animals, but it has no regulatory meaning. It does imply that the diet has
been subject to additional laboratory analysis to confirm the level of a substance or


===== PDF PAGE 542 =====
541
substances in the diet on a batch-by-batch basis. Much of the cost associated with
certified over noncertified diets is related to the fact that diets are not released until
conformational analysis is complete. Samples of each batch are also held in storage
in case reanalysis is indicated at a latter date.
The statement that a product is certified most often refers to the fact that the
levels of potential contaminants meet specified maxima. While this may have no
effect on the nutritional adequacy or safety of the diet above or beyond that required
for all dog and cat foods, it may be important with respect to measurement of a
particular study parameter. For example, some contaminants may affect hepatic
enzymes and/or alter drug metabolism, even at levels far below any practical safety
consideration (National Research Council, 1996). Presence of a substance in the food
also may be contraindicated by the goal of the study or by use of special laboratory
subjects (e.g., specific-pathogen free animals).
In addition to certification of potential contaminant concentrations, a
manufacturer—upon request—may also be willing to certify that the concentrations
of a given nutrient or nutrients are constrained to specified ranges. Use of a diet that
is certified by this means may be helpful in controlling nutrient variables that are
important to the study, a factor that can be especially important during long-term or
sequential studies where food must be purchased on multiple occasions.
Purified and Chemically Defined Diets
When stricter control of nutrient composition is mandated by experimental
protocol, a purified or chemically defined diet may be required. These diets are
formulated with increasingly pure, invariant, and limited number of ingredients
compared to most general or certified commercial formulations. For example, casein
or soy protein isolate may be used in place of meat or poultry meals as the primary
source of protein in the diet, the latter being more variable in the levels of protein
and amino acids than the former and also containing other nutrients such as fats and
minerals at higher and more variable levels. In the extreme case of chemically
defined diets, the most elemental ingredients are used, such as individual crystalline
amino acids in lieu of a “protein” source.
Use of these types of diets offers distinct advantages, especially in the conduct of
experiments related to nutritional requirements. It allows the investigator to
confidently restrict the level of a particular nutrient to a very narrow range or even to
eliminate it from the diet completely if needed. Other potential advantages include
more consistent batch-to-batch formulation and less potential for the presence of
contaminants to affect study results (Lichtman et al., 1999). Negative aspects include
increasing cost of ingredients, poorer animal acceptance, and, depending on the form
of the diet (many may be in powder form), increased wastage and difficulty in
obtaining accurate intake measurements. Also, use of highly purified formulas may
inadvertently limit intake of a number of nutrients that have yet to be established as
essential but nevertheless play a role in the normal structure and function of the body


===== PDF PAGE 543 =====
542
(e.g., ultra-trace minerals). Therefore, the degree of purity of a diet should depend on
its absolute importance to the integrity of the study.
Examples of use of purified diets in dogs and cats can be found in the literature.
Early diets were based on similar formulas developed for rodents, although modified
to contain increased animal source protein (Carvalho da Silva, 1950; Allison et al.,
1956). Later studies also added nutrients known to be uniquely required by the cat
(Piechota et al., 1995).
A significant problem with purified diets is their acceptability by the animal. The
source and amounts of fat have been shown to affect consumption rates, and some
fats can even cause feed aversion. Bleached tallow was found to be preferred by cats
over both butter and chicken fat, but there was no significant difference between the
preference for bleached tallow over unbleached tallow, lard, yellow grease, or
partially hydrogenated vegetable oil (Kane et al., 1981a). The same study found that
cats preferred a diet containing 25 percent yellow grease over diets containing either
10 or 50 percent. Cats also showed a notable aversion to diets containing medium-
chain triglycerides (MCTs) (MacDonald et al., 1984). In fact, cats preferred fat-free
diets over those containing hydrogenated coconut oil. The reason appears to be
related directly to palatability of the diet and not an effect of MCTs on physiology.
Addition of safflower seed oil improved, but did not totally ameliorate, decreased
consumption rates when cats were fed MCT-containing diets. Cats rejected diets
containing as little as 0.1 percent caprylic acid, an eight-carbon MCT (8:0).
Foods for Specific Dietary Purposes (e.g., Medical Foods)
Use of laboratory dogs or cats as models for certain animal or human diseases
may dictate the need to modify nutrient composition compared to foods intended for
healthy animals. For example, lower levels of protein and phosphorus in diets
intended for animals with compromised renal function may help mitigate clinical
manifestations of the disease and provide for a more normal quality of life (Allen et
al., 2000). Similar restrictions on other nutrient components may ameliorate signs of
other disease processes, such as sodium in cardiac insufficiency and copper in breed-
associated liver storage disease.
This is not to say that the levels of these restricted nutrients are necessarily below
that required to meet the needs of the healthy animal. Rather, because of the nutrient
content of commonly used ingredients, the typical levels of these substances may be
well above those that are absolutely necessary for normal nutrition. Lowering these
levels closer to the minimum requirements helps alleviate signs of disease but should
not in most cases compromise nutritional adequacy.
Commercial diets intended for medical use are held to the same nutritional
standards as any other dog or cat foods (AAFCO, 2003). Products that are not
“complete and balanced” must indicate that they are “intended for intermittent or
supplemental feeding only.” Product labels or specifications bearing this statement
should not be presumed to be adequate for long-term use.


===== PDF PAGE 544 =====
543
Special considerations also apply to the postoperative laboratory animal. Feeding
these animals may necessitate use of a more palatable and/or nutrient-dense food to
encourage adequate consumption. Inadequate intake of nutrients can affect both
immunocompetence and tissue repair, compromising surgical recovery. Also, trauma
from the procedure may result in a catabolic state, which could at least be
ameliorated partially by increased energy and other nutrient intakes (Remillard et al.,
2000). In extreme conditions of anorexia or where the procedure itself limits
voluntary consumption, use of a complete-and-balanced liquid or gel-form dog or cat
product that can be lapped up or delivered by a feeding tube may be necessary.
Although the gastrointestinal tract is always the preferred route of administration,
parenteral nutrition may be necessary on a temporary basis when the surgery or other
experimental procedure compromises gut function.
FEEDING MANAGEMENT
Life-Stage Designation of Food
In cases where the colony contains animals of different life stages (e.g., breeding
colonies) and where the intended studies are not nutritional in nature, a single food
substantiated to be nutritionally adequate for “all life stages” may be appropriate for
the entire colony. This eliminates at least one source of variability among subjects,
eases transition of individuals into and out of studies or reassignment to another part
of the colony, mitigates potential mistakes in feeding, and reduces inventory
problems. Although a diet so designated may provide nutrients in excess of those
required for maintenance, it should do no harm and will not appreciably affect total
feeding costs when considered in terms of its potential benefits to colony
management. Control of energy intake among the various life stages can be achieved
by adjustment in amounts and frequency of feeding. As opposed to a breeding
colony, a colony of mature, nonreproducing animals may be offered a single food
designated for adult maintenance only without undue effect.
Preferences or needs of individuals within the colony may dictate the availability
of additional diets. This can be especially true for individuals recovering from
surgery or other procedures, or when a medical condition dictates a special-use food.
This should be kept to a minimum, however, and animals should be acclimated to the
standard colony diet when indicated. Custom-made or specific commercial diets
other than the standard colony diet also may be required in some studies, particularly
those that examine a nutritional issue. For either individuals or groups, diets should
be changed slowly, with an increasing proportion of the old diet being replaced by
the new over a few days to a week. This mitigates the potential for food refusal or
gastrointestinal intolerance to a new food, as well as overconsumption of a novel
diet. The change should be instituted well before initiation of the study.


===== PDF PAGE 545 =====
544
Form of Food
Most commercial diets are available in dry (10 percent moisture) or canned (75
percent moisture) form. Both are held to the same regulatory standards for safety and
nutritional adequacy. However, canned foods tend to contain more animal source
ingredients than dry, meaning that protein and fat contents are higher and
carbohydrate and fiber contents lower on a dry-matter basis. Canned foods also tend
to be more variable in fat (and hence calorie) content between production batches
because of natural variability in meat sources. Semimoist foods (30 percent
moisture) offer no nutritional advantage to either of the other forms. Regardless, the
popularity and hence availability of semimoist foods has declined precipitously over
the past decade or so.
Under most laboratory conditions, dry food is the most convenient and practical
form. More precise and consistent feeding amounts can be offered, and the food can
be left with the animal for more extended periods of time with less risk of spoilage,
contamination, or insect invasion. It is also easier to weigh back orts and there is less
risk for errors due to moisture loss over time.
Amount Fed
Amounts of food offered to individual or groups of animals at the initiation of a
study should be based on calorie estimates of the food and energy requirements of
the animals based on life stages, body weights, and conditions under which they are
housed. However, a significant degree of individual animal variation should be
expected, and some animals may require much more or much less than calculated.
Amounts offered to each individual should be adjusted weekly as needed to maintain
appropriate body weight and condition of the animal. The proportion of the daily
allotment of food not consumed by the animal may also provide clues as to whether
an individual has been provided too much or too little food to meet its needs.
Frequency of Feeding
Dogs should be offered fresh food at least once daily, as required by law (9 CFR
3.9). Dogs tend to gulp food, and in most cases a nonreproducing adult can consume
its required caloric intake at a single sitting. This may not be true for the growing
puppy and gestating or lactating bitch, however. Regardless, multiple daily feedings
may help alleviate boredom and reduce the risk of gastric dilatation-volvulus in
susceptible breeds (Bataller, 1995). On the other hand, free-choice feeding could
result in excess consumption and weight gain, increasing the risk of developmental
bone disease in growing large- and giant-breed dogs and obesity in adults (Kendall
and Burger, 1980; Kealy et al., 1992).


===== PDF PAGE 546 =====
545
Compared to dogs, cats prefer frequent, small meals throughout the day and night
(Kane et al., 1981b). Therefore, dry food offered free-choice is the most practical
means of feeding. Again, fresh food should be offered daily to mitigate the risk that
spoilage or contamination will hinder normal consumption. Many pet cat owners
provide free-choice dry food with one or two additional small meals of canned food.
However, this is not necessary and is often impractical in a laboratory setting.
Storage of Food
The enemies of dry food are oxygen, light, heat, and moisture. Thus, keeping the
diet in opaque, airtight containers and under cool and dry conditions (in no case, at
temperatures or humidity above normal indoor comfort levels) is essential to long-
term storage. In the same vein, measures should be taken to prevent potential
contamination by bird, rodent, or insect infestations. Diets should be stored apart
from any drugs, pesticides, or other potential contaminants.
As dry food exits the extruder, it has reached temperatures sufficient to destroy
pathogenic organisms (Miller and Cullor, 2000). However, since it may be in contact
with non-sterile equipment or materials prior to packaging, it may not remain
microorganism-free even in an unopened bag. Although the risk of pathogenic
organisms from this source is low, it is possible. Regardless, although most animals
normally tolerate small doses of even pathogenic microorganisms, this may be
contraindicated in circumstances where potential exposure has to be limited (e.g.,
specific pathogen-free colonies).
Most instances of microbial contamination are the result of recontamination after
processing. A small degree of contamination may present a potential problem only if
the conditions provide for microbial growth (e.g., moisture, heat). This emphasizes
the need for appropriate storage of food as described above, as well as proper
handling of food and sanitation of utensils and facilities.
Sterilization of dry diets at the site of use is unnecessarily extreme in most cases,
but may be indicated in the case of specific pathogen-free and especially germ-free
animals. Dry diets can be autoclaved or exposed to irradiation to achieve sterility, but
only after additional consideration has been given in formulating diets to potential
nutrient losses due to the sterilization procedures. The degree of nutrient losses may
depend on the times, temperatures, or radiation doses; the quantity and volume of
food sterilized in each batch; the lability of specific nutrients; and the particular
nutrient matrix of the diet, so manufacturers of both the food and the sterilizing
equipment should be consulted before such measures are attempted. Also, although
nutrients that are generally synthesized by gut flora in the normal animal (e.g., biotin,
vitamin K) are typically added to most commercial petfoods as “insurance,” further
attention must be given to the adequate provision of these substances in diets
intended for germ-free colonies. Unlike the use in food of a chemical antimicrobial
agent that retains its function for some time after application, a diet that has been
autoclaved or irradiated is immediately susceptible to recontamination. Thus, due


===== PDF PAGE 547 =====
546
diligence should be exercised to ensure that foods treated by either of the latter
methods are not exposed to potential contaminants (e.g., treated in closed containers
not opened until time of feeding).
Because canned food is sterile and hermetically sealed, little effort is needed for it
to retain its wholesomeness and nutritive value. Extreme temperature conditions
(especially freezing) should be avoided, as should rough handling or any other action
that might dent or rupture the cans. Once canned food has been opened, of course,
the risk of contamination with potentially pathogenic organisms greatly increases,
indicating the need for the same degree of sanitation as with any other food.
REFERENCES
Allen, T. A., D. J. Polzin, and L. G. Adams. 2000. Renal disease. Pp. 563-604 in
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, Fourth Edition. Topeka, Kans.: Mark Morris
Institute.
Allison, J. B., S. Miller, J. R. McCoy, and M. K. Brush. 1956. Studies on the
nutrition of the cat. N. Amer Vet 37:38-43.
Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). 2003. Official
Publication. West Lafayette, Ind.: AAFCO.
Bataller, N. 1995. Risk factors and the debate of diet in canine gastric dilitation-
volvulus. Vet. Clin. Nutr. 2:87.
Carvalho da Silva, A. 1950. The domestic cat as a laboratory animal for
experimental nutrition studies. II. Comparative growth and hematology on stock
and purified rations. Acta Physiol. Lat. Am. 1:26.
Cottrell, T., J. W. Bartges, T. Moyers, D. Mawby, and D. P. Laflamme. 2000.
Determination of maintenance energy requirements in client-owned adult dogs
(abstract). Proceedings, Purina Nutrition Forum, St. Louis, Mo., p. 144.
Dzanis, D. A. 1994. The AAFCO Dog and Cat Food Nutrient Profiles:
Substantiation of nutritional adequacy of complete and balanced petfoods in the
United States. J. Nutr. 124(suppl):2535S-2539S.
Kane, E., J. G. Morris, and Q. R. Rogers. 1981a. Acceptability and digestibility by
adult cats of diets made with various sources and levels of fats. J. Anim. Sci.
53:1516-1523.
Kane, E., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1981b. Feeding behavior of the cat fed
laboratory and commercial diets. Nutr. Res. 1:499-507.
Kealy, R. D., S. E. Olsson, K. L. Monti, D. F. Lawler, D. N. Biery, R. W. Helms, G.
Lust, and G. K. Smith. 1992. Effects of limited food consumption on the incidence
of hip dysplasia in growing dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 201:857-863.
Kendall, P. T., and I. H. Burger. 1980. The effect of controlled and appetite feeding
on growth and development in dogs. Pp. 60-63 in Proceedings of the Kal Kan
Symposium for the Treatment of Dog and Cat Diseases, R. L. Wyatt, ed. Vernon,
Calif.: Kal Kan Foods, Inc.


===== PDF PAGE 548 =====
547
Lichtman, A. H., S. K. Clinton, K. Iiyama, P. W. Connelly, P. Libby, and M. I.
Cybulsky. 1999. Hyperlipidemia and atherosclerotic lesion development in LDL
receptor deficient mice fed defined semipurified diets with and without cholate.
Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol 19:1938-1944.
MacDonald, M. L., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1984. Aversion of the cat to
dietary medium-chain triglycerides and caprylic acid. Physiol. Behav. 35:371-375.
Miller, E. P., and J. S. Cullor. 2000. Food safety. Pp. 184-198 in Small Animal
Clinical Nutrition, Fourth Edition. Topeka, Kans.: Mark Morris Institute.
Morris, J. G., and Q. R. Rogers. 1994. Assessment of the nutritional adequacy of
petfoods through the life cycle. J. Nutr. 124(suppl):2520S-2534S.
National Research Council (NRC). 1985. Nutrient Requirements of Dogs.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). 1986. Nutrient Requirements of Cats.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). 1996. Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Parkman, A. L., K. E. Michel, K. E. Erswell, K. Saker, and D. P. Laflamme. 2000.
How many calories do pet cats really need? (abstract) Proceedings, Purina
Nutrition Forum, St. Louis, Mo., p. 146.
Piechota, T. R., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1995. Nitrogen requirement of cats
during gestation and lactation. Nutr. Res. 15:1535-1546.
Remillard R. L., P. J. Armstrong, and D. J. Davenport. 2000. Assisted feeding in
hospitalized patients: Enteral and parenteral nutrition. Pp. 351-399 in Small
Animal Clinical Nutrition, Fourth Edition. Topeka, Kans.: Mark Morris Institute.
Wichert, B., B. Opitz, U. Wehr, and E. Kienzle. 1999. New data on energy
requirements of pet dogs. Proceedings, Purina Nutrition Forum, St. Louis, Mo., p.
95.


===== PDF PAGE 549 =====
548
11
Physical Activity and
Environment
INTRODUCTION
Other chapters have considered energy and nutrient intakes for dogs and cats
undertaking average amounts of activity in a thermoneutral environment. The purpose
of this chapter is to examine how changes in activity or environment affect energy
and nutrient intakes required for optimal health and performance.
The relationship between exercise and diet in dogs has been the subject of several
recent reviews (Grandjean and Paragon, 1992, 1993a,b; Kronfeld et al., 1994; Hill,
1998; Bontuimpo and Brioschi, 1999; Toll and Reynolds, 2002). Most studies have
used trained animals (sexually intact male and female sled dogs, greyhounds, beagles,
foxhounds, or mixed-breed dogs weighing 10-35 kg) running on treadmills under
controlled environmental conditions, or free-running, sometimes at extreme ambient
temperatures. Principles and nutrient requirements obtained from these studies can
probably be applied to intact trained dogs of other breeds but may be different for
untrained, mostly inactive, neutered pet dogs that undertake intense activity only on
weekends. Rather than seek dietary solutions to problems caused by a lack of training
however, owners of these intermittently active dogs should exercise their dogs more
frequently. Training, more than any change in diet, will improve performance and
help to reduce the incidence of injury.
There are few studies of the effect of activity or ambient temperature on nutrient
requirements in cats. Results obtained in dogs probably have limited relevance to cats
because cats have a very specialized metabolism. Furthermore, cats are short-distance
sprinters and jumpers, whereas dogs evolved for endurance. Also, there is less


===== PDF PAGE 550 =====
549
variation in the amount and quality of activity among cats, and the activity of pet cats
is similar to that of laboratory cats. Outdoor cats and wild cats may be more active
than laboratory cats but are able to supplement their food intake with prey. Nutrient
requirements determined for laboratory cats are probably applicable, therefore, to pet
cats undertaking a range of activities. Nutrient density may have to be increased,
however, for cats undertaking very little activity to ensure that these animals receive
sufficient essential nutrients while not becoming obese, and the energy density of the
diet may have to be increased to support the activity of outdoor cats.
CALCULATIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Values are reported as means ± 2 standard deviations (SD) to encompass 95
percent of the population and more clearly represent the very wide individual
variation in metabolic rate of dogs and cats. Where diet analyses have been provided
in texts and nutrient digestibility has not been measured, metabolizable energy (ME)
density has been calculated from the proximate analysis using the equations in
Chapter 3. This ME density has then been used to calculate the nutrient density of
protein, fat, and carbohydrate as grams per 1,000 kcal ME. These values are often
slightly different than those generated by authors using Atwater or modified Atwater
factors.
Many authors have expressed the requirements for each of the major nutrients
(protein, fat, and carbohydrate) during exercise as percent ME. This was possible
because modified Atwater factors made assumptions about the digestibility of each
major nutrient. The equations in Chapter 3 estimate the energy digestibility of the
entire diet, not the individual digestibilities of each major nutrient. It is not possible,
therefore, to calculate the percent ME provided by each major nutrient precisely.
Nevertheless, to help in comparisons with earlier recommendations, the percent ME
from each major nutrient has been estimated by assuming that protein, fat, and
carbohydrate all have the same digestibility. This probably slightly underestimates the
digestibility and percent ME of fat and slightly overestimates the digestibility and
percent ME of protein or carbohydrate, but the difference should be small.
Energy requirements relative to body weight or body weight raised to an exponent
have not always been reported. These values have been calculated where possible
using individual data; otherwise they have been calculated using either the means of
body weight and energy consumption or the midpoint between the minimal and
maximal body weight and energy consumption when only a range has been reported.
The resulting values are, therefore, approximations of the true values relative to body
weight and are indicated as such in the tables, but the error should be small except
where body weights are not distributed normally.
Where studies have measured energy consumption indirectly by measuring oxygen
(O2) consumption, a standard assumption has been made that each liter of oxygen (L
O2) consumed represents 4.8 kcal (20.1 kJ) of heat production. The amount of energy


===== PDF PAGE 551 =====
550
generated for each liter of oxygen consumed would be lower when fat (4.7 kcal·L–1
O2) and protein (4.6 kcal·L–1 O2) were utilized and higher when carbohydrate was
the fuel (5.1 kcal·L–1 O2). A mixture of the major nutrients is used in most situations
however, which is why 4.8 kcal·L–1 O2 has been used when the respiratory quotient
(RQ) has not been reported. The RQ is the ratio of the volume of oxygen metabolized
by tissue to the volume of carbon dioxide generated by tissue. It provides some
indication of the primary fuel being utilized during long-distance running because it
approaches 1 when carbohydrate is the primary energy source but is 0.8 and 0.7,
respectively, when protein and fat are the primary fuels. Young et al. (1959a) found
that the RQ was closer to 1 in beagles during endurance exercise within 6 hours of a
meal but was 0.8 during endurance exercise 24 hours after meal. Anderson and Lusk
(1917) also reported that the RQ for a single dog was 0.8 during exercise after an 18-
hour fast or immediately after a meat meal, but was close to 1 during exercise
immediately after a glucose meal. Other studies in dogs have also reported a high RQ
during exercise, but the timing of exercise relative to feeding was not reported
(Cerretelli et al., 1964; Wagner et al., 1977). Using 4.8 kcal·L–1 O2 will
underestimate energy consumption in studies in which the RQ is high, but the error
should be less than 4 percent.
HOW MUCH EXERCISE DO DOGS AND CATS
UNDERTAKE?
Most studies of the activity of dogs and cats have been qualitative rather than
quantitative. Nevertheless, qualitative reports suggest many similarities among cats
and dogs whether caged or free. Most cats and dogs are inactive or asleep for large
parts of each day. Long periods of inactivity are interspersed with short bouts of
activity, but the activity pattern changes with time of day, ambient temperature, and
human contact (Houpt, 1998).
Dogs
Beagles in cages slept or laid down for 60 percent of each day, sat for 11 percent,
and stood for 26 percent (Hite et al., 1977). Hetts et al. (1992) found that beagles
spent twice as much time sleeping when housed in pairs and moved about more when
socially isolated, whereas Hubrecht et al. (1992) found that solitary dogs were
inactive 80 percent of the time, and group-housed dogs were inactive only 60 percent
of the time. Beagles in cages spent half as much time moving as those in pens or in
cages with runs (Hetts et al., 1992). Tethered sled dogs spent 80 percent of each day
recumbent, sat for 2 percent, stood for 10 percent, and moved about only for 5 percent
of each day (Delude, 1986). Much of the activity was in response to human contact,
but, in the absence of human intervention, activity peaked at sunrise and at sunset.


===== PDF PAGE 552 =====
551
Activity was unaffected by ambient temperature. O’Connor and Potts (1969) noted
that some dogs in kennels were much more active and moved about continuously in
the afternoons whereas others were much less active; both active and less active dogs
were largely inactive at night from 1700 to 0800. Patil and Bisby (2002) reported that
activity was higher among dogs in kennels than among dogs in the home
environment, but more dogs in kennels were small. Small-breed dogs (Manchester
terriers) were active for twice as many hours as large dogs (Labradors). Activity and
ME intake were similar in kennels as in the home environment among middle- and
large-breed dogs. In Britain, Downs et al. (1997b) and Butterwick and Hawthorne
(1998) observed that both working and pet Border collies spent half their time
running and one-quarter of their time walking during an exercise period and appeared
to utilize similar amounts of energy when allowance was made for duration of
exercise. More working dogs worked longer each day, and some older pet dogs spent
all of each exercise period walking and not running. Head et al. (1997) and Siwak et
al. (2002) noted a decrease in spontaneous activity with age in healthy beagles in their
home cage and in healthy pound dogs in a test room but not in beagles in the test
room. Breed and environment, therefore, determine whether spontaneous activity
declines with age. Dogs also tended to roam less after they have been neutered
(Hopkins et al., 1976).
Free-living suburban dogs were also observed resting approximately half of the
time (Berman and Dunbar, 1983). The amount of activity was greatly affected by
changes in ambient temperature (from 9 to 29°C), with sightings of free-ranging dogs
increasing to a maximum at 23°C and then declining as ambient temperature
increased. In the winter months, sightings of urban and suburban dogs were greatest
just after noon but in the summer were highest at sunrise and in the late afternoon
with some activity continuing at night (Beck, 1973; Berman and Dunbar, 1983;
Lehner et al., 1983). Dill et al. (1933) also noted greatly reduced exercise capacity in
a dog when the ambient temperature was 40°C in the shade compared to when it was
20°C. Some of the increase in energy requirements of dogs in winter months,
therefore, may be associated with increased exercise in the cold as well as cold-
induced thermogenesis.
In summary, most dogs, although not all pet dogs, are minimally active. There is
considerable variation in activity among individuals, among sizes of dogs, with
degree of confinement, with age, with ambient temperature, and with the extent of
human and canine contact. Therefore, it is not possible to generalize about a particular
situation. When considering how much activity an animal undertakes and how much
food it requires, each dog must be treated as an individual: It is less important to
classify a dog as working or pet, caged or kenneled than to classify the dog by its
activity level, particularly the duration of any exercise period and the distance
traveled.
Cats


===== PDF PAGE 553 =====
552
Laboratory cats and free-ranging farm cats, like dogs, are active in short 2-hour
bursts but spend much of their day asleep (Houpt, 1998). Panaman (1981) observed
that farm cats spent 62 percent of the day sleeping or resting, 15 percent hunting, and
2 percent traveling. Cats spent 80 percent of their time in a home area of between 0.7
and 15 hectares (ha) and traveled 1.8 ± 1.5 km daily only when hunting. Cats were
active mainly during the day, hunting primarily at noon and at dusk, and mostly slept
at night. Berman and Dunbar (1983), however, found that free-ranging suburban cats
were sighted more at night, with sightings constant up to 17°C and then decreasing as
the temperature increased further. Laboratory cats sleep for slightly more time each
day, probably because there is less concern about the food supply. Food-deprived cats
tend to sleep less, and cats fed more times daily or older cats more than 10 years of
age tend to sleep more (Houpt, 1998). Like dogs, most cats, but not all pet cats, are
minimally active. It is more important to consider the activity level of a cat than to
classify it according to its degree of confinement. Nevertheless, the variation in
activity is much less than in dogs because the distance traveled is quite short even for
a free-ranging cat.
TYPES OF EXERCISE: SPRINTING VERSUS ENDURANCE
Sprint Exercise Over a Distance of Less Than One Kilometer
Greyhounds commonly sprint over distances less than 1 km around oval tracks
approximately 400 m in circumference. Common names, distances, approximate best
times, and average speeds of greyhound races in the United States are listed in Table
11-1. Ambient temperatures are rarely below freezing and are often very high.
Anaerobic as well as aerobic sources of energy are important in this sprint type of
racing.
Endurance Exercise Over Distances Greater Than One Kilometer
Trained sled dogs can maintain an Iditarod-type trot of approximately 16 km·h–1
for 10-14 hours per day (Grandjean and Paragon, 1992). Sled dogs compete in
“sprint” races (Table 11-2) in which they pull lightweight sleds over distances of less
than 30 km, “middle-distance” races of approximately 50 km, or “long-distance”
races of 1,000 km or more over many days, often pulling heavy loads. Ambient
temperatures are often low and sometimes well below freezing. Aerobic metabolism
provides most of the energy for this endurance-type exercise.
TABLE 11-1 Greyhound Race Distances and Approximate Fastest Times at Tracks in
the United States


===== PDF PAGE 554 =====
553
SOURCE: American Greyhound Track Operators Association, 2001.
The type of exercise performed by pet and working dogs varies with the nature of
the activity that they are required by their owner to undertake. Chasing flying discs or
sticks involves sprinting, whereas running in company with a jogger involves
endurance exercise. Retrieving gun dogs and security dogs are required to undertake
many short sprints of much less than a kilometer. Hunting or tracking dogs and
search-and-rescue dogs undertake exercise that is more endurance in nature but does
not involve the resistive component required of sled dogs.
TRADITIONAL DIETS FED TO RACING DOGS
Sled Dogs
Sled dogs were fed “pemmican and fresh meat” during Amundsen’s successful
740-km round trip to the South Pole in 1911 (Editor’s note, Hanssen, 1937). Dogs
maintained body condition and gained weight despite hauling sleds with initial
weights of 450-500 kg for an average of 41 km·d–1 and one ascent of 3,400 m.
Hadwen (1937), however, noted that many explorers in both the Arctic and the
Antarctic reached their goals at the expense of their dogs, which were sacrificed to
feed the living, though “the latter are not in much better condition than those which
were killed.” Lack of a balanced food was offered as a cause for “nervous diseases
and malnutrition.”
In the Antarctic in the middle of the twentieth century, dogs at the base camp were
fed on alternate days 2.5-3.5 kg of seal meat, most of which was muscle, fat, and bone
with liver and heart added occasionally (Taylor et al. 1958). A concentrated dry ration
(Sled Dog Diet A), provided on journeys, consisted by weight of 70 percent beef
meal, 22 percent beef fat, 4 percent yeast extract, and 4 percent bone meal, which was
fed in 0.45-kg blocks. Mixed with some fresh meat, the diet was fed on journeys of
more than 1,000 miles but caused diarrhea, and dogs lost weight during heavy work.
Taylor et al. (1958) developed a new diet containing less protein but more fat and
vitamins (Sled Dog Diet B), consisting of 25 percent white fish meal, 15 percent skim


===== PDF PAGE 555 =====
554
milk powder, 10 percent precooked cornstarch, 20 percent margarine, 25 percent beef
suet, 5 percent yeast extract, and 4 percent bone meal by weight, also fed in 0.45-kg
blocks. After 1958, a modified diet (Sled Dog Diet C) substituted whale meat for fish
meal (Orr, 1966). Both Wyatt (1963) and Orr (1966) showed that 0.45 kg of any of
these diets provided insufficient energy for sled dogs working at very cold
temperatures and suggested that the amount fed should be doubled for working dogs.
The analyses of these diets are tabulated in Table 11-3.
TABLE 11-2 Distances and Reported Times for Some Long-Distance Races
aThese values do not take account of rest stops. Dogs will have run faster than this average
between rest stops.
In the Arctic, natives fed dogs walrus, seal, whale, bear, beaver, caribou, or
reindeer meat (Coppinger, 1977). Blubber was added (“to aid digestion”) when fish
was fed (Croft, 1937). Before snowmobiles, the 400 sled dogs on Southampton Island
in Hudson Bay consumed 50,000 kg of meat and 16,000 kg of fat annually
(Coppinger, 1977). This is equivalent to each dog consuming approximately 1,600
kcal ME·d–1 of a diet containing approximately 20 percent ME as protein and 80
percent ME as fat. In Alaska, 30-45-kg body weight (BW) sled dogs were fed mostly
sun-dried salmon: 0.45 kg when idle and 0.9 kg during work (equivalent to 2.7 kg of
fresh fish), which provided approximately 4,000 kcal ME, 62 percent ME as protein
and 38 percent ME as fat (Hadwen, 1937). In West Greenland, 30-35-kg BW dogs
were fed as much as 2.7 kg·d–1 of fresh food (mostly walrus) during cold weather
(Croft, 1937). On journeys, dogs were fed 0.45 kg·d–1 of dog pemmican (“a
concentrated form of fresh beef containing 28 percent fat and 65 percent protein”).
Dogs were fed dried sealmeat, raw fish, beaver meat, tallow, and high-protein dog
foods during the first Iditarod Trail Race (Adkins and Morris, 1975). Kronfeld (1973)
reported that trainers in North America fed meat and cereal with corn oil added
according to work performance needs.
TABLE 11-3 Analyses of Diets Fed to Working Sled Dogs in the Antarctic, Mid-
Twentieth Century


===== PDF PAGE 556 =====
555
aTaylor et al. (1958); Wyatt (1963); Orr (1966).
bWyatt (1963).
cOrr (1966).
In Europe, Ebing and Beynen (1999) found that the training ration fed by five
Dutch mushers to their dogs for sprint, middle- and long-distance racing was
nutritionally complete and contained 59-80 g per 1,000 kcal ME (24-34 percent ME)
as crude protein, 28-53 g per 1,000 kcal ME (25-46 percent ME) as crude fat, and 72-
128 g per 1,000 kcal ME (28-49 percent ME) as carbohydrate. These mushers fed a
commercial dry ration mixed with chicken, rumen, sunflower oil, cocoa fat,
buttermilk, vitamins, and/or yeast.
Decombaz (1995) reported that food given by an “experienced musher” from
Alaska during the Alpirod contained 72 percent gross energy as fat and 28 percent
gross energy as protein. Most (76 percent) gross energy came from a single evening
meal; the remainder was supplied as a snack of white fish, lamb, or sausage.
Greyhounds
Most greyhound trainers in the United States feed thawed raw meat mixed with a
commercial dry dog food together with various other ingredients including vitamins,
minerals, vegetables, buttermilk, and cider vinegar. This raw meat contains varying
amounts of protein and fat: one sample contained 117 g per 1,000 kcal ME (49
percent ME) as crude protein and 56 g per 1,000 kcal ME (47 percent ME) as ether
extract; another sample contained 180 g per 1,000 kcal ME (73 percent ME) as crude
protein and 29 g per 1,000 kcal ME (24 percent ME) as ether extract. Both contained
very little (<11 g per 1,000 kcal or <4 percent ME) carbohydrate. This carbohydrate,
measured as nitrogen-free extract (NFE), was mostly charcoal. The composition of a


===== PDF PAGE 557 =====
556
dry diet-meat mixture depends on the relative proportions and composition of the
meat and dry diet but adding meat to a dry diet, usually increases the fat and protein
content of the diet.
DIET AND HEALTH DURING EXERCISE
Diet may ameliorate some racing-related conditions. Rapid changes in diet at the
onset of a race can cause diarrhea, which can be exacerbated by stress and
dehydration during the race, whereas feeding dried fish containing bones has been
associated with constipation (Adkins and Morris, 1975). Increasing the digestibility of
protein in the diet prevented diarrhea in sled dogs working in the Antarctic (Taylor et
al., 1958). Providing adequate water may prevent dehydration and can reduce
exercise-induced hyperthermia (Young et al., 1959a; Baker et al., 1983).
Supplementary antioxidants may reduce oxidative injury during exercise (Baskin et
al., 2000). Dogs with high serum concentrations of vitamin E in the blood before the
Iditarod were almost twice as likely to finish the race (Piercy et al., 2001a). Strategies
to increase stamina by maintaining glycogen stores in muscles also may help to
reduce athletic injuries in dogs; Yoshikawa et al. (1994) found a 26-35 percent
increase in peak bone strain in the tibia of foxhounds when muscles showed
myoelectrical changes suggestive of muscle fatigue. Human skiers are reported to
have more injuries toward the end of the day, and skiers themselves report being too
tired to avoid a fall presumably because fast-twitch fibers that would be used to avoid
difficult situations are depleted of glycogen (Brouns et al., 1986).
Effect of Exercise on Intestinal Function
Changes in intestinal function have also been observed in dogs after short periods
of activity at levels of exercise less than 80 percent of maximal (Tasler et al., 1974;
Kenney et al., 1988; Kondo et al., 1994). In untrained 18- to 25-kg mongrel dogs
running on a treadmill with an 8 percent slope at 6 km·h–1 (when heart rate was only
60-70 percent of maximum), acid secretion was unaffected during the first hour of
exercise after a 380-kcal ME canned meal but decreased to 30 percent of resting
values during the second hour of exercise (Kondo et al., 1994). Intestinal motility was
also disrupted, and gastric emptying of a 390-kcal ME liquid meal was delayed (the
half-time was increased 25 percent) during exercise in these dogs (Kondo et al.,
1994). In food-deprived dogs, the pattern of myoelectrical activity characteristic of
the unfed state, the migrating motor complex (MMC), was abolished until after
exercise had stopped, whereas after a meal, the fed pattern of myoelectric activity in
the duodenum was interrupted during exercise by strong contractions (Kondo et al.,
1994). This disruption of duodenal activity after a meal, including conversion of the
fed pattern to an MMC pattern, was also seen in untrained dogs running at only 50-70
percent of maximal heart rate for 30-90 minutes (Kenney et al., 1988).


===== PDF PAGE 558 =====
557
Gastric acid secretion and the volume and bicarbonate content of pancreatic juice
secreted in response to food also decreased 40-50 percent in trained 16- to 20-kg
mongrel dogs running at 10 km·h–1 on an 8 percent slope (probably relatively close to
maximal) for just 15 minutes (Tasler et al., 1974). Mucosal blood flow was decreased
by 15 percent during this exercise and for a short period afterwards. In anesthetized
greyhounds, a decrease in blood flow of 50 percent to the intestine was associated
with a marked decrease in intestinal wall pH, suggesting that some degree of ischemia
and infusion of cream into the stomach caused a local hyperemia that exacerbated
jejunal ischemia (Poole et al., 1987). Feeding dogs a meal immediately before or
during a bout of intense exercise would seem, therefore, to be unwise, but how long
exercise should be deferred after a meal is unknown.
Sled Dog Diet A (0.45 kg) fed to dogs in fairly large pieces was found to clear
from the stomach of working sled dogs in the Antarctic between 14 and 18 hours after
a meal (Taylor et al., 1958). In sedentary dogs, De Wever et al. (1978) reported that
the fed pattern of myoelectric activity in the intestine disrupted the MMC for 5.5 ± 4
hours after a commercial low-fat dog food meal providing approximately one-third of
the daily maintenance energy requirement (MER). The duration of this fed pattern
increased proportionately with the size of meal to 13 ± 6.5 hours when the entire daily
MER was fed as a single meal. Medium-chain triglycerides (10 kcal ME·kg BW–1)
disrupted the pattern for longer (10.5 ± 8 hours) than 30 kcal ME·kg BW–1 of long-
chain peanut oil (6 ± 2 hours), sucrose (3 ± 1 hours), or milk proteins (1.5 ± 1 hours),
but duration of disruption depended more on the physicochemical properties of the
food than on its volume or caloric content (De Wever et al., 1978).
Racing sled dogs consume much larger meals than sedentary dogs, but no studies
to date have reported the rate of gastric emptying, the duration of disruption of the
MMC by a fed pattern, or the duration of small intestinal transit in these dogs after a
meal. To allow for intestinal transit, individual dogs may need more or less time
depending on the composition of the diet and the level and type of activity, but
intense exercise should probably be delayed 4-8 hours after a meal that provides one-
third of the daily MER, and should be delayed 10-16 hours after a meal providing the
entire daily MER.
Exercise and Digestibility
The effect of exercise on digestibility of nutrients in dogs has not been determined.
The digestibility of diets fed to sled dogs or beagles has been measured mostly in
sedentary dogs (Taylor et al., 1958; Downey et al., 1980). In greyhounds being raced
twice weekly, the average digestibility of four mixed protein dry diets was
comparatively high (>80 percent for protein and dry matter, >90 percent for fat and
NFE), but digestibility was measured on days when dogs were not being raced (Hill et
al., 2000, 2001b). In military dogs in training fed six dry diets and four experimental
diets with soy or fish meal as the primary sources of protein, dry matter (DM)


===== PDF PAGE 559 =====
558
digestibility and crude protein digestibility were 71-75 percent and 68-79 percent,
respectively (Wolter et al., 1980). Orr (1966) reported that protein digestibility was
very high (98 percent) in sled dogs fed lean seal meat, but Taylor et al. (1958) and Orr
(1966) reported that the digestibility of protein in Sled Dog Diet A (made with beef
meal and beef fat) and in Sled Dog Diet C (made with dehydrated whale meat) was
very low (61-70 percent and 75 percent, respectively). Wyatt (1963) reported that
protein digestibilities of Sled Dog Diet A (made with beef) and Sled Dog Diet B
(made with fish meal and skimmed milk) were higher (79 percent and 90 percent,
respectively) in tethered sled dogs, and higher still (89 percent and 93 percent,
respectively) in working dogs. Wyatt (1963) and Orr (1966) suggested that processing
such as heat treatment (steam washing of minced beef) might have been responsible
for the poor digestibility of protein in these diets. The digestibility of fat was
uniformly reported to be high (87-97 percent) in both working and tethered dogs in all
of these studies, except that the digestibility of fat in lean seal meat was very low (41
percent). Endogenous fat would have lowered the apparent digestibility of fat in seal
meat, however, because seal meat contained almost no fat and endogenous fat would
have been a greater proportion of fecal fat.
Taylor et al. (1958), Wyatt (1963), and Orr (1966) reported that when working sled
dogs were fed Sled Dog Diet A, their feces became dark and liquid, indican appeared
in the urine, dogs became coprophagic and lost weight, and one dog became listless
and apathetic and started to vomit. Dogs and their feces became normal and dogs
performed better either when fed a diet containing less protein and more
carbohydrate, such as Sled Dog Diet B, or when fed a more digestible source of
protein such as seal meat. Much more nitrogen was excreted in the feces of dogs fed
Sled Dog Diet A (14-22 g·d–1) than in those fed Sled Dog Diet C and seal meat (4
and 1 g·d–1, respectively) because Sled Dog Diet A contained more protein, and the
protein was less digestible. This suggests that the diarrhea and other changes in dogs
fed Sled Dog Diet A were associated with indigestible protein and that dogs fed high-
protein foods should be fed very digestible sources of protein. Sudden increases in
food intake can also cause diarrhea. Food intake and exercise should be increased
gradually therefore at the onset of training.
When to Feed Exercising Dogs
A variety of feeding times relative to exercise has been reported in dogs, although
there is little evidence to support or disagree with any of these practices. Reports have
described mushers feeding their sled dogs snacks during the longer stages of a race
and a main meal at the end of each stage (Decombaz, 1995), giving snacks during rest
stops between two 4-6 hour periods of running, followed by a full meal at the end of
each day (Reynolds et al., 1997), or providing water and food at rest stops every 2-4
hours (Hinchcliff et al., 1997b) during long races. Kohnke (1997) has advocated
feeding a small meal (weighing <1 percent of body weight) to greyhounds prior to a
race to provide a ready source of energy but recommends feeding at least 6-8 hours


===== PDF PAGE 560 =====
559
before exercise to allow time for digestion. Broun (1923a), however, reported that
dogs vomited when given food before or during but not after intense endurance
exercise.
Hypoglycemia and ketosis contribute to loss of endurance when human athletes
fast, but this does not appear to be true for food-deprived dogs. Young (1959) found
blood lactate and acetone concentrations were unaffected either by exercise to
exhaustion or by 5 days of food deprivation that resulted in a 10 percent loss of body
weight in trained young adult beagles running at approximately 50 percent of peak
effort (6 km·h–1 on a 17 percent slope). The mean blood glucose concentration was
20 percent lower (69 vs. 86 mg·dL–1) before exercise in food-deprived dogs but did
not decline with exhaustive exercise, whereas blood glucose decreased 45 percent
during exercise in dogs that were not deprived of food, with the result that
postexercise blood glucose was higher in food-deprived dogs. Endurance and average
energy expenditure were unaffected by food deprivation when no water was provided
during exercise, but endurance increased 74 percent after food deprivation when
water was provided during exercise; one dog ran 140 miles over 39 hours without
stopping after being deprived of food for 5 days.
Young et al. (1959a, 1962) found no effect of time of feeding (from 1.5 to 24 hours
prior to exercise) on mean energy expenditure during 40 minutes of exercise when a
low-fat (19 percent ME), high-carbohydrate (53 percent ME) meal providing most of
their daily energy requirement was fed to these dogs. Nevertheless, carbohydrate
provided more energy for exercise (70 percent vs. 45 percent), fat provided less
energy (24 percent vs. 53 percent), and RQ was higher (0.93 vs. 0.79) during exercise
performed within 6 hours postprandially than for exercise performed 17 or more
hours postprandially. Young et al. (1959a) also found that administration of 5 g·kg
BW–1 of carbohydrate (composed of a mixture of starch, dextrins, glucose, and
sucrose) 30 minutes before exercise had no effect on endurance capacity of these
dogs, but increased RQ from 0.77 to 0.85 and reduced the average decline in blood
glucose concentration during exercise from 39 to 20 mg·dL–1. When offered free
choice during exercise, water and solutions containing 50 g·L–1 glucose or 35 g·L–1
lactalbumin did not affect endurance, but whole milk, a 3.5 g·L–1 plant phospholipid
solution, and a vitamin solution (containing 3 mg·L–1 niacin, 3 mg·L–1 pantothenic
acid, 0.7 mg·L–1 riboflavin, 0.4 mg·L–1 thiamin, and 0.4 mg·L–1 pyroxidine) all
reduced endurance, and a mineral solution (containing 1.6 g K·L–1, 0.9 g P·L–1, 0.5 g
Na·L–1, and 0.2 g·L–1 Mg, Cu, and Fe) caused diarrhea (Young et al., 1960). Mean
RQ was 1.03 in dogs receiving milk, protein, and glucose but 0.83 in dogs receiving
water, vitamins, or phospholipids. Kruk et al. (1987) reported when 15- to 24-kg
mongrel dogs were infused with 3-4 g·kg BW–1 of glucose while running for 2 hours
on a treadmill at 4-5 km·h–1, RQ was increased, oxygen consumption was reduced by
16 percent, and the mean increase in rectal and muscle temperatures decreased by
0.9°C because the amount of heat dissipated by the body was 2 percent higher


===== PDF PAGE 561 =====
560
compared to saline-infused controls. Dogs given 100-150 mL of soybean oil 4 hours
before exercise and intravenous heparin to increase free fatty acid (FFA)
concentrations in the blood consumed more oxygen, and there was a trend to less
efficient thermoregulation.
Budohoski et al. (1982) found that skeletal muscle lipoprotein lipase activity
increased during exercise in food-deprived dogs but was low and remained low
during exercise in dogs 4 hours after a high-fat meal. Falecka-Wieczorek and
Kaciuba-Uscilko (1984) found evidence of increased fat utilization during moderately
intense exercise in dogs exercised 4 hours after a high-fat (71 percent ME), low-
carbohydrate (23 percent ME) meal (220 kcal ME·kg BW–0.75) compared to dogs
exercised 4 hours after a low-fat (13 percent ME), high-carbohydrate (70 percent ME)
meal or dogs exercised after 20 hours of food deprivation. Plasma triglyceride
concentrations remained high in unexercised control dogs fed the high-fat diet, were
low and increased during exercise in food-deprived dogs and dogs exercised after the
low-fat meal, but were high and decreased during exercise in dogs fed the high-fat
meal. Thus, chylomicron uptake by muscle appeared to increase during exercise after
a high-fat meal, but there was either reduced uptake or increased production of
triglyceride during exercise after a low-fat meal and after food deprivation. Plasma
free fatty acids (FFA) concentrations were higher in dogs fed the high-fat meal but
increased during exercise whether dogs were fasted, fed a high-fat meal, or fed a low-
fat meal. The utilization of FFAs also appeared to be greater in dogs fed the high-fat
meal however, because plasma glycerol increased more rapidly and the ratio of FFAs
to glycerol fell more rapidly during exercise in dogs fed the high-fat meal than in
fasted dogs or dogs fed the low-fat meal. Increased fat utilization in dogs fed the
high-fat diet could reduce glycogen utilization, but blood glucose concentrations
declined similarly in all three groups and glucose concentrations were higher in dogs
fed the high-carbohydrate, low-fat meal.
Reynolds et al. (1997) found that orally giving Alaskan huskies 500 mL of a
solution containing 1.5 mg·kg BW–1 of glucose polymer immediately after pulling an
all-terrain vehicle and driver 30 km as a 12-dog team, promoted recovery between
bouts of exercise by returning plasma glucose and muscle glycogen concentrations to
pre-race concentrations more rapidly. Wakshlag et al. (2002b), however, showed that
addition of 0.5 g·kg BW–1 of protein to 1.5 g·kg BW–1 of the same glucose polymer
given orally immediately after exercise had no additional benefit on the rate of
increase in glycogen concentrations in skeletal muscle after 30 minutes at 23 km·h–1
on a treadmill (1 percent slope). Galassetti et al. (1999a) showed that uptake of
glucose by liver and muscle is enhanced in mongrel dogs immediately after 150
minutes of exercise at 50 percent of maximal heart rate. Glucose in the portal vein
usually provides a “portal signal,” which stimulates hepatic glucose uptake but
inhibits skeletal muscle glucose uptake in sedentary animals. Galassetti et al. (1999b)
showed that infusion of glucose into the portal vein of mongrel dogs after this
moderate-intensity exercise stimulated hepatic glucose uptake and also increased
skeletal muscle glucose uptake by eliminating the inhibitory effect of the portal signal


===== PDF PAGE 562 =====
561
on skeletal muscle uptake. Hamilton et al. (1996) showed that, when glucose was
infused into the duodenum of mongrel dogs (1.2 g·kg BW–1 over 150 minutes),
glycogen deposition in muscle increased threefold 30 to 180 minutes after exercise
(150 minutes at 50 percent of maximal oxygen consumption) compared to rested
controls and that the increase in glucose uptake by muscle was facilitated by more
rapid glucose uptake by the intestinal mucosa.
Proteins in skeletal muscle and in the gut are catabolized during exercise. Williams
et al. (1996) have pointed out that amino acids depleted in the gut during prolonged
endurance exercise are replenished from the lumen when dogs are fed immediately
after exercise. Okamura et al. (1997) noted greater benefit when a 10 percent glucose
solution mixed with a 10 percent amino acid solution was infused intravenously into
beagles immediately after 150 minutes of moderately intense exercise (60 percent of
maximum), compared to when the solution was infused 2 hours after exercise. The
rates of protein synthesis and breakdown in skeletal muscle did not increase above
resting levels in these dogs during recovery unless supplemental nutrients were
provided. Protein synthesis doubled and protein breakdown halved in skeletal muscle
when amino acids were infused immediately after exercise. Amino acid and glucose
plasma concentrations and uptake by skeletal muscle also increased when nutrients
were infused. Provision of amino acids was essential therefore to allow protein
accretion after exercise, but the benefits of early versus late infusion were less clear.
Uptakes across the hind-limb of some amino acids were higher and some lower
during early compared to late infusion, but uptake of glucose was higher in dogs
infused early. Phenylalanine uptake was twice as high and protein synthesis 30
percent higher during early infusion than during later infusion.
In summary, dogs should be fed immediately after intense exercise. Currently, it
appears that dogs should not be fed meals containing fat immediately before or during
intense exercise. To allow for gastric emptying, ideally dogs should not undertake
intense exercise within 8 hours of a small meal or 16 hours of a large meal, although
this is obviously impractical with some racing dogs. During exercise, it is more
important to provide free-choice water than other nutrients. Glucose (up to 5 g·kg
BW–1) given before, during, or after exercise has been shown to minimize the decline
in blood glucose observed during exercise, promote more rapid repletion of muscle
glycogen after exercise, and improve thermoregulation.
EXERCISE AND BODY CONDITION
In human athletes, gradual weight reduction by calorie restriction does not appear
to greatly affect performance, maximal oxygen consumption (V̇ O2max), strength, or
endurance, provided enough carbohydrate, protein, and other essential nutrients are
included in the diet to maintain glycogen stores and muscle mass (McMurray et al.,
1985; Horswill et al., 1990; Fogelholm, 1994). Greyhound trainers, however, restrict
the amount of food fed to their racing dogs because dogs are purported to run faster


===== PDF PAGE 563 =====
562
when food is restricted slightly. One abstract lends support to this notion (Hill et al.,
1999b). The abstract reports that racing greyhounds ran 0.2 m·s–1 faster over a 500-m
sprint race when food intake was restricted to 85 percent of free-choice and body
weight was 6 percent less than when dogs were fed free-choice. This change in
performance is equivalent to 6 m over a 500-m race and would often be the difference
between winning and losing a race. Mean segmented neutrophil numbers were
slightly fewer (2,200 vs. 2,800·μL–1) in food-restricted dogs.
Few studies have examined the effect of body condition on endurance exercise.
Body weight and body conformation were not associated with whether dogs finished
the Iditarod (Constable et al., 1996). Hinchcliff et al. (1998), however, reported that
dogs that did not finish the Iditarod lost more weight (9 percent vs. 5 percent) than
dogs that finished the race. The highest V̇ O2max ever reported in dogs was measured
by Reynolds et al. (1999) in sled dogs with a lean body condition. Young (1959)
reported that weight loss associated with 5 days of food deprivation increased
endurance in young adult beagles running at 6 km·h–1 on a treadmill with the incline
varied to maintain a constant work load (approximately 50 percent V̇ O2max).
Nevertheless, this increase in endurance was probably a result of metabolic changes
associated with food deprivation because there was no change in energy expenditure
when corrected for changes in body weight. Young (1960) also examined the effect of
gradual weight gain on energy consumption during exercise in these beagles. Dogs
gained lean body mass, fat mass, and body water over several months, but body fat
increased only from 17 to 20 percent of the total. As mean body weight increased
from 10.4 to 12.4 kg, mean energy expenditure at rest (56 kcal·kg BW–1·d–1) and
during 50 minutes’ exercise (3.6 kcal·min–1) (Reynolds et al., 1999) did not change,
but mean RQ during exercise increased from 0.81 to 0.95, suggesting a greater
reliance on carbohydrate, and average water loss increased from 1.2 to 1.8 mL·kcal–1.
Orthopedic problems also appear to be more common in obese dogs and cats.
“Locomotor problems” were more common in grossly obese dogs in the United
Kingdom (Edney and Smith, 1986), and lameness was more common in heavy cats in
the United States (Scarlett and Donoghue, 1998). The prevalence of hip dysplasia and
the prevalence and severity of osteoarthritis were much lower in retrievers that
received 25 percent less food than in control dogs given free access to food (Kealy et
al., 1992, 2000). The body condition score on a 9-point scale was 6.7 ± 0.4 in those
dogs given free access to food and 4.6 ± 0.4 in restricted-fed dogs (Kealy et al.,
2002). It is worth noting (for dogs fed raw meat) that obesity was also associated with
an increased risk of infection from Salmonella (Williams and Newberne, 1971).
It appears wise, therefore, to keep exercising dogs lean. An ideal body condition
score for most breeds would be 4-5 on a scale of 1 to 9 such as that developed by
Laflamme (1997). Greyhounds have less body fat, however, than other breeds (Gunn,
1978b), and an ideal body condition score for racing greyhounds and other sight-
hounds is slightly less (approximately 3.5 on a 9-point scale). Reynolds et al. (1999)
described the ideal body condition in sled dogs as “easily palpable ribs and spinous


===== PDF PAGE 564 =====
563
processes and a slight depression between the wings of the ileum,” corresponding to a
score of 2.5 on a 1 to 5 scale (4 on a 9-point scale).
EFFECT OF CONFINEMENT AND TRAINING
Confinement in a cage or a regime of regular exercise results in adaptations that
may affect nutrient requirements. Most studies of the effect of exercise on nutrient
requirements have been performed on trained dogs exercising regularly, but
requirements determined for trained dogs may not be the same as requirements for
untrained pet dogs exercising only intermittently on weekends. A few studies,
however, have examined the effect of confinement and training on dogs. There appear
to be no studies of cats.
Most training of dogs involves “continuous” training for endurance exercise in
which dogs run aerobically at 50-80 percent of either maximal heart rate or maximal
oxygen consumption for 30 to 90 minutes daily for 6-8 weeks. Reynolds et al. (1999)
and Ready and Morgan (1984) assessed the effect of “interval” training on dogs by
running sled dogs on a treadmill supramaximally two to three times weekly as well as
exercising dogs submaximally two to three times weekly. Greyhounds training for
sprint exercise have also been raced or run supramaximally twice weekly and
exercised submaximally every day either by walking several miles daily or by being
released in a 900-m2 pen twice daily (Staaden, 1984; Hill et al., 2000, 2001b). All
studies have increased exercise gradually. None has examined the effect of sudden
increases in activity.
Morpurgo (1897) and Siebert (1928) both reported that training increased muscle
mass in dogs by hypertrophy of individual muscle fibers, not by hyperplasia.
Friedländer and Thierse (1928) reported that the bones of a leg inactivated with a stiff
bandage became lighter, more slender, and longer, with a more actively growing
epiphyseal line, and contained less water and mineral. Steinhaus et al. (1932),
however, did not find any hypertrophy of skeletal muscle or of limb bones in dogs
exercised by running or swimming. Kohlsrauch (1929) suggested that canine muscle
hypertrophied only if the speed of exercise was increased. This may explain why
trained greyhounds are subjectively more muscular than untrained greyhounds,
whereas dogs undertaking endurance exercise do not necessarily show increased
muscle bulk. Tipton et al. (1970) found that the strength, diameter, and collagen
content of lateral collateral ligaments was highest in trained dogs compared to
untrained dogs, and lowest from immobilized limbs. Laros et al. (1971) found that the
insertions of the lateral collateral ligaments but not other ligaments in the knee were
strongest in dogs kept in pens compared to dogs kept in cages but weakest in
immobilized limbs. As little as 6 weeks of caging resulted in subperiosteal bone
resorption at the insertion of the ligament, but over 6 months, fibrous tissue replaced
resorbed bone and became mineralized. Inactivity, therefore, was associated with
bone resorption followed by bone accretion. Külbs (1912, 1929), Grober (1908),
Thörner (1930), Steinhaus et al. (1932), Bove et al. (1979), and Arokoski et al. (1993)


===== PDF PAGE 565 =====
564
all found that the heart was larger relative to body weight in trained dogs, and
Steinhaus (1932) showed that heart size declined again when dogs became inactive.
More recently, using echocardiography, Stepien et al. (1998) reported a 24 percent
increase in heart mass index in both “veteran” and “rookie” sled dogs during a 5-
month winter season in which dogs ran approximately 20 km daily at 30-40 percent
V̇ O2max. Changes in other organs with exercise have been inconsistent and have
been performed only on small groups of dogs. Thus, Külbs (1912) and Thörner
(1930) found that the lungs and kidneys were heavier in exercised dogs than in
unexercised litter mates, but Steinhaus et al. (1932) found no effect of running
exercise on lung or kidney weight and heavier kidneys and lighter lungs in dogs
exercised by swimming. Külbs (1912) reported an increase in liver weight in trained
dogs, but Thörner (1930) and Steinhaus et al. (1932) found no difference from
unexercised controls.
Examining the effect of daily long-distance aerobic exercise (5-7 km·h–1 on 15
percent slope) on growing beagles, Arokoski et al. (1993) found food intake did not
increase greatly after 6 months of age in caged dogs, but increased almost linearly in
running dogs as distance increased to 40 km·d–1 by 1 year of age. At 1 year of age,
body mass was higher in running dogs, but by 70 weeks of age, body mass and
muscle mass did not differ from those of caged control dogs; the bone mass relative to
body mass of radius and tibia was approximately 10 percent greater, however, in
running dogs. Puustjärvi et al. (1991, 1992, 1995) reported that, although more
osteophytes developed and weight-bearing bones grew larger in running dogs, bone
mineral density was lower in the vertebrae, ileum, and radius of running beagles
compared to caged controls. Some markers of bone metabolism were increased
(median serum alkaline phosphatase concentrations doubled) and median serum
estradiol concentrations were 25 percent lower in running dogs, but osteoblast
markers of bone metabolism (concentrations of serum osteocalcin and carboxyl
terminal [C-terminal] propeptide of type I collagen) were unchanged by regular
exercise. Median daily urinary calcium excretion doubled from 0.3 mmol in sedentary
dogs to 0.7 mmol in running dogs at 55 weeks of age and increased 63 percent from
0.8 to 1.3 mmol at 70 weeks of age, but running dogs consumed 50 percent more
food, vitamin D, calcium, and phosphorus than did sedentary controls (Puustjärvi et
al., 1992).
Overall, with the exception of cardiac hypertrophy and changes in bones, gross
changes associated with training are comparatively subtle. Training does, however,
affect the capacity to maintain exercise. Musch et al. (1985) found that oxygen
consumption at any slope or speed was the same in trained and untrained 1- to 2-year-
old female foxhounds running on a treadmill, but trained dogs were able to run faster
on a steeper slope and their V̇ O2max was higher. At any speed or slope, oxygen
consumption, cardiac output, arteriovenous oxygen difference, mean arterial pressure,
and systemic vascular resistance were unaffected by training, but heart rate was 14
beats per minute lower, stroke volume was 14 percent greater, and the increase in


===== PDF PAGE 566 =====
565
venous lactate concentrations was less in trained dogs than untrained dogs. Training
increased V̇ O2max by 28-31 percent because maximal cardiac output was 27-28
percent higher and maximal arteriovenous oxygen difference was 4 percent higher in
trained than untrained dogs. At V̇ O2max, postexercise venous lactate concentrations
and mean arterial pressure were unchanged but systemic vascular resistance was 20-
23 percent lower in trained dogs. Blood flow to the heart, diaphragm, tongue, and
muscles of the hind limb increased 200-600 percent during exercise in these dogs;
blood flow to nonlocomotor muscles such as the temporal muscle decreased 60
percent and blood flow to the brain was unaffected during exercise (Musch et al.,
1987). Training did not alter capillary density in the muscles (Parsons et al., 1985) or
blood flow to most organs, but blood flow to the large intestine, spleen, liver, adrenal
glands, and kidneys decreased with exercise only in trained animals (Musch et al.,
1987).
Altom (1999) reported that olfactory acuity decreased 64 percent when
unconditioned 2- to 4-year-old English pointers ran 8 km·h–1 on a 10 percent slope
for 1 hour but did not decrease during this exercise when dogs had been conditioned
by running at 8 km·h–1 on the level for 30 minutes three times weekly for 12 weeks.
Wakshlag et al. (2002a) also reported pronounced up-regulation during the hunting
season of some components (the ubiquinated conjugates and p31 regulatory capping
subunit, but not the catalytic core β-subunit) of the ubiquitin-proteosome pathway
responsible for proteolysis in skeletal muscle of Labradors and English pointers.
Clark et al. (1988) reported that muscle phosphocreatine decreased less and
isometric tension was greater during electrical stimulation of skeletal muscle
previously conditioned by chronic electrical stimulation than during stimulation of
unconditioned muscle. In dogs trained to run on three legs, Procter and Best (1932)
found that glycogen increased in exercised muscles during the first 3 weeks of
training but returned to pretraining levels if training was continued for a month.
Pohoska (1979) found that confining 15- to 25-kg mongrel dogs to 0.4-m3 cages for
2-5 months increased the rate of increase in rectal temperature and reduced the mean
time to exhaustion from 197 ± 17 to 118 ± 21 minutes when dogs ran on a treadmill
with a 21 percent slope at 5-6 km· h–1. Confinement reduced resting muscle glycogen
content by 15 percent but did not affect muscle glycogen at exhaustion. Confinement
also increased the rate of decline in blood glucose during exercise, reduced the
increase in FFA concentrations during exercise, increased norepinephrine
concentrations during exercise, and reduced the FFA response to infused
norepinephrine. These changes had almost returned to normal by 15 days after
confinement ended. Nazar et al. (1992) showed that all of these changes returned to
normal after 8 weeks of retraining (running at 6 km·h–1 on a 21 percent slope for 1
h·d–1). Sneddon et al. (1989) reported that fitness deteriorated in Canaan dogs within
3-5 weeks of ceasing training.
Paul and Holmes (1973) found that plasma FFAs supplied only 20-30 percent of
energy during moderate submaximal exercise (6 km·h–1 on a 15 percent slope) in


===== PDF PAGE 567 =====
566
untrained dogs but 70-90 percent of energy in trained dogs. Issekutz et al. (1964)
noted that the rate of increase in blood lactate during exercise varied widely with
physical condition and showed that there was a negative correlation between lactic
acid concentration and the rate of FFA release during exercise. Thus, untrained
animals have to use anaerobic sources of energy, which limits their stamina.
Supplying glucose before, during, and after exercise may therefore be more important
in untrained animals than trained animals, and the increase in stamina that Downey et
al. (1980) observed in trained beagles when fat was increased in the diet may not
occur in untrained dogs.
ENERGY REQUIREMENTS
Minimal Metabolism
A minimal amount of energy is required each day to maintain homeostasis even in
the absence of factors that increase energy consumption such as exercise, food
consumption, or a low environmental temperature. The conditions for measuring
basal metabolic rate (BMR), resting fed metabolic rate (RFMR), maintenance energy
requirement (MER), and their values for dogs and cats are discussed in Chapter 3;
however, MER may vary with any factor that affects heat production.
Anxiety
Release of catecholamines in stressed animals increases metabolic rate. For
example, when animals are placed in a chamber to measure metabolic rate, oxygen
consumption is initially very high but declines over time as animals stop moving
about and become accustomed to their environment. Environmental stress may,
therefore, increase metabolic rate. Woods and Besch (1974), for example, report that
postabsorptive heat production was higher (266 ± 24 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1) in dogs
(greyhounds and beagles) kept in cages on their own compared to the 135 ± 24
kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1produced by the same dogs kept in groups of two to four. The
authors speculate that isolating the dogs caused stress.
Circadian Rhythms
Besch and Woods (1977) reported that heat production varies with a circadian
rhythm in dogs. Heat production in beagles and greyhounds kept in cages in a
thermoneutral environment with a 12-hour dark period was low in the morning (124 ±
17 and 94 ± 17 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1, respectively), gradually increased to an evening
maximum (195 ± 21 and 166 ± 20 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1, respectively), and then
declined through the night. Heat production averaged 141 ± 26 and 139 ± 4 kcal·kg


===== PDF PAGE 568 =====
567
BW–0.75·d–1 in greyhounds and beagles, but there was a 58 percent and 75 percent
increase, respectively, from morning to evening. Diet-induced thermogenesis was not
responsible for this oscillation because dogs were fed in the evening. Heat production
was similar in dogs maintained entirely in the dark or entirely in the light (Woods and
Besch, 1971), so, overall, this effect should not influence daily MER.
Cold-Induced Thermogenesis
Thermoregulation in Dogs
Warm-blooded or homeothermic animals, such as dogs and cats, increase heat
production to maintain body temperature at low ambient temperatures. The ambient
temperature below which heat production starts to increase is termed the lower
critical temperature and appears to vary with the thickness of an animal’s coat
(Scholander et al., 1950b). Metabolic rate also increases in homeotherms in high
ambient temperatures because cooling mechanisms require energy. The temperature
above which energy consumption increases is the upper critical temperature. The
range of temperatures at which normal temperatures are maintained with no increase
in metabolic rate is the thermoneutral zone (Figure 11-1).
Newborn pups have a much reduced capacity to maintain body temperature and do
not gain the adult capacity to thermoregulate until they are 3 weeks of age (Jensen
and Ederstrom, 1955). Crighton and Pownall (1974) found that newborn pups were
able to maintain body temperature only when ambient temperature was between 20
and 30°C (body temperature decreased when ambient temperature was below 20°C
and increased when it was above 30°C) but there was no thermoneutral zone. Heat
production was lowest (77 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1) at an ambient temperature of 30°C
but increased linearly as ambient temperature decreased below 30°C and was double
at an ambient temperature of 15°C (an increase of 5 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1·°C–1 below
30°C). Heat production also increased linearly above an ambient temperature of 30°C
until it was 50 percent higher at an ambient temperature of 35°C (an increase of 6
kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1·°C–1 above 30°C). McIntyre and Ederstrom (1958) found that
newborn pups increased heat production by 25 percent at an ambient temperature of
23°C but were unable to increase their metabolic rate by more than 25 percent at an
ambient temperature of 5°C, probably because they rapidly became too cold to mount
a metabolic response. Only after 3 weeks of age were pups able to maintain body
temperature like adults and double their metabolic rate at an ambient temperature of
5°C. Similarly, pups were not able to maintain body temperature at an ambient
temperature of 40°C until 4 weeks of age (Jensen and Ederstrom, 1955). Panting, like
shivering, appeared at 2-3 days of age but did not become an effective tool for losing
heat until 3 weeks of age.


===== PDF PAGE 569 =====
568
FIGURE 11-1 Effect of environmental temperature (°C) on energy requirement.
Hume and Egda (1959) reported that adult dogs maintained normal body
temperature in ambient temperatures as low as –46 to –50°C for 4-27 hours and six
out of seven dogs maintained temperature at –75 to –79°C for 3-5 hours. Giaja (1938)
found that an ambient temperature of –160° was necessary to make a dog
hypothermic after 1 hour. Adult dogs tolerated high ambient temperatures up to 56°C
for 3 hours or more in dry air (Adolph, 1947) but became poikilothermic at 33°C or
higher in moist air (Lozinsky, 1924). Taylor et al. (1971) reported that heat production
was lowest (63 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1) in two 3-kg dogs at ambient temperatures of 25
and 30°C and that heat production increased to 110 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1 at a low
ambient temperature of 20°C and a high ambient temperature of 40°C. Hammel et al.
(1958) found that heat production in adult dogs increased linearly below a lower
critical temperature of 23-25°C until it was twice BMR at 10°C (an increase of 5
kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1·°C–1). The upper critical temperature was between 30 and 35°C,
and energy consumption increased by less than 10 percent at 35°C. Scholander et al.
(1950a) reported similar results from a study by Rubner: two dogs showed a
thermoneutral zone from 20 to 30°C; metabolic rate was double at 5°C, and metabolic
rate increased 10 percent at 35°C. Blatteis et al. (1973) observed a 50 percent increase
in heat production in adult dogs moved acutely from an ambient temperature of 26°C
to one of 6°C. Minaire et al. (1973) reported that energy utilization in the cold
increased more than fourfold to approximately 487 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1 when dogs
were shorn to increase their response to the cold and were acutely exposed to air at an
ambient temperature of –25°C. Lucas et al. (1980) reported that oxygen consumption
increased to a maximum 10 minutes after dogs were acutely immersed in 8-13°C
water. The V̇ O2max in cold water was 3.5 ± 0.4 L O2·kg BW–1·h–1 (729 ± 88 kcal·kg


===== PDF PAGE 570 =====
569
BW–0.75·d–1), which was eightfold higher than oxygen consumption in the air at
23°C but only 60 percent of the V̇ O2max of these dogs during exercise. Dogs were
able to maintain this level of oxygen consumption provided their colonic temperature
did not decrease more than 4°C.
More moderate responses have been found in dogs in kennels. Zentek and Meyer
(1992) reported that MER was nearly 70 kcal ME·kg BW–0.75·d–1 higher in Great
Danes in outdoor kennels in winter than in summer. Since the average ambient
temperature is 25°C higher in summer than winter in northern Germany, this
represents a difference of approximately 3 kcal·kg BW–0.75·°C–1. Blaza (1982)
reported a 25 percent increase in maintenance food intake in four Labrador retrievers
and a beagle when ambient temperature decreased from 15 to 8°C. Nagasarka and
Carlson (1965), however, found that food intake increased only 30 percent in beagles,
though they lost 4 percent more body weight when kept in a room at –10°C for 1
month compared to dogs kept at 28°C. Crist and Romsos (1987) found a 38 percent
increase in energy expenditure in overfed adult beagles after 4 weeks’ exposure to an
ambient temperature of 3°C compared to overfed dogs at 22°C. Not surprisingly,
continuous exposure to cold increases energy requirements more than intermittent
exposure: Davis (1967) noted that continuous exposure to an ambient temperature of
5°C caused clipped dogs to lose body weight, whereas clipped dogs maintained their
body weight when exposed to –10°C for only 8 hours daily.
The thickness of a dog’s fur may also affect energy requirements in the cold.
Hoesslin (1888) estimated that the metabolic rate of a puppy raised at an ambient
temperature of 5°C was only 12 percent higher than that of a litter mate raised at an
ambient temperature of 32°C, but the coat of the dog raised in the cold was almost
four times as thick. Scholander et al. (1950a) reported that the metabolic rate of two
Eskimo dog pups varied very little at ambient temperatures from –30 to 40°C. Finke
(1991) also reported that as ambient temperature declined from 20 to 0°C, the
maintenance ME intake of Siberian huskies (125 kcal ME·kg BW–0.75·d–1) did not
increase significantly, whereas the maintenance ME intake of beagles and Labrador
retrievers increased by 20-25 percent (approximately 1 kcal ME·kg BW–0.75·d–1·°C–
1). Nevertheless, Durrer and Hannon (1962) suggest that energy consumption
increased by approximately 3 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1·°C in both huskies and beagles
(from 120 to 205 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1·°C–1, from 162 to 177 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1,
respectively) as ambient temperature decreased from 14°C in summer to –20°C in
winter. Orr (1966) reported that tethered sled dogs in Antarctica lost only small
amounts of weight when consuming 166 kcal ME·kg BW–0.75·d–1 at temperatures
estimated by Campbell and Donaldson (1981) to be 0-10°C. Campbell and Donaldson
(1981), however, reported that dogs consuming 320 kcal ME·kg BW–0.75·d–1
maintained body weight at –30°C in a tunnel (no wind chill) but lost weight when
exposed to a wind of 6 m·s–1. More recently, Hinchcliff et al. (1997b) found that sled


===== PDF PAGE 571 =====
570
dogs consumed 130 ± 29 kcal ME·kg BW–0.75·d–1 in kennels in a thermoneutral
environment (20°C) but expended 263 ± 96 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1 at –10 to –35°C.
Metabolic rate, therefore, appears to increase above basal by 5 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–
1·°C–1 (a 100 percent increase at 5°C) in inactive dogs below their critical
temperature. The cold-induced increase in heat production was more muted (≤ 3
kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1·°C–1 or a 50 percent increase at 5°C) in active animals, such as
dogs in kennels, because heat production in active dogs is higher than basal even in a
thermoneutral environment. The metabolic response to cold also develops at a lower
ambient temperature in dogs such as huskies with a critical temperature that is lower
than that of other breeds. The lower critical temperature appears to be 30°C for
newborn pups, 20-25°C for most adult dogs, and probably less than freezing for sled
dogs. Wind chill, clipping the coat, and immersion in cold water cause a greater
response to cold. The V̇ O2max in cold water is 30 kcal·kg BW–0.75·h–1. The upper
critical temperature is 30°C for pups and between 30 and 35°C for adult dogs. The
metabolic rate increases at an ambient temperature of 35°C by 50 percent in pups and
10 percent in adults.
Nonshivering Thermogenesis and Cold Acclimatization
Shivering is the most important mechanism for increasing metabolic rate in the
cold, but nonshivering heat production increases and shivering decreases during
prolonged exposure to cold in many species (Jansky et al., 1969). Brown adipose
tissue is the most important site of nonshivering thermogenesis in rats. Holloway et
al. (1985) and Ashwell et al. (1987) found that the fat in neonatal beagle pups had the
character of brown adipose tissue (high cytochrome oxidase activity, densely
populated with mitochondria, and presence of uncoupling protein), but fat in dogs
older than 6 months of age had the character of white adipose tissue (few
mitochondria and less cytochrome oxidase). This white adipose tissue retained an
ability to increase oxygen uptake in response to norepinephrine however, and chronic
administration of a β-agonist to mimic chronic cold exposure caused fat depots other
than subcutaneous fat to become more like brown adipose tissue. Davis (1967)
showed that nonshivering thermogenesis also occurs in the skeletal muscle of cold-
acclimatized dogs.
In some but not all species, this nonshivering thermogenesis develops as a result of
increased sensitivity to norepinephrine (Jansky et al., 1969). Nonshivering
thermogenesis developed in clipped dogs exposed to –10°C for 8 hours daily for 6-8
weeks (Davis, 1967) or immersed in 3-8°C water for 1 hour daily for 10 days
(Therminarias et al., 1979) and in unclipped dogs exposed to –10°C continuously for
1 month (Nagasarka and Carlson, 1965). The plasma concentrations of
triiodothyronine increased during cold adaptation, but the increase in plasma
catecholamine concentrations in response to cold and the increase in metabolic rate in
response to infused catecholamines were much reduced in cold-adapted dogs


===== PDF PAGE 572 =====
571
(Nagasarka and Carlson, 1965; Therminarias et al., 1979; Minaire et al., 1983).
Increased sensitivity to catecholamines is not responsible therefore for the increase in
nonshivering thermogenesis observed in cold-adapted dogs.
Energy consumption in a thermoneutral environment was unaffected by cold-
adaptation, but maximal heat production during immersion in cold water increased 40
percent (from 655 to 881 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1) in cold-adapted dogs and they were
able to maintain body temperature more effectively than warm-adapted dogs
(Therminarias et al., 1979). Long-term adaptation to cold, therefore, does not appear
to affect energy requirements at any ambient temperature but does improve a dog’s
ability to respond to and tolerate cold. Such changes are not dissimilar to the changes
in metabolic response to exercise observed in dogs during training.
Thermoregulation in Cats
There is much less information concerning thermoregulation in cats. Adolph
(1951) reported that newborn kittens were able to tolerate lower body temperatures
than adult cats. Scholander et al. (1950a) reported a study by Theodor of one cat that
suggests a thermoneutral zone from 20 to 30°C and a 30 percent increase in metabolic
rate at –5°C. Forster and Ferguson (1952) found that cats became vasoconstricted at
24-27°C, and became more active below 20°C; piloerection occurred below 10°C and
shivering only began below 5°C; rapid breathing and panting, however, were noted in
a warm environment of 36-40°C. Jacobson and Squires (1970) conducted experiments
to assess the effect of artificially altering the hypothalamic temperature of two cats in
different ambient temperatures. At normal hypothalamic temperatures, mean oxygen
consumption was at a minimum (40 kcal·kg BW–1·d–1) above an ambient
temperature of 30°C and increased by 50 percent at normal room temperature (25°C)
and by 150 percent at 5°C. Panting and respiratory water loss increased in a warm
environment (36°C), but there was little or no increase in oxygen consumption. Doris
and Baker (1981) reported that the mean metabolic rates of cats was lowest at 38°C
and approximately 30 percent higher at 35 and 43°C, and that evaporative losses
increased above 35°C. Adams et al. (1970) reported that the energy consumption of
adult shorthaired unacclimatized cats was approximately 73 kcal·kg BW–1·d–1 at 35
and 38°C but increased linearly by approximately 5 kcal·kg BW–1·d–1·°C–1 below
and above this range to 152 kcal·kg BW–1·d–1 at 20°C and 86 kcal·kg BW–1·d–1 at
41°C. Tissue insulation of the extremities increased below 35°C, and evaporative
losses and respiration increased markedly above 35°C. Measurements in chambers
used for indirect calorimetry do not allow full expression of behavioral patterns that
may extend the thermoneutral zone, but results suggest that there is a relatively
narrow thermoneutral zone in adult unacclimatized cats that is above 30-35°C and
below 38°C. They also suggest that there may be a substantial thermoregulatory
component to heat production at normal room temperature in cats, which may explain


===== PDF PAGE 573 =====
572
why measurements of metabolic rates in cats have often varied substantially in
different laboratories.
Other studies have used metabolic rate at normal room temperature (25°C) as a
baseline (Table 11-4). In these studies, energy consumption increased approximately
60 percent (in some studies as much as 160 percent) when adult cats moved from
room temperature (25°C) to an ambient temperature of 0-10°C. Energy consumption
also increased 60 percent in kittens, but this was associated with a smaller decline in
ambient temperature (from 30 to 20°C).
Shivering increased linearly with energy consumption and was responsible for 80
percent of heat production in cats during acute cold exposure (Hemingway et al.,
1964; Hoenig and Ferguson, 2002). Hemingway and Stuart (1962), however, reported
a 30-40 percent increase in metabolic rate in the absence of shivering in cats
acclimatized for 1 month at 0-5°C but not in cats acclimatized at temperatures above
10°C. This nonshivering thermogenesis was associated with an increased metabolic
response to norepinephrine in cold-acclimatized cats, but the increase in sensitivity to
norepinephrine was less than in rats (Hemingway et al., 1964). Adams (1963) also
found a small increase in metabolic rate in cats that had acclimatized at 5°C for 2
months.
In summary, therefore, the lower and higher critical temperature of unacclimatized
adult cats lies between 30-35 and 38°C, and the metabolic rate increases above and
below these temperatures by as much as 5 kcal·kg BW–0.67·d–1·°C–1. This represents
a two- to threefold increase at near freezing temperatures. The cold-induced increase
in heat production may be more muted (≤ 3 kcal·kg BW–0.67·d–1·°C–1) in active
animals.
Fuels for Thermogenesis
Dogs
In dogs, the changes in metabolism in response to the increased energy demands
during exposure to cold are similar to the changes observed in response to the energy
demands of endurance exercise (Minaire et al., 1973). Paul and Holmes (1973, 1975)
reported that, when dogs were acutely exposed to an ambient temperature of 4-5°C
for 120 minutes, energy expenditure increased 40 percent but the energy derived from
FFA increased from 32 ± 4 percent at rest to 48 ± 4 percent in the cold. Serum FFA
concentrations increased 70 percent, FFA turnover increased 60 percent, and the
percentage of FFA that was immediately oxidized increased from 22 to 33 percent. In
adult mongrel dogs, V̇ O2max was 40 percent less in the cold than during exercise, but
plasma norepinephrine and epinephrine concentrations increased to the same degree;
plasma lactate and glucose concentrations both increased in the cold and during
exercise, but blood glucose was 45 percent higher and lactate was 48 percent lower in
the cold; and FFA concentrations increased 43 percent in the cold but not during


===== PDF PAGE 574 =====
573
maximal exercise (Lucas et al., 1980). In adult mongrel dogs shorn to increase the
response to cold and acutely exposed to temperatures as low as –25°C, energy
consumption increased fourfold or more; plasma FFA concentrations almost doubled;
FFA turnover and oxidation rates increased four- and eightfold, respectively; and the
contribution of FFAs to carbon dioxide production nearly doubled from 36 to 64
percent or more (Vincent-Falquet et al., 1972; Minaire et al., 1973). Plasma
concentrations of β-hydroxybutyrate doubled in the cold, probably because of
increased generation of ketones from FFAs in the liver (Minaire et al., 1982). Glucose
turnover doubled and glucose oxidation rate increased fourfold, but plasma glucose
concentrations did not decline because glucose formation from muscle glycogen and
from glycerol in FFAs increased and the contribution of glucose to carbon dioxide
production declined slightly from 19 percent to 12 percent (Pernod et al., 1972;
Minaire et al., 1973). Glucose utilization, therefore, remained high despite high rates
of lipolysis in the cold, as it does during exercise. Alanine clearance increased but
plasma alanine concentrations declined in the cold, which suggests that, despite an
increased requirement for glucose and increased glucose utilization, pyruvate
generated by glycolysis was being oxidized rapidly in the cold and diverted from
alanine synthesis (Minaire et al., 1982). Lactate production by glycolysis increased in
the cold, but blood lactate concentrations remained low because lactate oxidation also
increased (Minaire et al., 1971).
TABLE 11-4 Effect of Changes in Ambient Temperature on Energy Utilizationain
Acclimatized and Unacclimatized Cats


===== PDF PAGE 575 =====
574
aMeasured as oxygen consumption using indirect calorimetry.
bValue is approximate as it has been calculated using the mean body weight or the midpoint
between maximum and minimum body weights.
cWeight of only one cat was reported.
These changes are consistent with skeletal muscle being the primary source of
increased energy consumption in the cold as well as during exercise. Minaire et al.
(1973) even suggested that glycogen stores may limit the ability to withstand cold as
well as limiting stamina during exercise. Currently, there have been no studies of the
influence of changing the relative proportions of the macronutrient composition of the
diet on resistance to cold in dogs. Nevertheless, if glycogen availability limits a dog’s
ability to withstand the cold, then diets containing increased fat may improve the
capacity of dogs to withstand the cold by reducing glycogen utilization in the same
fashion that stamina increases in exercising dogs fed high-fat diets. It is also possible
that dogs undertaking endurance exercise in warm environments may require less fat
during periods of quiescence and, therefore, may need slightly less fat in their diets
than dogs exposed to very low temperatures between bouts of exercise.


===== PDF PAGE 576 =====
575
It has not been determined if the requirements for protein or micronutrients change
in dogs in the cold. Blood glucose does not decline in the cold as it does during
endurance exercise; so, the demand for amino acids as precursors for gluconeogenesis
is probably not as great as during exercise. Exposure to cold may increase the amino
acid requirement slightly to accommodate hair growth and synthesis of mitochondria
and enzymes in adipose tissue during cold adaptation, but an increase in urinary
excretion of nitrogen has not been found in other species exposed to cold (Blaxter,
1989). The requirements for protein, vitamins, and most minerals are probably similar
in animals kept in the cold, therefore, to those kept in a thermoneutral environment.
Cats
Reducing the ambient temperature did not affect RQ in adult cats moving from
room temperature (25°C) to 3-8°C (Gautier et al., 1989) or in kittens moving from 30
to 20°C (Mortola and Matsuoka, 1993), despite a 60 percent increase in metabolic
rate. This suggests that substrate utilization in cats may not change during exposure to
cold.
Nutrients in a Warm Environment
There appear to be no studies of the metabolic response of dogs to high ambient
temperature. The heat increment of protein is greater than that of carbohydrate and fat
(Blaxter, 1989). High-protein meals will tend to generate slightly more heat
postprandially than low-protein meals, but the effect on daily heat production is likely
to be very small because the heat increment of a meal is small. Any advantage of
feeding a low-protein diet in a warm environment should be trivial.
Effect of Reduced Oxygen at High Altitude
With increasing altitude, the fractional concentration of oxygen in inspired air
remains 21 percent (FiO2 = 0.21), but barometric pressure, and therefore available
oxygen, decline. Barometric pressure and available oxygen are 17 percent less at an
altitude of 1,500 m than at sea level, 30 percent lower at an altitude of 2,750 m than at
sea level (equivalent to an FiO2 of 0.15 at sea level), and 50 percent lower at an
altitude of 5,800 m than at sea level (equivalent to an FiO2 of 0.10 at sea level).
Piiper et al. (1966) reported that the mean energy required for standing in adult
mongrel dogs decreased 10 percent at an FiO2 of 0.11, but statistically this did not
differ significantly from the energy for standing at an FiO2 of 0.21. These authors
also reported that the energy required for running each kilometer on a 10 percent
slope was unaffected by reducing the FiO2 to 0.11 but that V̇ O2max was at least 25
percent lower at an FiO2 of 0.15 and at least 50 percent lower at an FiO2 of 0.11.


===== PDF PAGE 577 =====
576
Schilling et al. (1956) found that the energy required for running at any speed or slope
on a treadmill, whether measured at an FiO2 = 0.21 or an FiO2 = 0.10, was unaffected
in adult dogs by 5 months of acclimatization to an FiO2 of 0.10. Zinker et al. (1995)
reported that glucose disappearance increased 50 percent at rest and during exercise
in dogs when FiO2 was decreased from 0.21 to 0.10, but arterial glucose
concentration was unchanged because hepatic glucose production increased
proportionately. Limb glucose and pyruvate oxidation doubled and limb
glycogenolysis increased more than twofold at rest and during exercise when FiO2
was decreased, and the fraction of carbon dioxide from lactate and glucose increased
proportionately. Reducing inspired oxygen, therefore, increases carbohydrate
oxidation and increases carbohydrate mobilization in the liver and muscle while
decreasing fat metabolism. Stamina is probably less therefore at high altitudes, and
the benefit of feeding a high-fat diet may also be reduced. Cold-induced
thermogenesis, shivering, and the ability to maintain body temperature at 6°C were
also inhibited in adult dogs by acute exposure to an FiO2 of 0.12, although there was
a slight recovery of heat production after 3 hours exposure to hypoxia (Blatteis and
Lutherer, 1973).
In adult cats at normal room temperature (23-27°C), energy consumption
decreased by 20 percent during acute exposure to hypoxia (FiO2 = 0.10), but there
was partial recovery and the decrease was only 10 percent after 1-hour exposure to
hypoxia (Gautier et al., 1989). Hypoxia (FiO2 = 0.10) caused a more marked (30
percent) decrease in oxygen consumption and a 30 percent decrease in shivering in
these cats during acute exposure to 3-8°C. In kittens, hypoxia (FiO2 = 0.10) decreased
energy consumption by 40 percent at an ambient temperature of 30°C and by 50
percent at an ambient temperature of 20°C (Mortola and Matsuoka, 1993).
Nevertheless, physiologic compensation during acclimatization and the rapid
recovery in response to prolonged hypoxia of only a few hours observed in these
experiments suggest that altitude may cause only a very small decrease in heat
production in either dogs or cats whether in a thermoneutral environment or in the
cold.
EFFECT OF EXERCISE ON ENERGY REQUIREMENTS
The MER of a dog or cat may be considered to be composed of the energy
required in the absence of exercise plus the energy associated with spontaneous
exercise. How energy requirements vary with exercise is the subject of this
discussion. Of the energy required in the absence of exercise, BMR, diet-induced
thermogenesis, and RFMR are discussed in Chapter 3; cold-induced thermogenesis is
discussed earlier in this chapter.
Effect of Exercise on Energy Required in the Absence of Exercise


===== PDF PAGE 578 =====
577
Steinhaus (1928) reported that BMR was unaffected by six months of training in
previously confined mongrel dogs, which ran 20-80 km·week–1 on a 22 per cent
slope at 8 km·h–1. The effect of exercise on dietary thermogenesis is less clear. Both
Rubner (1910) and Anderson and Lusk (1917) reported that, when a single dog was
exercised after a high-protein meal, the specific dynamic effect of the meal was
unchanged and there was an exact summation of the energy increments due to diet
and exercise. Anderson and Lusk (1917) also reported, however, that the specific
dynamic effect of carbohydrate was abolished when exercise was performed
immediately after ingestion of 0.8g·kg BW–1 of glucose, possibly because the glucose
was used immediately without prior conversion to glycogen or fat. Exercise does not
appear to affect dietary thermogenesis in sheep and humans (Blaxter, 1989).
Ambient temperature must be taken into account only when assessing the energy
required in the absence of exercise in dogs exercising in a cold environment. Cold-
induced thermogenesis is of little consequence in animals that live indoors in a fairly
stable ambient temperature or in dogs running on treadmills at room temperature.
Even in a very cold environment however, cold-induced thermogenesis is only of
consequence during periods when dogs or cats are not exercising. Heat produced by
muscular activity is much greater than that necessary to maintain body temperature.
Heat loss, not retention of heat is therefore of primary importance during exercise.
Energy Required for Exercise: Dynamic Exercise (Short Runs) Versus
Steady-State Exercise (Long Runs)
Most studies have measured the energy requirements of dogs running long
distances using aerobic sources of energy. During this endurance exercise, oxygen
consumption is in a steady-state equilibrium with energy expenditure and can be used
to measure energy expenditure. Only a few studies have attempted to assess energy
requirements of dogs running short distances using both aerobic and anaerobic
sources of energy. Anaerobic energy consumption is difficult to measure because it
represents a “debt” that subsequently has to be repaid. This debt has two components:
an “alactacid” debt and a lactic acid debt (Staaden, 1984).
Alactacid Debt
Marconi et al. (1982) showed that when 15 to 17 kg mongrel dogs started to run
on a 10 percent slope, there was a slight delay of 2 minutes before oxygen
consumption reached a new equilibrium with energy expenditure and there was a
similar delay of 3 minutes before oxygen consumption returned to resting levels when
running stopped after a 5-minute run. The delay at the start of exercise created an
oxygen debt that was repaid at the end of exercise. This delay did not represent a
lactic acid debt because blood lactic acid concentrations remained close to resting
levels. This delay represented an alactacid debt acquired as oxygen stores desaturated


===== PDF PAGE 579 =====
578
at the start of exercise and as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and creatine phosphate
provide energy from high-energy phosphate bonds. The accumulation and repayment
of this alactacid debt showed first-order kinetics with short half-times (20 ± 2 seconds
and 24 ± 3 seconds, respectively), which were unaffected by the speed of running.
The energy consumed in generating the debt can be estimated from the oxygen
consumed (area under the curve) during recovery (Figure 11-2). The area under a
curve can be obtained by integration. Integration of the first order recovery curve
gives the oxygen consumption during recovery (mL O2·kg BW–1) as the oxygen
consumption at the end of steady-state exercise (mL O2·kg BW–1·s–1) divided by an
elimination constant λ, where λ is (ln 2)/(the half-time) (Gibaldi and Perrier, 2001). In
this instance, λ is 0.693/24 seconds. For dogs undertaking the highest V̇ O2max ever
reported (2.9 mL O2·kg BW–1·s–1) (Reynolds et al., 1999), the oxygen consumption
during recovery would be 2.9 × 24/0.693 or 100 mL O2·kg BW–1. Assuming 5
kcal·L–1 O2, this would give a maximum for oxygen replenishment during recovery
of 0.5 kcal·kg BW–1 in dogs. This is very small and of consequence only during brief
exercise; when averaged over a run of more than a few minutes, this alactacid debt
can be ignored. The prolonged excess post-exercise oxygen consumption (EPOC)
observed in humans for up to 24 hours after long bouts of strenuous exercise (Bahr,
1991) has yet to be described in dogs.
FIGURE 11-2 Changes in oxygen consumption before and after a short bout of
submaximal exercise.
Lactic Acid Debt During Submaximal Exercise


===== PDF PAGE 580 =====
579
Seeherman et al. (1981) reported that lactic acid increased at the start of exercise
to less than 10 mmol·L–1 in dogs but then declined to resting levels in dogs exercising
at 78 percent V̇ O2max or remained unchanged for the duration of the run in dogs
exercising at 94 percent V̇ O2max. Young (1959) found that blood lactate
concentrations did not differ from resting concentrations in beagles at the end of
exhaustive exercise at 50 percent V̇ O2max (6 km·h–1 on a 17 percent slope).
Brzezinska et al. (1980) reported that mean lactate concentrations increased gradually
from 1.4 mmol·L–1 at rest to 2.7 mmol·L–1 at the point of exhaustion. Wagner et al.
(1977) reported that mean arterial lactate concentrations increased to less than 3
mmol·L–1 and dogs became alkalotic with a mean arterial pH of 7.55 (probably a
respiratory alkalosis associated with panting) after running for more than 20 minutes
at 50 percent V̇ O2max (8 km·h–1 on a 50 percent grade). Cerretelli et al. (1964) also
reported no lactic acid production in dogs running on a level treadmill but found that
blood lactic acid concentrations increased gradually in dogs running at speeds greater
than 8 km·h–1 on a 10 percent slope and increased 1.6 mmol·L–1·min–1 in dogs
running at 16 km·h–1 on a 10 percent slope, even though oxygen consumption had not
reached a maximum. Depocas et al. (1969) found that blood lactate concentrations did
not change greatly in dogs running at 30 percent V̇ O2max but , the turnover rate and
rate of oxidation of lactate increased two- and fourfold, respectively.
Cerretelli et al. (1969) estimated that the mean energy provided by lactic acid in
canine gastrocnemius muscle was 22.6 cal·mmol–1 during initial work but only 19.7
cal· mmol–1 in fatigued muscle. Piiper et al. (1966) estimated that lactic acid provided
20 cal·mmol–1 in dogs running in a reduced oxygen atmosphere. A value of 21
cal·mmol–1 for the energy from lactate seems a reasonable midpoint. Total lactic acid
accumulation can be estimated by assuming that the peak arterial lactic acid
concentration measured 5-10 minutes after exercise is representative of lactic acid
distributed uniformly in the total body water (Cerretelli et al., 1964). Staaden (1984)
reported that the arterial blood lactate concentration in greyhounds was 1.13 times the
venous lactate concentration. The total body water of beagles measured by
desiccation varied with age and amount of fat mass from 50 to 80 percent of body
weight (Sheng and Huggins, 1971, 1979). Plasma is 91 percent water (Hawk et al.,
1954). Multiplying venous lactate concentration by 1.13 (to obtain arterial
concentrations) and by total body water fraction (0.5 to 0.8) and dividing by 0.91
(plasma water fraction) gives an estimate of total lactate. Thus, lactate would provide
between 13 and 21 cal·kg BW–1 for each millimole per liter of lactate venous blood.
Since dogs develop no more than 10 mmol·L–1 lactate in venous blood during
submaximal runs, the maximal energy from lactate would be less than 210 cal·kg BW
–1, which is small enough to be ignored when averaged over a run of more than 15-20
minutes.


===== PDF PAGE 581 =====
580
Lactic Acid Debt During Supramaximal Exercise
Anaerobic metabolism with accumulation of lactic acid is of greater consequence
in dogs undertaking supramaximal sprint exercise over short distances. Seeherman et
al. (1981) reported that animals refused to continue supramaximal exercise when
lactate concentrations reached 18 mmol·kg–1. Greyhounds develop a marked lactic
acidosis, with mean pH falling from approximately 7.4 before racing to as low as 7.0
after racing and mean blood lactate concentrations increasing from 1 mmol·L–1 or
less before racing to 24-34 mmol·L–1 after racing (Rose and Bloomberg, 1989; Ilkiw
et al., 1989; Nold et al., 1991; Pieschl et al., 1992; Hill et al., 2000, 2001b). Lactate
concentrations reach a peak, and pH reaches a trough 2-10 minutes after a sprint;
lactate returns to normal and pH increases to slightly above normal by approximately
30 minutes after a sprint (Staaden, 1984; Snow et al., 1988; Rose and Bloomberg,
1989; Pieschl et al., 1992). Matwichuk et al. (1999) surprisingly reported mean blood
lactate concentrations increased to only 4 mmol·L–1 and mean pH increased slightly
to 7.6 in Labrador retrievers immediately after 10 minutes of repeatedly retrieving a
soft plastic tube over a distance of 40 m, suggesting that this particular retrieving
exercise involved primarily aerobic not anaerobic metabolism.
Energy Required for Short Supramaximal Exercise
Seeherman et al. (1981) reported that oxygen consumption increased linearly with
speed and was proportional to distance traveled until it reached a maximum,
whereupon it remained constant as speed increased. Lactate concentrations increased
linearly with speed above this V̇ O2max, which suggests that energy use continues to
increase linearly with speed and is proportional to distance traveled above V̇ O2max.
Staaden (1984) used indirect calorimetry to measure energy utilization of
greyhounds running on a treadmill. He made the following assumptions: (1) oxygen
consumed during a run represented 5 kcal·L–1 O2 because carbohydrate would be the
principal energy source; (2) oxygen replenishment measured as the persistence of
oxygen utilization above resting after dogs finished running also represented 5
kcal·L–1 O2; (3) the energy required to replenish high-energy phosphate bonds in
ATP and creatine phosphate was 56 cal·kg BW–1; and (4) lactic acid provided 21
cal·mmol–1. Pyruvate accumulation was not taken into account, but energy from
pyruvate was probably not more than one-third that from lactate (Cerretelli et al.,
1964). Staaden also appears to have calculated the energy from lactate by assuming
that lactate is evenly distributed throughout the whole body, not just in the total body
water as recommended by Cerretelli et al. (1964). The total body water of trained
greyhounds was reported recently to be 70 percent of total body weight by deuterium
dilution (Hill et al., 2001b), but deuterium dilution overestimates total body water
measured by desiccation by 14 percent (Sheng and Huggins, 1971). Staaden’s results


===== PDF PAGE 582 =====
581
have been recalculated, therefore, by assuming a total body water that is 56 percent of
total body weight and a water content of plasma of 91 percent (Hawk et al., 1954;
Table 11-5).
The major conclusions that can be drawn from Staaden’s work have not changed
however. Greyhounds used a tremendous amount of energy (3 kcal·kg BW–1·km–1)
during their initial acceleration, but energy utilization during the remainder of the run
was 1 kcal·kg BW–1·km–1, which is similar to the rate of energy utilization during
steady-state submaximal exercise for dogs of this size (discussed later). Greyhounds
accelerated to their top speed of 72 km·h–1 and then slowed during the rest of their
run. When corrected for changes in kinetic energy during the initial acceleration and
during subsequent slowing, the cost of running was almost constant (1.1 kcal·kg BW–
1·km–1) throughout a run.
Anaerobic sources of energy provided 89 percent of the energy during the initial
7.5 seconds and probably all of the energy for the initial acceleration, but all of the
energy from phosphagens and the alactacid component of the debt was used within
the first 15 seconds of a run. Aerobic energy sources contribute almost no energy for
the first few seconds, but oxygen consumption increased to a maximum of 8.3 L
O2·kg BW–1·h–1 between 30 and 45 seconds of a run. This V̇ O2max is similar to that
reported in other dogs running on a treadmill (discussed later). Aerobic sources
provided 37 percent of energy during a 30-second run, which is somewhat analogous
to a 500-m race, and 52 percent of energy during a 60-second run, which is somewhat
analogous to a 900-m race. Staaden assumed that only carbohydrate was used as an
aerobic substrate during such vigorous exercise. Wiebel et al. (1996) reported that
carbohydrate was the primary fuel but that fat was also used in dogs running at 80
percent V̇ O2max. Fat may, therefore, have contributed some energy even for these
short runs, but the estimate of aerobic energy use would not have been affected
greatly.
Surprisingly, some reserve capacity for generating energy from lactic acid was
found by Staaden after the initial burst. Nold et al. (1991) also reported that lactate
concentra tions increased more in greyhounds after a 704-m race than after a 402-m
and 503-m race. The mean peak blood lactate concentrations reported by Staaden (16
mmol·L–1 after a 30-second run and 22 mmol·L–1 after a 60-second run) were lower,
however, than the 24-34 mmol·L–1 that has been reported elsewhere after races of
similar duration (Lassen et al., 1986; Rose and Bloomberg, 1989; Hill et al., 2000,
2001b). Staaden reported that not all greyhounds could sustain their best speed when
running on the treadmill, and it is likely that lactic acid plays a more prominent role
early in a race when dogs compete on a track.
TABLE 11-5 Rate of Energy Utilization in Greyhounds


===== PDF PAGE 583 =====
582
SOURCE: Adapted from Staaden, 1984.
Staaden’s study also showed that greyhounds use very little energy during a race.
During a 60-second run dogs consumed only 1 kcal·kg BW–1. Most of this energy,
0.3 kcal·kg BW–1, was consumed in the first 100 m and dogs then consumed
approximately 0.1 kcal·kg BW–1 for each of the remaining 100 m. It is likely that
dogs running on a soft, uneven track, competing against each other, and having to turn
corners consume slightly more energy, but the difference is probably small because
lactate accumulation and oxygen utilization are close to maximal. Even if racing dogs
accumulate more lactic acid (28 mmol·L–1) after a 400-m race (Rose and Bloomberg,
1989; Hill et al., 2000), lactic acid could provide only 0.4 kcal·kg BW–1. The highest
reported V̇ O2max in dogs is 10.6 L O2·kg BW–1·h–1 (Reynolds et al., 1999), which is
only 25 percent higher than the value reported by Staaden. Increasing Staaden’s
estimate for aerobic energy by 25 percent gives only 0.3 kcal·kg BW–1 for the first 30
seconds. Staaden used conservative estimates for phosphagen replenishment, but even
his most liberal estimate was only 50 percent higher (0.1 kcal·kg BW–1). It is also
possible that Staaden underestimated oxygen replenishment. Staaden noted that
oxygen consumption reached a plateau soon after the end of a run but that the plateau
was higher than the resting rates of oxygen consumption. This persistent increase in
oxygen consumption has bedeviled many estimates of oxygen replenishment. Most
authors, like Staaden, have chosen to ignore this persistent increase, but most of the
area under a first-order curve is in the tail. As discussed earlier however, the area
under a first-order curve can be calculated once the half-life is known. Based on the
half-life provided by Marconi et al. (1982), the maximal energy for oxygen
replenishment would be 0.5 kcal·kg BW–1. In total, this gives a theoretical maximum
for available energy during the first 30 seconds of a run of approximately 1.3 kcal·kg
BW–1 (39 kcal for a 30-kg greyhound running a 500-m race). Using similar logic, the


===== PDF PAGE 584 =====
583
maximal available energy for a 60-second race would be 1.7 kcal·kg BW–1 (51 kcal
for a 30-kg greyhound running a 900-m race).
Energy Required for Standing and for Running on a Treadmill
Most measurements of energy consumption during exercise in dogs have been
performed using indirect calorimetry with dogs in a steady-state equilibrium either
standing or running long distances on a treadmill. These experiments have shown that
oxygen consumption increases linearly with speed in most running mammals until it
reaches a maximum ( V̇ O2max; Taylor et al., 1982). The y-intercept, where speed is
zero, represents the energy required for standing still (Figure 11-3). The slope is the
energy required per distance traveled and is constant irrespective of velocity below
the V̇ O2max in most species (Schmidt-Nielsen, 1984; Blaxter, 1989). Taylor et al.
(1982) found that in 62 species of birds and mammals, including dogs and cats, the
energy required for standing (y-intercept) and for running declined with body weight.
The energy required for standing was 124 kcal·kg BW–0.7·d–1; the energy required
for running (slope) was 2.6 kcal·kg BW–0.68·km–1. In domestic animals, the cost of
standing was 113 kcal·kg BW–0.66·d–1 and the cost of running was 2.9 kcal·kg BW–
0.67·km–1. Cohen et al. (1978), using a slightly larger data set, found that the cost of
running was 2.9 kcal·kg BW–0.67·km–1 for all species. Schmidt-Nielsen (1984) has
suggested on theoretical grounds that the mass exponent for the cost of running
should be 0.67.
Reported values for the cost of standing and running in dogs are listed in Table 11-
6. The cost of standing and running declines with body weight. The cost of running,
for example, appears to be higher (>1.5 kcal·kg BW–1·km–1) in dogs weighing less
than 10 kg BW and lower (approximately 1 kcal·kg–1·km–1) in dogs weighing more
than 10 kg. The exception is one study by Ordway et al. (1984), which gives very
high values for the cost of standing and running. Regression of the mean data points,
other than those given by Ordway, suggests that the cost of standing is 137 (range
102-196) kcal·kg BW–0.67·d–1 and the cost of running is 1.5 (range 1.2-2.0) kcal·kg
BW–0.81·km–1 in dogs. The exponent for standing is the same as the interspecies
exponent, whereas the exponent for running is higher than the interspecies exponent.
The mean cost of standing was higher than the interspecies mean, and the cost of
running was lower than the interspecies mean. With an exponent of 0.75, the mean
cost of standing was 111 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1 (range 79-154) or approximately 50
percent more than BMR, and the mean cost of running was 1.8 (range 1.3-2.3)
kcal·kg BW–0.75·km–1. It is of note that humans also require approximately 1 kcal·kg
BW–1·km–1 when running on a treadmill (Margaria et al., 1963), but a dog of similar
weight to an average human (70 kg) would probably require only 60 percent of this
amount.


===== PDF PAGE 585 =====
584
FIGURE 11-3 Cost of running on a treadmill.
TABLE 11-6 Cost of Standing and Running During Steady-State Exercise on a
Treadmill for Dogs and Cats
aA mean is reported where this is known; otherwise, the midpoint between maximum and
minimum is reported.
bValues are approximate because they were calculated using the mean or midpoint value to the
0.75 power.
cValues are reported relative to kg BW0.67 and are approximate because they were calculated
using the mean to the 0.67 power.
Taylor et al. (1982) also measured the cost of running in two cats. The mean cost of
standing was 28 kcal·kg BW–0.67·d–1 and the mean cost of running was 3 kcal·kg
BW–0.67·km–1. These values were less than and similar to the interspecies mean,
respectively.
Exercise Up- and Downhill


===== PDF PAGE 586 =====
585
An animal gains potential energy (2.34 kcal·kg BW–1·vertical km–1) as it moves
uphill. The efficiency of muscles in converting chemical to potential energy
determines how much chemical energy is required to move uphill (Schmidt-Nielsen,
1984). Taylor et al. (1972) estimated the energy cost of gaining height by subtracting
the energy cost per meter run on a horizontal treadmill from the energy cost per meter
run on a sloping treadmill and dividing the difference by the height gained in meters
for each meter run on the treadmill (percent slope of the treadmill). Using this
method, Cohen et al. (1978) found that the energy required to gain height and
muscular efficiency was constant (6.5 kcal·kg BW–1·vertical km–1 and 36 percent,
respectively), irrespective of body weight in mammals ranging from 0.25 to 253 kg
BW.
Only a few studies (Table 11-7) have measured energy consumption on both
horizontal and sloping treadmills, enabling the same method as that used by Taylor et
al. (1972) and Cohen et al. (1978) to be used to estimate the efficiency of canine
muscle. There is, however, a clear disparity between the first two and the second two
studies listed in Table11-7. The first two studies reported that the efficiency with
which dogs gain height is similar to that reported by Cohen et al. (1978) for other
mammals and that the efficiency declines slightly as the slope of the treadmill
increases above 5-7 percent (Cerretelli et al., 1964; Raab et al., 1976). The average
efficiencies were 37 percent on a 5-7 percent slope, 32 percent on a 10-12 percent
slope, and 29 percent on a 20 percent slope (i.e., 6-8 kcal·kg BW–1·vertical km–1).
The other two studies reported a much lower mean efficiency (17 percent), and the
mean efficiency increased and then decreased slightly with slope (Young et al.,
1959c; Ordway et al., 1984).
The first two studies measured energy consumption in fewer dogs but did so at
two or more speeds, which increases the accuracy of the estimate of energy
expenditure per kilometer. The latter two studies used more dogs, but measurements
were made at only one speed, which increases the possibility of error when measuring
the cost of running. Furthermore, it seems unlikely that the efficiency of dog muscle
should be any lower than that of other mammals. Zuntz (1903), however, showed that
the efficiency of a dog climbing a slope improved with practice. Until more studies
have been performed therefore, the higher estimates from the first pair of studies
listed in the table are assumed to be the better estimates.
It is also assumed that the efficiency of canine muscle does not change with body
weight. The relationship in dogs between body weight and efficiency cannot be
determined from the studies listed below because all studies used dogs of similar
body weight. Theoretical considerations, however, suggest that muscular efficiency
should prove unrelated to body weight (Schmidt-Nielsen, 1984), in which case the
energy to gain altitude will be directly proportional to body weight, whereas
horizontal running is proportional to BW0.67. A small 4-kg cat or dog would,
therefore, need to increase its energy consumption much less when climbing than
would a large 40-kg dog. The study by Raab et al. (1976) also found that dogs recover
the potential energy that they are losing when running down a slope of less than 11


===== PDF PAGE 587 =====
586
percent but recover only 59 percent of the lost potential energy when running down a
20 percent slope, probably because work has to be done to prevent falling at steeper
gradients (Blaxter, 1989).
TABLE 11-7 Efficiency of Gaining and Losing Height When Running
aValues represent potential energy saved compared to running on the level.
There appear to be no studies measuring the efficiency of cats moving up- and
downhill at present. It must be assumed, therefore, that the efficiency of feline muscle
is similar to that of muscle in other species.
Several studies have measured energy consumption in dogs running on sloping
treadmills but have not reported either the energy required for standing or the
efficiency with which the dogs were able to gain height. It is not possible, therefore,
to estimate the energy required for running unless some assumptions are made.
Slowtzoff (1903), for example, measured the energy consumption of running dogs of
body weights varying from 5 to 37 kg, but varied the slope of the treadmill among
dogs and did not measure the cost of level running. If it is assumed, based on the
previous discussion, that the cost of standing was 137 kcal·kg BW–0.67·d–1 and the
efficiency of climbing was 37 percent for a 5-7 percent slope, it is possible to regress
the estimated energy required for running against body weight. This gives a cost of
level running (3.1 kcal·kg BW–0.72·km–1) similar to that of Ordway et al. (1984) but
much higher than other estimates. Marconi et al. (1982) also reported data that
suggest a high cost of running (1.9 kcal·kg BW–1·km–1 for 15-17-kg BW dogs).


===== PDF PAGE 588 =====
587
Issekutz (1979), however, reported that dogs required only 2 ± 0.07 kcal·kg BW–
1·km–1 when running at 100 m·min–1 on a 15 percent slope, which is equivalent to
1.1 kcal·kg–1·km–1 in level running if a 32 percent efficiency of climbing is assumed.
Rough Terrain
The energy cost of running over rough terrain is much greater than that of running
on a smooth surface, such as a treadmill. Reindeer, for example, used 13 and 38
percent more energy, respectively, when walking on dry and wet tundra compared to
walking on hard-packed roads (White and Yousef, 1977). The energy cost of walking
in snow is even higher and increases exponentially as the sinking depth approaches
chest height. The energy requirement for walking increased two to three times when
wild ungulates sank 50 percent of brisket height into snow and five- to sevenfold
when they sank 80 percent of the height of the brisket (Fancy and White, 1985).
These increases are probably similar for dogs and cats, though dogs and cats tend to
hop rather than walk through deep snow. Energy requirements are also likely to be
greater in a lead dog than in following dogs.
Load Carrying
Energy consumption in dogs and other animals appears to increase in direct
proportion to the mass of the load carried, irrespective of the size or speed of the
animal, but with slight variation dependent on the disposition of the load (i.e., if the
load increases by 10 percent of body mass, energy consumption increases by 10
percent). Because small animals have a higher cost for locomotion than large animals,
the increase in energy to carry a given load is greater in small than in large animals
(Schmidt-Nielsen, 1984).
Pulling Weights
Work done by traction in pulling a load is the product of tractive force (measured
with a dynamometer) times distance. Taylor (1957) measured the tractive work of
nine sled dogs pulling a sled in the Antarctic. These dogs were 1-6 years of age,
“slow and strong,” and heavier (33-46 kg BW with a mean of 39 kg BW) than most
racing sled dogs. Dogs had three gaits. With very light loads (0-88 newtons), dogs
galloped at 11-25 km·h–1, the highest speeds being achieved when going downhill
with the towing rope slack. With intermediate loads (88-539 newtons), dogs trotted at
8-11 km·h–1, and with heavy loads (539-1,323 newtons) reached a maximum of 1,100
kcal·h–1 (7-8 kcal· kg BW–0.75·h–1), whether dogs were trotting or walking. This
value probably represents maximal aerobic exercise. A higher rate of work (1,350
kcal·h–1) was possible over shorter distances (706-newton load at 8 km·h–1 for 9


===== PDF PAGE 589 =====
588
minutes). The heaviest load was 1,156 newtons at 3 km·h–1 for 4 minutes. These
higher rates of work were probably supramaximal because they could not be
maintained for long. Maximal work occurred at one-third the top speed and one-third
the greatest pull when trotting, and at two-thirds the load and one-sixth the speed for
walking.
The energy cost of tractive work is the difference between walking or running with
or without load. Efficiency is the ratio of the work done and the energy cost. The
efficiency of dogs appears not to have been measured, but the efficiency of draught
horses and humans is approximately 33 percent (Blaxter, 1989). The energy cost of
pulling the sled was therefore probably three times the tractive force measured by
Taylor and would have been additional to the cost of running, the cost of standing,
and the cost of maintaining body temperature.
Wind Resistance and Swimming
When moving through air or water, the rate of energy consumption (power)
necessary to overcome wind resistance or drag is proportional to the force required to
combat drag multiplied by the speed. The force to overcome drag increases in
proportion to the square of the velocity and the maximal cross-sectional area in the
direction of motion (the breadth of the chest in dogs and cats). Energy consumption,
therefore, increases exponentially with (the cube of) speed (Blaxter, 1989).
Dogs on treadmills do not have to overcome wind resistance, but wind resistance
may be an important extra load for dogs and cats running across terrain. In humans,
experiments suggest that the energy required to overcome wind resistance is
approximately 8 percent of the total in distance runners running at 5 m·s–1, 15 percent
of the total in sprinters running at 10 m·s–1, and the energy required to run into a wind
of 18 m·s–1 would be 70 percent more than if there were no wind (Blaxter, 1989).
There appear to be no similar studies in dogs and cats, but quadrupeds present a
smaller cross-sectional area to the air than do humans; so the increase in energy
required to overcome wind resistance is probably less in dogs and cats than humans.
The cost of running into a wind probably increases exponentially, however, with the
speed of the wind, and it is likely that the lead dog in a team of dogs will require more
energy than dogs running behind it, especially in a head wind. Similarly, the energy
required for swimming has not been determined in dogs, but the energy cost of
swimming is likely to be high, to increase rapidly with increasing speed, and to be
greater in dogs with broad rather than narrow chests.
Other Activities
Drinking, grooming, stretching, playing, and jumping all increase heat production,
and the energy required to support them has not been measured in dogs or cats.


===== PDF PAGE 590 =====
589
Maximal Oxygen Consumption
Heat production and oxygen consumption increase with exercise until oxygen
consumption reaches a maximum ( V̇ O2max) (Seeherman et al., 1981). Work above
V̇ O2max (termed supramaximal) is possible only using energy from anaerobic
glycolysis and results in the rapid accumulation of lactic acid. Supramaximal exercise
rapidly results in exhaustion, whereas submaximal exercise can continue for long
periods and indefinitely when fat is the source of energy. Taylor et al. (1981) reported
that regression gave V̇ O2max as 6.9 L O2·h–1·kg BW–0.81 among 22 species of
mammal. This is equivalent to 796 kcal·kg BW–0.81·d–1, which is approximately 10
times Kleiber’s estimate for resting oxygen consumption between species (Kleiber,
1932).
It is not easy to persuade dogs to exceed their V̇ O2max (Donald and Ferguson,
1966). The maximal speed of most treadmills has proved too slow to measure
V̇ O2max in dogs running on the level, and most measurements have been obtained
with dogs running up a slope. Weibel et al. (1983) reported having to reduce the
ambient temperature to 5°C to prevent rectal temperatures from rising too high when
dogs and wild canids were running faster than V̇ O2max . As a result, oxygen
consumption in some studies did not reach a plateau, and V̇ O2max must be higher
than the highest value obtained. Training can also affect V̇ O2max (Musch et al.,
1985), and the intensity of training almost certainly varied among studies. Many
authors state that dogs were “trained to run on the treadmill,” but this would have
resulted in only slight conditioning compared to dogs that ran many kilometers daily.
Only a few authors describe withholding exercise prior to a study.
It is not surprising, therefore, that V̇ O2max in adult dogs has varied from 5.6 to
10.6 L O2·kg BW–1·h–1, which is equivalent to 50-106 kcal·kg–0.75· h–1 (Table 11-
8). The V̇ O2max was 56 percent lower in 5-month-old beagles and 30 percent lower
in 6-8-month-old beagles than in 11-month-old beagles (Young et al., 1959c). The
V̇ O2max was 31 percent lower in 10- to 14-year-old female beagles than in 2- to 3-
year-old male beagles (Haidet, 1989), and V̇ O2max increased 28 percent with training
in 1- to 2-year-old foxhounds (Musch et al., 1985). The V̇ O2max decreased in old
dogs and increased with training in parallel with changes in cardiac output and
smaller changes in arteriovenous oxygen difference. Old age and training did not
affect oxygen consumption at rest or at each level of activity; only the tolerance for
the highest level of activity was affected. Reynolds et al. (1999) found that V̇ O2max
declined with training in dogs fed a 19 percent ME protein diet but was unaffected by
training in adult sled dogs fed a diet containing 24 percent ME protein or more. The
V̇ O2max in these sled dogs was very much higher than reported by Musch et al.
(1985), but training was slightly less intense and the duration of exercise each day


===== PDF PAGE 591 =====
590
was half as long. The V̇ O2max was also lower when dogs were exercised in a low-
oxygen environment: V̇ O2max (FiO2 0.15) was <75 percent of V̇ O2max (FiO2 0.21),
and V̇ O2max (FiO2 0.11) was <50 percent of V̇ O2max (FiO2 0.21) (Piiper et al.,
1966).
TABLE 11-8 Maximal Oxygen Consumption in Dogs
aValues are approximate since they were calculated using the mean or midpoint value to the
0.75 power.
bThe V̇ O2max must be higher than the highest value measured because oxygen consumption
did not reach a plateau.
The V̇ O2max is much higher in trained adult dogs in a normal environment (15-30
times BMR) than in most other species, but similar to V̇ O2max in wild canids (Weibel
et al., 1983). Weibel et al. (1983) reported that V̇ O2max in dogs was similar to that of
foxes, coyotes, and wolves, and regression suggested that V̇ O2max varied with BW to
the 0.9 power (i.e., it was 63 kcal·kg–0.9·h–1 among domestic and wild canids).
Regression of V̇ O2max for trained adult dogs reported in Table 11-8 suggests that
V̇ O2max increases with body weight to the 1.2 power (i.e., V̇ O2max is 62 kcal·kg–
1.2·h–1 for dogs).


===== PDF PAGE 592 =====
591
The V̇ O2max of domestic cats appears not to have been measured, but oxygen
consumption did not reach a plateau in two cats running at almost 5 km·h–1 on a
treadmill (Taylor et al., 1982). At their greatest speed, these 3.9-kg cats were
consuming 2.2 L O2·kg–1·h–1, which is equivalent to 16 kcal·kg–0.67·h–1 or 391
kcal·kg BW–0.67 daily, (i.e., approximately five times BMR). This may be close to the
V̇ O2max of cats. The V̇ O2max of the gastrocnemius was five times higher in dogs
than cats (Cerretelli et al., 1969). Since dogs have a V̇ O2max that is up to 30 times
BMR, cats probably have a V̇ O2max that is no more than 6 times BMR.
Intensity of Exercise
The strenuousness of a bout of exercise is often classified in terms of oxygen
consumption either as multiples of oxygen consumption at rest ( V̇ O2rest) or as a
percentage of V̇ O2max. In humans, exercise has been classified as light if oxygen
consumption is less than three times V̇ O2rest; moderate if more than three and less
than six times V̇ O2rest; heavy if more than six times V̇ O2rest, and maximal if ten
times V̇ O2rest (McArdle et al., 1996). For dogs, most studies report the severity of
exercise as a percentage of V̇ O2max. Thus, the severity of exercise could be
considered light if less than 30 percent of V̇ O2max; moderate if 30-60 percent of
V̇ O2max; heavy if 60-100 percent of V̇ O2max; and very heavy if supramaximal. In
cats, a similar classification scheme to that in dogs is not possible because V̇ O2max
has not been determined. Nevertheless, the fastest that a cat has been induced to run is
approximately five times V̇ O2rest, which suggests that light exercise would be up to
twice V̇ O2rest, moderate would be 2-3 times V̇ O2rest, and heavy would be more than
three times V̇ O2rest.
Burger (1994) categorized activity in dogs as low if dogs exercised for less than 1
hour, moderate if they exercised for 1-3 hours, and high if they exercised for 3-6
hours. When considering energy and nutrient requirements, the distance traveled is
more important than the intensity or duration of exercise. Thus, exercise would be
very low when dogs are confined to cages, low when dogs are confined to pens or
runs or exercise for less then 2 km daily, moderate when dogs run between 2 and 20
km daily, heavy when dogs run more than 20 km daily, and very heavy when dogs run
more than 80 km daily.
Field Metabolic Rate
Several studies have measured the daily energy requirements of free-living
animals either by measuring food intake or by measuring metabolic rate using the


===== PDF PAGE 593 =====
592
doubly labeled water method (Table 11-9). Doubly labeled water consistently gives
higher values than food intake studies. Estimates of ME that have used modified
Atwater factors (NRC, 1985), however, may have underestimated the digestibility,
and therefore the ME density, of many foods fed to dogs and cats. This is not the case
for studies such as those by Hill et al. (2000, 2001b), which measured digestibility
directly. Studies that have relied on food surveys may also give artificially low
estimates of ME because underreporting of food consumption is common.
In many studies, the effect of exercise is also complicated by the effect of ambient
temperature. Kuhn and Hardegg (1988), for example, found that foxhounds kept
outside in 72-m2 enclosures exposed to ambient temperatures of 7-30°C ate 17
percent more than foxhounds kept indoors in 16-m2 pens in an ambient temperature
of 18-22°C. The average MER of sled dogs in kennels in a thermoneutral
environment has been reported to be approximately 125 kcal·kg–0.75·d–1 (Durrer and
Hannon, 1962; Finke, 1991) but increased in the cold to more than 320 kcal·kg–
0.75·d–1 in sedentary dogs at –30°C when there was a wind chill (Durrer and Hannon,
1962; Campbell and Donaldson, 1981; Hinchcliff and Reinhart, 1996). Kronfeld
(1973) reported anecdotally that the requirements of sled dogs double during exercise
and triple if exercise is performed in a cold environment.
Sled dogs exercising in the cold use the most energy. Hinchcliff et al. (1997b)
reported that mean energy consumption of sled dogs competing in a long-distance
race in ambient temperatures well below freezing was a remarkable 11,260 kcal or
1,050 kcal·kg–0.75 daily. This was four times greater than trained but sedentary dogs
kept at a similar ambient temperature. Over the 70 hours of the 490-km race, this
represents 2.3 kcal·km–1 or 4.7 kcal·km–1·kg BW–0.75 (i.e., only 2.5 times the energy
required for running on a level treadmill without a sled to pull). Wyatt (1963) reported
that sled dogs consuming up to 2,400 kcal ME daily were barely able to maintain
body weight when tethered and lost weight rapidly when working. The body weight
of dogs is not stated, but the average weight of sled dogs in the Antarctic when this
study was performed was approximately 40 kg (Raab et al., 1976), which suggests
that sled dogs in this environment needed more than 150 kcal ME·kg BW–0.75 daily.
Orr (1966) found that after an initial drop in body weight, tethered dogs maintained
weight when consuming 145 kcal ME·kg BW–0.75 daily, and dogs pulling a heavy
load across ice 32 km·d–1 maintained weight when consuming 270 kcal ME·kg BW–
0.75 daily. Kronfeld et al. (1977), however, reported that cross-bred Alaskan huskies at
ambient temperatures close to freezing consumed approximately 220 kcal·kg–0.75·d–1
when running 3-7 km daily and approximately 440 kcal·kg–0.75·d–1 when running 8-9
km daily. Reynolds et al. (1999), by contrast, found that mean daily energy
consumption (139 kcal·kg–0.75) did not increase when sedentary dogs started to run
40-60 km weekly. These authors noted, however, that exercise events were intense but
short in duration, that ambient temperature was higher during training, and that dogs


===== PDF PAGE 594 =====
593
subjectively appeared to sleep more during the day when in training and were more
active when confined to their chains.
TABLE 11-9 Field Metabolic Rate in Dogs
NOTE: DLW double labeled water method; energy is energy equivalent, but type of energy is
not stated.
aME was calculated using recommendations of the NRC (1985) and would be approximately 4
percent higher if calculated with the recommendations in this report.
bApproximate estimates obtained using published mean body weight.
cWhether there is some overlap in the dogs and data used in these studies is unclear.
Hunting and herding dogs require intermediate amounts of energy (Table 11-10).
Davenport et al. (2001) reported that 20-kg English pointers maintained or slightly


===== PDF PAGE 595 =====
594
gained weight during the hunting season when consuming 114 kcal ME·kg BW–1
daily (approximately 240 kcal ME·kg–0.75·d–1). Herding dogs appear to require on
average 184 kcal ME·kg–0.75·d–1 (Burger, 1994; Frankel and Bell, 1994; Downs et
al., 1997b; Butterwick and Hawthorne, 1998). Racing greyhounds, however, race over
relatively short distances (<1 mile) usually no more than twice weekly. It is not
surprising, therefore, that these dogs consume little more ME than a moderately
active dog. Kohnke (1989) reported that Australian greyhound trainers fed a mean of
2,400 kcal daily to female and 2,600 kcal daily to male greyhounds. This would be
the equivalent of 214 kcal·kg BW–0.75 daily for a 25-kg female or a 28-kg male dog.
Hill et al. (1999b, 2000, 2001b), however, found that racing greyhounds in training
fed free-choice but time-limited meals of dry dog food once daily maintained body
weight while consuming 155 kcal ME·kg BW–0.75 daily. Greyhounds ran 0.7 km·h–1
faster, however, when ME intake was slightly restricted to 137 kcal·kg–0.75 daily (Hill
et al., 1999b).
TABLE 11-10 Recommendations for Metabolizable Energy Requirements of
Exercising Dogs
Condition
ME Requirement
Mean Range
BMR (kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1)a 76 48-114
RFMR (kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1)a 84 51-127
Standing (kcal·kg BW–0.75·h–1)b 4.6 3.3-6.4
Running (kcal·kg BW–0.75·horizontal
km–1)b
1.8 1.3-2.3
Climbing (kcal·kg BW–1·vertical km–1)b 7 6-8
Racing sled dogs 168 km·d–1 in extreme
cold (kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1)
1,050 860-1,240
Sled dogs pulling heavy loads 32 km·d-1
(kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1)
270 250-290
Hunting dogs (kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1) 240 200-280
Working Collies (kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1) 184 80-380
Racing greyhounds (kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–
1)
140 120-160
Increase for each °C ambient temperature
below or above thermoneutral zone
(kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1)
3 2-5


===== PDF PAGE 596 =====
595
aFrom Chapter 3.
bTo estimate the requirement for running on a smooth surface, add the cost of running and the
cost of climbing to the cost of standing for the duration of the run.
Pet dogs and dogs in cages or kennels require the least energy, but energy
requirements vary considerably between studies and between individuals depending
on the level of activity and ambient temperature. Individual values vary from less
than 100 to more than 200 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1 (Arokoski et al., 1993; Ballevre et
al., 1994; Butterwick and Hawthorne, 1998; Connor et al., 2001; Patil and Bisby,
2002). It is impossible, therefore, to make a specific recommendation for any
particular animal. Each animal should be treated as an individual and food adjusted to
its environmental situation and activity. Food intake should be adjusted, therefore, to
maintain optimal body condition.
NUTRIENT REQUIREMENTS
How May Nutrient Requirements Change with Exercise or in the
Cold?
Diets for any life stage or condition are balanced for animals undertaking average
amounts of activity in a non-stressful thermoneutral environment (i.e., they provide
adequate but not excess nutrients when animals are fed enough food to maintain body
weight and condition). Since most studies examining nutrient requirements have been
performed on dogs and cats in kennels, most diets are balanced for dogs and cats
undertaking the same amount of activity as those in kennels. This activity may be
more than that performed by some pet animals but is much less than that undertaken
by some working dogs.
Exercise and keeping warm in the cold both require energy. If the energy density
of the diet does not change, dogs and cats have to increase food intake to maintain
energy balance in the cold or as activity increases. Intake of all nutrients will then
increase or decrease in proportion to the amount of food eaten and the amount of
activity. Nutrient requirements may not, however, parallel changes in energy intake.
As exercise decreases, the absolute amount of a nutrient required by an animal may
decrease proportionately with energy intake, may decrease less than energy intake, or
may remain the same despite decreased energy intake. In the latter case, it is quite
possible that animals, such as some pets, consuming less food because they are
undertaking less activity than the average laboratory animal, could consume
inadequate amounts of an essential nutrient if the diet has been balanced by assuming
an average amount of activity. To ensure adequate intake of essential nutrients,
therefore, a dog undertaking little activity and consuming little more than the RFMR
may have to consume a diet that is up to twice as nutrient dense as a diet fed to a dog
or cat undertaking average amounts of exercise and requiring up to twice as much


===== PDF PAGE 597 =====
596
energy. In practice, the lower limits expressed relative to DM or ME should be
increased by 1.5 times for diets intended for sedentary animals but expressed relative
to body weight will remain the same unless lack of exercise has been shown to
modify the requirement.
In a similar fashion, as exercise increases, the absolute requirement for a nutrient
may increase at the same rate, may increase faster or slower than the requirement for
energy, may increase slightly and then stop increasing, or may remain unchanged
irrespective of the amount of activity. In the latter case, animals undertaking heavy
exercise and consuming large amounts of food balanced for a dog undertaking
average amounts of exercise could take in excessive amounts of some potentially
toxic substance such as a trace mineral. In practical terms, safe upper limits (SULs)
expressed relative to DM and ME should be decreased eightfold in diets intended for
sled dogs running in a cold environment and halved in diets for working dogs. Safe
upper limits expressed relative to body weight will remain the same unless increased
exercise has been shown to modify the requirement.
Requirements may also vary with the amount of another nutrient in the diet (e.g.,
vitamin E requirements with fat), the type of exercise (endurance vs. sprinting), the
amount of training, the breed, or the gender of the animal. Therefore, an animal
undertaking endurance exercise may not take in enough of an essential nutrient, such
as fat or vitamin E when fed a diet formulated for an animal undertaking average
activity. The same also applies for various environmental conditions. There is, thus, a
complex matrix of nutrient requirements and energy intakes for each level of activity,
amount of training, and ambient temperature and for each life stage, breed, or gender.
This chapter primarily considers how requirements for adult maintenance change as
activity and environment change. There is little information however for many points
in the matrix, and it is recommended where there is some uncertainty to (1) reduce
nutrient density relative to DM and ME of potentially toxic nutrients, as described
above, in diets designed for dogs that require more energy such as dogs that live in a
cold environment or working dogs; and (2) increase the nutrient density relative to
DM and ME of essential nutrients in diets fed to sedentary animals living in a
thermoneutral environment.
Sources of Energy: Fat Versus Carbohydrate
The energy for muscle contraction comes from four chemical sources: ATP,
creatine phosphate, anaerobic metabolism of carbohydrate, or aerobic metabolism of
amino acids, glucose, and fat. Energy for muscular contraction is obtained directly
from the high-energy phosphate bonds of ATP. One molecule of ATP may then be
regenerated from ADP (adenosine diphosphate) at the expense of the high-energy
phosphate bond in creatine phosphate. High-energy phosphate bonds are continually
replenished either anaerobically by glycogenolysis and glycolysis or aerobically from
fat or glucose by oxidation.


===== PDF PAGE 598 =====
597
The muscle fibers in dogs and cats differ in the degree to which they rely on either
aerobic or anaerobic sources of energy. Muscle fibers with low myosin adenosine
triphosphatase (ATPase) activity contract slowly (slow twitch or type I), and those
with high myosin ATPase activity contract more rapidly (fast twitch or type II)
(Gunn, 1978a). In cats, type II muscle fibers can be differentiated further into type IIa
fibers with a high capacity for aerobic metabolism, which are fatigue resistant, and
type IIb fibers with low aerobic capacity that rely primarily on anaerobic metabolism
and are easily fatigable (Maxwell et al., 1977). In dogs, all muscle fibers have a high
aerobic capacity, are fatigue resistant, and contain high concentrations of the aerobic
enzymes succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide
(NAD) tetrazolium reductase (Gunn, 1978a; Maxwell et al., 1980; Armstrong et al.,
1982); there are no type IIb fibers. Cats have almost equal numbers of type I, IIa, and
IIb fibers and have a third or less SDH in their muscle (Cerretelli et al., 1969;
Maxwell et al., 1980). The V̇ O2max and blood flow at V̇ O2max in the gastrocnemius
were five times higher in dogs than cats (Cerretelli et al., 1969). Thus, dogs are
adapted for endurance exercise and using fat as an energy source, whereas cats are
adapted for short bursts of activity such as that required when jumping and pouncing
on small prey, using glycogen as the energy source.
Muscle fibers in dogs also appear to have a high anaerobic capacity because all but
a few type I fibers contain high concentrations of the anaerobic enzyme glycogen
phosphorylase (GP) (Gunn, 1978a). Guy and Snow (1981) found some type II fibers
with lower SDH activity, but SDH activity was still greater in these fibers in dogs
than in horses. Canine type II fibers also contain more glycogen at rest and rely more
on glycogen as a fuel (Reynolds et al., 1997). Thus, all canine muscle fibers appear to
have both high aerobic and high anaerobic capacity, but type I slow-twitch fibers tend
to rely more on aerobic metabolism, while type II fast-twitch fibers tend to rely more
on anaerobic metabolism (Gunn, 1978a; Reynolds et al., 1997). In dogs, the anti-
gravity deep part of limb muscles and deeper muscles of the extensor groups of
muscles in arm and thigh contain more slow-twitch fibers than the superficial
muscles, and greyhound muscles contain more fast-twitch fibers (80-100 percent)
than muscles in other breeds (20-100 percent) (Gunn, 1978a; Guy and Snow, 1981;
Armstrong et al., 1982). A greater proportion of fast-twitch fibers (one-half vs. one-
third) have also been found in sled dogs trained for “sprint” racing than in dogs
trained for endurance racing (Reynolds et al., 1995, 1997). The relative proportions of
muscle fiber types were not affected by training, however, in greyhounds and
foxhounds (Gunn, 1978a; Parsons et al., 1985). The activities of both aerobic and
anaerobic muscle enzymes (aldolase and citrate synthase, respectively) were
increased in greyhounds compared to other breeds, but the activities of many enzymes
(creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase) were the same as in other breeds (Guy and
Snow, 1981). All dogs, therefore, are adapted for endurance exercise and using fat as
an energy source, but anaerobic sources of energy are probably more important in
dogs trained for sprinting.


===== PDF PAGE 599 =====
598
In humans, the maximal rate of energy expenditure varies for each source of
energy, but the amount of each source limits the length of time that this maximal rate
of expenditure can be maintained (Hultman et al., 1994). Only creatine phosphate and
ATP are able to sustain speeds attained during a 100-m sprint, but muscle stores of
creatine phosphate and ATP are so small that a high rate of energy expenditure can be
maintained only for a few seconds. Carbohydrate oxidation supports the intermediate
speed of marathon runners for 20 miles until all glycogen stores have been depleted,
whereupon fat oxidation becomes the only source of available energy. Runners are
then unable to accelerate (i.e., they “hit the wall”). Stamina is, therefore, limited by
the amount of glycogen in muscle.
Dogs also sustain V̇ O2max for only short periods (approximately 5-10 minutes),
but beagles were able to run for 2-3 hours at >75 percent of V̇ O2max on a slope of 26
percent at 6 km·h–1 (Young et al., 1959c). Brzezinska et al. (1980) reviewed studies
of 242 mongrel dogs weighing 15-25 kg and reported that they were able to run for a
mean of 3 hours (range 1.1-5.2 hours) on a 21 percent slope at 4-6 km·h–1, but found
no correlation between time to exhaustion and resting muscle glycogen
concentrations. There was, however, a negative correlation between time to
exhaustion and body weight.
Issekutz (1979) has summarized the metabolic changes in dogs undertaking
moderate endurance exercise (100 m·min–1 on a 15 percent slope) for 3 hours. Most
of the energy for this exercise comes either from glucose derived from glycogen in
liver and muscle or from FFAs released from adipose tissue. At the onset of exercise,
muscle glucose utilization increases, but blood glucose concentrations remain almost
constant because exercise induces a decline in blood insulin concentration and a rise
in glucagon concentration that stimulate hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis
(Zinker et al., 1994). Epinephrine release stimulates a sixfold increase in muscle
glycogenolysis (Issekutz, 1979). Blood glucose concentrations increase slightly at the
onset of exercise because there is an abrupt increase in glucose production associated
with an increase in the catecholamine-insulin ratio (Miles et al., 1992). Blood glucose
then declines slowly as exercise continues because hepatic glucose production falls
slightly behind the uptake of glucose by working muscle (Issekutz, 1979).
Epinephrine protects against hypoglycemia during exercise of more than 90-minute
duration by inhibiting insulin-stimulated glucose uptake by muscle and enhancing
hepatic glycogenolysis (Issekutz, 1979; Moates et al., 1988). Lactate concentrations
increase at the onset of exercise because lactate production by the liver increases
when the fall in insulin stimulates glycogenolysis and glycolysis in the liver. As
exercise progresses, lactate concentrations fall because glucagon and then epinephrine
stimulate gluconeogenesis from lactate and the liver becomes a net lactate-consuming
organ (Wasserman et al., 1991a).
During exercise, norepinephrine stimulates an increase in the release of FFAs from
adipose tissue, and blood FFA concentrations rise gradually (Issekutz, 1979). Glucose
production from glycerol in the liver increased ninefold during moderate exercise


===== PDF PAGE 600 =====
599
almost in proportion to the increase in glycerol released from triglycerides, but
glucose derived from glycerol remained less than 9 percent of total glucose
production (Shaw et al., 1976). The ratio of the release of glucose to that of fat is
approximately 1 in dogs at rest but declines to 0.6 after 3 hours of exercise. Since 1
mole of fat provides 3.5 times the energy of 1 mole of glucose, glucose provides less
than 20 percent of the energy for exercise, and this contribution declines further as
exercise continues (Issekutz, 1979).
Paul and Holmes (1975) summarized the changes in energy provided by oxidation
of FFAs and glucose taken up by muscle at rest and during exercise of varying
intensity in 10-to 20-kg dogs. At rest, oxidation of plasma FFAs and plasma glucose
taken up by muscle provided 23 percent and 26 percent ME, respectively. When these
dogs walked on a treadmill at 3 km·h–1, energy expenditure was more than double
and energy from oxidation of plasma glucose increased but was a smaller part (13
percent ME) of the total. Energy from plasma FFAs, however, increased immediately
to 48 percent ME and continued to increase until it was 70 percent ME after 4 hours
of walking. When dogs ran at 5-6 km·h–1 on a 15 percent slope and energy
expenditure increased sevenfold, the results were similar to those of walking dogs.
The total amount of plasma glucose oxidized increased but provided a smaller amount
of the total (10 percent) ME. Oxidation of plasma FFAs provided 52 percent ME
initially, increasing to 70 percent during the last 2 hours of a 4-hour run. At more
intense exercise however, an increase in plasma lactic acid concentration inhibits
utilization of plasma FFAs by interfering with FFA mobilization from adipose tissue
(Issekutz et al., 1964). Thus, when dogs ran at 7.5 km·h–1 on a 15 percent slope,
which they could manage for only a short duration (60 minutes), energy expenditure
increased eightfold, but plasma FFAs and glucose contributed only 21 percent ME
and 7 percent ME to the total, respectively. The contribution of plasma FFAs was
even lower (12 and 14 percent ME) at rest and during intense short-duration exercise,
respectively, in dogs that were untrained. Therriault et al. (1973) also reported that in
untrained 22-27-kg mongrel dogs, plasma FFA utilization by muscle was low but
found that intramuscular triglyceride provided almost twice as much energy as muscle
glycogen during short–duration, intense exercise (7.5 km·h–1 on a 17 percent slope)
to exhaustion. At lower levels of energy expenditure (7.5 km·h–1 on the level), there
was still a net utilization of muscle glycogen, but plasma FFAs were taken up by
muscle and there was a net gain in triglyceride within muscle.
In dogs, as in other species, therefore, fat oxidation provides most of the energy at
low rates of energy expenditure (60 percent at 40 percent of maximal oxygen uptake;
V̇ O2max). As exercise intensity increases, glucose oxidation increases and is the
principal source of energy at high rates of energy expenditure (80 percent at 85
percent V̇ O2max) (Weibel et al., 1996). In dogs, however, the amount of energy from
fat oxidation at rest and during exercise is twice that in less aerobic species such as
humans and goats (Meyer and Doty, 1988; McLelland et al., 1994). Albumin binds
more FFAs in dogs than in less aerobic species, so the concentration of FFAs in the


===== PDF PAGE 601 =====
600
blood is higher and delivery of FFAs to tissues is enhanced (McLelland et al., 1994).
Muscle glycogen and fat stores are larger in dogs than in less aerobic species (Weibel
et al., 1996). High-carbohydrate diets increase stamina in human athletes by
increasing muscle glycogen (Hultman et al., 1994), but high-fat diets appear to
increase stamina in dogs undertaking endurance exercise. Downey et al. (1980) found
that beagles running on a treadmill with a 7.5 percent slope ran for an average of 20
miles (2.3 hours) before becoming exhausted when fed high-fat (59-81 g per 1,000
kcal ME or 49-63 percent ME as fat) diets containing 63-102 g per 1,000 kcal ME
(24-42 percent ME) as protein, but became exhausted after only 15 miles (1.7 hours)
when fed a lower-fat (33 g per 1,000 kcal or 26 percent ME as fat) diet containing 58
g per 1,000 kcal ME (23 percent ME) as protein. Feeding a high-fat, low-
carbohydrate diet, therefore, appeared to increase stamina. The diet associated with
poorer performance, however, contained corn, soybean meal, and wheat as its
principal ingredients, whereas the other diets contained soy and animal products. It is
possible, therefore, that ingredient composition or lack of some nutrient other than fat
may have been responsible for lack of stamina.
Reynolds et al. (1994, 1995) also compared a high-fat (70 g per 1,000 kcal or 58
percent ME), low-carbohydrate (43 g per 1,000 kcal or 15 percent ME) diet to a low-
fat (18 g per 1,000 kcal or 14 percent ME), high-carbohydrate (162 g per 1,000 kcal
or 59 percent ME) diet in 16 Alaskan husky dogs for 4 weeks before and 12 weeks
during training. Both diets contained 27 percent ME (66 g per 1,000 kcal ME) as
protein and were composed of similar ingredients except that the high-fat diet
contained more lung lobes and beef tallow and less cornstarch. Samples were
obtained from dogs before and after a standard aerobic test (1 hour at 14 km·h–1 on 0
percent slope) before and after 8 weeks of aerobic training (four 10-km runs at 25
km·h–1 each week) and also before and after a standard anaerobic test (3 minutes at
24 km·h–1 on a 10 percent slope) before and after 4 weeks of anaerobic training (like
the test or pulling an all-terrain vehicle at 16 km·h–1). Training increased muscle
glycogen irrespective of diet, but the increase in glycogen with training was greater
and glycogen was used more rapidly during the anaerobic test after training in dogs
fed the high-carbohydrate diet. There was no effect of diet on glycogen utilization
during the aerobic test or on lactate accumulation during either test. Plasma FFA
concentrations were higher before and after the aerobic test in trained dogs and
increased more during the aerobic test in untrained dogs fed the high-fat diet.
These two studies suggest that there is no benefit to dogs of feeding high-
carbohydrate diets because the potential benefit of increased glycogen in muscle is
overcome by the more rapid use of glycogen during exercise. On the contrary, feeding
high-fat diets appears to spare glycogen and improve stamina. Together, they suggest
49 percent ME (59 g per 1,000 kcal ME) as the adequate intake of fat in the diet of
dogs undertaking endurance exercise. Nevertheless, well-controlled studies have not
evaluated diets containing more than 26 percent and less than 49 percent ME as fat,
and it is possible that the fat content of a diet can be reduced below 49 percent ME
without any reduction in stamina.


===== PDF PAGE 602 =====
601
Type of Fat
Miller et al. (1963) reported that exercise increased the plasma concentration of
each individual fatty acid in proportion to the plasma concentration of that fatty acid
at rest: oleate (18:1), the predominant fatty acid, increased 150 percent, which was
more of an increase than palmitate (16:1), which increased more than linoleate (18:2),
or stearate (18:0).
Protein and Exercise
“Exercise-Induced Polycythemia” and “Sports Anemia”: Hematocrit and
Exercise in Dogs
Many studies have observed a reduction in hematocrit after exercise in dogs but
the importance of this change is still unclear. In dogs, release of norepinephrine
during exercise causes the spleen to contract and release red cells into the circulation,
thereby increasing hematocrit (Vatner et al., 1974). Broun (1922) reported that
hematocrit and hemoglobin concentration increased initially in dogs climbing a 34
percent slope, but then decreased as exercise continued, while plasma volume
increased to compensate for the decline in red cell volume. When dogs were
exercised daily for 3-6 days, total blood cell volume declined a mean of 19 percent in
dogs that had previously been confined for several weeks, and declined 11 percent in
dogs that had been confined only briefly (Broun, 1923a,c). This decline in red blood
cell volume stimulated a reticulocyte response and a doubling in size of the spleen,
which returned the red cell volume to normal and established a new equilibrium after
3 weeks of daily exercise (Broun, 1923b,c). These dogs were fed “a mixed diet with
considerable meat” (Broun, 1922).
Davis and Brewer (1935) also reported that blood volume, cell volume, number of
erythrocytes, and hemoglobin concentration decreased in the blood of dogs during the
first week of exercise after confinement but that all of these blood parameters
returned to normal or exceeded normal after 4 weeks of exercise, and remained
elevated for 4 weeks after exercise had ceased. These dogs consumed a diet of bread,
beef lung, and liver, which would have contained approximately 36 percent ME as
protein but only 19 percent ME as fat. Analysis of this diet using a computer program
(Food Processor for Windows Version 7.81, Database 2001, Esha Research, Salem,
Ore.) suggests that the diet conformed to the recommendations of the National
Research Council (1985) for a 10-kg dog except for a slight deficiency of vitamin E
and magnesium and a marked deficiency of calcium.
Thörner (1932) also found fewer red cells and less hemoglobin in trained dogs
than in untrained litter mates and found that the osmotic fragility of the remaining red
cells was less in trained dogs, suggesting that fragile cells had disappeared from the
circulation. Steinhaus et al. (1932) and Külbs (1912) noted that the bone marrow was


===== PDF PAGE 603 =====
602
redder in exercised dogs than in inactive litter mates. Külbs (1929) noted that there
were greater stores of iron in unexercised than in trained dogs. Külbs (1912) found
that the spleen increased in size in trained dogs, but Thörner (1930) and Steinhaus et
al. (1932) found that the spleen remained the same size or decreased in exercising
dogs. More recently, Arokoski et al. (1993) also found that hematocrit, hemoglobin
concentration, and erythrocyte count were lower in growing beagles running up to 40
km·d–1 on a 15 percent slope than in caged controls. These dogs were fed a diet
containing 28 percent ME as protein and 56 percent ME as fat. Mackintosh et al.
(1983) showed that blood volume increased 13 percent in beagles fed a “balanced
commercial ration” after 3 months running at 7 km·h–1 on a 10 percent slope for 1-
1.5 hours 5 days a week. Yamada (1987) reported that Shiraki (1968) had found that
sports anemia did not develop and red cells were less fragile during vigorous training
in splenectomized dogs. Shiraki suggested that there was a hemolytic factor released
by the spleen during exercise. Yamada suggested that this factor could be lysolethicin
and reported that Tohori et al. (1979) had found that lysolecithin was released by the
spleen in response to norepinephrine infusion in dogs that had previously been
injected daily with norepinephrine to mimic vigorous training.
Changes in hematocrit that follow the pattern described by Broun have been noted
in working and racing dogs. Mean hematocrit increased 0.04 in Labrador retrievers
after 10 minutes of repetitive retrieving of a dummy over a distance of 40 m
(Matwichuk et al., 1999). Mean hematocrit increased 0.04 in Border collies after a 12-
minute combination of intense aerobic and anaerobic exercise (Feldman and Lessard,
1992). Mean hematocrit increased 0.04 in hunting dogs from before to after a 40-
minute simulated hunt before the hunting season but did not increase after a 40-
minute hunt at the end of the season (Davenport et al., 2001). Mean pre-hunt but not
post-hunt hematocrit appeared to have increased 0.04 in these dogs during the hunting
season.
Greyhounds have a higher resting hematocrit than other breeds (Porter and
Canaday, 1971), but hematocrit has been consistently reported to increase from before
to after racing (Snow et al., 1988; Ilkiw et al., 1989; Rose and Bloomberg, 1989; Nold
et al., 1991; Hill et al., 2000, 2001b) and to decrease below resting levels by 1 to 3
hours after a race (Ilkiw et al., 1989; Rose and Bloomberg, 1989). Resting hematocrit
did not change significantly in greyhounds, however, after 14 days of training at
moderate intensity on a treadmill or during a 4-month racing season (McKeever et al.,
1985; Lassen et al., 1986). Total hemoglobin in the blood did increase 26 percent after
14 days of training on the treadmill, however, because mean plasma volume and
blood volume increased 27 percent and 21 percent, respectively (McKeever et al.,
1985). Mean hematocrit also increased in Alaskan huskies immediately after a 9-km
run pulling an all-terrain vehicle in teams of 12 dogs, but mean hematocrit decreased
0.08 during 6 months of training (Querrengaesser et al., 1994). Mean hematocrit
declined in Alaskan sled dogs from 0.60 before to 0.46 less than 1 hour after finishing
a 480-km race (Hinchcliff et al., 1997a).


===== PDF PAGE 604 =====
603
Exercise, therefore, appears to cause a transient polycythemia and then a
temporary anemia followed by a return to normal and an increase in blood volume
above normal. Red cell synthesis is stimulated, and the increased synthetic demands
on spleen and bone marrow could make hematocrit a sensitive indicator of nutritional
adequacy, especially of protein. It should be noted, however, that hematocrit can also
decline if plasma volume increases and a decline in hematocrit does not necessarily
mean a decline in red cell mass.
A reduction in hematocrit could affect performance by limiting the oxygen-
carrying capacity of the blood. Wu et al. (2001) found that pulmonary function
increased with hematocrit during exercise in dogs and postulated that the increase in
pulmonary diffusing capacity and pulmonary blood flow associated with exercise-
induced polycythemia could explain why trained dogs have such a high V̇ O2max
compared to elite human athletes. During exercise at 50 percent V̇ O2max, plasma
glucagon, epinephrine, norepinephrine, cortisol, and lactate concentrations all
increased more in anemic dogs with a 25 percent reduction in hematocrit than in dogs
that were not anemic (Wasserman et al., 1985). Hepatic glucose production also
increased, but plasma glucose concentrations declined more rapidly during exercise in
anemic dogs because blood glucose was cleared more rapidly. This suggests that
stamina could be compromised by a reduction in hematocrit. The V̇ O2max was
unaffected, however, by a 25 percent decrease in hematocrit in splenectomized dogs
because systemic resistance decreased and cardiac output increased, which
compensated for the decrease in oxygen content of arterial blood (Horstman et al.,
1974). The importance of the small reductions in hematocrit reported during
nutritional studies therefore remains uncertain.
Protein Metabolism During Exercise
Protein and amino acid synthesis and catabolism increase in exercising dogs.
Synthesis increases to accommodate the changes associated with training and to
replace protein and amino acids catabolized during exercise. Protein and amino acids
are catabolized during exercise as a source of energy and as precursors of
gluconeogenesis.
Okamura et al. (1997) reported that total plasma amino acid concentrations
decreased 15 percent and concentrations of glutamine, arginine, lysine, and
gluconeogenic amino acids such as alanine, glycine, serine, and threonine decreased
15-50 percent during exercise of moderate intensity, but concentrations of branched-
chain amino acids such as leucine did not change and tyrosine and phenylalanine
concentrations increased. During recovery, glutamine concentrations increased 10
percent and branched-chain amino acids increased 18 percent.
Wasserman et al. (1987, 1988, 1989a,b) showed that gluconeogenesis increased
over time in 21-kg mongrel dogs undertaking moderate endurance exercise (running
for 2.5 h at 6 km·h–1 on a 12 percent slope). Glucose utilization doubled initially and


===== PDF PAGE 605 =====
604
then increased further until it was three times normal, but blood glucose
concentrations remained relatively constant because hepatic glucose production
increased in tandem with glucose utilization. Hepatic glucose production increased
because hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis were stimulated by a fall in
circulating insulin and a gradual increase in blood glucagon concentrations to twice
normal. Gluconeogenesis from alanine increased gradually during 2.5 hours of
exercise until it was three times normal because fractional extraction of alanine by the
liver and channeling of alanine toward gluconeogenesis within the liver both
gradually increased over the 2.5 hours of exercise. Gluconeogenesis from alanine
increased further during recovery as delivery of alanine to the liver increased above
that during exercise and fractional excretion of alanine remained high. Lactate was
released by the liver at the start of exercise in response to the initial fall in insulin but
was then taken up by the liver and also used as a gluconeogenic precursor as glycogen
concentrations decreased.
These and other studies show that gluconeogenesis plays a more important role in
prolonged exercise of moderate intensity than in episodes of more intense activity.
Coker et al. (1997) showed that net hepatic alanine uptake decreased and arterial
lactate concentrations increased during a short period (20 minutes) of more intense
exercise (85 percent of maximal heart rate), presumably because there was greater
hepatic glycogenolysis and glycolysis and less gluconeogenesis. Wasserman et al.
(1992), however, showed that there was a transition to a “more gluconeogenic mode”
during prolonged exercise in dogs. Initially during exercise of moderate intensity,
glucose consumed by working muscle was mostly oxidized, but after 30 minutes,
nonoxidative glucose utilization increased leading to an increased release of the
gluconeogenic precursors lactate, pyruvate, and glutamine. Limb glycolysis increased
immediately at the onset of exercise but reached a peak at the end of exercise. Hepatic
uptake of lactate increased in proportion to the increased release by muscle. Lipolysis
increased immediately, but FFA concentrations increased more gradually. The
increase in FFA concentrations occurred at the same time as the increase in
gluconeogenesis and provided energy for gluconeogenesis within the liver.
The precursors for gluconeogenesis are mobilized from the gut and adipose tissue
as well as from muscle. Shaw et al. (1976) showed that hepatic glucose synthesis
from glycerol released from adipose tissue by lipolysis increased ninefold during
moderate endurance exercise in dogs. Ammonia generated in exercising muscle by
oxidation of branched-chain amino acids and deamination of AMP is shuttled to the
gut and liver as glutamine and alanine (Wasserman et al., 1991b). Glutamine taken up
by the gut is either oxidized or released as glutamate. Alanine, glutamate, glutamine,
and other amino acids are taken up by the liver, where their carbon skeletons may be
oxidized or used for gluconeogenesis, while nitrogen is used for synthesis of amino
acids or nucleotides or for ureagenesis (Wasserman et al., 1991b). Wasserman et al.
(1991b) showed that glutamine was the most important carrier in exercising dogs,
with splanchnic uptake four times that of alanine. Glutamine uptake by the gut
doubled and glutamine uptake by the liver increased more than fourfold during 150


===== PDF PAGE 606 =====
605
minutes of moderate-intensity exercise. Glutamate and ammonia release by the gut
and hepatic uptake increased in parallel during exercise, and urea synthesis by the
liver doubled, but there was net gut proteolysis because α-amino nitrogen release by
the gut exceeded glutamate output. Williams et al. (1996) also showed that release of
the branched-chain amino acid leucine, primarily by the intestine, increased gradually
during 90 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise until it was 30 percent above
normal. Blood concentrations of leucine did not change because leucine uptake,
presumably by exercising muscle, increased in tandem with increased release. Labile
proteins in the gut appear to be mobilized as a source of amino acids, therefore, to
attenuate protein catabolism in muscle before and after exercise. Halseth et al. (1997)
showed that gut and liver provided 40 percent of total body proteolysis as measured
by leucine turnover during both rest and exercise. Liver and gut were equally
important at rest and during exercise 42 hours after feeding, but proteolysis in the gut
was more important in dogs exercised 18 hours after a meal.
These studies demonstrate that protein utilization is greater in exercising than in
sedentary dogs but increases with the duration of exercise. Protein requirements are
probably greater, therefore, for dogs undertaking long-distance endurance exercise of
moderate intensity of more than 30 minutes’ duration than for dogs undertaking more
intense exercise for 20 minutes or less.
Protein in the Diet of Exercising Dogs
Arokoski et al. (1993) successfully fed growing beagles a commercial diet
containing 28 percent ME (67 g per 1,000 kcal ME) as protein and 56 percent ME (67
g per 1,000 kcal ME) as fat from 16 to 70 weeks of age when dogs were exercised on
a treadmill with a 15 percent slope 5 days per week, with the distance and speed
gradually increasing to 40 km·d–1 and 5-7 km·h–1 by 1 year of age. Young et al.
(1962) measured urinary excretion of nonprotein nitrogen, amino acids, and ammonia
17 hours after a meal containing 19 percent ME as fat and 29 percent ME as protein
in trained young adult beagles either at rest or when undertaking 3 hours of aerobic
exercise (at approximately 50 percent V̇ O2max). During exercise, dogs excreted
approximately 1 g nonprotein nitrogen in their urine per 1,000 kcal expended, which
was equivalent to only 2.5 percent ME as protein. At rest, dogs excreted
approximately 7 g nonprotein nitrogen in their urine per 1,000 kcal, which is
equivalent to 18 percent ME as protein. The mean rate of urinary excretion of taurine
was doubled during exercise from 19 to 43 μmol·h–1 and of cystathionine decreased
during exercise from 3 to 1 μmol·h–1, but rates of excretion of other essential amino
acids, ammonia, methylhistidine, and nonprotein nitrogen were the same in dogs at
rest and during exercise. Relative to energy expended, however, urinary excretion of
these nutrients was much reduced because exercising dogs expended nine times more
energy (200 vs. 23 kcal·h–1) than resting dogs.


===== PDF PAGE 607 =====
606
Reynolds et al. (1999) examined the effect of increasing dietary protein from 48 to
90 g per 1,000 kcal ME (19 to 36 percent ME) and decreasing carbohydrate from 98
to 52 g per 1,000 kcal ME (36 to 19 percent ME) on Alaskan sled dogs during
intensive training of 12 weeks duration (assuming 1.5 percent DM crude fiber in each
diet). Dietary fat was maintained between 54 and 58 g per 1,000 kcal ME (45-47
percent ME), and similar ingredients were used for all four diets. Dogs were run 15
km at 25-27 km·h–1 four times weekly for 8 weeks and then had two maximal and
two submaximal runs on a treadmill weekly for 4 weeks. The V̇ O2max was 25
percent lower and the rate of soft tissue injury was eight times higher in dogs fed the
48 g per 1,000 kcal ME (19 percent ME) as protein diet compared to dogs fed diets
containing 60 g per 1,000 kcal ME (24 percent ME) or more as protein. Plasma
volume was 10 percent higher in dogs fed the 90 g per 1,000 kcal ME (36 percent
ME) as protein diet compared to dogs fed diets containing 75 g per 1,000 kcal ME (30
percent ME) or less as protein. There were slight increases in mean hematocrit and
hemoglobin concentrations, and total red blood cell volume and total blood volume
increased linearly with protein intake. Querengaesser et al. (1994) increased protein in
the diet of Alaskan huskies from 72 to 85 g per 1,000 kcal ME (from 29 to 35 percent
ME), decreased fat from 69 to 63 g per 1,000 kcal ME (from 57 to 52 percent ME),
and kept NFE unchanged. Mean resting hematocrit declined a similar amount (0.08)
in dogs fed both diets during 6 months of training during which dogs ran 1,200 km,
but hematocrit increased after exercise only in dogs fed the higher-protein diet, lower-
fat diet.
Hill et al. (2001b) showed that, among greyhounds racing more than 500 m twice
weekly, dogs ran 0.3 km·h–1 faster and hematocrit was 0.02-0.03 higher when dogs
were fed a lower-protein (63 g per 1,000 kcal or 24 percent ME) and higher-
carbohydrate (106 g per 1,000 kcal or 43 percent ME) diet compared to when they
were fed a higher-protein (96 g per 1,000 kcal or 37 percent ME) and lower-
carbohydrate (75 g per 1,000 kcal or 30 percent ME) diet. These diets contained
similar amounts of fat (36 g per 1,000 kcal or 33 percent ME) and similar ingredients,
but rice and corn were increased in the lower-protein diet at the expense of soy
protein, corn gluten, egg, and poultry meal. Dogs were fed the lower-protein diet for
11 weeks. The amino acid composition of this low-protein diet (Table 11-11)
represents an adequate intake (AI) for sprinting dogs. For greyhounds whose food
intake is restricted 10 percent, these values may need to be increased 10 percent.
These amounts of amino acids are probably not adequate for sled dogs undertaking
endurance exercise.
Yamada et al. (1987) found that among mongrel dogs running 12 km·h–1 for 4
hours daily, “sports anemia” was greater in dogs fed a vegetable (soybean) protein
diet compared to dogs fed an animal (fish and meat meal) protein diet. Both diets
contained 35 percent ME as protein and 17-18 percent ME as fat. Red cell fragility
increased and hematocrit-declined after 3 weeks of exercise in dogs fed the vegetable
protein diet but not in dogs fed the animal protein diet. This change in red cell
fragility correlated with a fall in serum and red cell cholesterol and an increase in red


===== PDF PAGE 608 =====
607
cell lysolecithin. These authors attributed the decline in cholesterol and increase in
lysolecithin and phospholipid during exercise to the action of lecithin-cholesterol
acyltransferase (LCAT), which catalyzes transfer of a fatty acyl group from lecithin to
cholesterol to form lysolecithin and cholesterol ester. They postulated that increased
lysine in the animal protein diet prevented these lipid changes. Nevertheless, lysine
cannot provide the entire explanation because greyhounds in the study by Hill et al.
(2001b) that were fed a higher-protein diet consumed more lysine and more animal
protein but had a lower hematocrit than did dogs fed the lower-protein diet.
TABLE 11-11 Adequate Intake of Amino Acids for Greyhoundsa
Amino Acid
Intake
(g per 1,000
kcal ME)
Arginine 3.5
Histidine 1.3
Isoleucine 2.3
Leucine 5.8
Lysine 2.7
Cystine 0.9
Methionine 1.1
Tyrosine 2.2
Phenylalanine 2.8
Threonine 2.2
Tryptophan 0.5
Valine 2.8
aDerived from a study in which a diet containing 4,400 kcal ME·kg–1 DM was fed free
choice to trained racing greyhounds with an average body weight of 33 kg consuming 154 kcal
ME·kg BW–0.75.
Studies That Have Altered Both Fat and Protein in the Diet of
Exercising Dogs
Several studies have examined the effect on exercising dogs of feeding diets in
which both fat and protein are increased at the expense of carbohydrate. Many of
these studies also change major ingredients and sources of protein, fat, or
carbohydrate. It is often uncertain, therefore, whether it is the increase in protein, the
increase in fat, the decrease in carbohydrate, or a change in some other ingredient that
is responsible for any change observed.


===== PDF PAGE 609 =====
608
Adkins and Kronfeld (1982), for example, reported that among dogs that suffered
a bout of diarrhea while running in the Iditarod, red blood cell counts declined less in
dogs fed a diet with more protein (74 g per 1,000 kcal or 30 percent ME), more fat
(81 g per 1,000 kcal or 67 percent ME), and less carbohydrate (9 g per 1,000 kcal or 3
percent ME) than in dogs fed a diet containing less protein (62 g per 1,000 kcal or 24
percent ME), less fat (68 g per 1,000 kcal or 54 percent ME), and more carbohydrate
(64 g per 1,000 kcal or 22 percent ME). Davenport et al. (2001) found that English
pointers performed less well when hunting (fewer finds per hunt) and lost weight
when consuming a diet containing less protein (68 g per 1,000 kcal or 26 percent ME)
and less fat (45 g per 1,000 kcal or 35 percent ME) compared to one containing more
protein (74 g per 1,000 kcal or 29 percent ME) and more fat (51 g per 1,000 kcal or
41 percent ME).
Kronfeld (1973) reported that 2- to 6-year-old crossbred husky dogs tended to eat
their own feces and developed a “tying up” stiff-legged syndrome during work when
fed a commercial dog food containing, in “percent energy equivalent,” 29 percent
protein, 32 percent fat, and 39 percent carbohydrate. Coprophagy disappeared and
stamina improved in these dogs when horsemeat was added to the commercial food.
Adding horsemeat increased energy intake by 25 percent, decreased dietary
carbohydrate from 39 to 22 percent (energy equivalent), increased dietary protein
from 29 to 33 percent (energy equivalent), and increased dietary fat from 32 to 45
percent (energy equivalent). A further subjective improvement in stamina was
described when dogs were fed a commercial chicken product containing 34 percent
protein, 64 percent fat, and no carbohydrate (energy equivalent).
Kronfeld et al. (1977) and Hammel et al. (1977) blended a canned diet made from
whole chicken and pork lungs (containing almost no carbohydrate) with a dry diet
consisting mostly of ground corn and soybean meal (129 g per 1,000 kcal or 46
percent ME as carbohydrate) to produce three diets in which dietary protein increased
from 75 to 102 g per 1,000 kcal ME (from 29 to 41 percent ME) and dietary fat
increased from 41 to 71 g per 1,000 kcal ME (from 33 to 58 percent ME). These diets
were fed to racing cross-bred Alaskan huskies during 24 weeks of training, during
which dogs ran 1,100 km. Mean hematocrit and red cell count increased during
training in all dogs. These high red cell indices were maintained in dogs fed diets
containing 88 g per 1,000 kcal ME (35 percent ME) or more protein, 55 g per 1,000
kcal ME (44 percent ME) or more fat, and less than 21 percent ME (59 g per 1,000
kcal ME) carbohydrate, but hematocrit and red cell numbers declined very slightly
(0.02 and 5 × 106·mL–1, respectively) during training in dogs fed the diet containing
75 g per 1,000 kcal ME (29 percent ME) as protein, 41 g per 1,000 kcal ME (33
percent ME) as fat, and 107 g per 1,000 kcal ME (38 percent ME) as carbohydrate.
No evidence of a hematological abnormality was detected in any of the dogs fed these
high-protein and fat diets for 6 months. Peak plasma concentrations of FFAs after
exercise increased with increasing dietary fat, but there was no difference in resting
plasma glucose concentrations, peak concentrations after exercise, or most other
parameters among the three diets.


===== PDF PAGE 610 =====
609
Toll et al. (1992) reported that greyhounds ran 0.4 km·h–1 faster over 500 m
during the fifth week of feeding a higher-carbohydrate (52 percent DM), lower-fat (16
percent DM) diet than when they were fed a lower-carbohydrate (8 percent DM),
higher-fat (56 percent DM) diet. Diets were “otherwise similar in composition.” If
these diets are assumed to contain approximately 6 percent DM ash and 2 percent DM
crude fiber, then the percent ME from protein, fat, and carbohydrate, respectively,
would be 23, 31, and 46 percent in the higher-carbohydrate, lower-fat diet and 19, 75,
and 6 percent in the lower-carbohydrate, higher-fat diet. Hill et al. (2000), however,
showed that among greyhounds racing more than 500 m twice weekly, dogs ran 0.4
km·h–1 faster and hematocrit was 0.04 higher when dogs were fed a higher-protein
(67 g per 1,000 kcal or 25 percent ME), higher-fat (36 g per 1,000 kcal or 32 percent
ME), and lower-carbohydrate (105 g per 1,000 kcal or 43 percent ME) diet than when
they were fed a lower-protein (59 g per 1,000 kcal or 21 percent ME), lower-fat (29 g
per 1,000 kcal or 25 percent ME), and higher-carbohydrate (135 g per 1,000 kcal or
54 percent ME) diet. Diets contained similar ingredients, but the higher-fat diet
contained more poultry meal and less wheat. Since the study by Hill et al. (2001b)
suggests that increasing protein does not improve performance in racing greyhounds,
it is likely that the changes in relative proportions of dietary fat and carbohydrate
affected the performance of these greyhounds.
Together, all of these studies suggest an AI for dogs undertaking endurance
exercise of 90 g per 1,000 kcal or 35 percent ME for protein and 59 g per 1,000 kcal
or 49 percent ME for fat, and an AI for fed greyhounds undertaking sprint exercise of
60 g per 1,000 kcal or 24 percent ME for protein and 36 g per 1,000 kcal or 30
percent ME for fat. For greyhounds whose intake is being restricted 10 percent, these
values may need to be increased 10 percent. The amount of protein in the diet should
be increased proportionately as the duration of exercise increases above 30 minutes. It
is possible, however, that dogs undertaking endurance exercise may perform well
when consuming slightly less than 49 percent ME fat and sprinting dogs may run
even faster when fed a diet containing more than 30 percent ME as fat (but less than
75 percent ME as fat) or when fed a diet containing less than 24 percent ME as
protein. Untrained dogs may also require less fat.
There are no studies of the effect of protein, fat, and carbohydrate on exercise in
cats. Cats are sprinters and would be expected to have a requirement for large stores
of glycogen in muscle, but are adapted to a diet that is high in protein and fat and low
in carbohydrate. Experiments with sedentary cats suggest that feline metabolism is
little affected by changes in the composition of the diet, and it is unlikely that exercise
greatly affects requirements for protein, fat, or carbohydrate in exercising cats.
Dietary Carbohydrate and Exercise
Kronfeld et al. (1977) and Hammel et al. (1977) reported that Alaskan husky
cross-bred dogs remained healthy, performed well with no major changes in blood
parameters, and did not become hypoglycemic either before or after exercise when


===== PDF PAGE 611 =====
610
fed a diet containing almost no carbohydrate (1 g per 1,000 kcal ME of NFE) and
only 3 g per 1,000 kcal ME (2 percent DM) of crude fiber. This diet was very high in
protein (102 g per 1,000 kcal or 41 percent ME as protein) however, and it is possible
that more carbohydrate may be required when a diet contains fewer amino acid
precursors for gluconeogenesis. Kronfeld (1973) also described working sled dogs
performing well when fed a commercial chicken diet containing no “energy
equivalent” as carbohydrate and 34 percent of energy equivalent as protein. Dogs fed
this diet were reported to have “loose, pasty or fatty feces” when given their food as a
single large meal, but not when the diet was divided into two meals daily. Decombaz
(1995) reported that sled dogs were fed a diet containing no carbohydrate and 28
percent ME as protein during 9 days of the Alpirod with no ill effects. Thus, there
appears to be no requirement for digestible carbohydrate in dogs provided enough
protein is given to supply the precursors for gluconeogenesis.
In greyhounds, muscle glycogen declines markedly during a race, but most muscle
fibers are of the high oxidative type (Rose and Bloomberg, 1989). Some authors have
suggested that carbohydrate may improve performance (Gannon, 1987), but high-fat
diets may also increase maximal fat oxidation, total maximal energy expenditure, and
performance in greyhounds. Toll et al. (1992) reported that greyhounds ran slower
when the carbohydrate content of the diet decreased from approximately 46 percent to
6 percent ME in exchange for dietary fat. Hill et al. (2000, 2001b) showed that
greyhounds ran faster when dietary carbohydrate was increased from 30 to 43 percent
ME (from 75 to 106 g per 1,000 kcal ME) in exchange for dietary protein, but ran
slower when dietary carbohydrate was increased from 43 to 54 percent ME (from 105
to 135 g per 1,000 kcal ME) in exchange for dietary protein and fat. These studies
suggest that increasing dietary carbohydrate improves the performance of racing
greyhounds, but there is a point at which the benefit from increasing carbohydrate is
outweighed by the decrease in performance from decreasing dietary fat.
The potential health benefits of fermentation of resistant starch and soluble fiber in
the colon have been discussed elsewhere. It is probably preferable that some
indigestible fermentable carbohydrate passes through the small intestine of racing
dogs to be fermented in the colon, but there have been no experiments in exercising
dogs to determine how much this should be. Rapid fermentation of oligosaccharides,
for example, may decrease colonic pH and inhibit clostridial growth promoted by
feeding meat (Amtsberg et al., 1989). Fructooligosaccharides inhibit cecal
colonization by Salmonella spp. in chickens and may also do so in dogs fed raw meat
(Bailey et al., 1991). Biourge (1995) reported that the mean total dietary fiber content
of seven commercial diets recommended for sled dogs was 6.5 percent (range 5.7-7.8
percent). Fiber sources were cereals or added ingredients such as beet pulp or corn
fiber. Grandjean and Paragon (1993b) recommended that fiber should be included in
minimal amounts in diets for exercising dogs because fiber is bulky, lowers the
digestibility of the diet, and increases fecal water excretion, thereby promoting
dehydration. Undigested protein may also provide a substrate for fermentation in dogs


===== PDF PAGE 612 =====
611
fed very high protein diets. In conclusion, some indigestible fermentable carbohydrate
in the diet is probably beneficial, but the ideal amount is uncertain.
Importance of Water and Water Requirements at High Ambient
Temperatures
High body temperatures can be lethal. Adolph (1947) reported that dogs and cats
died when rectal temperatures increased above 41 and 42°C, respectively; the median
temperature at which the animals died was 41.7°C for dogs and 43.4°C for cats. Dogs
and cats were able to tolerate ambient temperatures of 56°C for at least 3 hours in an
atmosphere with 23 percent relative humidity, but lost their ability to keep cool in 100
percent humidity. Evaporative cooling by panting was the major factor that
determined their ability to keep cool. Animals lost 1-2 percent BW·h–1 at the highest
ambient temperatures they were able to tolerate, which suggests that the water
requirement at very high ambient temperatures must be 2 percent BW·h–1 (20 mL·kg
BW–1·h–1). Dogs and cats did not drink continuously, however, when allowed free
access to water in an ambient temperature of 48°C, but allowed up to 9 percent
dehydration to develop before drinking.
Adolph (1947) calculated that if animals evaporating water at a rate of 1 percent
BW·h–1 lost the ability to evaporate water, their body temperature would increase
7°C·h–1. Conversely, he observed that cats could cool themselves at a similar rate
when placed in a favorable environment. He also observed that dogs and cats became
intolerant to heat and rectal temperatures increased “explosively” when dogs became
11-20 percent dehydrated and cats became 17-23 percent dehydrated. None of these
changes developed when drinking water was available.
Baker (1984) and Doris and Baker (1981) also showed that normally hydrated
dogs and cats were able to maintain body temperature up to 45°C in air of 13-47
percent relative humidity. Mean evaporative losses in dogs and cats are shown in
Table 11-12. Water requirements increased approximately 6 mL·kg BW–0.75·d–1·°C–1
above 30°C in dogs and increased 8-12 mL·kg BW–0.67·d–1·°C–1 above 35°C in cats.
At an ambient temperature of 45°C, water requirements increased twofold above
normothermic levels in dogs and three- to sevenfold above normothermic levels in
cats.
The same authors also showed that dehydrated dogs and cats conserved water by
allowing their body temperature to rise almost 1°C at ambient temperatures of 35-
45°C. This increase in body temperature increased the temperature gradient with the
environment, enhanced heat loss, and reduced evaporative losses. In dehydrated dogs,
evaporative losses decreased by approximately 50 percent, panting by approximately
100 breaths per minute, and cardiac output by 30 percent. In dehydrated cats, body
temperature increased similarly, but panting and evaporative water losses declined
only at ambient temperatures of 35 and 38°C, not at higher ambient temperatures.


===== PDF PAGE 613 =====
612
In summary therefore, dogs and cats require free access to water to maintain
normal body temperature in high ambient temperatures. Water requirements double in
dogs and increase up to sevenfold in cats at an ambient temperature of 45°C. As much
as 20 mL·kg BW–1·h–1 may be required at higher ambient temperatures. Dogs and
cats are able to survive, however, when consuming slightly less water because they
are able to conserve body water by allowing their body temperature to rise slightly
when they become dehydrated.
Exercise-Induced Hyperthermia and the Importance of Water During
Exercise
Heat is generated during exercise because work is an inefficient process. Unless
this heat is lost to the environment, rectal body temperature tends to rise. In a warm
environment, evaporative cooling by panting is the primary means of losing heat.
Dogs respond to a warm environment by peripheral vasodilatation to promote heat
dissipation, but they are unable to lose this heat by sweating because dogs sweat only
on their paws (Hammel et al., 1958). Only in a cold environment can dogs and cats
lose heat by radiation and convection. Rice and Steinhaus (1931) reported that
mongrel dogs running at normal room temperature or swimming in 40°C water
developed a respiratory alkalosis from panting in response to a gradually mounting
temperature. Dogs swimming in water at less than 20°C developed an acidosis and a
declining temperature, and dogs swimming in 20-30°C water showed no change in
blood pH or temperature until close to exhaustion. Thus, losing heat was an
overriding concern in a warm environment where the heat generated by exercise was
greater than that being lost to the environment. In a cold environment, dogs increase
their metabolic rate to maintain body temperature at rest (Grandjean and Paragon,
1993a). Exercise reduces the need to generate heat to maintain body temperature, and
as the level of activity increases, maintaining a low body temperature and losing heat
once again become overriding concerns.
TABLE 11-12 Daily Water Loss from Hydrated and Dehydrated Dogs and Cats as
Affected by Temperature


===== PDF PAGE 614 =====
613
Several authors have noted that a high ambient temperature limits exercise capacity
in dogs. Dill et al. (1932, 1933) noted that dogs were able to travel further in a cool
than in a warm environment and that rectal temperature as well as lactate
concentrations increased as dogs became exhausted. Young et al. (1959b) found that
the rate of increase of rectal temperature increased with the intensity of work and that
the maximum duration of a run was proportional to the time required for rectal
temperature to reach 41°C. Weibel et al. (1983) reported having to reduce ambient
temperature to 5°C to prevent rectal temperatures from rising too high when dogs ran
faster than V̇ O2max. Pohoska (1979) found that the rise in rectal temperature during
exercise was attenuated and dogs ran for twice as long when mongrel dogs were
cooled while running. Kruk et al. (1985) and Kozlowski et al. (1985) reported that
cooling mongrel dogs with ice packs while they ran at 6 km·h–1 on a 21 percent slope
in an ambient temperature of 22°C increased the mean time to exhaustion by 45-62
percent, reduced the mean rectal temperature at exhaustion by 1°C, and decreased
heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood lactate concentrations slightly. The muscle
content of ATP and creatine phosphate decreased less, glycogen concentrations in
muscle declined more slowly, and muscle concentrations of AMP, pyruvate, and
lactate increased less in cooled dogs. This suggests that increasing body temperature
lowers the energy balance between high- and low-energy phosphagens and decreases
endurance by increasing the rate of glycolysis.
Taylor et al. (1971) reported that African hunting dogs maintain a higher
temperature than domestic dogs during exercise in a hot environment to minimize
their evaporative losses. Some studies suggest that dehydrated dogs also allow body
temperature to rise higher during exercise to minimize water losses but at the risk of
body temperature rising too high and reducing endurance. Baker et al. (1983) reported
that in dehydrated domestic dogs, rectal temperature was 0.5°C higher at the end of


===== PDF PAGE 615 =====
614
30 minutes of moderately heavy exercise and the amount of fluid drooled by dogs
during exercise was 90 percent less compared to normally hydrated dogs, but the rate
of increase in rectal temperature during exercise was not affected by dehydration.
Greenleaf et al. (1974) reported that increasing plasma sodium concentration and
osmolality by infusing hypertonic saline before or during 60 minutes of exercise
increased the rectal temperature of dogs 0.3°C before and during exercise. Young et
al. (1959a) found that provision of water to adult beagles undertaking moderately
intense exercise reduced the rectal temperature at the end of exercise from 40.9 to
40.1°C, reduced the mean loss of body weight during exercise from 11 to 7 percent,
decreased the average increase in hematocrit associated with exercise from 21 to 3
percent, and increased endurance by 80 percent. Dill et al. (1932) commented that
body temperature does not rise and a dog is virtually tireless during submaximal
exercise when the ambient temperature is low and food and water are provided.
In summary, therefore, exercise-induced hyperthermia limits the capacity of dogs
to exercise. Dehydration increases body temperature slightly during exercise, whereas
free access to water minimizes exercise-induced hyperthermia and markedly
improves stamina.
Water Requirements at Rest and During Exercise
Animals have access to three sources of water: free water that they drink, water in
their food, and water generated during metabolism. Metabolic water provides 0.41,
1.07, and 0.6 mL·g–1 (0.1, 0.12, and 0.15 mL·kcal ME–1) from protein, fat, and
carbohydrate, respectively (Rowntree, 1922). The metabolic water in a mixed diet,
therefore, provides approximately 0.12 mL·kcal ME–1. This metabolic water will
mitigate some of the water losses during a run, but will be partly balanced by loss of
water in feces. Water that is drunk and water in food are the primary subjects of this
discussion because they can be varied separately from the composition of the food.
Total water intake for the purpose of this discussion, therefore, refers to the sum of
drinking water and water in food.
Adolph (1939) reported that four dogs in cages took in a mean of 0.79 (range 0.61-
0.91) mL·kcal–1 ME as free water and in food (109 ± 21 mL·kg BW–0.75·d–1 as free
water and 3 ± 3 mL·kg BW–0.75·d–1 in food). English and Filippich (1980) reported
that dogs in 1-m3 cages took in a mean of 0.56 (range 0.51-0.67) mL·kcal–1 ME as
free water and in food (109 ± 26 mL·kg BW–0.75·d–1 as free water and 8 ± 1 mL·kg
BW–0.75·d–1 in food). Van Limborgh and Van der Wind (1972) reported that water
intake (free water and in food) was between 0.6 and 1 mL·kcal–1 ME in sedentary
adult beagles and weaned pups. All reports, however, describe considerable day-to-
day and dog-to-dog variation in intake, with some animals on some days taking in
more than twice the mean. At least twice the mean amount of water reported here
should therefore be made available to sedentary animals daily.


===== PDF PAGE 616 =====
615
Dry food contains little water (approximately 0.1 mL·g–1 as fed or 0.03 mL·kcal–1
ME), whereas canned food or meat contains much more (0.7-0.8 mL·g–1 as fed or
approximately 0.2 mL·kcal–1 ME). Dogs adjust the amount of water that they drink,
however, to balance the amount of water in food (Ramsay and Thrasher, 1991). Cizek
(1959) reported that as water in the food fed to dogs increased, total water intake
remained constant at 30 mL·kg BW–1·d–1 because dogs drank less. Only as water in
the food approached and then exceeded 30 mL·kg BW–1 did total intake exceed 30
mL·kg BW–1·d–1. Dogs consuming dry food, therefore, drink approximately 0.2
mL·kcal–1 ME more free water than dogs consuming wet food. Cizek (1959) also
showed that dogs continue to drink a minimal amount of water (6 mL·kg BW–1·d–1)
even when taking in an abnormally high amount of water in the food.
Drinking water is an intermittent process at rest and during exercise for dogs, but
loss of water is a continuous process. Robinson and Adolph (1943) found that dogs at
rest given free access to water did not sip it continuously but drank after losing about
0.5 percent BW. Dogs drank only enough water to replace 0.2-0.4 percent BW and
body weight did not return to baseline until after a meal. When water was withheld
for a period, however, dogs drank as soon as it was presented, often earlier than they
would normally have done if offered free-choice water. Gregersen (1932) noted that
dogs consumed most of their water within 2-5 hours of eating but that this
postprandial thirst was temporary; dogs drank much less each day when water was
withheld for several hours after each meal. Starved animals drank 66-80 percent less
water (Kleitman, 1927). It is not recommended that water be withheld after a meal,
however, because increased water intake after a meal balances a tendency to lose
weight between meals.
Dogs with free access to water regulate their osmolality by adjusting water intake
to balance the amount of water lost in urine and by evaporation, not by altering the
concentration of their urine (O’Connor and Potts, 1969; Ramsay and Thrasher, 1991).
Urine production and total water intake, therefore, increase in proportion to the
amount of solute that must be excreted (i.e., with the amount of salt, protein [excreted
as urea], and dry matter in the diet; Danowski et al., 1944; Ramsay and Thrasher,
1991). Mean water intake of 13-kg sedentary beagles increased from 0.64 to 0.9
mL·kcal–1 ME when sodium increased in the diet from 1 to 2.5 g per 1,000 kcal ME
(Baker, 1984). Mean water intake increased in sedentary 18- to 20-kg mongrel dogs
from 99 to 210 mL·kg BW–0.75·d–1 (from 0.55 to 1.16 mL·kcal–1) when sodium
intake increased from 76 to 505 mg·kg BW–0.75·d–1 (Cowley et al., 1983). Mean total
water loss increased from 17 to 26 mL·kg BW–1·d–1 when protein consumed
increased from 1.5 to 4 g·kg BW–1·d–1 in sedentary dogs (Danowski et al., 1944).
Water requirements can double, therefore, when salt and protein intake is increased.
Increased protein and salt intake also enhances the rate of dehydration if water is
withheld during exercise.


===== PDF PAGE 617 =====
616
O’Connor and Potts (1969) reported that dogs in kennels took in a mean of 0.64
(range 0.44-1.24) mL·kcal–1 ME as free water and in food, but that mean evaporative
loss (1 g·kg BW–1·h–1 at rest to 5 g·kg BW–1·h–1) and water intake (4 to 109 mL·kg
BW–1·d–1) varied with activity, the most active dogs losing and drinking the most
water. Dogs drank mostly small volumes (30 to 100 mL) during times of day when
they were most active, but drank larger quantities after a period of water deprivation.
Urine volume was unrelated to the amount of activity and determined mostly by
solute excretion. O’Connor (1975) reported that dogs also drank water at zero to five
of six short rest stops when running on a treadmill at 10 km·h–1 for 1 hour. With the
exception of one dog that did not drink, dogs drank 4-13 mL·kg BW–1 during the
hour of exercise and did not become dehydrated over time. When no water was
offered during the run, dogs always drank if offered water immediately after the run,
but did not drink until they were 0.5-1 percent dehydrated if water was offered more
than 5 minutes after a run (O’Connor, 1972). Dogs, therefore, drink in anticipation of
a need when exercising, but not at rest.
Young et al. (1960, 1962) measured water intake and weight loss in trained 8- to
12-kg young adult beagles at rest and when running for 40 minutes at approximately
50 percent of peak effort (6 km·h–1 on a 16-21 percent slope) at an ambient
temperature of 18-21°C and 50 percent relative humidity. Dogs drank 547 ± 90 mL at
rest while consuming 670 ± 97 kcal (approximately 0.8 mL·kcal–1). Dogs became
dehydrated when running even when given free access to water. Dogs consumed only
0.5 mL·kcal–1 energy expended during short runs but 1 mL·kcal–1 energy expended
during long runs. Weight loss due to dehydration relative to energy expended
decreased with the length of the run. Urine output was also less for short runs (70 ±
30 mL per 300 kcal) than for long runs (150 ± 104 mL per 1,800 kcal). Young et al.
(1959a, 1960) reported that in three separate experiments, provision of 0.94 L (0.56
mL·kcal–1), 1.5 L (0.7 mL·kcal–1 ME), and 1.8 L (approximately 1 mL·kcal –1) of
water during moderate exercise increased maximum work capacity 70 percent from
980 to 1,696 kcal, 80 percent from 1,191 to 2,141 kcal, and 100 percent from 1,000 to
2,000 kcal, respectively.
When they were not allowed access to water, dogs lost 1.16 ± 0.98 mL·kcal–1 ME
at normal body weight and 1.84 ± 0.74 mL·kcal–1 ME after a 20 percent increase in
body weight (Young, 1960). Water requirements, therefore, increased 50 percent in
obese animals. Young (1959) also reported that water loss decreased from 1.28 ± 0.34
within 24 hours of eating to 0.94 ± 0.34 mL·kcal–1 after 4 days of food deprivation.
Thus, water requirements decreased 25 percent in food-deprived underweight
animals. When allowed access to water while undertaking exhaustive exercise,
postprandial dogs drank 1.6 ± 0.5 L (0.65 mL·kcal–1 ME) while expending a mean of
2,332 kcal, but still lost 7 ± 2 percent BW; after 5 days of food deprivation, dogs
drank 3.5 ± 0.6 L (0.87 mL·kcal–1 ME) while expending a mean of 4,056 kcal, but
still lost 12 ± 0.1 percent BW. These results suggest that dogs required 1 mL·kcal–1


===== PDF PAGE 618 =====
617
ME before food deprivation and 1.1 mL·kcal–1 ME after food deprivation to prevent
loss of weight. The food fed to dogs in these experiments was described in only one
experiment as containing 24 percent protein, 49 percent carbohydrate, and 7 percent
fat (presumably as fed).
Taylor et al. (1958) reported that sled dogs in the Antarctic ate snow because they
rarely had an opportunity to drink. In an ambient temperature of –45°C, dogs were
estimated to consume 1 kg snow and 20 g water in a food providing approximately
2,500 kcal ME daily (i.e., dogs consumed approximately 0.4 mL·kcal–1 ME).
Hinchcliff et al. (1998) found that sled dogs lost a mean of 5 percent of body weight
when completing the Iditarod Trail Race and dogs that did not finish lost a mean of 9
percent body weight. Hinchcliff et al. (1997c) reported that water turnover in sled
dogs in ambient temperatures well below freezing increased dramatically from 1.1 ±
0.6 L·d–1 (approximately 111 mL·kg BW–0.75·d–1) in sedentary dogs to 5.0 ± 3.6
L·d–1 (approximately 430 mL·kg BW–0.75·d–1) in dogs running at an average speed
of 7 km·h–1 for 65 hours. Hinchcliff et al. (1997b) also reported that the energy
consumption of sled dogs under these conditions was approximately 263 kcal ME·kg
BW–0.75·d–1 in sedentary dogs and 1,082 kcal ME·kg BW–0.75·d–1 in running dogs.
Water turnover (including metabolic water) was, therefore, approximately 0.42
mL·kcal–1 ME in sedentary dogs and 0.40 mL·kcal–1 ME in running dogs. These
dogs consumed a high-protein diet containing 31 percent ME as protein, 54 percent
ME as fat, and 15 percent ME as carbohydrate (Hinchcliff et al., 1997b).
Greyhounds lose little water during a race, but dogs are kept in a pen without
access to water for up to 6 hours before a race. Blythe and Hansen (1986) reported
that in Oregon during August, dogs lost up to 6 percent BW prior to racing. Most
dogs (50 percent) lost less than 1 percent BW prior to racing, 36 percent lost 1-2.4
percent BW, and only 5 percent lost more than 2.4 percent BW. Female dogs and dogs
racing in later races were more likely to lose more than 2.4 percent BW than male
dogs or dogs racing earlier. Dogs losing more than 2.4 percent BW were more likely
to perform well in the first five races, and among dogs losing more than 2.4 percent
BW, males performed better than females in the final seven races. McKeever et al.
(1985) reported that water intake of untrained greyhounds increased 34 percent from
1 L·d–1 (approximately 80 mL·kg BW–0.75·d–1) to 1.3 L·d–1 (approximately 108
mL·kg BW–0.75·d–1) after 14 days of training in which dogs were run on a treadmill
at 13 km·h–1 on a 4 percent slope (65 percent of maximum work capacity) for 30
minutes daily at a mean ambient temperature of 20°C and relative humidity of 16
percent. This increase was not a result of an increase in solute load because food
intake was kept unchanged. The increased water intake was associated with a 27
percent increase in plasma volume and a 21 percent increase in blood volume.
In summary, therefore, dogs should be offered free access to water at rest and
before, during, and after exercise to optimize performance and reduce the risk of
hyperthermia. Ideally, dogs should be offered water during exercise whenever they
lose 0.5 percent of body weight. Requirements increase with exercise almost in


===== PDF PAGE 619 =====
618
parallel to the amount of energy expended, but can more than double in a warm
environment. In a very cold environment, sled dogs required an average of
approximately 0.4 L per 1,000 kcal ME at rest or during exercise. At an ambient
temperature of 20°C, sedentary dogs in kennels require an average of 0.6-1.2 L per
1,000 kcal ME, depending on the salt content of the diet and require an average of
0.6-1.2 L per 1,000 kcal ME during exercise, but obese dogs may require 1.8 L per
1,000 kcal ME during exercise. Dogs should be offered more than twice these average
amounts, however, because a few individuals may require twice as much water as the
mean.
Sodium, Potassium, and Chloride
Mild hyponatremia without clinical signs has been reported to develop in Alaskan
sled dogs during long-distance sled dog races (Hinchcliff et al., 1997a,c). Such small
changes in electrolyte concentrations in the blood must be interpreted with caution,
however, because they do not necessarily reflect loss of total body electrolytes.
Hyponatremia can result from dilution, a response to changes in acid-base status, the
timing of a sample relative to the race, and an absolute decline in total body sodium.
Hinchcliff et al. (1997a), however, estimated total exchangeable cation content by
multiplying the serum sodium concentration by total body water (estimated as 0.66
times the body weight) in Alaskan sled dogs before and after a 480-km race. During
the race, the mean serum sodium concentration declined only 2 percent (from 148 to
145 mmol·L–1) but body weight decreased 2.5 percent (0.6 kg); so, there was a 5
percent decrease in cation content and a 2 percent decrease in cation content relative
to body weight. Total body water (measured using deuterium dilution) did not change
relative to body weight during the race, but dogs lost 0.6 kg body weight; so, there
must have been an absolute loss of body water. Sodium intake was not reported.
Hinchcliff et al. (1998) also found that serum sodium concentrations were less
than the reference range in more dogs that did not finish the Iditarod Trail Race (71
percent) than in dogs that finished (58 percent). The mean serum sodium
concentration in both groups was only 2 mmol·L–1 less than the lower limit of the
reference range however, and mean loss of body weight was greater (9 percent vs. 5
percent) in dogs that did not finish than in dogs that finished the race. The sodium
content of the diet was not reported.
Small changes in potassium concentration also do not necessarily reflect changes
of potassium within cells or an increased requirement for potassium. Gannon (1980)
has suggested that lactic acidosis after a race increases potassium loss in the urine and
may cause intracellular potassium deficiency and exertional rhabdomyolysis in
greyhounds that are raced too frequently. Knochel et al. (1985) found that training
reduced plasma potassium concentrations and reduced the increase in plasma
potassium concentration following exercise but increased intracellular potassium,
skeletal sarcolemmal sodium:potassium ATPase activity, and muscle membrane


===== PDF PAGE 620 =====
619
potential. Fomin (1930) also found 10-17 percent more potassium in muscles from a
leg exercised with an extra load.
Changes in the rate of excretion of electrolytes are of greater consequence.
Hinchcliff et al. (1997c) reported that the mean serum sodium concentration declined
6 percent (from 149 to 140 mmol·L–1) in dogs during a 480-km sled dog race despite
evidence of renal conservation of sodium. Mean plasma concentrations of aldosterone
and renin activity increased threefold, while concentrations of arginine vasopressin
decreased 50 percent and concentrations of atrial natriuretic peptide changed little.
Urine concentrations of sodium, potassium, and chloride and fractional excretion of
sodium and chloride decreased 50-80 percent during the race while water turnover
increased fourfold. The authors suggested that solute diuresis associated with the
excretion of urea increased urine sodium losses. Urea excretion was increased
because dogs consumed 960 g protein (29 percent ME) during the race. Dogs
consumed approximately 300 mg·kg BW–1 sodium during the race, which is well
above the normal daily requirement of sedentary dogs, but the sodium content of the
diet relative to ME was very low (71 mg sodium per 1,000 kcal ME).
McKeever et al. (1985) reported that plasma volume increased 27 percent, water
intake increased 34 percent, and urine output increased 21 percent in greyhounds at
the end of 14 days of moderate-intensity training (20 minutes daily at 13 km·h–1 on a
4 percent grade) on a treadmill. Plasma concentrations of sodium did not change with
training and plasma potassium concentrations increased slightly (0.8 mmol·L–1), but
total plasma sodium and potassium content increased 1.5 g (24 percent) and 0.15 g
(48 percent), respectively. Total daily sodium excretion in the urine almost doubled
from 1.6 ± 0.7 g to 3.0 ± 1.1 g, whereas total daily urinary excretion of potassium (2.5
± 1.0 g) did not change with training because sodium clearance increased by 90
percent, but potassium clearance decreased 12 percent. If these dogs were 30-kg
greyhounds consuming 155 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1, this would represent an increase
from 0.8 ± 0.3 to 1.5 ± 0.5 g per 1,000 kcal of urinary sodium loss with training while
potassium loss in the urine remained unchanged at 1.3 ± 0.5 g per 1,000 kcal ME.
These changes were not a result of changes in solute intake as dogs were fed the same
amount of food throughout. Dogs in training may, therefore, require an additional 0.7
g per 1,000 kcal ME sodium but no additional potassium. It remains to be determined,
however, whether this increase in urinary excretion of sodium and increased sodium
requirement is maintained after the initial 2 weeks of training.
Young et al. (1962) also measured urinary excretion of sodium and potassium 17
hours after a meal in trained young adult beagles either at rest or when undertaking 3
hours of aerobic exercise (at approximately 50 percent V̇ O2max). The mean rate of
excretion of potassium in the urine was three times higher in dogs during exercise
than at rest, but the rate of sodium excretion did not change with exercise. Relative to
energy expended, however, the rate of urinary excretion of sodium and potassium
declined during exercise. Thus, urinary potassium excretion was 0.9 ± 0.8 g per 1,000
kcal ME at rest but only 0.3 ± 0.3 g per 1,000 kcal ME during exercise. Urinary


===== PDF PAGE 621 =====
620
sodium excretion was 1.3 ± 1.4 g per 1,000 kcal ME at rest but only 0.2 ± 0.2 g per
1,000 kcal ME during exercise.
Sodium excretion in urine changes markedly, however, if dogs are deprived of
water during exercise. Ramsay and Thrasher (1991) reported that dogs did not
concentrate their urine when deprived of water but developed a protective natriuresis
(124 ± 9 mg·kg–1·d–1) that reduced the rise in plasma osmolality caused by
dehydration but obligated continued excretion of water. When water was once more
made available, dogs drank rapidly, replacing the deficit in less than 5 minutes, and a
profound sodium retention restored sodium balance. Dehydration during a race will
therefore clearly exacerbate sodium losses in the urine, but provision of increased
sodium in the diet should not be necessary to combat the natriuresis caused by
dehydration.
Water is also lost by vaporization from oral and respiratory epithelium. Young
(1960) reported that dogs lost approximately 30 percent of water by salivation during
exercise and that this “drip loss” (pH 8.8) contained 217 mg·L–1 nitrogen, 1.3 g·L–1
sodium, 0.3 g·L–1 potassium, 24 mg·L–1 magnesium, 92 mg·L–1 calcium, and 18
mg·L–1 phosphorus. Assuming water losses of approximately 1 mL·kcal–1 during
exercise, 70 mg nitrogen or 0.4 g crude protein, 0.4 mg sodium, 0.1 mg potassium, 8
μg magnesium, 31 μg calcium, and 6 μg phosphorus would be required for each
additional kilocalorie of food consumed above the MER. These amounts are small
compared to the minimum requirements of average dogs. Young’s experiment was
performed at room temperature (approximately 20°C) however, and drip loss of
electrolytes may be higher when dogs exercise at higher ambient temperatures.
Blatt et al. (1972) collected fluid secreted at high ambient temperatures by the
large serous nasal gland, which opens through a single duct 2 cm inside each nostril in
mongrel dogs. There was little secretion below 20°C, but secretion increased to 2.6,
4.6, and 9.6 g·h–1 per gland at 30, 40, and 50°C, respectively. Secretions contained
0.4-0.8 g·L–1 sodium and 0.7 to 0.8 g·L–1 potassium, and were less osmotic than
plasma. These electrolytes would be absorbed in the intestine if swallowed but can
contribute to salivary drip losses. Salivary drip rate increased above 20°C in these
dogs to 0-4 mL·kg BW–0.75·h–1 at 40°C and 0-9 mL·kg BW–0.75·h–1 at 50°C. If the
composition of this drip fluid was similar to that during exercise, dogs would also
lose up to 216 mL·kg BW–0.75 daily in salivary drip losses at 50°C, but this would
result in loss of only 47 mg·kg BW–0.75 nitrogen, 0.3 g·kg BW–0.75 sodium, 0.1 g·kg
BW–0.75 potassium, 5 mg·kg BW–0.75 magnesium, 20 mg·kg BW–0.75 calcium, and 4
mg·kg BW–0.75 phosphorus. With the exception of sodium, these values are small
relative to normal requirements and dogs should not require increased electrolytes in
a warm environment. Average dogs may, however, require as much as 1 g per 1,000
kcal ME sodium when the ambient temperature is constantly 40°C and up to twice
this amount when the ambient temperature is constantly 50°C. In practice however,


===== PDF PAGE 622 =====
621
ambient temperatures decline at night and even outdoor dogs should require less than
half this amount.
Few studies have reported the sodium and electrolyte content of diets fed to
exercising dogs. Orr (1966) reported that tethered sled dogs in the Antarctic were fed
seal meat containing 0.2-0.4 g per 1,000 kcal ME sodium and chloride and 0.04 to 4 g
per 1,000 kcal ME potassium, depending on whether the meat was lean or included
fat. These dogs maintained body weight while pulling heavy loads for several weeks
over long distances in an ambient temperature of –8°C and consuming diets
containing 0.9 g per 1,000 kcal ME sodium and 1.0-1.2 g per 1,000 kcal ME
potassium and chloride. These dogs would have consumed approximately 0.24 g·kg
BW–0.75 sodium and 0.3 g·kg BW–0.75 potassium and chloride daily. Hammel et al.
(1977) and Kronfeld et al. (1977) measured serum electrolyte changes in sled dogs
fed diets containing 1.5-1.6 g per 1,000 kcal ME sodium and 1.9-2.7 g per 1,000 kcal
ME potassium. Dogs consumed approximately 0.3-0.7 g·kg BW–0.75 sodium and 0.4-
1.2 g·kg BW–0.75 potassium daily. There was no change in serum sodium
concentrations with exercise when dogs ran for 12 miles in less than 40 minutes, but
serum sodium increased 10 percent during 24 weeks of training in which dogs ran
800 miles. Serum sodium concentrations declined again after training ended. Changes
in serum potassium concentrations were not discussed. Querengaesser et al. (1994)
reported no change in serum sodium or potassium concentrations or body weight in
sled dogs after a 9-km test run or after 24 weeks of training (over a total 802 km) and
sprint racing (over a total 414 m) at an ambient temperature of –4 to +6°C when
consuming diets containing 0.4 g per 1,000 kcal ME sodium and 0.6 g per 1,000 kcal
ME potassium. Hill et al. (2000, 2001b) reported that serum sodium and potassium
concentrations and body weight did not change over time in greyhounds raced more
than 500 m twice weekly when consuming diets containing 1.3-1.6 g per 1,000 kcal
ME sodium and 1.2-1.4 g per 1,000 kcal ME potassium. These dogs consumed
approximately 0.2 g·kg BW–0.75 sodium and potassium daily. Together, these studies
suggest adequate intakes of sodium, potassium, and chloride of 1 g per 1,000 kcal ME
for dogs undertaking more than average amounts of exercise.
Safe Upper Limit
Ladd and Raisz (1949) reported that sedentary 14- to 17-kg mongrel dogs were
capable of excreting 4 g sodium·kg BW–1 daily for 6 days without showing any sign
of salt retention. This is equivalent to approximately 8 g sodium·kg BW–0.75·d–1 or
66 g per 1,000 kcal ME in a dog consuming 120 kcal·kg BW–0.75·d–1 or 8 g per
1,000 kcal ME in a sled dog running a long-distance race in the cold. High-sodium
diets are not recommended, however, because excretion of very high sodium loads
requires increased urinary excretion of water, which may increase the risk of
dehydration. High-sodium diets can also affect the requirements for other minerals
(see Chapter 7).


===== PDF PAGE 623 =====
622
Fluids Containing Electrolytes
Holloway et al. (1996) reported that oral administration of sodium bicarbonate
(400 mg·kg BW–1) to greyhounds before a 500-m race increased arterial pH, and
sodium and bicarbonate concentrations, decreased chloride concentrations, but did not
affect lactate concentrations or race times compared to values obtained after oral
administration of lactated Ringer’s solution. Mazin et al. (2001) reported that serum
sodium concentrations fell but performance was subjectively unaffected when search-
and-rescue dogs received an electrolyte mixture containing 9 percent protein, 65
percent glucose, 14 percent sodium, and 2 percent potassium during 8 hours of
training. Young et al. (1960) reported that a mineral mixture containing 1.6 g·L–1
potassium, 0.9 g·L–1 phosphorus, 0.5 g·L–1 sodium, 0.2 g·L–1 magnesium, 0.2 g·L–1
copper, and 0.2 g·L–1 iron given to exercising dogs free-choice during exercise
caused diarrhea.
Ramsay and Thrasher (1991) reported that dehydrated dogs were unable to
discriminate the nature of the fluid drunk to replace their deficit. Dehydrated dogs
consumed similar amounts of water, saline, mannitol, milk, and soup, but, whereas
water returned osmolality to normal and satisfied their thirst completely, dogs
continued to drink the other solutions that did not return plasma osmolality to normal.
Currently, therefore, electrolyte-containing solutions do not appear to have any
benefit over water for maintaining hydration in exercising dogs or dogs in high
ambient temperatures.
Calcium, Phosphorus, and Magnesium
Meat is commonly fed to sled dogs and greyhounds but is not a balanced food.
Feeding meat without adequate calcium supplementation can result in
hyperparathyroidism, poor bone mineralization, and increased risk of fractures in
dogs (Morris et al., 1971). Fractures of the tarsus, carpus, metacarpi, and metatarsi are
common in racing greyhounds, and many areas of increased bone remodeling are
evident with scintigraphy in the carpi and metacarpi of racing greyhounds, often in
the absence of radiographic signs of injury (Bloomberg and Dugger, 1996; Zuber et
al., 1996). Bone mineral density also may affect the incidence of fractures in racing
sled dogs (Stoliker et al., 1976). Excess calcium supplementation, however, can
increase the risk of osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) in growing large-breed dogs
(Hazewinkel et al., 1985). This risk is also present in exercising dogs. Slater et al.
(1992) reported an increased risk of OCD in dogs that played one or more times daily
with other dogs and suggested that OCD may be precipitated by cartilage damage
during vigorous exercise. The risk of OCD was increased in dogs consuming
increased calcium in the diet. The median calcium intake in dogs with OCD was 3.6 g
per 1,000 kcal ME compared to 3.1 g per 1,000 kcal ME in control dogs. Dogs fed
specialty dry dog foods were at less risk of OCD, but dogs of different body weights


===== PDF PAGE 624 =====
623
were fed differently in the control and affected animals, so an unrelated factor may
have been responsible for this difference.
Bones are 10 percent heavier relative to body mass in exercising dogs than in
sedentary dogs (Arokoski et al., 1993), but no studies have compared the calcium
requirements of exercising and sedentary dogs. Calcium absorption may be slightly
reduced with high-fat foods, but this effect is small. The requirement for calcium
relative to body weight is probably not much increased above that of sedentary dogs.
The requirement for calcium relative to ME is probably lower, therefore, in dogs
undertaking exercise in proportion to the extra energy required above MER for
kenneled dogs.
Few studies have reported the calcium, phosphorus, or magnesium content of diets
fed to exercising dogs. Orr (1966) reported that tethered sled dogs in the Antarctic
were fed seal meat containing less than 0.03 g calcium per 1,000 kcal ME, 0.2 to 1.8
g phosphorus per 1,000 kcal ME, and 0.03-0.2 g magnesium per 1,000 kcal ME,
depending on whether the meat was lean or included fat (i.e., the calcium to
phosphorus ratio was much less than 1:1). These dogs pulled heavy loads for several
weeks over long distances when consuming diets containing 2.1-4.3 g calcium per
1,000 kcal ME, 1.6-2.1 g phosphorus per 1,000 kcal ME, and 0.13-0.16 g magnesium
per 1,000 kcal ME (see Table 11-3). Dogs would have consumed approximately 0.6-
1.2 g calcium·kg BW–0.75, 0.4-0.6 g phosphorus·kg BW–0.75, and 0.03-0.04 g
magnesium·kg BW–0.75 daily.
Hammel et al. (1977) and Kronfeld et al. (1977) measured serum electrolyte
changes in sled dogs fed diets containing 3.0-4.3 g calcium per 1,000 kcal ME, 2.3-
3.0 g phosphorus per 1,000 kcal ME, and 0.15-0.49 g magnesium per 1,000 kcal ME.
Dogs would have consumed approximately 0.7-1.9 g calcium·kg BW– 0.75, 0.5-1.3 g
phosphorus·kg BW–0.75, and 0.03-0.21 g magnesium·kg BW–0.75 daily. Serum
calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium all decreased immediately after exercise when
dogs ran for 12 miles in less than 40 minutes. During 24 weeks of training in which
dogs ran 800 miles, serum calcium decreased and then increased, but differences in
serum calcium concentrations between dogs fed different diets were not proportional
to calcium content. Serum phosphorus concentrations declined during training in dogs
fed a diet containing less phosphorus but no carbohydrate and increased fat and
protein, and increased during training in dogs fed more phosphorus and carbohydrate
and less protein and fat in the diet. Serum phosphorus concentrations increased at the
end of training in dogs fed the lower-phosphorus diets. This suggests that diets for
sled dogs should contain at least 3 g phosphorus per 1,000 kcal ME in the diet. Serum
magnesium increased during training and declined at the end of training and was
higher in dogs consuming diets containing more magnesium.
Querengaesser et al. (1994) reported no change in serum calcium, phosphorus, or
magnesium concentrations in sled dogs after a 9-km test run or after 24 weeks of
training when consuming diets containing 2.6 g calcium per 1,000 kcal ME, 1.4 g
phosphorus per 1,000 kcal ME, and 0.07-0.11 g magnesium per 1,000 kcal ME. Hill
et al. (2000, 2001b) reported that serum calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium


===== PDF PAGE 625 =====
624
concentrations did not change over time in greyhounds raced more than 500 m twice
weekly when consuming diets containing 2.3-3.0 g calcium per 1,000 kcal ME, 2.0-
2.5 g phosphorus per 1,000 kcal ME, and 0.2-0.3 g magnesium per 1,000 kcal ME.
These dogs consumed approximately 0.2 g ·kg BW–0.75 sodium and potassium daily.
Serum phosphorus concentration declined more after exercise in dogs fed a higher-
carbohydrate, lower-fat and protein diet than in dogs fed a lower-carbohydrate,
higher-fat and protein diet (Hill et al., 2000), but the phosphorus was only 0.1 g per
1,000 kcal ME lower (2.1 vs. 2.0 g per 1,000 kcal ME) in the higher-carbohydrate
diet. It is possible, however, that greyhound diets containing increased carbohydrate
may require more than 2.0 g per 1,000 kcal ME phosphorus.
Trace Minerals
Even fewer studies have reported the trace mineral composition of diets fed to
exercising dogs. Orr (1966) reported that tethered sled dogs in the Antarctic were fed
seal meat containing 0.02 g per 1,000 kcal ME iron, and dogs pulled heavy loads for
several weeks over long distances when consuming diets containing 0.01 g per 1,000
kcal ME iron. Dogs would have consumed approximately 27 μg iron·kg BW–0.75
daily. Querengaesser et al. (1994) reported feeding sled dogs diets containing 15 mg
iron per 1,000 kcal ME, 1.8 mg copper per 1,000 kcal ME, 14-15 mg zinc per 1,000
kcal ME, 0.8 mg manganese per 1,000 kcal ME, and 0.04 mg iodine per 1,000 kcal
ME, during and after 24 weeks of training. Hill et al. (2000, 2001b) reported feeding
greyhounds raced more than 500 m twice weekly for 16 and 22 weeks diets
containing 72-91 mg iron per 1,000 kcal ME, 1.9-5.7 mg copper per 1,000 kcal ME,
16-48 mg zinc per 1,000 kcal ME, 4-11 mg manganese per 1,000 kcal ME, 0.3-0.4
mg iodine per 1,000 kcal ME, and 0.1 mg selenium per 1,000 kcal ME.
Vitamins
Few studies have measured the vitamin requirements of exercising dogs.
Requirements for thiamin and probably other vitamins are likely to be proportional to
energy intake and will, therefore, be much higher relative to body weight in racing
sled dogs than in sedentary dogs. In humans, the requirement for pyridoxine increases
with protein intake and exercise (Miller et al., 1985; Manore et al., 1987; Manore and
Leklem, 1988; Hansen et al., 1996). Minimal requirements for pyridoxine are likely,
therefore, to be greater in sled dogs fed high-protein diets than in sedentary dogs, but
no studies in sled dogs have reported pyridoxine concentrations in the diet.
Taylor et al. (1958) reported that male sled dogs weighing on average 41 kg and
female sled dogs weighing on average 34 kg and undertaking long-distance journeys
in the Antarctic in the middle of the twentieth century were fed 0.45-kg (1-pound)
blocks of food daily containing no vitamin A, 0.4 mg thiamin, 1.5 mg riboflavin, 17.8
mg nicotinic acid, and <3 mg vitamin C. These authors reported that thiamin and


===== PDF PAGE 626 =====
625
riboflavin excretion in the urine decreased and bisulfite-binding substances in the
urine increased when sled dogs consumed this diet, but bisulfite-binding substances
decreased in the urine when 100 mg thiamin was injected intramuscularly. These
authors developed a diet containing more fat and less protein in which 1,000
international units (IU) vitamin A, 600 IU vitamin D, 1.2 mg thiamin, 3 mg
riboflavin, 9 mg nicotinic acid, 2 mg calcium pantothenate, and 0.4 mg pyridoxine
were added to each 0.45-kg (2,400-kcal ME) block. This is equivalent to
approximately 125 retinol equivalents (RE) per 1,000 kcal ME of vitamin A, 6 μg per
1,000 kcal ME of vitamin D, 0.5 mg per 1,000 kcal ME of thiamin, 1.2 mg per 1,000
kcal ME of riboflavin, 3.7 mg per 1,000 kcal ME of nicotinic acid, and 0.8 mg of
calcium pantothenate per 1,000 kcal ME. Wyatt (1963) reported dogs subjectively
performed better on the new diet, but changes in the diet other than vitamin
composition could have been responsible for the improvement. Querengaesser et al.
(1994) fed sled dogs a diet containing 4,700 RE vitamin A per 1,000 kcal ME and 0.4
μg vitamin D per 1,000 kcal ME without notable changes in health or blood
chemistries during 24 weeks of training.
Arnrich et al. (1956) reported that some Cocker spaniel puppies fed diets deficient
in riboflavin or pantothenic acid collapsed in a hypoglycemic coma after swimming
for 25 minutes in 25°C water. In dogs fed a balanced purified diet containing 18
percent ME as protein and 61 percent ME as carbohydrate, 0.46 mg riboflavin per
1,000 kcal, and 14 mg calcium pantothenate per 1,000 kcal, blood glucose increased
34 mg·dL–1 immediately after exercise, decreased to 6 mg·dL–1 below normal 1 hour
after exercise, and then rebounded to normal 2 hours after exercise. In riboflavin-
deficient dogs, the increase in blood glucose concentrations immediately after
exercise was much greater (73 mg·dL–1 above normal), and in both pantothenic acid-
deficient and riboflavin-deficient dogs, blood glucose concentrations decreased more
(to 14 and 19 mg·dL–1 below normal, respectively) and stayed low 1-2 hours after
exercise. Some of these deficient dogs collapsed and died with blood glucose
concentrations between 14 and 44 mg·dL–1. Normal growth resumed when deficient
dogs were fed the balanced diet, but glycemic responses to exercise did not return to
normal for 3 weeks.
The amount of each vitamin in these “balanced” diets is less than or only slightly
more than the amount recommended for maintenance in Chapter 8. At present
therefore, there seems to be no reason to increase the minimum recommendations
relative to energy intake for vitamins in diets of exercising dogs.
Creatine
Creatine as creatine phosphate acts as an energy buffer in muscle cells, moderating
changes in ATP concentration. During muscle contraction when ATP becomes
depleted, creatine kinase hydrolyzes creatine phosphate to creatine, and the high-
energy phosphate is transferred to ADP to replenish ATP. Creatine is then usually


===== PDF PAGE 627 =====
626
rapidly rephosphorylated, but some creatine is continuously dehydrated to creatinine
and excreted in the urine. Snow et al. (1987) reported that 10 percent of creatine
phosphate was hydrolyzed to creatine in trained racing greyhounds during a 400-m
sprint.
If creatine phosphate becomes depleted during intense exercise however, transfer
of a high-energy phosphate from one ADP molecule to another ADP molecule
generates additional ATP but also generates adenosine monophosphate (AMP). This
AMP is then broken down to ammonia, hypoxanthine, and uric acid by xanthine
oxidase, generating reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Sahlin et al., 1991). By
preventing the generation of AMP from ADP, creatine phosphate can, therefore, also
limit the production of ROS.
Creatine is not considered an essential nutrient in mammals because it can be
synthesized in the kidney and liver from glycine, arginine, and S-adenosylmethionine.
Nevertheless, creatine can be absorbed orally, and oral creatine supplementation
increased muscle concentrations of creatine in humans with low resting muscle
concentrations of creatine, but did not affect muscle concentrations in humans with
high resting muscle concentrations of creatine (Balsom et al., 1994). Supplemental
creatine has also improved performance and recovery in humans undertaking short-
duration, repetitive, high-intensity exercise (Balsom et al., 1994).
In dogs, Benedict and Osterberg (1923) demonstrated that oral creatine was
absorbed and excreted in the urine. All creatine was retained in the body for the first
few days but subsequently appeared in the urine as creatine and creatinine. Body
weight increased in these creatine-supplemented dogs. Body weight has also been
reported to increase in humans supplemented with creatine (Balsom et al., 1994).
Harris and Lowe (1995) and Lowe et al. (1998) have shown that plasma creatine
concentrations increased markedly for at least 4 hours after dogs were supplemented
orally with up to 3 mmol·kg BW–1 synthetic creatine or 2 g creatine in raw meat.
Nevertheless, creatine is degraded to creatinine by heat processing, and pet dogs and
cats fed heat-processed commercial petfood must consume very little creatine. Harris
et al. (1997) showed that uncooked chicken, beef, and rabbit meat contained 30
mmol·kg–1 wet weight of creatine; ox heart and liver contained 22 and 2 mmol·kg–1
wet weight, respectively; and dried meat contained 90-100 mmol·kg–1 DM of
creatine, but that heat-processed canned and dry commercial petfoods and dried
rendered meat meal contained less than 4 mmol·kg–1 DM of creatine. Lowe et al.
(1998) reported that oral supplementation with up to 3 mmol·kg BW–1 creatine daily
for 4 weeks did not increase mean total creatine concentrations in the muscle of caged
beagles previously fed a commercial diet containing less than 0.2 mmol·kg–1 creatine.
Muscle creatine concentrations appeared to increase over time in those dogs with low
initial muscle concentrations of creatine, but there were no unsupplemented control
dogs for comparison. Scott et al. (1999) found no evidence of an effect of creatine
supplementation on either total muscle creatine concentrations or running speed of
trained racing greyhounds compared to unsupplemented controls when dogs were


===== PDF PAGE 628 =====
627
supplemented with 2.5 g creatine three times daily for 6 weeks. Clark et al. (1988),
however, have shown that the reduction in phosphocreatine during muscle contraction
is much less in canine muscle that has previously been conditioned by repetitive
electrical stimulation. Currently, therefore, there is no evidence for any benefit from
adding creatine to the diet of exercising dogs, and any such effect is likely to be small
compared to the benefit observed after conditioning.
Creatine Kinase
Creatine kinase is the enzyme that catalyzes the interconversion of creatine and
creatine phosphate. This enzyme leaks into the serum of normal animals. The rate of
this leak and the serum concentrations increase in proportion to muscle damage, and
very high serum concentrations may be associated with exertional rhabdomyolysis
(Aktas et al., 1993). In trained racing greyhounds, mean serum creatine kinase
concentrations at rest were unaffected by repeated racing during a racing season, but
mean concentrations increased up to twofold (approximately 200 U·L–1) immediately
after a sprint race of up to 700 m irrespective of distance raced, and increased to
approximately 400 U·L–1 3 hours after a 700-m race (Lassen et al., 1986; Snow et al.,
1988; Ilkiw et al., 1989; Nold et al., 1991; Bjotvedt et al., 1993; Hill et al., 2000,
2001b). Similar or smaller increases in serum creatine kinase concentrations were
also noted in Labrador retrievers immediately after 10 minutes of intense retrieving
exercise, and in sled dogs immediately after runs of up to 9 km (Ready and Morgan,
1984; Querrengaesser et al., 1994; Matwichuk et al., 1999). Serum creatine kinase
concentrations increased more in unfit dogs than in fit dogs after an hour of moderate
exercise (Sneddon et al., 1989) and increased to more than 1,000 U·L–1 in some
greyhounds after racing (Lassen et al., 1986; Hill et al., 2000).
Hinchcliff et al. (1993) reported that mean serum creatine kinase concentration
was 400 U·L–1 or less in most racing sled dogs within 1 hour of their competing in
the Yukon Quest International Sled Dog race, but the concentrations increased to
3,000 U·L–1 in individual dogs. There was no evidence of a difference in serum
creatine kinase concentrations between dogs that did and did not finish the race
(Hinchcliff et al., 1996). In dogs withdrawn from the Iditarod Trail Race, however,
Piercy et al. (2001b) reported that the median and maximal serum creatine kinase
concentrations were much higher (5,100 and 440,000 U·L–1, respectively). Hinchcliff
et al. (1998) also reported that the mean and maximal serum creatine kinase
concentrations were much higher (2,000 and 57,000 U·L–1, respectively) in dogs that
did not finish the Iditarod than in dogs that did finish (640 and 3,000 U·L–1,
respectively). Serum creatine kinase concentrations were higher (up to 57,000 U·L–1)
in dogs retiring during the first 800 km of the race than in dogs retiring during the
final 1,000 km (up to 3,400 U·L–1). These results suggest that serum concentrations


===== PDF PAGE 629 =====
628
of up to 3,400 U·L–1 may be normal in dogs undertaking intense exercise but that
higher concentrations suggest abnormal amounts of muscle damage.
Antioxidants, Exercise, and Training
Free radicals and ROS are produced during normal metabolism and have the
potential to damage protein, fat, and nucleic acids. They are prevented from doing so
by antioxidants and antioxidant enzyme systems within the body. Oxidation produces
molecules, such as isoprostanes, thiobarbituric acid reducing substances (TBARS),
lipid hydroperoxides, and 7,8- dihydro-8-oxo-2’ -deoxyguanosine, that can be
measured in blood or urine. During exercise, production of ROS and oxidation
products increases and concentration of antioxidants in blood decreases. Hinchcliff et
al. (2000) reported that plasma isoprostane concentrations increased sevenfold and
plasma vitamin E concentrations declined 25 percent in sled dogs that pulled an
unladen sled and musher 58 km daily over snow for 3 days. The mean serum creatine
kinase concentration also increased moderately (tenfold to approximately 1,000 U·L–
1), and this increase correlated with the increase in isoprostane concentration. Hill et
al. (1999a) reported that concentrations of TBARS increased 30 percent and total
antioxidant concentrations decreased 10 percent in the blood of trained greyhounds
immediately after a 500-m race. Declining antioxidant concentrations in the face of
increased concentrations of oxidation products suggests that exercise increases
oxidative stress. It remains to be determined, however, whether this oxidative stress
causes any pathology in exercising dogs or whether increased supplementation of
antioxidant nutrients, such as vitamins E or C, can prevent any oxidative damage
caused by exercise.
Training has also been shown to have an effect on both the production of ROS and
the antioxidant defense system in exercising dogs. Marin et al. (1993) reported that
running 40 km on 26 percent slope at 7 km·h–1 decreased total plasma glutathione
concentrations 20 percent but did not affect plasma oxidized glutathione
concentrations in beagles. These authors found that 30 weeks of training (running for
64 km daily on a 26 percent slope) increased total glutathione concentrations but did
not affect oxidized glutathione concentrations in the lung, gastrocnemius muscle, or
plasma. This training increased the enzymes responsible for glutathione synthesis
two- to threefold in the leg muscles of beagles but did not affect these enzymes in
axial muscles or in the liver. Fink (2001) reported that ROS formation increased 80
percent in untrained dogs but did not increase in trained dogs running at 15 km·h–1 on
a 5 percent slope. The increase in ROS formation in untrained dogs was prevented by
infusion of pyruvate. These studies suggest that any benefit from providing additional
antioxidants may be greater in untrained than in trained animals.
Vitamin E and Antioxidant Cocktails in Exercising Dogs


===== PDF PAGE 630 =====
629
Vitamin E is an antioxidant that is an essential nutrient in dogs. Muscular,
neuronal, and testicular degeneration, intestinal lipofuscinosis, reproductive failure,
and increased fragility of red cells have been reported in sedentary dogs fed vitamin
E-deficient diets (Anderson et al., 1939; Brinkhous and Warner, 1941; Elvehjem et
al., 1944; Kaspar and Lombard, 1963; Hayes et al., 1970a,b). Retinal degeneration
developed in hunting dogs fed a diet of meat and fat deficient in vitamin E but not in
hunting dogs fed a commercial diet containing vitamin E (Davidson et al., 1998).
Hayes et al. (1970b) reported that plasma tocopherol concentration in normal dogs
was more than 5.5 mg·L–1, whereas the mean plasma tocopherol concentration in
deficient dogs was 2.7 mg·L–1.
In normal, trained racing greyhounds, Snow and Frigg (1990) reported that mean
plasma tocopherol concentration was 10 mg·L–1. Scott et al. (2001) reported that
mean plasma tocopherol concentrations decreased from 12 to 7 mg·L–1 during a 500-
m race in racing greyhounds fed a diet deficient in vitamin E, but that dogs did not
exhibit signs of deficiency. Resting concentrations increased to 27 mg·L–1 and did not
decline during a race when dogs were supplemented with 0.5 g (680 IU) of D-α-
tocopheryl acetate daily for 1 week. Hill et al. (2001a) also reported that
supplementation of trained racing greyhounds with either 100 or 1,000 IU of α-
tocopheryl acetate daily for 8 weeks increased plasma concentrations of tocopherol
markedly, but that dogs ran slower than unsupplemented controls when given 1,000
IU daily. Greyhounds weigh 25-30 kg. This suggests that racing greyhounds should
receive less than 30 IU·kg BW–1 vitamin E daily, and supplementation with 3.5 IU·kg
BW–1 vitamin E daily does not have a demonstrably beneficial or detrimental effect.
In trained, racing sled dogs (mean 23 kg BW), Piercy et al. (2000) reported that
mean resting plasma tocopherol concentrations were greater (75 vs. 44 mg·L–1) in
dogs supplemented with 457 IU α-tocopheryl acetate daily (in combination with 706
mg vitamin C and 5.1 mg α-carotene) for 3 weeks compared to unsupplemented
controls and that concentrations decreased slightly after exercise (pulling an unladen
sled and a musher at 17 km·h–1 for 77 km daily for 3 days) in the supplemented dogs.
Mean serum creatine kinase concentrations increased to more than 1,000 IU·L–1
when dogs were exercised, but this increase was not attenuated by antioxidant
supplementation. Antioxidants did not, therefore, prevent any muscle damage
associated with exercise in this study. Baskin et al. (2000) also reported that
supplementing trained racing sled dogs (mean 21 kg BW) with 400 IU of α-
tocopheryl acetate (combined with 3 mg β-carotene and 20 mg lutein orally) for 1
month increased the mean plasma tocopherol concentration from 17 to 30 mg·L–1 and
increased both plasma lutein and β-carotene concentrations. In this experiment
however, plasma concentrations of the oxidation product 7,8-dihydro-8-oxo-2′-de-
oxyguanosine decreased approximately 20 percent in supplemented dogs but
increased approximately 10 percent in unsupplemented dogs after 3 days of exercise
(64-75 km daily pulling a lightly laden sled and musher at 19 km·h–1).


===== PDF PAGE 631 =====
630
Supplementation did not affect other oxidation products (lipid hydroperoxide
concentrations) or the in vitro oxidation rate of lipoproteins. The total antioxidant
given to these dogs each day cannot be determined because the antioxidant
composition of the base diet was not reported. Nevertheless, no detrimental effects,
were reported, which suggests that daily supplementation with 20 IU·kg BW–1
vitamin E, 30 mg·kg BW–1 vitamin C, 200 μg·kg BW–1 β-carotene, and 1 mg·kg
BW–1 lutein for 4 weeks may represent a safe upper limit for racing sled dogs.
Piercy et al. (2001a) reported that sled dogs running for up to 1,865 km in the
Iditarod Trail Race were twice as likely to finish, and two times less likely to be
withdrawn for each kilometer run if their plasma vitamin E concentrations were
greater than 41 mg·L–1 before racing compared to dogs with concentrations less than
41 mg·L–1 before racing. Team speed was not associated with vitamin E
concentrations before racing. Among dogs that were withdrawn from the Iditarod
Trail Race however, Piercy et al. (2001b) reported that there was no difference in pre-
race vitamin E concentrations between dogs with plasma concentrations of creatine
kinase greater than 10,000 IU·L–1 (with probable exertional rhabdomyolysis) when
they were withdrawn compared to those with concentrations less than 10,000 IU·L–1
when they were withdrawn. Dogs that were withdrawn with creatine kinase
concentrations greater than 10,000 IU·L–1 had lower total antioxidant concentrations
when withdrawn but started the race with higher total antioxidant concentrations than
dogs with lower creatine kinase concentrations when withdrawn.
Currently, there is no evidence that supplementation of exercising dogs with
additional vitamin E or any other antioxidant combination above that suggested for
sedentary dogs is necessary to prevent oxidative damage associated with exercise. It
is essential, however, to provide adequate vitamin E in the diet. Sled dogs and
greyhounds are often fed meat or fish, and sled dogs are often fed very high-fat diets.
If this meat is stored for long periods, the fat may become oxidized. Fish also contains
polyunsaturated fats. Hayes et al. (1970a) showed that increased consumption of
polyunsaturated fats exacerbated changes associated with vitamin E deficiency in
sedentary dogs. Creatine kinase concentrations increased, whereas hemoglobin
concentrations and hematocrit decreased in proportion to fat consumption. Wander et
al. (1997) found that plasma tocopherol concentrations also decreased 20 percent and
TBARS concentrations in blood and urine increased in sedentary old beagles fed a
diet containing increased amounts of n-3 fatty acids (from fish oil) relative to n-6
fatty acids (a ratio of 1:1 compared to a ratio of 5:1 or higher). The amount of vitamin
E provided in the diet of exercising dogs should therefore take into account the
amount and type of fat.
Vitamin C


===== PDF PAGE 632 =====
631
Vitamin C is synthesized in adequate quantities for normal function by sedentary
dogs and cats. Plasma ascorbic acid concentrations of up to 19 mg·L–1 have been
reported in unsupplemented sedentary dogs (Zannoni et al., 1974; Crilly et al., 1976;
Robinson et al., 1979; Schwartz, 1980; Lee et al., 1986; Kronfeld et al., 1989). Taylor
et al. (1958) reported that sled dogs consuming seal meat excreted 100 mg ascorbic
acid daily in their urine and that dogs consuming less than 10 mg ascorbic acid daily,
even those with marked palatal ulcers, excreted more than 50 mg daily. These authors
concluded that the sled dogs were synthesizing at least 50 mg ascorbic acid daily and
did not require an additional dietary supply.
Nevertheless, the rate at which vitamin C is synthesized in the liver is lower in
dogs and cats than in other species (Chatterjee et al., 1975). Kronfeld and Donoghue
(1988) have suggested that stress or intense exercise may increase the requirement for
vitamin C above the synthetic capacity of the liver. Butson (1973) reported that signs
of scurvy in sled dogs fed stored frozen meat for long periods were prevented by
feeding fresh meat but did not demonstrate that vitamin C was deficient. Donoghue et
al. (1993) reported that the mean plasma concentration in trained sled dogs before the
racing season was 5.3 mg·L–1 in unsupplemented dogs but increased 30 percent to 6.9
mg·L–1 in dogs supplemented with 0.5 g vitamin C daily. A day after a major race at
the end of the racing season, the mean concentration of vitamin C had decreased in
these same dogs, to 2.5 mg·L–1 in unsupplemented dogs and 3.7 mg·L–1 in dogs
receiving 1 g vitamin C daily. After a period of 4 weeks during which these same
dogs had not undertaken any activity, the mean concentration increased to 6.6 mg·L–1
in unsupplemented dogs and 9.6 mg·L–1 in dogs receiving 1 g vitamin C daily. Low
plasma concentrations of vitamin C and an increase in these concentrations in
response to supplementation do not, however, indicate a deficiency. Piercy et al.
(2000), by contrast, reported that mean plasma vitamin C concentrations were 19.1
mg·L–1 in unsupplemented sled dogs and 21 mg·L–1 in dogs supplemented with 706
mg vitamin C daily (in combination with vitamin E and β-carotene), but vitamin C
concentrations increased 25 percent after endurance exercise. The vitamin C content
of the base diet was not reported.
In trained racing greyhounds, Snow and Frigg (1990) reported that the mean
plasma ascorbic concentration was 5.3 mg·L–1. Scott et al. (2002) reported that the
plasma ascorbic acid concentrations were only 1.8-2.8 mg·L–1 in trained racing
greyhounds receiving little (0.1 mg·kg BW–1) ascorbic acid in their diet.
Concentrations doubled after oral administration of 1 g of vitamin C, but returned to
normal levels within 6 hours. Schwartz (1980) reported that addition of 1 g of vitamin
C daily to the diet increased mean plasma concentrations of vitamin C from 10.5 to
15.4 mg·dL–1 and increased mean cartilage weight in beagles with surgically induced
osteoarthritis. High doses, however, may not be beneficial. Marshall et al. (2002)
found that trained racing greyhounds ran, on average, 0.3 km·h–1 slower over 500 m
when supplemented daily for 4 weeks with a high dose (1 g) of vitamin C either


===== PDF PAGE 633 =====
632
before or after racing. Although this difference was small, it is equivalent to a lead of
3 m at the finish of a 500-m race. Others have also reported that vitamin C may have
a deleterious effect at high doses by acting as a prooxidant in humans (Podmore et al.,
1998; Childs et al., 2001). Currently, therefore, supplementation with vitamin C in
normal animals is not recommended.
Other Nutrients
Several food additives, including dimethylglycine, pangamic acid (vitamin B15),
L-carnitine, inosine, coenzyme Q, bee pollen, methylsulfonylmethane, caffeine,
alcohol, and vinegar, have been suggested to improve the performance of racing dogs
(Williams, 1992). To date, no controlled studies have shown any benefit in dogs or
cats. Gannon and Kendall (1982) reported that dimethylglycine and
diisopropylammonium dichloroacetic acid reduced the race time of greyhounds.
Pangamic acid is a substance of uncertain composition. It consists of an ester of
dimethylglycine and gluconic acid but may include diisopropylammonium
dichloroacetic acid (Herbert, 1988). The beneficial effects described by Gannon and
Kendall can probably be ascribed to dichloroacetic acid. Dichloroacetic acid is a
potent drug that activates pyruvate dehydrogenase and reduces lactic acidosis (Merrill
et al., 1980). The appropriate dose of dichloroacetic acid is uncertain, and neurologic,
hepatic, testicular, pulmonary, and pancreatitic toxicity has been described in dogs
(Cicmanec et al., 1991).
REFERENCES
Adams, T. 1963. Mechanisms of cold acclimatization in the cat. J. Appl. Physiol.
18:778-780.
Adams, T., M. L. Morgan, W. S. Hunter, and K. R. Holmes. 1970. Temperature
regulation of the unanesthetized cat during mild cold and severe heat stress. J.
Appl. Physiol. 29:852-858.
Adkins, T. O., and D. S. Kronfeld. 1982. Diet of racing sled dogs affects erythrocyte
depression by stress. Can. Vet. J. 23:260-263.
Adkins, T. O., and J. C. Morris. 1975. The Iditarod: Sled Dogs and DVMs. Mod. Vet.
Prac. 56:456-461.
Adolph, E. F. 1939. Measurements of water drinking in dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 125:75-
86.
Adolph, E. F. 1947. Tolerance to heat and dehydration in several species of mammals.
Am. J. Physiol. 151:564-575.
Adolph, E. F. 1951. Responses to hypothermia in several species of infant mammals.
Am. J. Physiol. 166:75-91.
Aktas, M., D. Auguste, H. P. Lefebvre, P. L. Toutain, J. P. Braun, and U. Inra. 1993.
Creatine kinase in the dog: A review. Vet. Res. Commun. 17:353-369.


===== PDF PAGE 634 =====
633
Altom, E. K. 1999. Effect of dietary fat and physical conditioning on the metabolic
and physiological responses of the canine athlete. Ph.D. dissertation, Auburn
University, Auburn, Ala.
American Greyhound Track Operators Association. 2001. Track Facts, Melbourne,
Fla.: American Greyhound Track Operators Association.
Amtsberg, G., V. Stock, E. Treschnak, and U. Ringel. 1989. Investigations on the gut
flora of ileal and colonic chyme in relation to diet and oral antibiosis. Fortschr.
Tierphysiol. Tierernährg. 19:120-130.
Anderson, H. D., C. D. Elvehjem, and J. E. Gonce. 1939. Vitamin E deficiency in
dogs. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 42:750-755.
Anderson, R. J., and G. Lusk. 1917. Animal calorimetry. The interrelationship
between diet and body condition and the energy production during mechanical
work. J. Biol. Chem. 32:421-445.
Armstrong, R. B., C. W. Saubert, H. J. Seeherman, and C. R. Taylor. 1982.
Distribution of fiber types in locomotory muscles. Am. J. Anat. 163: 87-98.
Arnrich, L., L. S. Hurley, B. R. Forker, and A. F. Morgan. 1956. Response to stress by
riboflavin-deficient and pantothenic acid-deficient dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 184:515-
520.
Arokoski, J., P. V. Miettinen, A. M. Saamanen, K. Haapanen, M. Parviainen, M.
Tammi, and H. J. Helminen. 1993. Effects of aerobic long distance running training
(up to 40 km·day–1) of 1-year duration on blood and endocrine parameters of
female Beagle dogs. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol. 67(4):321-329.
Ashwell, M., D. Stirling, S. Freeman, and B. R. Holloway. 1987. Immunological,
histological and biochemical assessment of brown adipose tissue activity in
neonatal, control and b-stimulant-treated adult dogs. Int. J. Obes. 11:357-365.
Bahr, R., and O. M.Sejersted. 1991. Effect of intensity of exercise on excess
postexercise O2 consumption. Metabolism 40:836-841.
Bailey, J. S., L. C. Blankenship, and N. A. Cox. 1991. Effect of fructooligosaccharide
on Salmonella colonization of the chicken intestine. Poult. Sci. 70(12):2433-2438.
Bailie, M. D., S. Robinson, H. H. Rostorfer, and J. L. Newton. 1961. Effects of
exercise on the heart output of the dog. J. Appl. Physiol. 16:107-111.
Baker, M. A. 1984. Cardiovascular and respiratory responses to heat in dehydrated
dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 246:R369-R374.
Baker, M. A., P. A. Doris, and M. J. Hawkins. 1983. Effect of dehydration and
hyperosmolality on thermoregulatory water losses in exercising dogs. Am. J.
Physiol. 244:R516-R521.
Ballevre, O., G. Anantharaman-Barr, P. Gicquello, C. Piguet-Welsh, A. L. Thielen,
and E. Fern. 1994. Use of the doubly labelled water method to assess energy
expenditure in free living cats and dogs. J. Nutr. 124:2594S-2600S.
Balsom, P. D., K. Soderlund, and B. Ekblom. 1994. Creatine in humans with special
reference to creatine supplementation. Sports Med. 18(4):268-280.
Baskin, C. R., K. W. Hinchcliff, R. A. DiSilvestro, G. A. Reinhart, M. G. Hayek, B. P.
Chew, J. R. Burr, and R. A. Swenson. 2000. Effects of dietary antioxidant


===== PDF PAGE 635 =====
634
supplementation on oxidative damage and resistance to oxidative damage during
prolonged exercise in sled dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 61:886-891.
Beck, A. M. 1973. The Ecology of Stray Dogs: A Study of Free-Ranging Urban
Animals. Baltimore, Md.:York Press.
Benedict, S. R., and E. Osterberg. 1923. Studies in creatine and creatinine
metabolism. V. The metabolism of creatine. J. Biol. Chem. 56:229-252.
Berman, M., and I. Dunbar. 1983. The social behavior of free-ranging suburban dogs.
Appl. Anim. Ethol. 10:5-17.
Besch, E. L., and J. E.Woods. 1977. Heat dissipation biorhythms of laboratory
animals. Lab. Anim. Sci. 27:54-59.
Biourge, V. 1995. Quantity and quality of the fibers in the diet of sled dogs. Pp. 51-55
in Proceedings of the Second Annual Sled Dog Veterinary Medical Association
Symposium, D. Grandjean and J. Vanek, eds. Reims, France: Reims Champagne
Congres.
Bjotvedt, G., C. W. Weems, and K. Foley. 1993. Strenuous exercise may cause health
hazards for racing Greyhounds. Vet. Med. Sm. Anim. Clin. 79:1481-1487.
Blatt, C. M., C. R. Taylor, and M. B. Habal. 1972. Thermal panting in dogs: The
lateral nasal gland, a source of water for evaporative cooling. Science 177:804-805.
Blatteis, C. M., and L. O. Lutherer. 1973. Cold-induced thermogenesis in dogs: Its
reduction by moderate hypoxia. J. Appl. Physiol. 35:608-612.
Blaxter, K. 1989. Energy Metabolism in Animals and Man. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Blaza, S. E. 1982. Energy requirements of dogs in cool conditions. Canine Practice
9(1):10-15.
Bloomberg, M. S., and W. W. Dugger. 1996. Racing injuries of Greyhounds:
Racetrack injury survey. Pp. 28-35 in Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual
International Sports Medicine Symposium, M. S. Bloomberg and D. Lewis, eds.
Center for Sports Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Fla.
Blythe, L. L., and D. E. Hansen. 1986. Factors affecting pre-race dehydration and
performance of racing Greyhounds. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 189:1572-1574.
Bontuimpo, V., and L. Brioschi. 1999. Alimentazione del cane da slitta. Fabbisogni
energetici. Obiettivi e Documenti Veterinari 20:18S-25S.
Bove, A. A., P. B. Hultgren, T. F. Ritzer, and R. A. Carey. 1979. Myocardial blood
flow and hemodynamic responses to exercise training in dogs. J. Appl. Physiol.
46:571-578.
Brinkhous, K. M., and E. D. Warner. 1941. Muscular dystrophy in biliary fistula dogs:
Possible relationship to vitamin E deficiency. Am. J. Pathol. 17:81-86.
Broun, G. O. 1922. Blood destruction during exercise. I. Blood changes occurring in
the course of a single day of exercise. J. Exp. Med. 36: 481-500.
Broun, G. O. 1923a. Blood destruction during exercise. II. Demonstration of blood
destruction in animals exercised after prolonged confinement. J. Exp. Med. 37:113-
130.


===== PDF PAGE 636 =====
635
Broun, G. O. 1923b. Blood destruction during exercise. III. Exercise as a bone
marrow stimulus. J. Exp. Med. 37:187-206.
Broun, G. O. 1923c. Blood destruction during exercise. IV. The development of an
equilibrium between blood destruction and regeneration after a period of training.
J. Exp. Med. 37:207-220.
Brouns, F., W. H. M. Saris, and F. Ten Hoor. 1986. Nutrition as a factor in the
prevention of injuries in recreational and competitive downhill skiing. J. Sports
Med. 26:85-90.
Brzezinska, Z., H. Kaciuba-Uscilko, and K. Nazar. 1980. Physiological responses to
prolonged physical exercise in dogs. Arch. Int. Physiol. Biochim. 88:285-291.
Budohoski, L., S. Kozlowski, R. L. Terjung, H. Kaciuba-Uscilko, K. Nazar, and I.
Falecka-Wieczorek. 1982. Changes in the lipoprotein lipase activity during exercise
in dogs fed on a mixed fat-rich meal. Pflugers Arch. 394:191-193.
Burger, I. H. 1994. Energy needs of companion animals: Matching food intakes to
requirements throughout the life cycle. J. Nutr. 124:2584S-2593S.
Butson, A. R. 1973. Scurvy in the Antarctic. Lancet 1(808):892.
Butterwick, R. F., and A. J. Hawthorne. 1998. Advances in dietary management of
obesity in dogs and cats. J. Nutr. 128:2771S-2775S.
Campbell, I. T., and J. Donaldson. 1981. Energy requirements of Antarctic sledge
dogs. Br. J. Nutr. 45:95-98.
Cerretelli, P., J. Piiper, F. Mangili, and B. Ricci. 1964. Aerobic and anaerobic
metabolism in exercising dogs. J. Appl. Physiol. 19:25-28.
Cerretelli, P., P. E. Di Prampero, and J. Piiper. 1969. Energy balance of anaerobic
work in the dog gastrocnemius muscle. Am. J. Physiol. 217:581-585.
Chatterjee, I. B., A. K. Majumder, B. K. Nandi, and N. Subramanian. 1975. Synthesis
and some major functions of vitamin C in animals. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 258:24-47.
Childs, A., C. Jacobs, T. Kaminski, B. Halliwell, and C. Leeuwenburgh. 2001.
Supplementation with vitamin C and N-acetyl-cysteine increases oxidative stress in
humans after an acute muscle injury induced by eccentric exercise. Free Radic.
Biol. Med. 31:745-753.
Cicmanec, J. L., L. W. Condie, G. R. Olson, and S. R. Wang. 1991. 90 day toxicity
study of dichloroacetate in dogs. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 17(2):376-389.
Cizek, L. J. 1959. Long-term observations on relationship between food and water
ingestion in the dog. Am. J. Physiol. 197:342-346.
Clark, B. J., M. A. Acker, K. McCully, H. V. Subramanian, R. L. Hammond, S.
Salmons, B. Chance, and L. W. Stephenson. 1988. In-vivo 31P-NMR spectroscopy
of chronically stimulated canine skeletal muscle. Am. J. Physiol. 254:C258-C266.
Cohen, Y., C. T. Robbins, and B. B. Davitt. 1978. Oxygen utilization by elk calves
during horizontal and vertical locomotion compared to other species. Comp.
Biochem. Physiol. A 61:43-48.
Coker, R. H., M. G. Krishna, D. B. Lacy, D. P. Bracy, and D. H. Wasserman. 1997.
Role of hepatic alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptor stimulation on hepatic glucose
production during heavy exercise. Am. J. Physiol. 273:E831-E838.


===== PDF PAGE 637 =====
636
Connor, M., M. A. Labato, and D. P. Laflamme. 2001. Variation in maintenance
energy requirements of pet dogs. Compend. Cont. Education, 23:84S.
Constable, P. D., K. W. Hinchcliff, J. Farris, and K. E. Schmidt. 1996. Factors
associated with finishing status for dogs competing in a long-distance sled race. J.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 208:879-882.
Coppinger, L. 1977. The world of sled dogs: From Siberia to sport racing, 1st edition,
New York: Howell Book House.
Cowley, A. W., M. M. Skelton, D. C. Merrill, A. W. Quillen, and S. J. Switzer. 1983.
Influence of daily sodium intake on vasopressin secretion and drinking in dogs.
Am. J. Physiol. 245:R860-R872.
Crighton, G. W., and R. Pownall. 1974. The homeothermic status of the neonatal dog.
Nature 251:143-145.
Crilly, J. C., D. M. Push, and D. J. Cuffe. 1976. Plasma and buffy coat vitamin C
concentrations in the dog. Folia Vet. Lat. 6:289-293.
Crist, K. A., and D. R. Romsos. 1987. Evidence for cold-induced but not for diet-
induced thermogenesis in adult dogs. J. Nutr. 117:1280-1286.
Croft, A. 1937. West Greenland sledge dogs. Polar Rec. 13:68-81.
Danowski, T. S., J. R. Elkington, and A. W. Winkler. 1944. The deleterious effect in
dogs of a dry protein ration. J. Clin. Invest. 23:816-823.
Davenport, G. M., R. L. Kelley, E. K. Altom, and A. J. Lepine. 2001. Effect of diet on
hunting performance of English pointers. Vet. Therapeutics 2:10-23.
Davidson, M. G., F. J. Geoly, B. C. Gilger, G. J. McLellan, and W. Whitley. 1998.
Retinal degeneration associated with vitamin E deficiency in hunting dogs. J. Am.
Vet. Med. Assoc. 213:645-651.
Davis, J. E., and N. Brewer. 1935. Effect of physical training on blood volume,
hemoglobin, alkali reserve and osmotic resistance of erythrocytes. Am. J. Physiol.
113:586-591.
Davis, T. R. 1967. Contribution of skeletal muscle to nonshivering thermogenesis in
the dog. Am. J. Physiol. 213:1423-1426.
Decombaz, J., M. Jambon, C. Piguet, A. Thelin, and O. Ballevre. 1995. Energy intake
and expenditure of sled dogs during the Alpirod race 1995. Pp. 113-118 in
Proceedings of the Second Annual Sled Dog Veterinary Medical Association
Symposium, D. Grandjean and J. Vanek, eds. Reims, France: Reims Champagne
Congres.
Delude, L. A. 1986. Activity patterns and behaviour of sled dogs. Appl. Anim. Behav.
Sci. 15:161-168.
Depocas, F., Y. Minaire, and J. Chattonet. 1969. Rates of oxidation of lactic acid in
dogs at rest and during moderate exercise. Can. J. Physiol. 47:603-610.
De Wever, I., C. Eeckhout, G. Vantrappen, and J. Hellemans. 1978. Disruptive effect
of test meals on interdigestive motor complex in dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 235:E661-
E665.
Dill, D. B., H. T. Edwards, and J. H. Talbott. 1932. Studies in muscular activity. VII.
Factors limiting the capacity for work. Am. J. Physiol. 77:49-62.


===== PDF PAGE 638 =====
637
Dill, D. B., A. V. Bock, and H. T. Edwards. 1933. Mechanisms for dissipating heat in
man and dog. J. Physiol. 104:36-43.
Donald, D. D., and D. Ferguson. 1966. Response of heart rate, oxygen consumption,
and arterial blood pressure to graded exercise in dogs. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med.
121:626-630.
Donoghue, S., D. S. Kronfeld, H. L. Dunlap, and H. F. Schryver. 1993. Intérêt de la
supplémentation vitaminique C chez le chien de traîneau en situation de courses ou
de stress. Recueil de Medecine Veterinaire 169:773-777.
Doris, P. A., and M. A. Baker. 1981. Effects of dehydration on thermoregulation in
cats exposed to high ambient temperatures. J. Appl. Physiol. 51:46-54.
Downey, R. L., D. S. Kronfeld, and C. A. Banta. 1980. Diet of beagles affects
stamina. J. Am. An. Hosp. Assoc. 16:273-277.
Downs, L. G., S. M. Crispin, V. LeGrande-Defretin, G. Perez-Camargo, T. McCappin,
and C. H. Bolton. 1997a. The effect of dietary changes on plasma lipids and
lipoproteins of six Labrador retrievers. Res. Vet. Sci. 63:175-181.
Downs, L. G., S. M. Crispin, V. LeGrande-Defretin, G. Perez-Camargo, T. McCappin,
and C. H. Bolton. 1997b. The influence of lifestyle and diet on the lipoprotein
profile of border collies. Res. Vet. Sci. 63: 35-42.
Durrer, J. L., and J. P. Hannon. 1962. Seasonal variations in caloric intake of dogs
living in an arctic environment. Am. J. Physiol. 202(2):375-378.
Ebing, L., and A. C. Beynen. 1999. De voeding van nederlandse sledehonden in
training. Tijdschr Diergeneeskd 124:698-701.
Edney, A. T., and P. M. Smith. 1986. Study of obesity in dogs visiting veterinary
practices in the United Kingdom. Vet. Rec. 118:391-396.
Elvehjem, C. D., J. E. Gonce, and G. W. Newell. 1944. The effect of vitamin E on
reproduction in dogs fed milk diets. J. Pediatr. 24:436-448.
English, P. B., and L. J. Filipich. 1980. Measurement of daily water intake in the dog.
J. Sm. Anim. Prac. 21:189-193.
Falecka-Wieczorek, I., and H. Kaciuba-Uscilko. 1984. Metabolic and hormonal
responses to prolonged physical exercise in dogs after a single fat-enriched meal.
Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 53:267-273.
Fancy, S. G., and R. G. White. 1985. Incremental cost of activity. Pp.143-160 in
Bioenergetics of Wild Herbivores, R. J. Hudson, and R. G. White, eds. Boca Raton,
Fla.: CRC Press.
Feldman, B. F., and P. Lessard. 1992. Hematologic and biochemical analytes in a
sporting breed. Compend. Cont. Education 14:1574-1581.
Fink, B. 2001. Reactive oxygen species release during exercise is normalized by
exercise training and reduced by administration of pyruvate as an antioxidant.
FASEB, J. 15:A951.
Finke, M. D. 1991. Evaluation of the energy requirements of adult kennel dogs. J.
Nutr. 121:S22-S28.
Fogelholm, M. 1994. Effects of bodyweight reduction on sports performance. Sports
Med. 18:249-267.


===== PDF PAGE 639 =====
638
Fomin, S. W. 1930. Über den Einfluß des Trainierens auf die Mineralischen
Substanzen der Muskeln. Biochem. Zeitsch. 217:423-429.
Forster, R. E., and T. B. Ferguson. 1952. Relationship between hypothalamic
temperature and thermoregulatory effectors in unanaesthetized cat. Am. J. Physiol.
169:255-269.
Frankel, T. L., and C. J. Bell. 1994. The practicalities of measurement and
interpretation of field metabolic rate in dogs. J. Nutr. 124:2614S-2615S.
Friedländer, K., and J. Thierse. 1928. Über den Einfluß der Inaktivität auf den
wachsenden Knochen. Zeitschr. gesammt Exper. Med. 59:724-764.
Galassetti, P., R. H. Coker, D. B. Lacy, A. D. Cherrington, and D. H. Wasserman.
1999a. Prior exercise increases net hepatic glucose uptake during a glucose load.
Am. J. Physiol. 276:E1022-E1029.
Galassetti, P., Y. Koyama, R. H. Coker, D. B. Lacy, A. D. Cherrington, and D. H.
Wasserman. 1999b. Role of a negative arterial-portal venous glucose gradient in
the postexercise state. Am. J. Physiol. 277:E1038-E1045.
Gannon, J. 1987. Feeding Greyhounds to win races. Pp. 97-109 in The Racing
Greyhound, Vol. 4, R. J. Clifford, ed. London, UK: World Greyhound Racing
Federation.
Gannon, J. R. 1980. Exertional rhabdomyolysis (myoglobinuria) in the racing
Greyhound. Pp. 783-787 in Current Veterinary Therapy: Small Animal Practice, R.
W. Kirk, ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
Gannon, J. R., and R. V. Kendall. 1982. A clinical evaluation of N,N-dimethylglycine
(DMG) and diisopropylammonium dichloroacetate (DIPA) on the performance of
racing Greyhounds. Canine Practice 9(6):7-13.
Gautier, H., M. Bonora, and J. E. Remmers. 1989. Effects of hypoxia on metabolic
rate of conscious adult cats during cold exposure. J. Appl. Physiol. 67:32-38.
Giaja, J. 1938. L’influence du froid sur l’organisme. Nutrition 8:147-160
Gibaldi, M., and D. Perrier. 2001. Pharmacokinetics, 2nd edition, New York: Marcel
Dekker.
Grandjean, D., and B. M. Paragon. 1992. Nutrition of racing and working dogs. Part I.
Energy metabolism of dogs. Compend. Cont. Education 14(12):1608-1615.
Grandjean, D., and B. M. Paragon. 1993a. Nutrition of racing and working dogs. Part
II. Determination of energy requirements and the nutritional impact of stress.
Compend. Cont. Education 15(1):45-76.
Grandjean, D., and B. M. Paragon. 1993b. Nutrition of racing and working dogs. Part
III. Dehydration, mineral and vitamin adaptations, and practical feeding guidelines.
Compend. Cont. Education 15(2):203-211.
Greanleaf, J. E., S. Kozlowski, K. Nazar, H. Kaciuba-Uscilko, and Z. Brzezinska.
1974. Temperature responses of exercising dogs to infusion of electrolytes.
Experientia 30:769-770.
Gregersen, M. I. 1932. Studies on the regulation of water intake. II. Conditions
affecting the daily water intake of dogs as registered continuously by a potometer.
Am. J. Physiol. 102:344-349.


===== PDF PAGE 640 =====
639
Grober, J. 1908. Über die Beziehungen zwischen Körperarbeit und der Masse des
Herzens and seiner Teile. Arch. Exper. Path. Pharm. 59: 424-429.
Gunn, H. M. 1978a. Differences in the histochemical properties of skeletal muscles of
different breeds of horses and dogs. J. Anat. 127:615-634.
Gunn, H. M. 1978b. The proportions of muscle, bone and fat in two different types of
dog. Res. Vet. Sci. 24:277-282.
Guy, P. S., and D. H. Snow. 1981. Skeletal muscle fiber composition in the dog and its
relationship to athletic ability. Res. Vet. Sci. 31:244-248.
Hadwen, S. 1937. The Canadian sledge dogs of the eastern and western Arctic. Polar
Rec. 13:59-68.
Haidet, G. C. 1989. Dynamic exercise in senescent Beagles: Oxygen consumption
and hemodynamic responses. Am. J. Physiol. 257:H1428-H1437.
Halseth, A. E., P. J. Flakoll, E. K. Reed, A. B. Messina, M. G. Krishna, D. B. Lacy, P.
E. Williams, and D. H. Wasserman. 1997. Effect of physical activity and fasting on
gut and liver proteolysis in the dog. Am. J. Physiol. 273:E1073-E1082.
Hamilton, K. S., F. K. Gibbons, D. P. Bracy, D. B. Lacy, A. D. Cherrington, and D. H.
Wasserman. 1996. Effect of prior exercise on the partitioning of an intestinal
glucose load between splanchnic bed and skeletal muscle. J. Clin. Invest. 98:125-
135.
Hammel, E. P., D. S. Kronfeld, V. K. Ganjam, and H. L. Dunlap. 1977. Metabolic
responses to exhaustive exercise in racing sled dogs fed diets containing medium,
low, or zero carbohydrate. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 30:409-418.
Hammel, H. T., C. H. Wyndham, and J. D. Hardy. 1958. Heat production and heat
loss in the dog at 8-36oC environmental temperature. Am. J. Physiol. 194(1):99-
108.
Hansen, C. M., J. E. Leklem, and L. T. Miller. 1996. Vitamin B-6 status of women
with a constant intake of vitamin B-6 changes with three levels of dietary protein.
J. Nutr. 126:1891-1901.
Hanssen, H. 1937. Sledge Dogs on Amundsen’s South Polar Journey. Polar Rec.
13:57-59.
Harris, R. C., and J. A. Lowe. 1995. Absorption of creatine from meat or other dietary
sources by the dog. Vet. Rec. 137:595.
Harris, R. C., J. A. Lowe, K. Warnes, and C. E. Orme. 1997. The concentration of
creatine in meat, offal and commercial dog food. Res. Vet. Sci. 62:58-62.
Hawk, P. B., B. L. Oser, and W. H. Summerson. 1954. Practical Physiological
Chemistry, 13th edition. New York: Blackiston Company.
Hayes, K. C., S. W. Nielsen, and J. E. Rousseau. 1970a. Vitamin E deficiency and fat
stress in the dog. J. Nutr. 99:196-209.
Hayes, K. C., J. E. Rousseau, and D. M. Hegsted. 1970b. Plasma tocopherol
concentrations and vitamin E deficiency in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 157:64-
71.
Hazewinkel, H. A. W., S. A. Goedegeburre, P. W. Poulos, and W. T. Wolvekamp.
1985. Influences of chronic calcium excess on the skeletal development of growing


===== PDF PAGE 641 =====
640
Great Danes. J. Am. An. Hosp. Assoc. 21: 377-391.
Head, E., H. Callahan, B. J. Cummings, C. W. Cottman, W. W. Buehl, B. A.
Muggenburg, and N. W. Milgram. 1997. Open field activity and human interaction
as a function of age and breed in dogs. Physiol. Behav. 62:963-971.
Hemingway, A. and D. Stuart. 1962. Non-shivering metabolism of cold acclimated
cats. Fed. Proc. 21:220.
Hemingway, A., W. M. Price, and D. Stuart. 1964. The calorigenic action of
catecholamines in warm acclimated and cold acclimated non-shivering cats. Int. J.
Neuropharmacol. 3:495-503.
Herbert, V. D. 1988. Pseudovitamins. Pp. 471-477 in Modern Nutrition in Health and
Disease, M. E. Shils and V. R. Young, eds. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
Hetts, S., J. D. Clark, J. P. Calpin, C. E. Arnold, and J. M. Mateo. 1992. Influence of
housing conditions on Beagle behaviour. Appl. Anim. Behav. Sci. 34:137-155.
Hill, R. C. 1998. The nutritional requirements of exercising dogs. J. Nutr. 128:2686S-
2690S.
Hill, R. C., D. Armstrong, R. W. Browne, D. D. Lewis, K. C. Scott, D. A. Sundstrom,
and J. Harper. 1999a. Some evidence for possible oxidative stress in trained
Greyhounds after a short sprint race. Fed. Proc. Program Addendum:LB49.
Hill, R. C., D. D. Lewis, K. C. Scott, S. C. Randell, D. B. Sundstrom, J. E. Speakman,
and R. F. Butterwick. 1999b. Mild food restriction increases the speed of racing
Greyhounds. J. Vet. Int. Med. 13:281.
Hill, R. C., M. S. Bloomberg, V. Legrand-Defretin, I. H. Burger, S. M. Hillock, D. A.
Sundstrom, and G. L. Jones. 2000. Maintenance energy requirements and the effect
of diet on performance in racing Greyhounds. Am. J. Vet. Res. 61:1566-1573.
Hill, R. C., D. Armstrong, R. W. Browne, D. D. Lewis, K. C. Scott, D. A. Sundstrom,
and J. Harper. 2001a. Chronic administration of high doses of vitamin E appears to
slow racing greyhounds. FASEB J. 15:A990.
Hill, R. C., D. D. Lewis, K. C. Scott, M. Omori, M. Jackson, D. A. Sundstrom, G. L.
Jones, J. E. Speakman, C. A. Doyle, and R. F. Butterwick. 2001b. The effect of
increased protein and decreased carbohydrate in the diet on performance and body
composition in racing Greyhounds. Am. J. Vet. Res. 62:440-447.
Hinchcliff, K. W. 1996. Performance failure in Alaskan sled dogs: Biochemical
correlates. Res. Vet. Sci. 61:271-272.
Hinchcliff, K. W., and G. A. Reinhart. 1996. Energy metabolism, and water turnover
in Alaskan sled dogs during running. Pp. 199-206 in Recent Advances in Canine
and Feline Nutritional Research: Proceedings of the 1996 Iams International
Nutrition Symposium, D. P. Carey, S. A. Norton, and S. M. Bolser, eds.
Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Hinchcliff, K. W., J. Olson, C. Crusberg, J. Kenyon, R. Long, W. Royle, W. Weber,
and J. Burr. 1993. Serum biochemical changes in dogs competing in a long-
distance sled race. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 202:401-405.
Hinchcliff, K. W., G. A. Reinhart, J. R. Burr, C. J. Schreier, and R. A. Swenson.
1997a. Effect of racing on serum sodium and potassium concentrations and acid-


===== PDF PAGE 642 =====
641
base status of Alaskan sled dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 210:1615-1618.
Hinchcliff, K. W., G. A. Reinhart, J. R. Burr, C. J. Schreier, and R. A. Swenson.
1997b. Metabolizable energy intake and sustained energy expenditure of Alaskan
sled dogs during heavy exertion in the cold. Am. J. Vet. Res. 58:1457-1462.
Hinchcliff, K. W., G. A. Reinhart, J. R. Burr, and R. A. Swenson. 1997c. Exercise-
associated hyponatremia in Alaskan sled dogs: Urinary and hormonal responses. J.
Appl. Physiol. 83:824-829.
Hinchcliff, K. W., L. C. Shaw, N. S. Vukich, and K. E. Schmidt. 1998. Effect of
distance traveled and speed of racing on body weight and serum enzyme activity of
sled dogs competing in a long-distance race. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 213:639-644.
Hinchcliff, K. W., G. A. Reinhart, R. DiSilvestro, A. Reynolds, A. Blostein-Fujii, and
R. A. Swenson. 2000. Oxidant stress in sled dogs subjected to repetitive endurance
exercise. Am. J. Vet. Res. 61:512-517.
Hite, M., H. M. Hanson, N. R. Bohidar, P. A. Conti, and P. A. Mattis. 1977. Effect of
cage size on patterns of activity and health of Beagle dogs. Lab. An. Sci. 27:60-64.
Hoenig, M., and D. C. Ferguson. 2002. Effects of neutering on hormonal
concentrations and energy requirements in male and female cats. Am. J. Vet. Res.
63:634-639.
Hoesslin, H. V. 1888. Ueber die Ursache der scheinbaren Abhängigkeit des Umsatzes
von der Grösse der Körperoberfläche. Arch. Physiol. 11:323-379.
Holloway, B. R., D. Stribling, S. Freeman, and L. Jamieson. 1985. The thermogenic
role of adipose tissue in the dog. Int. J. Obes. 9:423-432.
Holloway, S. A., D. Sundstrom, and D. F. Senior. 1996. Effect of acute induced
metabolic alkalosis on the acid/base responses to sprint exercise of six racing
Greyhounds. Res. Vet. Sci. 61:245-251.
Hopkins, S. G., T. A. Schubert, and B. L. Hart. 1976. Castration of adult male dogs:
Effects on roaming, aggression, urine marking, and mounting. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Assoc. 168:1108-1110.
Horstman, D. H., M. Gleser, D. Wolfe, T. Tryon, and J. Delehunt. 1974. Effects of
hemoglobin reduction on V̇ O2max and related hemodynamics in exercising dogs. J.
Appl. Physiol. 37:97-102.
Horswill, C. A., R. C. Hickner, J. R. Scott, D. L. Costill, and D. Gould. 1990. Weight
loss, dietary carbohydrate modifications, and high intensity physical performance.
Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 22: 470-476.
Houpt, K. A. 1998. Domestic animal behavior for veterinarians and animal scientists,
3rd edition, Ames: Iowa State University Press.
Hubrecht, R. C., J. A. Seppel, and T. B. Poole. 1992. Correlates of pen size and
housing conditions on the behaviour of kennelled dogs. Appl. Anim. Behav. Sci.
34:365-383.
Hultman, E., R. C. Harris, and L. L. Spriet. 1994. Work and exercise. Pp. 663-685 in
Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease, M. E. Shils, J. A. Olson, and M. Shike,
eds. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.


===== PDF PAGE 643 =====
642
Hume, D. M., and R. H. Egdahl. 1959. Effect of hypothermia and of cold exposure on
adrenal cortical and medullary secretion. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 80:435-444.
Ilkiw, J. E., P. E. Davis, and D. B. Church. 1989. Hematalogic, biochemical, blood-
gas, and acid-base values in Greyhounds before and after exercise. Am. J. Vet. Res.
50(4):583-586.
Issekutz, B. 1979. Energy mobilization in exercising dogs. Diabetes 28:139S-144S.
Issekutz, B. 1980. The role of hypoinsulinemia in exercise metabolism. Diabetes
29:629-635.
Issekutz, B., H. I. Miller, P. Paul, and K. Rodhal. 1964. Aerobic work capacity and
plasma FFA turnover. J. Appl. Physiol. 20:293-296.
Jacobson, F. H., and R. D. Squires. 1970. Thermoregulatory responses of the cat to
preoptic and environmental temperature. Pp. 581-596 in Physiological and
Behavioral Temperature Regulation, J. D. Hardy, A. P. Gagge, and J. A. J. Stolwijk,
eds. Springfield, Ill.: C. C. Thomas.
Jansky, L., R. Bartunkova, J. Kockova, J. Mejsnar, and E. Zeisberger. 1969.
Interspecies differences in cold adaptation and nonshivering thermogenesis. Fed.
Proc. 28:1053-1058.
Jensen, C., and H. E. Ederstrom. 1955. Development of temperature regulation in the
dog. Am. J. Physiol. 183:340-344.
Kaspar, L. V., and L. S. Lombard. 1963. Nutritional myodegeneration in a litter of
beagles. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 143:284-288.
Kealy, R. D., S. E .Olsson, K. L. Monti, D. F. Lawler, D. N. Biery, R. W. Helms, G.
Lust, and G. K. Smith. 1992. Effects of limited food consumption on the incidence
of hip dysplasia in growing dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 201:857-863.
Kealy, R. D., D. F. Lawler, J. M. Ballam, G. Lust, D. N. Biery, G. K. Smith, and S. L.
Mantz. 2000. Evaluation of the effect of limited food consumption on radiographic
evidence of osteoarthritis in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 217:1678-1680.
Kealy, R. D., D. F. Lawler, J. M. Ballam, S. L. Mantz, D. N. Biery, E. H. Greeley, G.
Lust, M. Segre, G. K. Smith, and H. D. Stowe. 2002. Effects of diet restriction on
life span and age-related changes in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 220:1315-1320.
Kenney, M. J., A. Flatt, R. W. Summers, C. K. Brown, and C. V. Gisolfi. 1988.
Changes in jejunal myoelectrical activity during exercise in fed untrained dogs.
Am. J. Physiol. 254:G741-G747.
Kleiber, M. 1932. Body size and metabolism. Hilgardia 6:315-353.
Kleitman, N. 1927. The effect of starvation on the daily consumption of water by the
dog. Am. J. Physiol. 81:336-340.
Knochel, J. P., J. D. Blachley, J. H. Johnson, and N. W. Carter. 1985. Muscle cell
electrical hyperpolarization and reduced exercise hyperkalemia in physically
conditioned dogs. J. Clin. Investig. 75(2):740-745.
Kohlsrauch, W. 1929. Zur Kenntnis des Trainingszustandes. Arbeitsphysiol. 2:46-50.
Kohnke, J. 1989. Feeds and feeding of greyhounds. Pp. 421-466 in Greyhound
Medicine and Surgery, Sydney: Post Graduate Committee in Veterinary Science,
University of Sydney.


===== PDF PAGE 644 =====
643
Kohnke, J. 1997. Pre-race and after racing feeding of greyhounds: Innovative new
concepts. Proceedings, Australian Greyhound Veterinary Association, Brisbane,
Australia.
Kondo, T., S. Naruse, T. Hayakawa, and T. Shibata. 1994. Effect of exercise on
gastroduodenal functions in untrained dogs. Int. J. Sports Med. 15:186-191.
Kozlowski, S., Z. Brzezinska, B. Kruk, H. Kaciuba-Uscilko, J. E. Greenleaf, and K.
Nazar. 1985. Exercise hyperthermia as a factor limiting physical performance:
Temperature effect on muscle metabolism. J. Appl. Physiol. 59:766-773.
Kronfeld, D. S. 1973. Diet and the performance of racing sled dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Assoc. 162(6):470-473.
Kronfeld, D. S., and S. Donoghue. 1988. A role for vitamin C in work stressed dogs.
Pp. 537-538 in Proceedings of the Sixth Aannual Veterinary Medical Forum of the
American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine, G. Pigeon, ed. Madison, Wis.:
Minipress.
Kronfeld, D. S., E. P. Hammel, C. F. Ramberg, and H. L. Dunlap. 1977.
Hematological and metabolic responses to training in racing sled dogs fed diets
containing medium, low, or zero carbohydrate. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 30:419-430.
Kronfeld, D. S., T. O. Adkins, R. L. Downey, I. H. Burger, and J. P. Rivers. 1989.
Nutrition, anaerobic and aerobic exercise, and stress. Pp. 133-145 in Nutrition of
the Dog and Cat: Waltham Symposium 7, I. H. Burger, and J. P. W. Rivers, eds.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kronfeld, D. S., P. L. Ferrante, and D. Grandjean. 1994. Optimal nutrition for athletic
performance, with emphasis on fat adaptation in dogs and horses. J. Nutr.
124:2745S-2753S.
Kruk, B., H. Kaciuba-Uscilko, K. Nazar, J. E. Greenleaf, and S. Kozlowski. 1985.
Hypothalamic, rectal, and muscle temperatures in exercising dogs: Effect of
cooling. J. Appl. Physiol. 58:1444-1448.
Kruk, B., K. Nazar, H. Kaciuba-Uscilko, and S. Kozlowski. 1987. Enhanced glucose
availability for working muscles reduces exercise hyperthermia in dogs. Eur. J.
Appl. Physiol. 56:577.
Kuhn, G., and W. Hardegg. 1988. Effects of indoor and outdoor maintenance of dogs
upon food intake, body weight, and different blood parameters. Z. Versuchstierkd.
31:205-214.
Külbs, F. 1912. Ueber den Einfluß der Bewegung auf den wachsenden und
erwachsenen Organismus. Deutsch Med. Wochenschr. 38:1916-1920.
Külbs, F. 1929. Neuere Untersuchungen über Herz und Arbeit. Zeitschr gesammt.
Exper. Med. 67:822-827.
Ladd, M., and L. C. Raisz. 1949. Response of the normal dog to dietary sodium
chloride. Am. J. Physiol. 159:149-152.
Laflamme, D. 1997. Development and validation of a body condition score system for
dogs. Canine Practice 22(4):10-15.
Laros, G. S., C. M. Tipton, and R. R. Cooper. 1971. Influence of physical activity on
ligament insertions in the knees of dogs. J. Bone Joint Surg. 53A:275-286.


===== PDF PAGE 645 =====
644
Lassen, E. D., A. M.Craig, and L. L. Blythe. 1986. Effects of racing on hematological
and serum biochemical values in Greyhounds. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
188(11):1299-1303.
Lee, A. H., J. S. Spano, S. F. Swaim, J. A. McGuire, and K. S. Hughes. 1986.
Evaluation of plasma and buffy coat ascorbic acid concentrations in dogs before
and after a 24-hour fast. Am. J. Vet. Res. 47:2000-2003.
Lehner, P. N., C. McCluggage, D. R. Mitchell, and D. H. Neil. 1983. Selected
parameters of the Fort Collins, Colorado, dog population, 1979-80. Appl. Anim.
Ethol. 10:19-25.
Lowe, J. A., M. Murphy, and V. Nash. 1998. Changes in plasma and muscle creatine
concentration after increases in supplementary dietary creatine in dogs. J. Nutr.
128(12):2691S-2693S.
Lozinsky, E. 1924. Heat regulation and water exchange III. The effects of “dry” and
“moist” heat upon the body temperature and blood concentrations of dogs. Am. J.
Physiol. 67:388-398.
Lucas, A., A. Therminarias, and M. Tanche. 1980. Maximum oxygen consumption in
dogs during muscular exercise and cold exposure. Pflugers Arch. 388:83-87.
Mackintosh, I. C., I. C. Dormehl, A. L. Van Gelder, and M. Du Plessis. 1983. Blood
volume, heart rate, and left ventricular ejection fraction changes in dogs before and
after exercise during endurance training. Am. J. Vet. Res. 44:1960-1962.
Manore, M. M., and J. E. Leklem. 1988. Effect of carbohydrate and vitamin B6 on
fuel substrates during exercise in women. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 20:233-241.
Manore, M. N., J. E. Leklem, and M. C. Walter. 1987. Vitamin B-6 metabolism as
affected by exercise in trained and untrained women fed diets differing in
carbohydrate and vitamin B-6 content. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 46:995-1004.
Marconi, C., D. Pendergast, J. A. Krasney, D. W. Rennie, and P. Cerretelli. 1982.
Dynamic and steady-state metabolic changes in running dogs. Respir. Physiol.
50:93-110.
Margaria, R., P. Cerretelli, P. Aghemo, and G. Sassi. 1963. Energy cost of running. J.
Appl. Physiol. 18:367-370.
Marin, E., M. Kretzshmar, J. Arokoski, O. Hänninen, and W. Klinger. 1993. Enzymes
of glutathione synthesis in dog skeletal muscles and their response to training. Acta
Physiol. Scand. 147:369-373.
Marshall, R. J., K. C. Scott, R. C. Hill, D. D. Lewis, D. Sundstrom, G. L. Jones, and J.
Harper. 2002. Supplemental vitamin C appears to slow racing greyhounds. J. Nutr.
132:1616S-1621S.
Matwichuk, C. L., S. Taylor, C. L. Shmon, P. H. Kass, and G. D. Shelton. 1999.
Changes in rectal temperature and hematologic, biochemical, blood gas, and acid-
base values in healthy Labrador retrievers before and after strenuous exercise. Am.
J. Vet. Res. 60:88-92.
Maxwell, L. C., J. K. Barclay, D. E. Mohrman, and J. A. Faulkner. 1977.
Physiological characteristics of skeletal muscles of dogs and cats. Am. J. Physiol.
233:C14-C18.


===== PDF PAGE 646 =====
645
Maxwell, L. C., T. P. White, and J. A. Faulkner. 1980. Oxidative capacity, blood flow,
and capillarity of skeletal muscles. J. Appl. Physiol. 49:627-633.
Mazin, R. M., H. H. Fordyce, and C. M. Otto. 2001. Electrolyte replacement in urban
search and rescue dogs: A field study. Vet. Therap. 2:140-147.
McArdle, W. D., F. I. Katch, and V. L. Katch. 1996. Exercise Physiology. Energy,
Nutrition and Human Performance, 4th edition, Baltimore, Md.: Williams &
Wilkins.
McIntyre, D. G., and H. E. Ederstrom. 1958. Metabolic factors in the development of
homeothermy in dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 194:293-296.
McKeever, K. H., W. A. Schurg, and V. A. Convertino. 1985. Exercise training-
induced hypervolemia in greyhounds: Role of water intake and renal mechanisms.
Am. J. Physiol. 248:R422-R425.
McLelland, G., G. Zwingelstein, C. R. Taylor, and J. M. Weber. 1994. Increased
capacity for circulatory fatty acid transport in a highly aerobic mammal. Am. J.
Physiol. 266:R1280-R1286.
McMurray, R. G., V. Ben-Ezra, W. A. Forsythe, and A. T. Smith. 1985. Responses of
endurance-trained subjects to caloric deficits induced by diet or exercise. Med. Sci.
Sports Exerc. 17:574-579.
Merrill, G. F., E. J. Zambraski, and S. M. Grassl. 1980. Effect of dichloroacetate on
plasma lactic acid in exercising dogs. J. Appl. Physiol. 48(3):427-431.
Meyer, J. H., and J. E. Doty. 1988. GI transit and absorption of solid food: Multiple
effects of guar. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 48:267-273.
Miles, P. D., D. T. Finegood, H. L. Lickley, and M. Vranic. 1992. Regulation of
glucose turnover at the onset of exercise in the dog. J. Appl. Physiol. 72:2487-
2494.
Miller, H., B. Issekutz, and K. Rodahl. 1963. Effect of exercise on the metabolism of
fatty acids in the dog. Am. J. Physiol. 205(1):167-172.
Miller, L. T., J. E. Leklem, and T. D. Shultz. 1985. The effect of dietary protein on the
metabolism of vitamin B-6 in humans. J. Nutr. 115:1663-1672.
Minaire, Y., A. Pernod, M. J. Jomain, and M. Mottaz. 1971. Lactate turnover and
oxidation in normal and adrenal-demedullated dogs during cold exposure. Can. J.
Physiol. Pharmacol. 49:1063-1070.
Minaire, Y., J. C. Vincent-Falquet, A. Pernod, and J. Chatonnet. 1973. Energy supply
in acute cold-exposed dogs. J. Appl. Physiol. 35: 51-57.
Minaire, Y., M. Cagnard, A. Freminet, J. Forichon, and G. Dallevet. 1982. Effect of
cold ambient temperature on glucose and alanine turnover in dogs. Pflugers Arch.
395:126-131.
Minaire, Y., J. Forichon, A. Freminet, M. Cagnard, and G. Dallevet. 1983. Substrates
for cold thermogenesis in thyrotoxic dogs. J. Appl. Physiol. 55:663-668.
Moates, J. M., D. B. Lacy, R. E. Goldstein, A. D. Cherrington, and D. H. Wasserman.
1988. Metabolic role of the exercise-induced increment in epinephrine in the dog.
Am. J. Physiol. 255:E428-E436.


===== PDF PAGE 647 =====
646
Morpurgo, B. 1897. Ueber Activitäts-Hypertrophie der willkürlichen Muskeln.
Virchow’s Arch.150:522-554.
Morris, M. L., S. M. Teeter, and D. R.Collins. 1971. The effects of the exclusive
feeding of an all-meat dog food. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 158(4):477-488.
Mortola, J. P., and T. Matsuoka. 1993. Interaction between CO2 production and
ventilation in the hypoxic kitten. J. Appl. Physiol. 74:905-910.
Musch, T. I., G. C. Haidet, G. A. Ordway, J. C. Longhurst, and J. H. Mitchell. 1985.
Dynamic exercise training in foxhounds. I. Oxygen consumption and
hemodynamic responses. J. Appl. Physiol. 59:183-189.
Musch, T. I., G. C. Haidet, G. A. Ordway, J. C. Longhurst, and J. H. Mitchell. 1987.
Training effects on regional blood flow response to maximal exercise in foxhounds.
J. Appl. Physiol. 62:1724-1732.
Nagasarka, T., and L. D. Carlson. 1965. Responses of cold- and warm-adapted dogs
to infused norepinephrine and acute body cooling. Am. J. Physiol. 209:227-230.
National Research Council (NRC). 1985. Nutrient Requirements of Dogs.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Nazar, K., J. E. Greenleaf, E. Pohoska, H. Kaciuba-Uscilko, and S. Kozlowski. 1992.
Exercise, performance, core temperature, and metabolism after prolonged restricted
activity and retraining in dogs. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 63:684-688.
Nazar, K., J. E. Greenleaf, D. Philpott, E. Pohoska, K. Olszewska, and H. Kaciuba-
Uscilko. 1993. Muscle mitochondrial density after exhaustive exercise in dogs:
Prolonged restricted activity and retraining. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 64:306-
313.
Nold, J. L., L. J. Peterson, and M. R. Fedde. 1991. Physiological changes in the
running greyhound (Canis domesticus): Influence of race length. Comp. Biochem.
Physiol. 100A(3):623-627.
O’Connor, W. J. 1972. Drinking by dogs during and after running. J. Physiol.
226:66P.
O’Connor, W. J. 1975. Drinking by dogs during and after running. J. Physiol.
250:247-259.
O’Connor, W. J., and D. J. Potts. 1969. The external water exchanges of normal
laboratory dogs. Q. J. Exp. Physiol. 54:244-269.
Okamura, K., T. Doi, K. Hamada, M. Sakurai, K. Matsumoto, K. Imaizumi, Y.
Yoshioka, S. Shimizu and M. Suzuki. 1997. Effect of amino acid and glucose
administration during postexercise recovery on protein kinetics in dogs. Am. J.
Physiol. 272:E1023-E1030.
Ordway, G. A., D. L. Floyd, J. C. Longhurst, and J. H. Mitchell. 1984. Oxygen
consumption and hemodynamic responses during graded treadmill exercise in the
dog. J. Appl. Physiol. 57:601-607.
Orr, N. W.M. 1966. The feeding of sledge dogs on Antarctic expeditions. Br. J. Nutr.
20:1-12.
Panaman, R. 1981. Behaviour and ecology of free-ranging female farm cats. Z.
Tierpsychol. 56:59-73.


===== PDF PAGE 648 =====
647
Parsons, D., T. I. Musch, R. L. Moore, G. C. Haidet, and G. A. Ordway. 1985.
Dynamic exercise training in foxhounds. II. Analysis of skeletal muscle. J. Appl.
Physiol. 59:190-197.
Patil, A. R., and T. M. Bisby. 2002. Comparison of maintenance energy requirement
of client-owned dogs and kennel dogs. Compend. Cont. Education 24:S81.
Paul, P., and W. L. Holmes. 1973. Free fatty acid metabolism during stress: Exercise,
acute cold exposure, and anaphylactic shock. Lipids 8:142-150.
Paul, P., and W. L. Holmes. 1975. Free fatty acid and glucose metabolism during
increased energy expenditure and after training. Med. Sci. Sports 7:176-183.
Pernod, A., J. C. Vincent-Falquet, M. J. Jomain, and Y. Minaire. 1972. Glucose and
glycogen as fuels for thermogenesis in cold exposed dogs. Life Sci. I 11:475-482.
Piercy, R. J., K. W. Hinchcliff, R. A. DiSilvestro, G. A. Reinhart, C. R. Baskin, M. G.
Hayek, J. R. Burr, and R. A. Swenson. 2000. Effect of dietary supplements
containing antioxidants on attenuation of muscle damage in exercising sled dogs.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 61:1438-1445.
Piercy, R. J., K. W. Hinchcliff, P. S. Morley, R. A. DiSilvestro, G. A. Reinhart, S.
L.Nelson, K. E. Schmidt, and A. Morrie-Craig. 2001a. Association between
vitamin E and enhanced athletic performance in sled dogs. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.
33:826-833.
Piercy, R. J., K. W. Hinchcliff, P. S. Morley, R. A. DiSilvestro, G. A. Reinhart, S. L. J.
Nelson, K. E. Schmidt, and A. M. Craig. 2001b. Vitamin E and exertional
rhabdomyolysis during endurance sled dog racing. Neuromuscul. Disord. 11:278-
286.
Pieschl, R. L., P. W. Toll, D. E. Leith, L. J. Peterson, and M. R. Fedde. 1992. Acid-
base changes in the running greyhound: Contributing variables. J. Appl. Physiol.
73(6):2297-2304.
Piiper, J., P. Cerretelli, F. Cuttica, and F. Mangili. 1966. Energy metabolism and
circulation in dogs exercising in hypoxia. J. Appl. Physiol. 21:1143-1149.
Podmore, I. D., H. R.Griffiths, K. E. Herbert, N. Mistry, P. Mistry, and J. Lunec.
1998. Vitamin C exhibits pro-oxidant properties. Nature 392:559.
Pohoska, E. 1979. The effect of prolonged restriction of physical activity on exercise
performance in dogs. Acta Physiol. Pol. 30:337-350.
Poole, J. W., R. J. Sammartano, and S. J. Boley. 1987. Hemodynamic basis of the pain
of chronic mesenteric ischemia. Am. J. Surg. 153:171-175.
Porter, J. A., and W. R. Canaday. 1971. Hematologic values in mongrel and
greyhound dogs being screened for research use. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
159(11):1603-1606.
Procter, H. A., and C. H. Best. 1932. Changes in muscle glycogen accompanying
physical training. Am. J. Physiol. 100:506-510.
Puustjärvi, K., P. Karjalainen, J. Nieminen, H. J. Helminen, S. Soimakallio, T.
Kivimäki, and J. Arokoski. 1991. Effect of long term running on spinal mineral
content in dogs. Calcif. Tissue Int. 49:S81-S82.


===== PDF PAGE 649 =====
648
Puustjärvi, K., P. Karjalainen, J. Nieminen, J. Arokoski, M. Parviainen, H. J.
Helminen, and S. Soimakallio. 1992. Endurance training associated with slightly
lowered serum estradiol levels decreases mineral density of canine skeleton. J.
Bone Mineral Res. 7:619-624.
Puustjärvi, K., R. Lappalainen, L. Niemitukla, I. Arnala, J. Nieminen, M. Tammi, and
H. J. Helminen. 1995. Long-distance running alters bone anthropometry, elemental
composition and mineral density of young dogs. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 5:17-
23.
Querrengaesser, A., C. Iben, and J. Liebetseder. 1994. Blood changes during training
and racing in sled dogs. J. Nutr. 124:2760S-2764S.
Raab, J. L., P. Eng, and R. A. Waschler. 1976. Metabolic cost of grade running in
dogs. J. Appl. Physiol 41:532-535.
Ramsay, D. J., and T. N. Thrasher. 1991. Regulation of fluid intake in dogs following
water deprivation. Brain Res. Bull. 27:495-499.
Ready, A. E., and G. Morgan. 1984. The physiological response of Siberian husky
dogs to exercise: Effect of interval training. Can. Vet. J. 25:86-91.
Reynolds, A. J., L. Fuhrer, H. L. Dunlap, M. D. Finke, and F. A. Kallfelz. 1994. Lipid
metabolite responses to diet and training in sled dogs. J. Nutr. 124:2754S-2759S.
Reynolds, A. J., L. Fuhrer, H. L. Dunlap, M. Finke, and F. A. Kallfelz. 1995. Effect of
diet and training on muscle glycogen storage and utilization in sled dogs. J. Appl.
Physiol. 79:1601-1607.
Reynolds, A. J., D. P. Carey, G. A. Reinhart, R. A. Swenson, and F. A. Kallfelz. 1997.
Effect of postexercise carbohydrate supplementation on muscle glycogen repletion
in trained sled dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 58:1252-1256.
Reynolds, A. J., G. A. Reinhart, D. P. Carey, D. A. Simmerman, D. A. Frank, and F.
A. Kallfelz. 1999. Effect of protein intake during training on biochemical and
performance variables in sled dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 60:789-795.
Rice, H. A., and A. H. Steinhaus. 1931. Studies in the physiology of exercise. V.
Acid-base changes in the serum of exercised dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 96:529-537.
Robinson, E. A., and E. F. Adolph. 1943. Pattern of normal water drinking in dogs.
Am. J. Physiol. 139:39-44.
Robinson, J. A., B. A. Gulick, R. E. Hodges, and B. W. Glad. 1979. Comparative
studies of whole blood and plasma ascorbic acid levels in some species of animals.
Fed. Proc. 38 556.
Rose, R. J., and M. S. Bloomberg. 1989. Responses to sprint exercise in the
greyhound: Effects on haematology, serum biochemistry and muscle metabolites.
Res. Vet. Sci. 47:212-218.
Rowntree, L. G. 1922. The water balance of the body. Physiol. Rev. 2:116.
Rubner, M. 1910. Ueber Kompensation und Summation von funktionellen Leistungen
des Körpers. Sitzungsberichte der Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin) 16:316-
324.
Sahlin, K., K. Ekberg, and S. Cizinsky. 1991. Changes in plasma hypoxanthine and
free radical markers during exercise in man. Acta Physiol. Scand. 142:275-281.


===== PDF PAGE 650 =====
649
Scarlett, J. M., and S. Donoghue. 1998. Associations between body condition and
disease in cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 212:1725-1731.
Schilling, J. A., R. B. Harvey, E. L. Becker, T. Velasquez, G. Wells, and B. Balke.
1956. Work performance at altitude after adaptation in man and dog. J. Appl.
Physiol. 11:381-387.
Schmidt-Nielsen, K. 1984. Scaling: Why Is Animal Size So Important. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Scholander, P. F., R. Hock, V. Walters, F. Johnson, and L. Irving. 1950a. Heat
regulation in some Arctic and tropical mammals and birds. Biol. Bull. 99:237-258.
Scholander, P. F., V. Walters, R. Hock, and L. Irving. 1950b. Body insulation of some
Arctic and tropical mammals and birds. Biol. Bull. 99:225-236.
Schwartz, E. R. 1980. Metabolic response during early stages of surgically-induced
osteoarthritis in mature beagles. J. Rheumatology 7:788-800.
Scott, K. C., R. C. Hill, D. D. Lewis, D. A. Sundstrom, P. Harris, and R.C. Harris.
1999. Oral creatine has little effect on muscle creatine or performance in racing
greyhounds. Program Addendum for Fed. Proc. LB212.
Scott, K. C., R. C. Hill, D. D. Lewis, A. J. Boning, and D. A. Sundstrom. 2001. Effect
of α-tocopheryl acetate supplementation on vitamin E concentrations in
greyhounds before and after a race. Am. J. Vet. Res. 62:1118-1120.
Scott, K. C., R. C. Hill, D. D. Lewis, R. Gronwall, D. A. Sundstrom, G. L. Jones, and
J. Harper. 2002. Serum ascorbic acid concentrations in previously unsupplemented
greyhounds after administration of a single dose of ascorbic acid intravenously or
per os. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 86:222-228.
Seeherman, H. J., C. R. Taylor, G. M. Maloiy, and R. B. Armstrong. 1981. Design of
the mammalian respiratory system. II. Measuring maximum aerobic capacity.
Respir. Physiol. 44:11-23.
Shaw, W. A., T. B. Issekutz, and B. Issekutz. 1976. Gluconeogenesis from glycerol at
rest and during exercise in normal, diabetic, and methylprednisolone-treated dogs.
Metabolism 25:329-339.
Sheng, H. P., and R. A. Huggins. 1971. Direct and indirect measurement of total body
water in the growing beagle. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 137:1093-1099.
Sheng, H. P., and R. A. Huggins. 1979. A review of body composition studies with
emphasis on total body water and fat. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 32:630-547.
Shiraki, K. 1968. The effect of splenectomy on sports anemia. J. Physiol. Soc. Jpn.
30:1-13.
Siebert, W. W. 1928. Untersuchungen über Hypertrophie des Skelettmuskels. Klin.
Med. 109:350-359.
Siwak, C. T., H. L. Murphey, B. A. Muggenburg, and N. W. Milgram. 2002. Age-
dependent decline in locomotor activity in dogs is environment specific. Physiol.
Behav. 75:65-70.
Slater, M. R., J. M. Scarlett, S. Donoghue, R. E. Kaderly, B. N. Bonnett, J. Cockshutt,
and H. N. Erb. 1992. Diet and exercise as potential risk factors for osteochondritis
dessicans in dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 53(11):2119-2124.


===== PDF PAGE 651 =====
650
Slowtzoff, B. 1903. Über die Beziehungen zwischen Körpergrösser und
Stoffverbrauch der Hunde Bei Ruhe und Arbeit. Archives Gesamte Physiologie
95:158-191.
Sneddon, J. C., P. P. Minnaar, J. F. W. Grosskopf, and H. T. Groeneveld. 1989.
Physiological and blood biochemical responses to submaximal treadmill exercise in
Canaan dogs before, during and after training. J. South Afr. Vet. Assoc. 60:87-91.
Snow, D. H., and M. Frigg. 1990. Plasma concentration of some vitamins in
greyhounds. J. Sm. Anim. Prac. 31:605-609.
Snow, D. H., R. C. Harris, and E. Stuttard. 1988. Changes in haematology and plasma
biochemistry during maximal exercise in greyhounds. Vet. Rec. 123:487-489.
Staaden, R. 1984. The exercise physiology of the racing Greyhound: Ph.D. thesis,
School of Veterinary Studies, Murdoch University: Perth, Australia.
Steinhaus, A. H. 1928. Studies on the physiology of exercise I. Exercise and basal
metabolism in dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 83:658-677.
Steinhaus, A. H. 1933. Chronic effects of exercise. Physiol. Rev. 13:103-143.
Steinhaus, A. H., L. A. Hoyt, and H. A. Rice. 1932. Studies in the physiology of
exercise. X. The effects of running and swimming on the organ weights of growing
dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 99:512-520.
Stepien, R. L., K. W. Hinchcliff, P. D. Constable, and J. Olson. 1998. Effect of
endurance training on cardiac morphology in Alaskan sled dogs. J. Appl. Physiol.
85:1368-1375.
Stoliker, H. E., H. L. Dunlap, and D. S. Kronfeld. 1976. Bone mineral measurement
by photon densitometry in racing sled dogs, and its relationship to body weight, sex
and bone fractures. Vet. Med. Small Anim. Clin. 71:1545-1550.
Stuart, D. G., R. George, W. J. Freeman, A. Hemingway, and W. M. Price. 1961.
Effects of anti- and pseudo-Parkinson drugs on shivering. Exp. Neurol. 4:106-114.
Tasler, J., W. Obtulowicz, M. Cieszkowski, and S. Konturek. 1974. Gastrointestinal
secretory function during physical exercise. Acta Physiol. Pol. 25:215-226.
Taylor, C. R., K. Schmidt-Nielsen, and J. L. Raab. 1970. Scaling of energetic cost of
running to body size in mammals. Am. J. Physiol. 219:1104-1107.
Taylor, C. R., K. Schmidt-Nielsen, R. Dmi’el, and M. Fedak. 1971. Effect of
hyperthermia on heat balance during running in the African hunting dog. Am. J.
Physiol. 220:823-827.
Taylor, C. R., S. L. Caldwell, and V. J. Rowntree. 1972. Running up and down hills:
Some consequences of size. Science 178:1096-1097.
Taylor, C. R., G. M. Maloiy, E. R. Weibel, V. A. Langman, J. M. Kamau, H. J.
Seeherman, and N. C. Heglund. 1981. Design of the mammalian respiratory
system. III. Scaling maximum aerobic capacity to body mass: Wild and domestic
mammals. Respir. Physiol. 44: 25-37.
Taylor, C. R., N. C. Heglund, and G. M. O. Maloiy. 1982. Energetics and mechanics
of terrestrial locomotion. Metabolic energy consumption as a function of speed and
body size. J. Exp. Biol. 97:1-21.
Taylor, R. J. F. 1957. The work output of sledge dogs. J. Physiol. 137: 210-217.


===== PDF PAGE 652 =====
651
Taylor, R. J. F., A. N. Worden, and C. E. Waterhouse. 1958. The diet of sledge dogs.
Br. J. Nutr. 13:1.
Therminarias, A., M. F. Chirpaz, A. Lucas, and M. Tanche. 1979. Catecholamines in
dogs during cold adaptation by repeated immersions. J. Appl. Physiol. 46:662-668.
Therriault, D. G., G. A. Beller, J. A. Smoake, and L. H. Hartley. 1973. Intramuscular
energy sources in dogs during physical work. J. Lipid Res. 14:54-60.
Thörner, W. 1930. Trainingsversuche an Hunden. I. Der Enfluß der Laufarbeit auf das
Herz. Arbeitsphysiol 3:1-26.
Thörner, W. 1932. Trainingsversuche an Hunden. II. Enfluß der Laufarbeit auf das
Blut, insbesondere auf seine körperlichen Bestandteile. Arbeitsphysiol 5:516-536.
Tipton, C. M., S. L. James, W. Mergner, and T. K. Tcheng. 1970. Influence of
exercise on strength of medial collateral ligaments of dogs. Am. J. Physiol.
218:894-901.
Tohori, M., T. Yamada, S. Hibino, K. Ikeda, T. Ichii, S. Kimura, and H. Yoshimura.
1979. On the erythrocyte fragility of the splenic blood in relation to the lipid
components of the plasma and erythrocyte. Jpn. J. Phys. Fitness Sports Med.
28:333.
Toll, P. W., and A. J. Reynolds. 2002. The canine athlete. Pp.261-289 in Small
Animal Clinical Nutrition, M. S. Hand, C. D. Thatcher, R. L. Remillard, and P.
Roudebush, eds. Marceline, Mo.: Walsworth Publishing.
Toll, P. W., R. L. Pieschl, and M. S. Hand. 1992. The effect of dietary fat and
carbohydrate on sprint performance in racing Greyhound dogs. Pp. 1-3 in
Proceedings of the 8th International Racing Greyhound Symposium. Fla: North
American Veterinary Conference.
Van Limborg, C. L., and J. J. Van der Wind. 1972. Enkele voorlopige onderzoekingen
aangaande de wateropname van honden. Tijdschrift voor Diergeneeskunde
97:1217-1221.
Vatner, S. F., C. B. Higgins, R. W. Millard, and D. Franklin. 1974. Role of the spleen
in the peripheral vascular response to severe exercise in untethered dogs.
Cardiovasc. Res. 8:276-282.
Vincent-Falquet, J. C., A. Pernod, J. Forichon, and Y. Minaire. 1972. Free fatty acids
as the major fuel for thermogenesis in dogs. Life-Sciences II 11:725-732.
Wagner, J. A., S. M. Horvath, and T. E. Dahms. 1977. Cardiovascular, respiratory, and
metabolic adjustments to exercise in dogs. J. Appl. Physiol. 42:403-407.
Wakshlag, J. J., F. A. Kallfelz, S. C. Barr, G. Ordway, N. J. Haley, C. E. Flaherty, R.
L. Kelley, E. K. Altom, A. J. Lepine, and D. J. Davenport. 2002a. Effects of
exercise on canine skeletal muscle proteolysis: An investigation of the ubiquitin-
proteosome pathway and other metabolic markers. Vet. Therap. 3:215-225.
Wakshlag, J. J., K. A. Snedden, A. M. Otis, C. A. Kennedy, J. M. Scarlett, F. A.
Kallfelz, D. J. Davenport, A. J. Reynolds, and G. A. Reinhart. 2002b. Effects of
post-exercise supplements on glycogen repletion in skeletal muscle. Vet. Therap.
3:226-234.


===== PDF PAGE 653 =====
652
Wander, R. C., J. A. Hall, J. L. Gradin, S. H. Du, and D. E. Jewell. 1997. The ratio of
dietary (n-6) to (n-3) fatty acids influences immune system function, eicosanoid
metabolism, lipid peroxidation and vitamin E status in aged dogs. J. Nutr.
127:1198-1205.
Wasserman, D. H., H. Lavina, A. Lickley and M. Vranic. 1985. Effect of hematocrit
reduction on hormonal and metabolic responses to exercise. J. Appl. Physiol.
58:1257-1262.
Wasserman, D. H., D. B.Lacy, D. R. Green, P. E. Williams, and A. D. Cherrington.
1987. Dynamics of hepatic lactate and glucose balances during prolonged exercise
and recovery in the dog. J. Appl. Physiol. 63:2411-2417.
Wasserman, D. H., P. E. Williams, D. B. Lacy, D. R. Green, and A. D. Cherrington.
1988. Importance of intrahepatic mechanisms to gluconeogenesis from alanine
during exercise and recovery. Am. J. Physiol. 254:E518-E525.
Wasserman, D. H., J. A. Spalding, D. B. Lacy, C. A. Colburn, R. E. Goldstein, and A.
D. Cherrington. 1989a. Glucagon is a primary controller of hepatic glycogenolysis
and gluconeogenesis during muscular work. Am. J. Physiol. 257:E108-E117.
Wasserman, D. H., P. E. Williams, D. B. Lacy, R. E. Goldstein, and A. D.
Cherrington. 1989b. Exercise-induced fall in insulin and hepatic carbohydrate
metabolism during muscular work. Am. J. Physiol. 256:E500-E509.
Wasserman, D. H., C. C. Connolly, and M. J. Pagliassotti. 1991a. Regulation of
hepatic lactate balance during exercise. Med Sci. Sports Exerc. 23:912-919.
Wasserman, D. H., R. J. Geer, P. E. Williams, T. Becker, D. B. Lacy, and N. N.
Abumrad. 1991b. Interaction of gut and liver in nitrogen metabolism during
exercise. Metabolism 40:307-314.
Wasserman, D. H., D. B. Lacy, D. Bracy, and P. E. Williams. 1992. Metabolic
regulation in peripheral tissues and transition to increased gluconeogenic mode
during prolonged exercise. Am. J. Physiol. 263:E345-E354.
Weibel, E. R., C. R. Taylor, J. J. O’Neil, D. E. Leith, P. Gehr, H. Hoppeler, V.
Langman, and R. V. Baudinette. 1983. Maximal oxygen consumption and
pulmonary diffusing capacity: A direct comparison of physiologic and
morphometric measurements in canids. Respir. Physiol. 54:173-188.
Weibel, E. W., C. R. Taylor, J. M. Weber, R. Vock, T. J. Roberts, and H. Hoppeler.
1996. Design of the oxygen and substrate pathways VII. Different structural limits
for oxygen supply to muscle mitochondria. J. Exp. Biol. 199:1699-1709.
White, R. G., and M. K. Yousef. 1977. Energy expenditure in reindeer walking on
roads and on tundra. Can. J. Zool. 56:215-223.
Williams, B. D., R. R. Wolfe, D. P. Bracy, and D. H. Wasserman. 1996. Gut
proteolysis contributes essential amino acids during exercise. Am. J. Physiol.
270:E85-E90.
Williams, G. D., and P. M. Newberne. 1971. Decreased resistance to Salmonella
infection in obese dogs. Fed. Proc. 30:572.
Williams, M. H. 1992. Ergogenic and ergolytic substances. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.
24:S344-S348.


===== PDF PAGE 654 =====
653
Wolter, R., J. Bretau, A. Durix, and C. Gibon. 1980. Étude expérimental de la
digestibilité d’aliments secs chez le chien. Recueil de Medecine Veterinaire
156:385-388.
Woods, J. E., and E. L. Besch. 1971. Dissipation of body heat in dogs in a controlled
environment. Physiologist 14:252.
Woods, J. E., and E. L. Besch. 1974. Influence of group size on heat dissipation from
dogs in a controlled environment. Lab. An. Sci. 24:72-78.
Wu, E. Y., M. Ramanathan, and C. C. W. Hsia. 2001. Role of hematocrit in the
recruitment of pulmonary diffusing capacity: Comparison of human and dog. J.
Appl. Physiol. 80:1014-1020.
Wyatt, H. T. 1963. Further experiments on the nutrition of sledge dogs. Br. J. Nutr.
17:273-279.
Yamada, T., M. Tohori, T. Ashida, N. Kajiwara, and H. Yoshimura. 1987. Comparison
of effects of vegetable protein diet and animal protein diet on the initiation of
anemia during vigorous physical training (sports anemia) in dogs and rats. J. Nutr.
Sci. Vitaminol. Tokyo 33(2):129-149.
Yoshikawa, T., S. Mori, A. J. Santiesteban, T. C. Sun, E. Hafstad, J. Chen, and D. B.
Burr. 1994. The effects of muscle fatigue on bone strain. J. Exp. Biol. 188:217-233.
Young, D. R. 1959. Effect of food deprivation on treadmill running in dogs. J. Appl.
Physiol. 14:1018-1022.
Young, D. R. 1960. Effect of body composition and weight gain on performance in
the adult dog. J. Appl. Physiol. 15:493-495.
Young, D. R., A. Iacovino, P. Erve, R. Mosher, and H. Spector. 1959a. The effect of
time of feeding after carbohydrate or water supplement on work in dogs. J. Appl.
Physiol. 14:1013-1017.
Young, D. R., R. Mosher, P. Erve, and H. Spector. 1959b. Body temperature and heat
exchange during treadmill running in dogs. J. Appl. Physiol. 14:839-843.
Young, D. R., R. Mosher, P. Erve, and H. Spector. 1959c. Energy metabolism and gas
exchange during treadmill running in dogs. J. Appl. Physiol. 14:834-838.
Young, D. R., N. S. Schafer, and R. Price. 1960. Effect of nutrient supplements during
work on performance capacity in dogs. J. Appl. Physiol. 15:1022-1026.
Young, D. R., R. Price, N. E. Elder, and R. R. Adachi. 1962. Energy and electrolyte
metabolism and adrenal responses during work in dogs. J. Appl Physiol. 17:669-
674.
Zannoni, V., M. Lynch, S. Goldstein, and P. Suto. 1974. A rapid micromethod for
determination of ascorbic acid in plasma and tissues. Biochem. Med. 11:41-48.
Zentek, J., and H. Meyer. 1992. Energieaufnahme adulter Deutscher Doggen. [Energy
intake of adult Great Danes]. Berl. Munch. Tierarztl. Wochenschr. 105:325-327.
Zinker, B. A., T. Mohr, P. Kelly, K. Namdaran, D. P. Bracy, and D. H. Wasserman.
1994. Exercise-induced fall in insulin: Mechanism of action at the liver and effects
on muscle glucose metabolism. Am. J. Physiol. 266:E683-E689.
Zinker, B. A., R. D. Wilson, and D. H. Wasserman. 1995. Interaction of decreased
arterial PO2 and exercise on carbohydrate metabolism in the dog. Am. J. Physiol.


===== PDF PAGE 655 =====
654
269:E409-E417.
Zuber, R. M., L. Neuwirth, and R. C. Hill. 1996. A scintigraphic study of the carpus
and metacarpus of the racing greyhound. Vet. Radiol. Ultrasound 37(1)A:80.
Zuntz, N. 1903. Einfluss der Gesshwindigkeit, der Körpertemperatur und der Uebung
auf den Stoffverbrauch bei Ruhe udn bei Muskelarbeit. Pflugers Arch. 95:192-208.


===== PDF PAGE 656 =====
655
12
Diet Formulation and Feed
Processing
PETFOOD PROCESSING
Although there are substantial differences in the nutrient requirements of dogs
and cats, there are many similarities in the techniques used to manufacture their
foods. For this reason, petfood processing is discussed in a generic manner and,
when appropriate, issues concerning individual species are addressed separately.
General Considerations
Dogs and cats have a demonstrated requirement for specific nutrients but not a
requirement for specific feedstuffs to be included in their diet (AAFCO, 2002).
Nevertheless, pets can be quite individualistic in their feeding habits and often
exhibit food preferences that may have been conditioned by previous dietary
experiences. The conditioned responses may favor a particular form (dry, semi-
moist, canned) or texture (mixed; soft-moist; dry; flavor induced by specific
ingredients, e.g., fish). It is sometimes difficult to change a pet’s feeding behavior,
even though the new feed may be nutritionally adequate. A conditioned diet
preference should not be confused with nutritional requirements.
Dogs


===== PDF PAGE 657 =====
656
Dogs differ from cats in that they are not strict carnivores but fall more in the
omnivorous category. This fact allows a great deal more latitude in ingredient
selection and formulation. It is entirely feasible to formulate an adequate dog diet
using no animal tissue-based ingredients. This fact and the remarkable adaptability
of the dog have led to the successful use of commercial diets that differ widely in
their ingredient composition, texture, and form.
Cats
While cats are true carnivores in the wild, most commercial diets for domestic
cats contain significant amounts of vegetable matter that is satisfactorily used by the
animal as a nutrient source. However, acceptable commercial cat diets contain a
portion of animal source ingredients to meet specific nutrient requirements (e.g.,
arachidonic acid, taurine) if not met by synthetic sources. Animal tissue-based
ingredients also contribute significantly to the acceptability of the food by the cat
and, therefore, play a role in adequate consumption. Generally speaking, strict
vegetarian diets, when fed alone, are not nutritionally adequate for cats, even though
such diets can be made sufficiently palatable to be readily consumed.
PETFOOD CATEGORIES
Petfood generally falls into two broad categories: dry or canned. Dry petfood can
be further subdivided into dry-expanded, semi-moist, or soft-expanded, depending
on moisture content.
Dry Petfoods
Dry-Expanded
Dry-expanded petfoods typically contain 10-12 percent final moisture content and
are formulated using cereal grains, cereal grain by-products, soybean products,
animal by-products (including milk by-products), fats and oils, vitamins, and micro-
and macrominerals. Whereas dry dog foods may be marketed as meal, pellets,
kibbles, extruded, or baked products, dry cat foods are usually processed by
extrusion cooking. Because cats lack the molar teeth found in dogs, food particles
must be produced in a size and shape suitable for incising rather than grinding by
attrition. Extrusion processing is particularly suited for accomplishing this (Rokey
and Huber, 1994).
The vast majority of dry petfood marketed is extrusion processed. The extrusion
process typically results in moderate to high levels of gelatinization of dietary starch
(Mercier and Feillit, 1975). By gelatinizing part or most of the starch, the site of


===== PDF PAGE 658 =====
657
starch hydrolysis (digestion) occurs in the upper gut, resulting in better utilization by
the animal and reduced digestive upset.
Typical modern extrusion systems incorporate a means of conditioning the pre-
extrusion mash with both steam and water. After conditioning, the mash is directed
into the extruder barrel where additional steam, water, and, in some cases, a meat
slurry may be incorporated into the mash. Within the extruder barrel, the material is
“cooked” by a combination of friction, shear, and indirect heat to the point that the
starch is mostly gelatinized and the heat-labile microbial population is reduced to nil
(Rokey and Huber, 1994).
The die, located at the discharge of the extruder, serves two functions in petfood
processing. First, it provides a resistive force for the extruder screw and barrel to
work against to elevate both frictional heat and pressure resulting in thermal
reactions within the extrudate. Second, the die, in combination with the cutter knife,
provides the three-dimensional shapes of the petfood.
At the die exit, the mash, now a viscoamorphic mass, will expand upon reaching
atmospheric pressure. The expanded, intricately shaped food particles have become
very important in satisfying the anthropomorphic desires of contemporary pet
owners. Using extrusion processing, a petfood manufacturer can produce a nearly
infinite array of shapes, sizes, and colors. This capability is critical in market
development but has little to do with the nutritional adequacy of the petfood.
After extrusion processing, the injected steam and water used in the process must
be removed by drying. Typical moisture levels reached during processing range from
22 to 28 percent and must be reduced to the range of 10-12 percent for suitable shelf
life. Drying is typically accomplished using some form of a continuous dryer with a
separate cooler or dryer-cooler combination.
Dry dog and cat foods typically contain 5-12.5 percent crude fat, with the
majority of the fat being applied post-processing. These fat levels are achieved by
spraying a portion of the liquefied fat onto the extruded product. Additionally, it is
common to spray-coat the petfood with various protein digests and/or flavors to
increase its acceptance by the pet (Corbin, 2000).
Alternative Food Forms—Meal, Pellets, and Kibbles
As alternate feed forms, meal, pelleted, and kibbled petfoods represent a minor
part of the petfood industry. However, some pet owners prefer one of these forms,
and they often provide a lower-cost alternative to extruded dry foods.
Meal
Meal form petfoods are a relatively simple mixture of dry ingredients together
with fats or oils and, perhaps, a flavoring agent. The official definition of meal
(AAFCO, 2002), “an ingredient which has been ground or otherwise reduced in


===== PDF PAGE 659 =====
658
particle size,” does not really apply to this feed form. Meal petfoods are more
accurately described as “textured” feeds since they are often a blend of heat-
processed grain (flaked or extruded) and a pelleted protein supplement that also
contains vitamins, minerals, trace minerals, amino acids, and the like. After the grain
and pellets are blended, tallow, oils, and/or flavors are applied.
Pelleted Food
As the name implies, the food is in the form of a pellet and is made using
conventional feed processing technology. As a rule, the grain in a pelleted diet is heat
processed to improve starch availability because the steam conditioning process prior
to pelleting is not sufficient to result in significant starch gelatinization. The dry
ingredients are weighed, uniformly mixed, steam conditioned, pelleted, cooled, and
then coated with tallow, oils, and/or flavors prior to packaging.
Kibbled
Kibbled petfood is processed in a manner similar to baked products, but instead
of the dough being formed into distinct shapes, it is simply sheeted and baked (Case
et al., 2000). The baked sheets are then broken into small pieces, sieved to remove
fines, and packaged. Kibbles are often blended with raw or cooked meat to constitute
the pet’s ration but, if properly formulated, can be a complete and balanced diet.
Semi-moist Petfoods
Semi-moist petfoods typically have an intermediate moisture level of 25-35
percent. These products are usually cooked through an extrusion process that is very
similar to the process used for dry-expanded petfood. There are distinct differences,
however, due in large part to the differences in formulations necessary to result in
semi-moist products (Rokey and Huber, 1994).
These products contain moisture levels substantially higher than those found in
dry-expanded petfoods. Shelf-life stability is obtained by controlling water activity
(aw). Water activity is defined as the measure (amount) of free moisture in a product
and is the ratio of the water vapor pressure of the food to that of pure water at the
same temperature (Beuchat, 1981; Montville, 1987; Kuntz, 1992). As suggested by
this definition, water in association with other substances does not behave like pure
water, and one measure of this difference is activity, which may be expressed as a
ratio. Through the use of certain ingredients in the formula, generally known as
“humectants,” water activity can be predicted, and thus, controlled (Rokey and
Huber, 1994).
Semi-moist products often contain many of the same basic ingredients as dry-
expanded products. However, they usually contain meat or meat by-product slurries


===== PDF PAGE 660 =====
659
incorporated prior to or during extrusion. The ratio of dry to wet ingredients can vary
considerably, but generally ranges from 4:1 (dry vs. wet) to 1:1. In addition to the
wet slurry, semimoist petfoods incorporate a combination of water-soluble solids
such as sugar, sodium chloride, sorbate, and low-molecular-weight alcohols (e.g.,
propylene glycol) sufficient to bind a large portion of the water and reduce the
product’s aw to an acceptable range (<0.60) for shelf stability. It must be noted that
propylene glycol is considered “generally recognized as safe” (GRAS) for use in
human food products, dog food, and other animal feed provided specified conditions
are met. Federal regulations prohibit the use of propylene glycol in cat food
formulations at this time (21 CFR 589.1001).
Semi-moist cat foods commonly contain fresh or frozen meats (e.g., liver, kidney,
tripe), animal by-product meal (e.g., meat, poultry, liver), whole or dehulled cereal
grains (e.g., corn, wheat, rice), marine products (e.g., fish meal, condensed fish
solubles), soy products (e.g., soybean meal, soy flour, soy protein concentrate), fats
and oils (e.g., animal fat, marine oils), and mineral and vitamin supplements.
Because of the final moisture content, nutrient levels are often expressed on a dry
matter (DM) basis. Protein normally ranges from 28 to 40 percent (DM) and crude
fat from 10 to 15 percent (DM).
Semi-moist dog foods are made from similar ingredients but are often shaped into
“patties” of a size convenient for feeding or packaged to simulate meat chunks. In all
cases, semi-moist petfoods must be packaged in low-moisture-diffusion packaging to
prevent moisture loss and changes in water activity. These foods are commonly
marketed in sealed pouches of a size convenient for feeding as a single meal or in a
resealable package to control moisture loss.
Soft-Expanded (Soft Dry) Petfoods
A third category of extrusion processed petfood consists of soft-expanded
petfoods. These products are similar to semi-moist in that they often contain a
relatively high level of meat by-products and often have higher levels of fats and oils
than dry-expanded foods. They differ from semi-moist with respect to taking on an
expanded appearance after extrusion (Rokey and Huber, 1994).
With soft-expanded products, the basic extrusion parameters are similar to dry-
expanded food processing. However, the ingredients used are more like those found
in semi-moist foods and include humectants to control water activity. Typical
moisture content of soft-expanded petfoods is in the range of 27-32 percent. Soft-
expanded foods are often mixed with dry-expanded and semi-moist foods to produce
a highly palatable food with a texture that is appealing to the pet owner.
Baked Petfoods


===== PDF PAGE 661 =====
660
Although it is not common, some owners of dogs, in particular, prefer to feed
baked petfoods rather than a meal, pelleted, or extruded food. These products are
usually given the shape of bones or some other stylized shape to attract buyers.
Baked petfoods are produced using a traditional means of dough formation, shape
cutting or stamping, and oven baking. Because of the nature of the process, formulas
commonly contain high levels of cereal flours (>50 percent) and have limited
capacity to incorporate wet meat by-products or slurries. The baked food morsels are
cooled, screened, and packaged. Fats and oils are seldom applied post-baking, and as
a result, these products usually contain 3 to 6 percent crude fat.
Starch-Lipid Complexes
One problem associated with the extrusion process used to produce dog and cat
foods of various types is the creation of starch-lipid complexes. These structures
were first reported by Charbonnier et al. (1973) and have been identified as an
amylose-lipid complex (Asp and Bjorck, 2000). While these complexes do not
significantly affect the availability of either starch or lipid to the target animal to any
great extent, they do interfere with the assay for ether extract (crude fat). For an
accurate crude fat determination one must use an acid hydrolysis procedure.
Snacks for Pets
Historically, pet snacks or treats have been produced using traditional means of
processing, which would include dough forming, shape cutting, and oven baking.
Snacks of this type are often formed to appear as bones, fish, chicken legs, and the
like. In recent years, many pet snacks have been developed using extrusion
techniques to form either a dry product or a semi-moist product (Rokey and Huber,
1994). A typical petfoods snack extrusion system would utilize the same equipment
and processing principles found in large-scale petfood production facilities.
Because pet snacks are typically marketed in small packages and because issues
such as palatability and appearance are highly important, process control and design
are more critical than in large-scale facilities. However, pet snacks are gaining in
popularity each year and may represent a significant opportunity for some
companies.
As a rule, pet snacks do not represent a significant portion of a typical diet for
most dogs or cats; however, careful attention to nutrient formulation is necessary.
There are no differences in labeling requirements between pet snacks and major food
categories for dogs and cats. Dog and cat food products conspicuously identified as a
“snack” or “treat” do not have to bear a statement attesting to nutritional adequacy
(or lack thereof) as mandated for most other petfoods under Association of Animal
Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) Model Pet Food Regulations. Also, there is no


===== PDF PAGE 662 =====
661
requirement for snacks or treats to bear feeding directions if the product is not
represented as being “complete and balanced” (AAFCO, 2002).
Canned (Wet) Petfoods
The market for canned dog food appears to be level or shrinking, while canned
foods for cats enjoy a sizable market share, with annual consumption increasing.
Many of the same ingredients utilized in canned petfoods are also used in dry-
expanded and semi-moist petfoods although not at the same level. Because canned
petfoods are high in moisture (usually 74-78 percent), they often contain much
higher levels of fresh or frozen meat, poultry, or fish products and animal by-
products. A meat-based formula may contain from 25 to 75 percent meat and/or meat
by-products. Many canned petfoods may contain a significant level of textured
protein (either soy- or wheat gluten-based) that is essentially a meat analogue with a
structure that mimics the appearance of meat. These products have all but replaced
earlier fortified “all-meat” formulas because of reduced formula costs and, more
importantly, the improved nutrient profiles possible with meat-textured protein
combinations.
Higher energy densities in canned petfoods dictate high concentrations of amino
acids (protein), vitamins, and minerals. Although these petfoods are designed to be
fed alone as a complete and balanced diet, they are commonly used as supplements
to improve the acceptability of dry petfoods. Although the addition of canned
petfoods, milk, eggs, meat, or broths to dry petfoods may improve acceptability, the
nutritional value of a well-balanced dry petfood may not be enhanced.
Canned Petfood Processing
Canned petfood processing is a rather complex endeavor. Typically, the meat and
fat ingredients are blended with some amount of water and then appropriate amounts
of dry ingredients, such as vitamins, minerals, amino acids, and the like, are added.
These ingredients are then blended, and, if the petfood is to have a fine texture, the
blend is finely ground to produce a very thick slurry. The mixture may be heated
(blanched) to begin the cooking process, or it may be added directly to the can
through a filling device. After filling, the cans are sealed with a double-seam lid and
retorted. The retort process is essentially a heat and pressure-cooking and
sterilization process that ensures destruction of food-borne pathogens.
After retorting, the canned petfood is cooled and dried, and a paper label and
production code are applied. The processing involved results in a product that has an
extremely long-term shelf life.
Not all canned petfoods are in “cans” per se. Technology now exists to retort
products in flexible pouches and other novel containers. For this reason, this


===== PDF PAGE 663 =====
662
category may also be referred to as “wet” petfoods, although all undergo similar
processing.
Because of the heat and pressure involved during canning, there is likely some
destruction of critical nutrients. For example, thiamin is readily destroyed by heat,
especially under neutral or alkaline conditions, and extensive losses may occur in
canned petfoods during processing and storage (Baggs et al., 1978). In one study,
thiamin content was reduced by 74 percent in canned dog food due to retorting and
storage for 14 days (Hoffmann-LaRoche, 1981). Reputable petfood manufacturers
have conducted extensive research to determine the extent of these losses and have
formulated overages of these nutrients to compensate.
The commercial petfoods industry has created a large variety of canned petfood
choices and textures including food with chunks of meat or meatlike morsels,
shredded, loaves, and chunks with gravy as well as the traditional ground texture. As
with texture, available petfoods are produced from all manner of base ingredients,
including fish of various species, poultry, beef, and so on. It is common to have the
primary meat ingredient identified as part of the label (e.g., chicken, salmon, turkey
giblets).
Regulatory Issues in Canning Operations
Many of the ingredients used in canned petfoods are of animal origin and include
various poultry, meat, and marine products. Most of these ingredients are used as a
source of protein but often contribute a variety of other required nutrients such as
minerals, amino acids (especially taurine), vitamins, fatty acids, and energy. As with
all petfoods, these ingredients should conform to the definitions promulgated by
AAFCO (2002) in its Official Publication. The petfood industry uses fresh,
undecomposed animals and marine tissue from many sources. These may be from
the rendering industry and include various meat, poultry, and bone meals; meat
scraps; and offal from packing house waste. Additionally, products from slaughter
such as freshly boned-out animal tissues and organ meats are often utilized in canned
petfoods.
From a regulatory standpoint, canned petfoods are included in the low-acid
canned food regulations (LACFRs) found in 21 CFR 113 and 110, and are applied in
the same manner as for human low-acid canned food products. When properly
processed in accordance with the above regulations, the Center for Veterinary
Medicine (CVM) considers petfoods, not otherwise in violation of the statue or
regulations, to be safe and suitable for consumption by pets regardless of the origin
of the animal tissue used. CVM, which is a regulatory agency, has determined that
the temperatures required for retort canning are sufficient to destroy pathogenic
organisms. However, recent changes in CVM policy indicate that “the Center will
consider regulatory action based on low-acid canned food violations alone where a
report indicate a probable hazard to pets. CVM will also consider regulatory action


===== PDF PAGE 664 =====
663
against canned petfood on the basis of use of decomposed animal tissue or use of
tissue containing a violative drug residue” (FDA/ORA, 2002).
FDA does not approve, license, or issue permits for finished canned food
products, including canned petfood, shipped in interstate commerce. However, all
commercial processors of LACFRs are required to register their establishments and
to file processing information for all canned products (21 CFR 110.3). This is done
to ensure the safety of canned petfood for its intended purpose.
Homemade Diets
The vast majority of pet owners have chosen to feed their animals commercially
prepared diets. However, for a variety of reasons, some owners prefer to prepare and
feed homemade diets to their pets. This can be done successfully if the pet owner is
willing to become fully knowledgeable concerning the pet’s nutritional requirements;
learn the critical aspects of diet formulation; identify and acquire the required
ingredients needed for the diet; and develop effective processing technology to
produce the diet safely on a routine basis. The decision to make homemade pet diets
should not be made lightly because the owner is assuming full responsibility for the
nutritional status of the pet. Consultation with a professional with sufficient
advanced training to be able to formulate diets and/or assess the nutrient adequacy of
a recipe is prudent.
DIET FORMULATION
The actual process of diet formulation involves the application of knowledge of
energy, amino acid, mineral, and vitamin requirements for the target animal (Deyoe,
1976). From a conceptual standpoint, formulation is simply the process of selecting
ingredients in specific amounts that contribute required and available nutrients to the
diets so that the level of each required nutrient is met in the amount of diet consumed
on a daily basis.
Two basic techniques are used in diet formulation: hand formulation and
computer formulation. For the hand calculation technique, only a limited number of
factors, both ingredients and nutrients, can be considered. In most instances the
formulator will consider only major nutrients such as protein, calcium, phosphorus,
and energy. Additionally, only a few ingredients are used (e.g., a grain, a vegetable
protein meal, an animal protein meal, and a vitamin-mineral supplement). In most
cases, precision is largely ignored.
All commercial companies and consulting nutritionists now use a computer-based
process known as “linear programming.” The value of linear programming is in the
vast array of ingredients, nutrient requirements, and restrictions that it can deal with
in just a few seconds.


===== PDF PAGE 665 =====
664
Although dedicated least-cost (linear) programs are widely available, they are not
inexpensive. Many of the more advanced programs have the National Research
Council nutrient requirements for various species pre-loaded as well as numerous
ingredient profiles. For computer-literate users, most spreadsheet programs of today
have linear programming capabilities and can be set up to formulate diets using least
cost as the default restriction.
Some proponents tout the nutritional superiority of “fixed” versus “variable”
ingredient formulas. It is argued that the potential for batch-to-batch substitution of
ingredients on the basis of cost may result in inconsistent nutrient content and
product performance. While this position has merit, it must also be understood that
any ingredient source is likely to change over time and that one shipment of
ingredients, such as meat or bone meal and even soybean meal or grain, may differ
distinctly in nutrient content from another. Adherence to a precisely fixed ingredient
formula may not allow enough flexibility to ensure consistent nutrient content either.
Thus, formulating on the basis of a fixed nutrient range rather than a fixed ingredient
formula appears most prudent. Also, it must be noted that substitutions based on
least cost are limited in the petfood industry because, unlike livestock feeds,
ingredients must be declared by their specific names, not by “collective terms”
(AAFCO, 2002). Thus, the costs of reprinting packaging to accommodate the change
must be offset by the savings in production for it to have any value.
SUMMARY
The variety of petfood forms available today is mind-boggling, and new products
are appearing almost daily. A summary of the major nutrient content of dry, semi-
moist, and canned dog food is found in Table 12-1. The ranges are similar for the
various forms of cat food. However, given the variety of forms available and the
innovative nature of the petfood industry, a true picture of all commercial petfoods in
the market is simply not possible.
TABLE 12-1 Nutrient Content of Dry, Semi-moist, and Canned Dog Foods
As-Fed Basis DM Basis
Dry
  Moisture (%) 6-10 0
  Fat (%) 7-20 8-22
  Protein (%) 16-30 18-32
  Carbohydrate (%) 41-70 46-74
  ME (kcal·kg–1) 2,800-4,050 3,000-4,500
Semi-moist


===== PDF PAGE 666 =====
665
As-Fed Basis DM Basis
  Moisture (%) 15-30 0
  Fat (%) 7-10 8-14
  Protein (%) 17-20 20-28
  Carbohydrate (%) 40-60 58-72
  ME (kcal·kg–1) 2,550-2,880 3,000-4,000
Canned
  Moisture (%) 75 0
  Fat (%) 5-8 20-32
  Protein (%) 7-13 28-50
  Carbohydrate (%) 4-13 18-57
  ME (kcal·kg–1) 875-1,250 3,500-5,000
NOTE: ME = Metabolizable energy.
SOURCE: Case et al., 2000, Table 17-1.
REFERENCES
Asp, N. G., and I. Bjorck. 2000. Nutritional properties of extruded foods. Pp. 399-
434 in Extrusion Cooking. C. Mercier, P. Lineo, and J. M. Harper, eds. St. Paul,
Minn.: American Association of Certified Chemistry.
Association of American Feod Control Officials (AAFCO). 2002. Dog and cat food
nutrient profiles. Pp. 126-141 in AAFCO. Oxford, Ind.
Baggs, R. B., D. deLaHuata, and D. R. Averill. 1978. Thiamin deficiency
encephalopathy in a specific-pathogen free cat colony. Lab. Anim. Sci. 28:323.
Beuchat, L. R. 1981. Microbiological stability as affected by water activity. Cereal
Foods World 26(7):345-349.
Case, L. P., D. P. Carey, D. A. Hirakawa, and L. Daristotle. 2000. Types of petfoods.
Pp. 187-197 in Canine and Feline Nutrition, 2nd Edition. Philadelphia: Mosley.
Charbonnier, R., F. Duprat, and A. Guilbot. 1973. Changes in various starches by
extrusion-cooking processing. II. Physical structure of extruded products (Abstr.).
Cereal Science Today 18:286.
Corbin, J. 2000. Petfood and feeding. Pp. 72-76 in 2000 Feedstuffs Reference Issue.
Minnetonka, Minn.: Rural Press Limited.
Deyoe, C. W. 1976. Feed formulation fundamentals. In Feed Manufacturing
Technology. Arlington, Va.: American Feed Industry Association.
Food and Drug Administration, Office of Regulatory Affairs (FDA). 2002.
Compliance program guidelines 7126.18 Sec. 690.300. Canned petfood.
Rockville, Md.: Center for Veterinary Medicine.
Hoffman-LaRoche. 1981. Rationale for Roche Recommended Vitamin Fortification
—Dogs and Cats. RCD 5963/1280. Nutley, N.J.: Hoffmann-LaRoche.


===== PDF PAGE 667 =====
666
Kuntz, L. A. 1992. Keeping microorganisms in control. Food Prod. Design.
August:44-51.
Mercier, C., and P. Feillit. 1975. Modification of carbohydrate components by
extrusion cooking of cereal products. Cereal Chem. 52:283-297.
Montville, T. J. 1987. Pp. 2-3 in Food Microbiology: Concepts in Physiology and
Metabolism. Boca Raton, Fla., CRC Press.
Rokey, G., and G. Huber. 1994. Petfood. Pp. 479-493 in Feed Manufacturing
Technology IV. Arlington, Va.: American Feed Industry Association.


===== PDF PAGE 668 =====
667
13
Nutrient Composition of
Ingredients Used in Dog and Cat
Foods
Data in Tables 13-1 through 13-9 were compiled from commercial feed ingredient
suppliers, published literature, and unpublished data provided by university
researchers.1 The tables include means and, when available, the standard deviation
and number (N) of samples used to generate those statistics. Users should examine the
standard deviation and N before using the mean value as an estimate of the nutritional
content of a specific feed ingredient. Means derived from a large N will better reflect
the total population. Means with a large standard deviation may represent the total
population, but be a poor estimate for a specific sample. Common names are used to
designate feed ingredients.
TABLE 13-1 Proximate Analysis of Selected Feed Ingredients (as fed)a


===== PDF PAGE 669 =====
668


===== PDF PAGE 670 =====
669
aFor each ingredient two numbers are given: the first is the % composition of each respective
dietary component in the ingredient; the second, the number (N) of observations on which the
data are based.
bInternational Feed Number.
cDry Matter.
dCrude Protein.
eTotal Dietary Fiber.
fCrude Fiber.
gMetabolizable Energy.
TABLE 13-2 Carbohydrate and Lignin Concentrations of Some Common Ingredients
in Canine and Feline Foods (g/kg dry matter)a
aAdapted from Bach-Knudsen, 1997.
bSoluble noncellulosic polysaccharides.


===== PDF PAGE 671 =====
670
cInsoluble noncellulosic polysaccharides.
dNonstarch polysaccharides.
eNot measured.
TABLE 13-3 Total Fat Concentration and Fatty Acid Composition of Selected Feed
Ingredients
TABLE 13-4 Fatty Acid Composition of Selected Fats and Oilsa


===== PDF PAGE 672 =====
671
aCertain fats and oils have significant amounts of fatty acids other than those listed above.
Examples include:
Butter oil: C4:0, 3.65%; C6:0, 2.2%; C15:0, 2.1%; C14:1, 0.8%
Peanut oil: C24:0, 1.5%
Rapeseed (high erucic acid rape oil): C24:0, 1.0%; C22:1, 41.1%; C20:2, 0.7%
Canola (low erucic acid rape) oil: C24:0 0.2%; C22:1, 0.7%; C20:2, 0.0%
Borage seed oil: C16:0, 11.5%; C18:0, 4.9%; C18:1n-9, 19.5%; C18:2n-6, 40.3%;C18:3n-6,
22.1%
Evening primrose oil: C16:0, 6.5%; C18:0, 1.8%; C18:1n-9, 8.6%; C18:2n-6, 73.5%; C18:3n-
6, 8.7%
Black currant seed oil: C16:0, 6.7%; C18:0, 1.6%; C18:1n-9, 11.3%; C18:2n-6, 47.1%,
C18:3n-6, 15.3%; C18:3n-3, 13.1%
bInternational Feed Number.
cSaturated fatty acids.
dPolyunsaturated fatty acids.
eMonosaturates are not included in this calculation.
SOURCE: Belch and Hill, 2000; Khan and Shahidi, 2000; Senanayake and Shahidi, 1999;
Spurvey and Shahidi, 2000.
TABLE 13-5 Amino Acid Composition of Selected Feed Ingredients (% as fed)a


===== PDF PAGE 673 =====
672


===== PDF PAGE 674 =====
673
aFor each ingredient two numbers are given: the first is the % composition of each respective
amino acid in the ingredient; the second, the number (N) of observations on which the data are
based.
bInternational Feed Number.
cDry matter.
dCrude protein.
TABLE 13-6 Mineral Content of Selected Ingredients (% or mg/kg, as fed)a


===== PDF PAGE 675 =====
674


===== PDF PAGE 676 =====
675
aFor each ingredient two numbers are given: the first is the percent composition of each
respective amino acid in the ingredient; the second, the number (N) of observations on which
the data are based.
bInternational Feed Number.
cDry matter.
TABLE 13-7 Vitamin Content of Selected Ingredients (mg/kg, as fed)a


===== PDF PAGE 677 =====
676


===== PDF PAGE 678 =====
677
aFor each ingredient two numbers are given: the first is the percent composition of each
respective amino acid in the ingredient; the second, the number (N) of observations on which
the data are based.
bInternational Feed Number.
TABLE 13-8 Composition of Selected Inorganic Macro-mineral Sources Used in
Petfood
aInternational Feed Number.
TABLE 13-9 Composition of Selected Inorganic Micro-mineral Sources Used in
Petfood


===== PDF PAGE 679 =====
678
aInternational Feed Number.
REFERENCES
Bach-Knudsen, K. E. 1997. Carbohydrate and lignin contents of plant materials used
in animal feeding. Anim. Feed Sci. Technol. 67:319-338.
Belch, J. J. F., and A. Hill. 2000. Evening primrose oil and borage oil in
rheumatologic conditions. J. Clin. Nutr. 71:3525-3565.
Khan, M. A., and F. Shahidi. 2000. Tocopherols and phospholipids enhance the
oxidative stability of borage and evening primrose triacylglycerols. J. Food Lipids
7:143-150.
National Research Council (NRC). Nutrient Requirements of Swine. 1998.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Senanayake, S. P., and F. Shahidi. 1999. Enzyme-assisted acidolysis of borage and
evening primrose oil. J. Agric. Food Chem. 47:3105-3112.
Spitze, A. R., D. L. Wong, Q. R. Rogers, and A. J. Fascetti. 2003. Taurine
concentrations in animal feed ingredients; cooking influences taurine content. J.
Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 87:251-262.
Spurvey, S. A., and F. Shahidi. 2000. Concentration of gamma linolenic acid (GLA)
from borage oil by urea complexation: Optimization of reaction conditions. J. Food
Lipids 7:163-174.
__________________
1 An excellent source of information for feed ingredients not included here is contained in
Chapter 11 of the report Nutrient Requirements of Swine, available online at
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/6016.html (NRC, 1998).


===== PDF PAGE 680 =====
679
14
Other Food Constituents
CONSTITUENTS INTENDED FOR NUTRITIVE VALUE
Introduction
In the years since the previous editions of nutrient requirements for dogs and cats
were published (National Research Council, 1985, 1986), there has been an increase
of interest in substances in the diet that may affect the structure or function of the
body, but whose absence from the diet does not fit into classical models of nutritional
deficiency. Many of these substances play vital roles in the normal metabolism of the
animal, but cannot be deemed essential because the body is capable of synthesizing
them from other dietary components. Still, it is thought that their inclusion in the diet
will augment endogenous production and facilitate bodily functions. Other
substances that may play a role in the normal function of the body must come from
an exogenous source, but determinations of essentiality have yet to be established.
For still other compounds added to dog and cat foods, their roles in normal
metabolism are unknown and likely nonexistent.
A few of these substances fall into established categories of nutrients and are
discussed in detail elsewhere in this report (e.g., omega-3 fatty acids, “prebiotic”
fibers, some vitamins and trace minerals). The remainder do not fit as neatly into the
preceding chapters. While the nature and functions of these substances are broad in
scope, only a few of the more commonly used compounds are discussed here.
Under the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 (DSHEA), most
of these substances are allowed in dietary supplement products for human
consumption without demonstration of safety and utility prior to marketing.


===== PDF PAGE 681 =====
680
However, since DSHEA has been determined by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) as inapplicable to products intended for animals, many of
these same substances may be considered unapproved food additives when used in
dog or cat formulations. Thus, a pet product containing these substances might be
subject to regulatory action as an adulterated food. In addition, claims that a
substance can treat, prevent, cure, or mitigate a disease or condition (except for
prevention, but not treatment, of an essential nutrient deficiency) or affect the
structure or function of the body in a manner distinct from its provision of “nutritive
value” may render it a “drug” under the law. Further, it could be considered an
adulterated drug unless it has undergone sufficient review to establish safety and
efficacy for its intended use prior to marketing. Therefore, even if a particular
substance is allowed in a dog or cat food product, the manufacturer may be restricted
in terms of statements regarding its function in the food, including some of the
functions described below.
Chondroprotective Agents
The most commonly used chondroprotective agents in dog and cat foods are
glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate. Glucosamine is an amino sugar that can be
synthesized in the body from other dietary components. It is used by the body in the
further synthesis of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), which are substances associated
with cartilage and joint tissues. It also stimulates production of GAGs and inhibits
degradative enzymes. Chondroitin sulfate is a form of GAG that consists of a long
carbohydrate polymer associated with a small amount of protein. In addition to
functions similar to glucosamine, it also holds water in the cartilage tissue, which
assists in the delivery of nutrients and serves as a shock absorber for the joints.
Commercially, glucosamine is derived from the hydrolysis of chitin, a material
found in the shells of crabs and shrimp. It is most often available in the
hydrochloride form but may also be found in a sulfated form. Chondroitin sulfate is
typically extracted from the cartilaginous tissue of cattle and swine. Unpublished
data suggest that other petfood ingredients that may contain appreciable amounts of
chondroitin sulfate or other GAGs include meat and poultry meals.
Glucosamine and GAGs can be wholly synthesized in the body from other
nutritive components of the diet. Thus, they are not considered dietary essential
nutrients. Because of their modes of action, the premise of their inclusion in the diet
is to augment their endogenous production in animals that may be susceptible to
osteoarthritic conditions (especially older animals, large- and giant-breed dogs, and
working dogs).
One form of GAG is approved for the treatment of osteoarthritic conditions in
horses and dogs. However, this is in the form of an injectable drug only, and orally
administered agents have not received similar approval to date. Although research
has shown glucosamine to be absorbable by the gastrointestinal tract of dogs, some
question whether the same is true for larger molecules such as chondroitin sulfate


===== PDF PAGE 682 =====
681
(Senikar et al., 1986). Later work has demonstrated significant absorption of low-
molecular-weight chondroitin sulfate after multiple oral doses in dogs and an
increase in concentration of epitopes of chondroitin sulfate in synovial fluid after
oral administration (Johnson et al., 2001; Adebowale et al., 2002). Some degree of
clinical benefit of orally administered chondroprotective agents, particularly
glucosamine hydrochloride and chondroitin sulfate in combination, has been shown
in dogs (Lippiello et al., 1998; Anderson et al., 1999; Canapp et al., 1999). Many of
these benefits are relatively short-term and based on subjective assessment of pain
and mobility in the test subjects.
Other substances that have been characterized as chondroprotective include
green-lipped mussel extract and methylsulfonylmethane (MSM). Green-lipped
mussel extract consists of a mixture of GAGs, omega-3 fatty acids, and other
compounds that, in combination, are reported to benefit dogs exhibiting chronic
lameness (Bui and Bierer, 2001). However, a subsequent study failed to confirm that
finding (Dobenecker et al., 2002). The reported benefit of MSM is different in that it
is intended as a source of bioavailable sulfur (Parcell, 2002). Sulfur is a component
of compounds associated with joint structure and function such as glucosamine.
Studies of the effects of MSM in dogs or cats have not been reported.
Definitive, long-term safety studies of chondroprotective agents in dogs and cats
have not been reported. Potential adverse effects include disruption of normal
clotting mechanisms (heparin is also a GAG). Short-term experiments indicate little
risk of adverse effects, including effects on blood clotting, at typical ingestion levels
of glucosamine or chondroitin sulfate in the dog or cat (McNamara et al., 1996,
2000). In vitro studies on cell cultures are mixed as to whether dietary
supplementation of glucosamine may enhance or actually impair endogenous
production (Kim and Conrad, 1974; Anderson et al., 1999).
Studies have indicated that glucosamine may also induce or exacerbate insulin
resistance (Kajinuma et al., 1975; Robinson et al., 1993; Almada et al., 2000;
Monauni et al., 2000). This suggests a possible contraindication for use in dogs with
type II diabetes mellitus or those at risk for the disease (e.g., obese dogs). However, a
recent study failed to demonstrate adverse effects of glucosamine or chondroitin
sulfate on glucose metabolism (Echard et al., 2001).
Finally, since GAGs may come from various species of animal and be
accompanied by other proteins, there is a potential for allergic reactions (especially
when the source of the GAG is not known). In light of all these possible concerns,
although chondroprotective agents may be used for selected individual animals, their
widespread inclusion in the diets of healthy populations may not be warranted at this
time.
Antioxidants
General Principles


===== PDF PAGE 683 =====
682
Antioxidants include a host of substances that vary in structure, specific function,
and site of function in the body. All act to prevent oxidative damage to nutrients and
other compounds in the body and to inhibit or quench the formation of free radicals.
Free radicals are defined as compounds containing at least one unmatched electron.
They are produced as a result of normal metabolism but can also be unpaired through
exposure to environmental stressors such as UV radiation, pollutants, tobacco
smoke, and other chemical agents.
Free radicals are highly reactive and subsequently destroy other molecules to
form even more free radicals. The effect of this continuing process is thought to be
integral to the pathogenesis of many conditions, including cancer, arthritis,
cardiovascular disease, other degenerative conditions, and even the aging process
itself. The immune system appears especially susceptible to damage. Because
oxygen is essential to life, oxidative damage and free-radical formation cannot be
prevented entirely. Also, once damage has been done, it cannot be wholly reversed.
However, antioxidants can curtail the process somewhat.
Vitamin E
Vitamin E serves mainly to protect the lipid-rich cell membrane by preventing
oxidation of polyunsaturated fats. Failure to prevent oxidation can result in loss of
membrane integrity and cell rupture. Vitamin E cannot be synthesized by the body.
For this reason, it is considered a dietary essential nutrient. A high intake of
polyunsaturated fat requires a concomitant increase in vitamin E in the diet.
However, levels above those needed to ensure adequate intake are of questionable
benefit. A study showed an increase in several immune function criteria in dogs
given supraphysiological levels of vitamin E in the diet (Meydani et al., 1998).
However, the amount in the control diet was below that considered adequate for
normal nutritive needs according to the Association of American Feed Control
Officials (AAFCO) Dog Food Nutrient Profiles, and there were no intermediate
levels of intake tested. Thus, the lowest point at which this beneficial effect is
observed could not be determined. A study in cats showed that vitamin E had a mild
preventive effect on Heinz body formation and other criteria of oxidative damage
due to consumption of propylene glycol and onion powder (Hill et al., 2001).
Vitamin C
Vitamin C functions as an antioxidant inside and outside the cell. It also interacts
with vitamin E to help restore the latter’s function. It can be synthesized in the body
of both dogs and cats and hence is not considered a dietary essential nutrient.
Classical signs of deficiency, such as those observed in humans and guinea pigs,
have not been documented in these species. Regardless, it is suggested that dietary
supplementation may be beneficial, particularly in times of “stress.” Studies have


===== PDF PAGE 684 =====
683
shown a slight depression in serum vitamin C concentration in response to some
conditions and diseases, and supplementation can increase serum levels in healthy
animals (Kronfeld and Donoghue, 1988; Skinner et al., 1999). Vitamin C can also
mildly prevent oxidative damage from consumption of propylene glycol or onion
powder (Hill et al., 2001). However, definitive evidence of benefit in dogs and cats is
lacking. Still, work in other species has shown beneficial effects on immune
function, even in species that are able to endogenously synthesize the compound
(Machlin, 1993).
Mineral-Dependent Antioxidants
Many trace minerals exhibit at least one of their functions in the body by
incorporation into antioxidant enzymes. These include selenium (glutathione
peroxidase); copper, zinc, and manganese (superoxide dismutases); and iron
(catalase). These enzymes can all be synthesized in sufficient quantities in the body,
provided ample amounts of the mineral are available. Studies to demonstrate a
benefit of direct inclusion of the enzymes in the diet have not been reported.
Other antioxidants, such as ceruloplasmin and ferritin, are nonenzymatic
antioxidants containing copper and iron, respectively. Again, if ample quantities of
these minerals are present in the diet, direct supplementation of these compounds is
not required.
β-Carotene and Other Carotenoids
β-Carotene and related substances such as lutein and lycopene are derived from
plants and are not endogenously synthesized by either dogs or cats. β-Carotene can
serve as a precursor to vitamin A in the dog but not the cat. Apart from this function,
carotenoids also have antioxidant properties (Machlin, 1993). β-Carotene can be
taken up by blood plasma and leukocytes after oral administration in both dogs and
cats, and has been shown to stimulate immune response in dogs (Chew et al.,
2000b,c,d). However, it is known that β-carotene may exhibit pro-oxidant properties
at high levels of intake in humans and laboratory animals (Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-
Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group, 1994).
One known function of lutein is to help retard age-related degeneration of the
macula lutea in the retina of humans (Seddon et al., 1994). However, that specific
attribute may be of little service in dogs and cats, since the presence of this structure
in the eyes of these species has not been reported (Miller et al., 1964).
Other
A host of other antioxidants have been reported for use in dogs or cats. S-
Adenosylmethionine (SAMe) is a precursor of glutathione and is used in support of


===== PDF PAGE 685 =====
684
liver function (Center et al., 1999; Davidson, 2002). In a case study, SAMe was also
reported to be used in the successful treatment of acetaminophen toxicity in a dog
(Wallace et al., 2002). Coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinone) is an antioxidant with reported
beneficial effects on cardiac function and oral hygiene in dogs (Shizukuishi et al.,
1984; Harker-Murray et al., 2000). Long-term administration of α-lipoic acid over 6
months resulted in an increase in the ratio of reduced vs. oxidized glutathione ratios
in dogs (Zicker et al., 2002). However, the response was not dose-dependent, and the
lowest-supplemented group showed the most significant increase. Because of
reduced capacity of cats to metabolize α-lipoic acid compared to dogs, caution is
urged for its use in that species (Hill et al., 2002).
Since cats appear prone to oxidative injury, several studies have looked at
potential protective effects of antioxidants. A supplement containing bioflavonoids
offered before administration of acetaminophen provided some protection against
Heinz body formation in red blood cells but did not prevent methemoglobinemia
(Allison et al., 2000). Pre-exposure administration of N-acetylcysteine, vitamin E, or
ascorbate did not appear to significantly affect Heinz body formation in cats
challenged with onion powder, although Nacetylcysteine administration did result in
higher reduced glutathione concentrations in whole blood (Hill et al., 2001). In a
second trial of the same antioxidants using propylene glycol as the challenging agent,
cats in the antioxidant treatment groups drank less of the water that contained
propylene glycol, which may have confounded the results. When the water intake of
the control group was normalized to that of the treatment groups, the only
antioxidant to show significant effect on Heinz body formation was N-acetylcysteine.
Use in Petfoods
The beneficial effects of antioxidant “cocktails” in dog and cat foods have been
reported. A combination of supplemental vitamin E, vitamin C, and β-carotene
increased serum vitamin E concentrations and suppressed serum total alkenyls
(biomarkers of lipid peroxidation) in both dogs and cats (Jewell et al., 2000).
Supplementation of the diets of Alaskan sled dogs with β-carotene, lutein, and
vitamin E “normalized” the adverse effect of exercise on immune status (Chew et al.,
2000a). Another cocktail including vitamin E, vitamin C, α-lipoic acid, L-carnitine,
and fruit- and vegetable-based ingredients containing flavonoids and carotenoids in a
petfood is reported to improve learning ability in older dogs (Milgram et al., 2002).
Supplementation with antioxidants improved the length of response to vaccination in
adult and senior dogs, although the composition and quantities of the antioxidants in
the cocktail were not disclosed (Devlin et al., 2001).
Knowledge of the beneficial effects of antioxidants in the diets of dogs and cats is
likely to increase with continued study. Unfortunately, most direct evidence of
benefit of antioxidant administration to dogs and cats is from the use of cocktails, so
the relative contribution of any single antioxidant is difficult to assess. At this time,


===== PDF PAGE 686 =====
685
there is a lack of data on which to base specific recommendations beyond those for
the essential vitamins and minerals that are components of antioxidants.
Probiotics (Direct-Fed Microbials) and Enzymes
Probiotics, or direct-fed microbials, are colonies of live microorganisms often
found in the gastrointestinal tract of healthy animals, such as Lactobacillus,
Bifidobacterium, and Aspergillus. When added to the diet, they are intended to
influence the gut flora by preferentially populating it with nonpathogenic organisms
to the exclusion of Salmonella, Escherichia coli, and other potential pathogens
(Biourge et al., 1998). These microorganisms also synthesize vitamins, enzymes, and
volatile fatty acids, which may have a beneficial effect on gastrointestinal (GI) health
and function, as well as provide and aid in the absorption of nutrients. However, a
study using Bacillus in dogs failed to show a significant effect on dry matter, protein,
fat, or metabolizable energy digestibility (Biourge et al., 1998). The beneficial effects
of Lactobacillus acidophilus on fecal quality and production of ammonia and
putrefactive compounds in dogs was more readily observed when administered in
combination with the “prebiotic” fructooligosaccharides (Swanson et al., 2002). The
addition of viable Enterococcus faecium to the diets of young dogs has been shown
to positively affect immune function parameters (Benyacoub et al., 2003).
A microbiologic evaluation of commercial probiotic products intended for animal
use (including dogs and cats) revealed that the concentration of live organisms in
most products was lower than claimed or even absent (Weese, 2002). Further, some
products contained additional species that were not claimed but either had no known
probiotic effect or were potentially pathogenic.
Enzymes added to petfoods may be derived from plant sources (e.g., papain from
papaya) but are obtained mainly by fermentation of organisms also used as
probiotics. The enzyme phytase has been shown to be of benefit in increasing the
availability of phosphorus in livestock feed (Lobo, 2000). This can allow for
decreases in the amount of phosphorus added to the ration and subsequently decrease
its excretion into the environment. Although environmental impact is a key
consideration in livestock operations, it is of less concern in the feeding of pets at
this time. Other enzymes include proteases, lipases, and amylases, which
hypothetically can improve digestion of nutrients by dogs and cats. Increases in
absorption of fatty acids, trace minerals, and vitamins were observed with
administration of a commercial enzyme product (Ackerman, 1993). However,
whether these effects have any practical benefit in animals offered diets that already
provide ample quantities of these nutrients is unclear.
Both probiotics and enzymes are at a disadvantage compared to prebiotics (which
provide substrates to encourage beneficial gut populations) in that the former are
much more sensitive to loss in processing and storage. Microorganisms must remain
alive, and enzymes must be active, for them to function as intended. Effects may also
be very short-lived, with any benefit quickly negated by cessation of administration.


===== PDF PAGE 687 =====
686
While these technical limitations do not preclude the use of probiotics or enzymes in
petfood applications, attention should be paid to the feasibility of inclusion for the
potential benefits gained.
Herbs and Botanicals
In whole form, herbs and other botanicals provide some nutritive value in the
form of fiber, sugar, oils, and some vitamins and minerals. However, at typical
levels, they are unlikely to contribute significantly to the overall nutrient intake of
the animal. Rather, their intended use in petfoods is either to provide flavor or, more
often, to have an effect on the body other than by nutritional means. This is
especially true in the case of extracts, where the classical nutritive components of the
plant may be separated from the extract in the process. Since the intended functions
are more pharmacologic than nutritional in nature, discussion of potential benefit is
beyond the scope of this report.
However, this does not negate potential concerns about the safety of some herbs
and botanicals that may be incorporated in petfoods. Adverse effect from ingestion
of a substance intended for use by humans containing guarana and ma huang (both
contain stimulants to induce appetite suppression) in dogs has been reported (Ooms
et al., 2001). However, offending agents are not necessarily limited to the relatively
obscure. Garlic and onion, for example, are generally recognized as safe when used
as flavoring agents. However, they also are known to cause oxidative damage when
consumed in greater quantities (Gfeller and Messonnier, 1998). In fact, onion powder
has been used to intentionally provoke Heinz body formation in cats in some studies
(Hill et al., 2001). Although garlic is purported to be beneficial in the treatment and
prevention of flea and gastrointestinal parasite infestations, there is little evidence to
support its use for these purposes. Inclusion in petfood is imprudent at best.
Another example is St. John’s wort. Admittedly not often used in dog or cat
foods, it is most often employed to promote “well-being” in human dietary
supplement products. However, varieties of this plant are also well known to farmers
as a toxic weed (Hulbert and Oehme, 1977). Its bitter taste limits voluntary
consumption by livestock, and, when ingested, it can cause photosensitive reactions
to UV light, including blistering, edema, and skin necrosis. As a precaution,
exposure of pets to sunlight should be limited while the herb is being administered.
Other
L-Carnitine helps to mobilize and metabolize fatty acids in the mitochondria of
cells. It is synthesized in the body of dogs and cats, and hence is not considered an
essential dietary nutrient. Clinical investigations in American cocker spaniels,
Doberman pinschers, and boxers suggest that lack of adequate production by
individuals of some breeds of dogs may lead to dilated cardiomyopathy similar to


===== PDF PAGE 688 =====
687
that seen in taurine deficiency in cats (Kittleson, 2000). In other clinical situations,
supplementation has been reported to be useful in management of weight loss by
beneficially encouraging utilization of body energy and to potentially mitigate the
risk of hepatic lipidosis in obese cats on a weight loss regimen (Blanchard, 1997;
Center and Sunvold, 2000).
Yucca schidigera extract has no value as a provider of nutritive substances.
However, studies have shown it to have some value in reducing offensive fecal odors
(Lowe and Kershaw, 1997; Giffard et al., 2001).
CONSTITUENTS INTENDED FOR TECHNICAL OR
NONNUTRITIVE EFFECTS ON FOOD
Introduction
A food must do more than provide nutrients. It must also appeal to the senses of
taste, smell, sight, and feel if it is to be consumed in quantities needed to provide
adequate amounts of essential nutrients. Thus, many constituents of a food are added
to affect form, flavor, and other aspects of the food beyond provision of nutrients.
Other agents are used to retard degradation of nutrients or formation of compounds
that could adversely affect acceptance, or to facilitate the manufacturing process
itself.
Many compounds added to dog and cat foods for their technical functions are
generally recognized as safe (GRAS) in Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
For these substances there is ample public knowledge of safety, through either
published scientific studies or, more often, a long history of safe use in foods and
feeds. Status of a substance as GRAS does not imply that it is nontoxic. For example,
vitamin D is GRAS; yet, it can induce severe toxic manifestations if fed to excess. A
provision of its GRAS status (and that of all substances codified as GRAS) is that it
is used in accordance with good manufacturing or feeding practice.
A substance that is not GRAS may still be approved for use in dog or cat foods as
a food additive if adequate data are submitted to demonstrate safety and utility.
Direct food additives include any of the compounds intended to become a
component of the food to achieve its technical effect. Indirect food additives include
substances that may become a component of the food through contact with
processing machinery and packaging materials, such as lubricants, plastics, and
paper components. For purposes of regulation, treatment of a food with ionizing
radiation is considered a direct food additive.
Preservatives


===== PDF PAGE 689 =====
688
Ethoxyquin
Ethoxyquin is a synthetic antioxidant preservative approved for use in animal
feeds more than 40 years ago (21 CFR 573.380). It functions to retard degradation of
fatty acids and fat-soluble vitamins and formation of peroxide compounds. This is
especially important in preserving the quality and acceptability of ingredients
containing large quantities of polyunsaturated fats such as fish meal and vitamin
premixes.
Although approved for use in all animal feeds, its safety in dog foods has been
questioned since the late 1980s (Dzanis, 1991). Questions began when a breeder
reported a connection between use of foods containing ethoxyquin and a high
incidence of liver cancer in her dogs. Within a few years, similar reports were
received, associating use with a wide variety of maladies, including cancer, immune
disorders, major organ failures, allergies, reproductive failures, and skin diseases. A
review of the published scientific literature could not find data from controlled
studies to confirm these purported effects (Dzanis, 1991). Ethoxyquin was found to
cause reversible hepatic changes at high doses and to promote certain cancers
induced by other chemical substances in laboratory animals (Parke et al., 1973;
Fukushima et al., 1984, 1987). One study reported preneoplastic changes in the
kidneys of rats receiving high doses of ethoxyquin, but that finding was subsequently
refuted (Manson et al., 1987; Hard and Neal, 1990). Contrary to reports of adverse
effect, ethoxyquin has also been demonstrated to inhibit other chemically induced
neoplasias and have other positive effects (Tsuda et al., 1984; Masui et al., 1986;
Manson et al., 1987).
Studies conducted in dogs since then have not uncovered evidence of adverse
effect, with one exception. In lactating bitches receiving doses in food approaching
the maximum allowable level of 150 parts per million (ppm), extracellular deposition
of protoporphyrin IX in the liver, along with slight increases in serum liver enzymes,
was observed. The pigment was a normal intermediate in the synthesis of heme and
not chemically related to ethoxyquin. These effects appeared to be mild and wholly
reversible upon removal of ethoxyquin from the diet, and no clinical manifestations
of these effects were seen. Regardless, to ensure safe use of the preservative in foods
intended for all life stages, including gestation-lactation, manufacturers were asked
to voluntarily reduce maximum levels of ethoxyquin in dog food from 150 ppm to 75
ppm (FDA, 1997).
Most foods already contained ethoxyquin at or below this reduced level when the
request was made. In fact, some manufacturers had removed the ingredient from dog
food formulations in response to consumer concerns, despite the lack of scientific
evidence of harm. A remaining question is whether ethoxyquin is effective in
retarding oxidative damage at these lower levels in the finished food. It can still be
used at higher levels in ingredients and premixes to prevent degradation prior to
incorporation into the formulation.


===== PDF PAGE 690 =====
689
No studies on the effect of ethoxyquin in cats are reported in the literature.
Although the voluntary reduction in maximum levels requested by FDA does not
apply to cat foods, many manufacturers have removed or reduced its use in these
products as well.
Propylene Glycol
Propylene glycol is a humectant and antimicrobial preservative, although it has
many other functions in foods as well. It is codified as a GRAS general-purpose food
additive for use in animal feed (21 CFR 582.1666). Its main purpose in petfoods is to
allow them to retain larger percentages of water than would be possible in a dry dog
or cat food without resulting in microbial growth and spoilage. Therefore, it is
especially useful in the formulation of semimoist foods. It also provides calories and
taste to the product. Propylene glycol is often used therapeutically as a source of
energy in ruminants suffering from ketosis.
In semimoist foods, propylene glycol is typically used at levels between 6 and 12
percent of the formulation. These dietary levels were known to cause Heinz body
formation in the erythrocytes of cats, but observations could not be associated with
anemia or other adverse clinical manifestations (Quast et al., 1979). Later studies
confirmed that propylene glycol did cause oxidative damage at these levels in cats,
which included a decrease in red blood cell half-life, increased susceptibility to
damage from other oxidants and disease processes, and changes in the liver and other
organs (Christopher, 1989; Christopher et al., 1989; Hickman et al., 1990; Weiss et
al., 1990; Bauer et al., 1991, 1992). The level at which these adverse effects were no
longer observed was well below amounts needed for the compound to function as a
humectant in semimoist foods. Thus, propylene glycol was subsequently prohibited
from use in the manufacture of cat foods, with specific note in the federal regulations
that it is not GRAS for that intended use (Dzanis, 1994). An informal exception that
is not codified is made for its use as a carrier in fat-soluble vitamin premixes, where
the resultant level of propylene glycol in the final food is well below the known no
observed adverse-effect level. Other compounds, such as glycerin and some organic
acids, have been used to mimic the function of propylene glycol in these types of
products. Although no work has been reported to show similar effects in dogs at
these levels, some manufacturers have substituted these other compounds for
propylene glycol in dog formulations as well.
Other
Other synthetic antioxidant preservatives include butylated hydroxyanisole
(BHA), butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), and tertiary butylhydroquinone (TBHQ).
Questions have been raised regarding potential carcinogenic effects of BHA and
BHT in human foods (Fukushima et al., 1987). However, currently both are


===== PDF PAGE 691 =====
690
considered GRAS for use in human foods and animal feeds, with the restriction that
the total antioxidant content cannot exceed 200 ppm of the fat content of the food or
feed (21 CFR 182.3169, 182.3173, 582.3169, and 582.3173). The same restriction
applies to the use of the approved food additive TBHQ (21 CFR 172.185). Although
not formally approved for use in animal feeds, it is listed as an acceptable feed
ingredient by AAFCO as the result of an informal review by FDA (AAFCO, 2003).
Mixed tocopherols include forms of vitamin E that have antioxidant preservative
functions similar to ethoxyquin and other synthetic preservatives (21 CFR
582.3890). Because they are extracted from plant materials without further
chemically synthetic processes, tocopherols are often marketed as “natural”
preservatives. However, the amounts needed to achieve this function may be higher
and may not last as long as the synthetic alternatives (Gross et al., 1994).
Compounds with the highest functionality with respect to preservation of food
include the γ- and δ-tocopherols, as opposed to the form with the highest nutritional
value (α-tocopherol). Also, unlike the nutritional form of vitamin E, mixed
tocopherols cannot be altered synthetically to include a moiety that helps prevent
oxidative degradation in vitro (e.g., acetate, succinate). Addition of this moiety is
prudent for nutritional sources of the vitamin, since it helps prevent degradation in
the food prior to consumption. However, the same chemical modification would also
prevent vitamin E from functioning as a preservative while in the food. In
performing its function, mixed tocopherols are destroyed. Other agents, such as
ascorbic or citric acids or rosemary extract, are sometimes used to help recycle the
function of the tocopherol compounds. Rosemary extract is not approved for use as a
preservative, however.
Benzoic acid is an antifungal chemical preservative that is classified as GRAS for
use in animal feeds at levels not to exceed 0.1 percent of the formulation (21 CFR
582.3021). Cats appear particularly sensitive to adverse effects because of reduced
ability to metabolize this compound. The maximal tolerated dose in cats is reported
to be 200 mg·kg BW–1·d–1 when given for 15 days (Bedford and Clarke, 1972). At
allowed use levels an adequate margin of safety should still exist. For example, a 4-
kg adult cat consuming 80 g a day of a food containing 0.1 percent benzoic acid
would consume 20 mg·kg BW–1·d–1.
Sodium and potassium salts of bisulfite and metabisulfite are preservatives most
often used in wine production to sanitize equipment and stop the growth of yeast.
Complaints of adverse reactions to consumption of sulfites prompted the requirement
for label disclosure on commercial wine. Sulfites are GRAS for use in animal feed,
with two exceptions (21 CFR 582.3616, 582.3637, 582.3739, and 582.3776). Use of
sulfites on meat may misleadingly conceal a lack of freshness; so, they are prohibited
from this use under the regulation. Also, because of the potential for sulfites to
destroy thiamin, regulations do not consider them GRAS for use in products
intended to serve as a source of thiamin for animals. Thiamin deficiency has been
demonstrated in dogs and cats in Australia that were fed a fresh meat product


===== PDF PAGE 692 =====
691
containing sulfur dioxide (Studdert and Labue, 1991). Because of their potential
adverse effect on thiamin, use of sulfites would be precluded in dog and cat products
intended to serve as the sole source of nutrition in the United States.
Sodium and potassium salts of nitrite and nitrate are prior sanctioned by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture for use in cured meat and poultry products for human
consumption as a preservative and color fixative (21 CFR 181.33 and 181.34). When
the sodium salts are used to cure smoked fish or sold as a retail product for home-
curing meat and meat products for human consumption, the final product cannot
contain more than 500 ppm sodium nitrate and 200 ppm sodium nitrite (21 CFR
172.170 and 172.175). Concern has been expressed about the use of these substances
in human foods, particularly about the formation of potentially carcinogenic
nitrosamines during high-temperature cooking. Regardless, because of the nature of
most petfood products, use of these substances is limited. The only approval for use
of sodium nitrite in animal feed is in canned petfood containing meat or fish, and
there it is limited to 20 ppm (21 CFR 573.700). There are no regulations sanctioning
the use of sodium nitrate or potassium salts of either compound in animal feed.
Flavors and Extracts
Digests
Digests are the results of chemical or enzymatic hydrolysis of animal tissues,
including those derived from meat, poultry, or fish. As such, they are considered
“natural” flavors as the term is used in the pertinent regulations (21 CFR 501.22(a)
(3)). Digests are used to increase palatability by replacing or accentuating the
predominant flavor of food. Only small quantities of digests are needed to achieve
their intended effects as flavors. However, even in amounts used, many digests
contain concentrations of phosphoric acid that are sufficient to influence total
phosphate intake. Phosphoric and other acids in digests may also be present in
amounts capable of influencing urine pH when consumed.
Other Natural Flavors
A wide variety of flavors can be derived from other animal and plant materials
including dairy products, eggs, herbs, and spices. Acceptable processing methods
include roasting, extraction, and fermentation.
Many herbs and similar flavoring agents that are acceptable for use in animal
feeds and petfoods are sometimes added for other intended effects, such as an
antiparasitic agents (garlic), antioxidants (rosemary), or agents having effects other
than taste (parsley, turmeric, licorice, chamomile). These alternative functions are
not recognized as legitimate intended uses under federal regulations, and claims
alluding to function beyond provision of flavor may prompt regulatory action. There


===== PDF PAGE 693 =====
692
are few data to suggest that these substances would be of benefit at levels typically
added as flavors.
Artificial Flavors
A host of various synthetic compounds available simulate vanilla, fruits, and
many other flavors. Artificial flavors allowed for use in human food products may
also be used in animal feeds. Except for artificial smoke and bacon flavors, synthetic
substances are rarely used in most dog and cat foods, and then mainly in treat
products.
Colors
Certified
Certified colors are synthetic compounds used to replace or accentuate the
inherent color of food (21 CFR 74.101 through 74.706). In addition to the need for
the substance to undergo an approval process prior to marketing, each batch must be
individually certified to ensure safe use. These substances are identified on the label
by the color and a designated number, such as “Red 40” and “Blue 1.” Although the
use of a color additive in a petfood would have an arguable effect on the
acceptability of the product to a dog or cat, it can influence pet owner purchase and
use. Only certified colors approved for use in human foods are allowed in petfoods.
One potential drawback of inclusion of either certified or noncertified colors is a
change in color of the feces. While this is not considered detrimental to the animal, a
permanent stain may be left if the feces has contact with some household surfaces.
Non-certified
Color additives that are approved but are exempt from certification procedures
can be synthetically derived (e.g., iron oxide, titanium dioxide), but more often are
obtained from natural sources such as spices (paprika, saffron), fruits and vegetables,
caramel, and other sources (carmine from the insect Dactyloptus coccus) (21 CFR
73.1 through 73.1991). Irrespective of their sources, none can be identified as
“natural” color, since any substance added to a food intended only to alter its
inherent color is “artificial” (21 CFR 501.22(a)(4)). For example, beets added to a
product would change the color of the final food but would also add nutrients and
flavor. On the other hand, beet juice (21 CFR 73.260) would not provide these
additional attributes; hence the resultant color would not be considered natural. Also,
approval of a substance as a color does not imply approval as a source of nutrients or


===== PDF PAGE 694 =====
693
other functional benefit (e.g., marigold extract as a source of lutein) (21 CFR
73.295).
Iron Oxide and Titanium Dioxide
Iron oxide is a synthetic but noncertified color used to give dog and cat food a
red, meaty appearance (21 CFR 73.200). It can be used at levels not to exceed 0.25
percent of the product. At these levels, it can influence the total iron concentration in
the formula. However, iron oxide is very poorly bioavailable to dogs and cats
(Chausow and Czarnecki-Maulden, 1987). Thus, it cannot be used as a nutritional
source of iron in commercial dog and cat foods, nor can its contribution to the total
iron content be considered in determination of whether a petfood meets the AAFCO
Dog or Cat Food Nutrient Profiles (AAFCO, 2003).
Titanium dioxide is another common color additive in human food and petfoods.
Because it can impart a brilliant white color alone, a more common use is in
cosmetics, but it can also induce a “brightness” in foods by complementing other
color additives. Its use is limited to 1 percent of the food by weight (21 CFR 73.575).
Other Additives
Many other additives are approved for use to facilitate the manufacturing process
or affect the stability, form, and other technical qualities of the food. These include
anticaking agents (primarily silica salts), dust control agents, and die lubricants such
as mineral oil, emulsifiers, gums and other stabilizers, and sequestrants. Sequestrants
such as sodium hexametaphosphate have also been added to foods for the purpose of
controlling dental calculus formation (Stookey et al., 1995, 1996). These function by
sequestering minerals to form soluble complexes, thus preventing mineralization of
dental plaque to form calculi. However, although this and related compounds are
GRAS as technical food additives, the use of sequestrants for the purpose of
affecting dental calculus formation has not been approved to date.
REFERENCES
Ackerman, L. 1993. Effect of an enzyme supplement on selected nutrient levels. J.
Vet. Allerg. Clin. Immun. 2:25-29.
Adebowale, A., J. Du, Z. Liang, J. L. Leslie, and N. D. Eddington. 2002. The
bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of glucosamine hydrochloride and low
molecular weight chondroitin sulfate after single and multiple doses to beagle
dogs. Biopharm. Drug Dispos. 23:217-225.
Allison, R. W., E. D. Lassen, M. J. Burkhard, and M. R. Lappin. 2000. Effect of a
bioflavonoid dietary supplement on acetaminophen-induced oxidative injury to
feline erythrocytes. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 217:1157-1161.


===== PDF PAGE 695 =====
694
Almada, A. L., F. W. Harvey, and K. J. Platt. 2000. Effect of chronic oral
glucosamine sulfate upon fasting insulin resistance index (FIRI) in non-diabetic
subjects (abs). Proceedings FASEB S21.15:A750.
Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group. 1994. The effect
of vitamin E and beta carotene on the incidence of lung cancer and other cancers
in male smokers. New Engl. J. Med. 330:1029-1035.
Anderson, C. C., J. L. Cook, J. M. Kreeger, J. L. Tomlinson, and C. C. Wagner-
Mann. 1999a. In vitro effects of glucosamine and acetylsalicilate on canine
chondrocytes in three-dimensional culture. Am. J. Vet. Res. 60:1546-1551.
Anderson, M. A., M. R. Slater, and T. A. Hammand. 1999b. Results of a survey of
small animal practitioners on the perceived clinical efficacy and safety of an oral
nutraceutical. Prev. Vet. Med. 38:65-73.
Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). 2003. Official
Publication. West Lafayette, Ind.: AAFCO.
Bauer, M. C., D. J. Weiss, and V. Perman. 1991. Hematologic alterations in adult cats
fed 6 or 12% propylene glycol. Am. J. Vet. Res. 53:69-72.
Bauer, M. C., D. J. Weiss, and V. Perman. 1992. Hematological alterations in kittens
induced by 6 and 12% dietary propylene glycol. Vet. Hum. Toxicol. 34:127-130.
Bedford, P. G. C., and E. G. C. Clarke. 1972. Experimental benzoic acid poisoning in
the cat. Vet. Rec. 90:53.
Benyacoub, J., G. L. Czarnecki-Maulden, C. Cavadini, T. Sauthier, R. E. Anderson,
E. J. Schiffrin, and T. von der Weid. 2003. Supplementation of food with
Enterococcus faecium (SF68) stimulates immune functions in young dogs. J. Nutr.
133:1158-1162.
Biourge, V., C. Vallet, A. Levesque, R. Sergheaert, S. Chevalier, and J. L. Roberton.
1998. The use of probiotics in the diet of dogs. J. Nutr. 128:2730S-2732S.
Blanchard, G. 1997. Carnitine and feline hepatic lipidosis. Pp. 33-35 in American
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine Veterinary Medical Forum Proceedings,
Lake Buena Vista, Fla.
Bui, L. M., and T. Bierer. 2001. Influence of green lipped mussels (Perna
canaliculus) in alleviating signs of arthritis in dogs. Vet. Therapeutics 2:101-111.
Canapp, S. O., R. M. McLaughlin, J. J. Hosknson, J. K. Roush, and M. D. Butine.
1999. Scintigraphic evaluation of dogs with acute synovitis after treatment with
glucosamine hydrochloride and chondroitin sulfate. Am. J. Vet. Res. 60:1552-
1557.
Center, S. A., and G. D. Sunvold. 2000. Investigations of the effect of l-carnitine on
weight reduction, body condition and metabolism in obese dogs and cats. Pp. 113-
122 in Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition, Volume III, G. A.
Reinhart and D. P. Carey, eds. Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Center, S. A., K. Warner, and W. F. Hoffman. 1999. Influence of S-adenosyl-
methionine on metabolic and morphologic hepatocellular features induced by
chronic glucocorticoid administration in dogs. Proceedings ACVIM 40.


===== PDF PAGE 696 =====
695
Chausow, D. G., and G. L. Czarnecki-Maulden. 1987. Estimation of the dietary iron
requirement of the weanling puppy and kitten. J. Nutr. 117:928-932.
Chew, B. P., J. S. Park, H. W. Kim, T. S. Wong, C. Cerveny, H. J. Park, C. R. Baskin,
K. W. Hinchcliff, R. A. Swenson, G. A. Reinhart, J. R. Burr, and M. G. Hayek.
2000a. Effects of heavy exercise and the role of dietary antioxidants on immune
response in the Alaskan sled dog. Pp. 531-539 in Recent Advances in Canine and
Feline Nutrition, Volume III, G. A. Reinhart and D. P. Carey, eds. Wilmington,
Ohio: Orange Frazer Press.
Chew, B.P., J. S. Park, B. C. Weng, T. S. Wong, M. G. Hayek, and G. A. Reinhart.
2000b. Dietary beta-carotene is taken up by plasma and leukocytes in dogs. J.
Nutr. 130:1788-1791.
Chew, B. P., J. S. Park, B. C. Weng, T. S. Wong, M. G. Hayek, and G. A. Reinhart.
2000c. Dietary beta-carotene is taken up by plasma and leukocytes in domestic
cats. J. Nutr. 130:2322-2325.
Chew, B.P., J. S. Park, T. S. Wong, B. C. Weng, T. S. Wong, M. G. Hayek, and G. A.
Reinhart. 2000d. Dietary beta-carotene stimulates cell-mediated and humoral
immune response in dogs. J. Nutr. 130:1910-1913.
Christopher, M. M. 1989. Relation of endogenous Heinz bodies to disease and
anemia in cats: 120 cases (1978-1987). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.194:1089-1095.
Christopher, M. M., V. Perman, and J. W. Eaton. 1989. Contribution of propylene
glycol-induced Heinz body formation to anemia in cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
194:1045-1055.
Davidson, G. 2002. S-Adenosylmethionine improves hepatic function. 2002. Comp.
Cont. Educ. Pract. Vet. 24:600-603.
Devlin, P., S. Koelsch, P. Heaton, B. Smith, and J. Harper. 2001. The maintenance of
a vaccine-induced immune response in adult and senior dogs fed an antioxidant-
supplemented diet. Comp. Cont. Educ. Pract. Vet. 23(suppl) (9A):96.
Dobenecker, B., Y. Beetz, and E. Kienzle. 2002. A placebo-controlled double-blind
study on the effect of nutraceuticals (chondroitin sulfate and mussel extract) in
dogs with joint diseases as perceived by their owners. J. Nutr. 132(suppl):1690S-
1691S.
Dzanis, D. A. 1991. Safety of ethoxyquin in dog foods. J. Nutr. 121(suppl):S163-
S164.
Dzanis, D. A. 1994. Propylene glycol unsafe for use in cat foods. FDA Vet 9(1):1-3.
Echard, B. W., N. A. Talpur, K. A. Funk, D. Bagchi, and H. G. Preuss. 2001. Effects
of oral glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate alone and in combination on the
metabolism of SHR and SD rats. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 225:85-91.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 1997. FDA requests that ethoxyquin levels be
reduced in dog foods. FDA Vet. 12(5).
Fukushima, S., Y. Y. Kurata, M. A. Shibata, E. Ikawa, and N. Ito. 1984. Promotion
by ascorbic acid, sodium erythorbate and ethoxyquin of neoplastic lesions in rats
initiated by N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)nitrosamine. Cancer Lett. 23:29-37.


===== PDF PAGE 697 =====
696
Fukushima, S., T. Sakata, Y. Tagawa, M. A. Shibata, M. Horose, and N. Ito. 1987.
Different modifying response of butylated hydroxyanisole, butylated
hydroxytoluene, and other antioxidants in N,N-dibutylnitrosamine esophagus and
forestomach carcinogenesis of rats. Cancer Res. 47:2113-2116.
Gfeller, R. W., and S. P. Messonnier. 1998. Pp. 197-198 in Handbook of Small
Animal Toxicology and Poisonings. St. Louis: Mosby, Inc.
Giffard, C. J., S. B. Collins, N. C. Stoodley, R. F. Butterwick, and R. M. Batt. 2001.
Administration of charcoal, Yucca schidigera, and zinc acetate to reduce
malodorous flatulence in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 218:892-896.
Gross, K. L., R. Bollinger, P. Thawnghmung, and G. F. Collings. 1994. Effect of
three different preservative systems on the stability of extruded dog food subjected
to ambient and high temperature storage. J. Nutr. 124(suppl):2638S-2642S.
Hard, G. C., and G. E. Neal. 1990. Induction of renal pipillary necrosis in the rat by
ethoxyquin. Toxicologist 10:182 (abs).
Harker-Murray, A. K., A. J. Tajik, F. Ishikura,.D. Meyer, J. C. Burnett, and M. M.
Redfield. 2000. The role of coenzyme Q10 in the physiology and therapy of
experimental congestive heart failure in the dog. J. Card. Fail. 6:233-42.
Hickman, M. A., Q. R. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1990. Effect of diet on Heinz body
formation in kittens. Am. J. Vet. Res. 50:475-478.
Hill, A. S., S. O’Neill, Q. R. Rogers, and M. M. Christopher. 2001. Antioxidant
prevention and treatment of Heinz body formation and oxidative injury in cats.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 62:370-374.
Hill, A. S., M. M. Christopher, S. O’Neill, and Q. R. Rogers. 2002. Pharmacokinetics
of lipoic acid in adult cats and dogs (ab). Comp. Cont. Educ. Pract. Vet.
24(suppl):67.
Hulbert, L. C., and F. W. Oehme. 1977. Plants Poisonous to Livestock. New York:
Kansas State University Printing Service.
Jewell, D. E., P. W. Toll, K. J. Wedekind, and S. C. Zicker. 2000. Effect of increasing
dietary antioxidants on concentrations of vitamin E and total alkenals in serum of
dogs and cats. Vet. Therapeutics. 1:264-272.
Johnson, K. A., D. A. Hulse, R. C. Hart, D. Kochevar, and Q.Chu. 2001. Effects of
an orally administered mixture of chondroitin sulfate, glucosamine hydrochloride
and manganese ascorbate on synovial fluid chondroitin sulfate 3B3 and 7D4
epitope in a canine cruciate ligament transection model of osteoarthritis.
Osteoarth. Cart. 9: 14-21.
Kajinuma, H., T. Kuzuya, and T. Ide. 1975. Effects of glucosamine on insulin and
glucogon secretion in dogs and ducks. Endocrinologia Japonica 22:517-523.
Kim, J. J., and H. E. Conrad. 1974. Effect of D-glucosamine concentration on the
kinetics of mucopolysaccharide biosynthesis in cultured chick embryo vertebral
cartilage. J. Biol. Chem. 249:3091-3097.
Kittleson, M. D. 2000. Taurine- and carnitine-responsive dilated cardiomyopathy in
American Cocker Spaniels. Pp. 761-762 in Kirk’s Current Veterinary Therapy
XIII. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.


===== PDF PAGE 698 =====
697
Kronfeld, D. S., and S. Donoghue. 1988. A role for vitamin C in work-stressed dogs.
Pp. 537-538 in Proceedings, American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Forum, Washington, D.C.
Lipiello, L., A. Idouraine, P. S. McNamara, S. C. Barr, and R. M. McLaughlin. 1998.
Cartilage stimulatory and antiproteolytic activity is present in sera of dogs treated
with a chondroprotective agent. Canine Pract. 23:10-12.
Lobo, P. 2000. A smaller load: Enzymes to cut animal waste. Pp. 90- 93 in Petfood
Forum Proceedings. Chicago: Watt Publishing.
Lowe, J. A., and S. J. Kershaw. 1997. The ameliorating effect of Yucca schidigera
extract on canine and feline faecal aroma. Res. Vet. Sci. 63:61-66.
Machlin, L. J. 1993. Antioxidant vitamins: Role in disease prevention. Petfood
Industry 35:4-39.
Manson, M. M., J. A. Green, and H. E. Driver. 1987. Ethoxyquin alone induces
preneoplastic changes in rat kidney whilst preventing induction of such lesions in
liver by aflatoxin B1. Carcinogenesis 8:723-728.
Masui, T., H. Tsudu, K. Inoue, T. Ogiso, and N. Ito. 1986. Inhibitory effects of
ethoxyquin, 4,4′-diaminodiphenylmethane and acetaminophen on
hepatocarcinogenesis. Jpn. J. Cancer Res. 77:231-237.
McNamara, P. S., S. C. Barr, and H. N. Erb. 1996. Hematologic, hemostatic and
biochemical effects in dogs receiving an oral chondroprotective agent for thirty
days. Am. J. Vet. Res. 57:1390-1394.
McNamara, P. S., S. C. Barr, H. N. Erb, and L. L. Barlow. 2000. Hematologic,
hemostatic and biochemical effects in cats receiving an oral chondroprotective
agent for 30 days. Vet. Therapeutics 1:108-117.
Meydani, S. N., N. Hayek, D. Wu, and M. Meydani. 1998. Vitamin E and immune
response in aged dogs. Pp. 295-303 in Recent Advances in Canine and Feline
Nutrition, Vol. II, R. A. Reinhart and D. P. Carey, eds, Wilmington, Ohio: Orange
Frazer Press.
Milgram, N. W., S. C. Zicker, E. Head, B. A. Muggenburg, H. Murphey, C. Ikeda-
Douglas, and C. W. Cotman. 2002. Dietary enrichment counteracts age-associated
cognitive dysfunction in canines. Neurobiol Aging 82:375-381.
Miller, M. E., G. C. Christensen, and H. E. Evans. 1964. Anatomy of the Dog.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company.
Monauni, T., M. G. Zenti, A. Cretti, M. C. Daniels, G. Targher, B. Caruso, M.
Caputo, D. McClain, S. Del Prato, A. Giaccari, M. Muggeo, E. Bonora, and R. C.
Bonadonna. 2000. Effects of glucosamine infusion on insulin secretion and insulin
action in humans. Diabetes 49: 926-935.
National Research Council (NRC). 1985. Nutrient Requirements of Dogs.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). 1986. Nutrient Requirements of Cats.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Ooms, T. G., S. A. Khan, and C. Means. 2001. Suspected caffeine and ephedrine
toxicosis resulting from ingestion of an herbal supplement containing guarana and


===== PDF PAGE 699 =====
698
ma huang in dogs: 47 cases (1997-1999). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 218:225-229.
Parcell, S. 2002. Sulfur in human nutrition and applications in medicine. Altern.
Med. Rev. 7(1):22-44.
Parke, D. V., A. Rahim, and R. Walker. 1973. Reversibility of hepatic changes
caused by ethoxyquin. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 1:1316-1319.
Quast, J. F., C. G. Humiston, and C. E. Wade. 1979. Results of a toxicology study in
cats fed diets containing propylene glycol for up to three months. FDA Master File
Report No. 12.
Robinson, K. A., D. A. Sens, and M. G. Buse. 1993. Pre-exposure to glucosamine
induces insulin resistance of glucose transport and glycogen synthesis in isolated
rat skeletal muscles. Diabetes 42:1333-1346.
Seddon, J. M., U. A. Ajani, R. D. Sperduto, N. Blair, T. C. Burton, M. D. Farber, E.
S. Gragoudas, J. Haller, and D. T. Miller. 1994. Dietary carotenoids, vitamin A, C
and E, and advanced age-related macular degeneration. J. Am. Med. Assoc.
272:1413-1420.
Senikar, I., C. Giacchetti, and G. Zanolo. 1986. Pharmacokinetics of glucosamine in
the dog and in man. Arzneimittelforschung 36:728-733.
Shizukuishi S, E. Inoshita, A. Tsunemitse, K. Takahashi, T. Kishi, and K. Folkers.
1984. Therapy of coenzyme Q10 of experimental periodontitis in a dog model
supports results of human periodontitis therapy. Pp.153-162 in Biomedical and
Clinical Aspects of Coenzyme Q10, Vol. 4, K. Folkers, and Y. Yamamura, eds. St.
Louis: Elsevier Scientific Publishers.
Skinner, N. D., D. J. Martin, and E. J. Harper. 1999. Effect of a vitamin C
supplement on plasma status in healthy adult cats (abs). FASEB J. 13:A892.
Stookey, G. K., J. M. Warrick, and L. L. Miller. 1995. Effect of sodium
hexametaphosphate on dental calculus formation in dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res.
56(7):913-918.
Stookey, G. K., J. M. Warrick, L. L. Miller, and B. P. Katz. 1996.
Hexametaphosphate-coated snack biscuits significantly reduce calculus formation
in dogs. J. Vet. Dent. 13(1):27-30.
Studdert, V. P., and R. H. Labue. 1991. Thiamin deficiency in cats and dogs
associated with feeding meat preserved with sulphur dioxide. Aust. Vet. J. 68:54-
7.
Swanson, K. S., C. M. Grieshop, E. A. Flickinger, L. L. Bauer, H. Healy, K. A.
Dawson, N. R. Merchen, and G. C. Fahey, Jr. 2002. Supplemental
fructooligosaccharides and mannanooligosaccharides influence immune function,
ileal and total tract nutrient digestibilities, microbial populations and
concentrations of protein catabolites in the large bowel of dogs. J. Nutr. 132:980-
989.
Tsuda, H., T. Sakata, T. Masui, K. Imaida, and N. Ito. 1984. Modifying effects of
butylated hydroxyanisole, ethoxyquin and acetaminophen on induction of
neoplastic lesions in rat liver and kidney initiated by Nethyl-N-
hydroxyethylnitrosamine. Carcinogenesis 5:525-531.


===== PDF PAGE 700 =====
699
Wallace, K. P., S. A. Center, F. H. Hickford, K. L. Warner, and S. Smith. 2002. S-
adenosyl-L-methionine (SAMe) for the treatment of acetaminophen toxicity in a
dog. J. Amer. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 38:246-254.
Weese, J. S. 2002. Microbiologic evaluation of commercial probiotics. J. Am. Vet.
Med. Assoc. 200:794-797.
Weiss, D. J., C. B. McClay, M. M. Christopher, M. Murphy, and V. Perman. 1990.
Effects of propylene glycol-containing diets on acetaminophen-induced
methemoglobinemia in cats. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 196:1816-1819.
Zicker, S. C., T. M. Hagen, N. Joisher, C. Golder, D. K. Joshi, and E. P. Miller. 2002.
Safety of long-term feeding of α-lipoic acid and its effect on reduced
glutathione:oxidized glutathione ratios in beagles. Vet. Therapeutics 3:167-176.


===== PDF PAGE 701 =====
700
15
Nutrient Requirements and
Dietary Nutrient Concentrations
The purpose of this chapter is to assemble and present the nutrient data discussed
in this report in an easy-to-use summary. In Tables 15-2 through 15-14, nutrient data
are presented for energy, protein and amino acids, fat and fatty acids, macro- and
microminerals, and vitamins. Because it is known that the requirements for nutrients
vary with differing physiological states of an animal, separate tables of the nutrient
data are provided for cats and dogs during growth, for adult maintenance, and during
gestation and lactation.
Normal animal health and physiology can only be maintained if the intake of all
nutrients meets the minimal requirements on a continuing basis. Minimal requirement
data are derived from peer-reviewed literature, and, although research on the nutrient
requirements of dogs and cats has appeared since the last publications on dog and cat
nutrition (NRC, 1985, 1986), large gaps in our knowledge of the quantitative
requirements for specific nutrients still exist. These gaps are noted in the text and by
the absence of data in the requirement tables.
The nutrient requirement data for dogs and cats are provided in four distinct
categories, presented in tabular form. First, the Minimal Requirement (MR) is given;
this term is defined as the minimal concentration or amount of a bioavailable nutrient
that will support a defined physiological state.
The next column presents Adequate Intake (AI), which is defined as the
concentration in the diet or amount required by the animal of a nutrient that is
presumed to sustain a given life stage when no MR has been demonstrated. The AI is
based on published data demonstrating the adequacy of a concentration or amount of


===== PDF PAGE 702 =====
701
nutrient for a given life stage in the target species, which is supported, in some cases,
by comparative data from studies in other species.
Next, the Recommended Allowance (RA) for each nutrient is presented. The RA is
defined as the concentration or amount of a nutrient in a diet formulated to support a
given physiological state. The RA is based on the MR and, where applicable, includes
a safety factor for nutrients with uncertain bioavailability. If no MR is available, the
RA is based on the AI.
Finally, values for the Safe Upper Limit (SUL) are presented. The SUL values are
based on the maximal concentration or amount of a nutrient that has not been
associated with adverse effects in dogs and cats. Unfortunately, SUL values are not
available for many required nutrients, especially minerals and vitamins.
To meet the desired amount of nutrient intake, the diet consumed must contain the
proper concentration of each nutrient. Because animals normally eat to satisfy their
energy requirement, one way to express the dietary nutrient concentrations is as
unit(s) or nutrient per 1,000 kilocalories (kcal) of metabolizable energy. It is also
possible to express the dietary concentrations as unit(s) per kilogram (kg) of diet. The
tables provide this information both ways, but to standardize the tabulated data for all
nutrients, the following assumptions were made:
The energy density of the diet for both dogs and cats was assumed to be 4,000 kcal
of metabolizable energy (ME) per kg. Requirements for growth in puppies are based
on a 5.5-kg puppy that consumes 1,000 kcal of ME per day. Requirements for adult
dogs at maintenance are based on a 15-kg adult dog that consumes 1,000 kcal ME per
day. Requirements for gestating and lactating bitches are based on a 22-kg bitch with
eight puppies in peak lactation consuming 5,000 kcal of ME per day. Requirements
for growth of kittens are based on an 800-g kitten consuming 180 kcal of ME per day,
and those for adult cats at maintenance are based on a 4-kg adult cat consuming 250
kcal of ME per day. Requirements for gestating and lactating cats are based on a 4-kg
queen with four kittens in peak lactation consuming 540 kcal of ME per day.
With the exception of amino acid requirements in gestating queens, there is a lack
of experimental data for nutrient requirements of gestating cats and dogs. In general,
however, the nutrient requirements of lactating animals are likely to be sufficient for
gestation. The values provided in the tables for lactating cats and dogs can be used for
gestating animals after adjusting for differences in caloric intake. Information on how
to correct for the difference is included in the footnotes to the tables.
In addition to providing data on dietary nutrient concentrations as (1) amount of
nutrient per kg of dietary dry matter (DM) (which is assumed to contain 4,000 kcal
ME) and (2) amount of nutrient per 1,000 kcal of ME, the tables also provided the
data expressed as (3) amount of nutrient per kg of metabolic body weight, that is,
body weight to the 0.75 exponent (BW0.75) per day for dogs and body weight to the
0.67 exponent (BW0.67) per day for cats. The pros and cons of developing diets based
on any particular expression of nutrient requirements are discussed later in this
chapter.


===== PDF PAGE 703 =====
702
Energy requirements are expressed as kcal of ME per kg of BW0.75 per day for
dogs at maintenance and for pregnant bitches. For lactating bitches, energy
requirements are a function of both BW0.75 and body weight (BW) as well as number
of suckling puppies. Daily energy requirements for growing dogs are based on
maintenance requirements multiplied by a factor that is a function of the ratio
between actual BW and expected mature BW. The equations for energy requirements
in dogs are based on data of dogs between 4 and 60 kg of mature weight, except for
female reproduction where the majority of data were obtained from dogs between 5
and 25 kg BW.
The equations for energy requirements in cats are based on data of domestic cats
between 2.5 and 7 kg of mature weight. Energy requirements for cats at maintenance
are expressed as kcal of ME per kg BW0.67 per day for cats with body condition
scores equal to or less than 5.0 (on a 9-point scale) and as per kg BW0.4 for cats with
body condition scores greater than 5.0. For pregnant queens, energy requirements are
expressed as a function of BW0.67, whereas, for lactating queens, energy
requirements are a function of both BW0.67 and BW as well as number of suckling
kittens. Daily energy requirements for growing cats are based on maintenance
requirements multiplied by a factor that is a function of the ratio between actual BW
and expected mature BW.
USE OF NUTRIENT REQUIREMENT TABLES
Expressing a requirement relative to DM or ME is most convenient when
formulating a diet for general use in feeding dogs and cats, such as in commercial
diets, but expressing a requirement relative to metabolic BW may be more convenient
when formulating a diet for an individual. Unfortunately, requirements expressed
relative to DM change with the energy density of the diet. In a few instances, there is
also a suggestion that requirements expressed relative to ME may change with BW.
These issues are discussed in the following paragraphs, and information as to how to
correct for dogs and cats of differing sizes has been included as footnotes to the
tables.
Recommendations Relative to ME Compared with Requirements
Relative to DM
Nutrient recommendations for dogs and cats are best expressed relative to ME
rather than relative to DM because ME, not DM, determines the amount of food that
must be consumed by a dog or cat to maintain BW and body condition score.
Requirements expressed relative to ME do not change as the energy density of a diet
changes, whereas requirements relative to DM vary with energy density of the food.
For some nutrients, requirements have been established experimentally relative to


===== PDF PAGE 704 =====
703
DM rather than ME. These have been converted to requirements expressed relative to
ME, at an energy density of 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1 DM. Following this conversion, it is
the requirements and allowances expressed relative to ME, not those expressed
relative to DM, that remain constant as the energy density of the diet changes.
For example, a cat maintaining its BW while consuming 240 kcal ME would have
to eat 60 g DM of a food that contains 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1 DM but would have to
consume 80 g of a food containing only 3,000 kcal ME·kg–1 DM. In this example, a
nutrient that must be included at a minimum of 8 g·kg–1 DM in the first diet need
only be included at a concentration of 6 g·kg–1 DM in the second, but the nutrient
requirement relative to ME remains the same (2 g per 1,000 kcal ME in this example)
in both diets.
Thus, when using the tables to determine how much nutrient should be included in
the diet when the nutrient density of a diet is not 4,000 kcal ME·kg–1, the value of the
requirement relative to kg DM reported in the table should be multiplied by the
energy density of the new diet (in kilocalories ME per kg) and divided by 4,000.
Requirements Relative to ME in the Food Compared with
Requirements Relative to BW
There is little information about how nutrient requirements vary with BW. Many
nutrient requirements vary, as do maintenance energy requirements, relative to
metabolic BW (BW with an exponent of 0.75 in lean dogs and 0.67 in lean cats;
Rucker and Steinberg, 2002; Rucker and Storms, 2002). Other requirements may vary
directly with BW or with some other exponent (Rivers and Burger, 1989).
Several authors, for example, have suggested that endogenous nitrogen output and,
by inference, protein requirements vary with an exponent of approximately 0.75
(Miller and Payne, 1963; Kendall et al., 1982; Rivers and Burger, 1989). In dogs,
Kendall et al. (1982) reported the endogenous nitrogen output to be 273 mg·kg BW–
0.75, which suggests an MR of 1.7 g crude protein·kg BW–0.75. Protein requirements
expressed relative to ME in the diet should remain, therefore, almost constant
irrespective of BW and are best expressed relative to ME (Schaeffer et al., 1989). The
requirements for some minerals may vary more directly with BW, however, and, for
these nutrients, requirements relative to ME will vary with BW. Variation with BW
may need to be considered when making diets for individuals using MRs and SULs.
Recommendations for maintenance in the tables have been calculated by assuming a
moderate-sized lean adult dog of 15 kg BW and a moderate-sized lean adult cat of 4
kg BW. For nutrients whose requirements are thought to vary with metabolic BW,
recommendations expressed relative to ME will remain the same, irrespective of body
size. For nutrients whose requirements are thought to vary directly with BW,
requirements expressed relative to ME will increase or decrease with BW, with an
exponent of 0.25 for lean dogs and 0.33 for lean cats, as shown in Table 15-1. In this


===== PDF PAGE 705 =====
704
case, the requirement relative to ME will be about 40 percent greater in a 6-kg cat
than in a 2-kg cat and twice as large for a 100-kg dog as for a 2-kg dog (i.e., the diet
would need to be more nutrient dense for a large than for a small animal).
Note on Bioavailability
The proposed minimal concentrations and amounts of vitamins are the total
bioavailable forms of the vitamins present in the diet (contributed by natural
ingredients and vitamin premixes) at the point of consumption. Because the natural
forms of some vitamins have low bioavailabilities, the proposed amount will
generally be adequate when the majority of that vitamin is from a vitamin premix.
However, when a vitamin is contributed mainly by food ingredients, the minimal
concentration in the tables should be modified to account for bioavailability by using
a suitable factor. For a discussion of the bioavailability of vitamins from various
foods, refer to Baker (1995).
TABLE 15-1 Change in Requirements Relative to ME (per 1,000 kcal) if
Requirements Vary Directly with BW
Species BW (kg) Change (%)
Dog 2 – 40
5 – 24
10 – 10
15 No change
20 + 7
40 + 28
60 + 41
80 + 52
100 + 61
Lean cat 2 – 20
3 – 9
4 No change
5 + 8
6 + 14
Table 15-1 is intended to illustrate the concept that, for nutrients whose requirements vary
directly with BW, the value of those nutrient requirements expressed relative to ME will
increase or decrease with differences in BW. The table should not be used to formulate diets.
Rather, the reader is directed to the footnotes in each of the subsequent tables in Chapter 15 that
provide information on how to calculate requirements for cats and dogs of different sizes.


===== PDF PAGE 706 =====
705
The reader should take note that this published report reflects a number of
changes made to correct and update an unedited prepublication version of this
report. Some values, particularly in Chapter 15, have been revised or deleted
based on the availability of new information or to correct errors in calculation.
These changes were examined by four independent reviewers and have been
approved by the authoring committee and the institution. This final published
version of the report therefore supersedes the data contained in the
prepublication.
TABLE 15-2 Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements for Growth of Puppies After
Weaninga,b
ME (kcal) = maintenance amount × 3.2 × [e(–0.87p) – 0.1]
ME (kcal) = 130 × BWa0.75 × 3.2 × [e(–0.87p) – 0.1]
Where:
p = BWa /BWm
BWa = actual body weight at time of evaluation (kg)
BWm = expected mature body weight (kg)
e = base of natural log ≈ 2.718
Example:
Labrador puppy 16 weeks of age, 17 kg actual body weight, expected mature weight
35 kg ME (kcal) = 130 × 170.75 × 3.2 × [e(–0.87 × 17/35) – 0.1] = 1,934 kcal
aThis table refers to puppies after weaning. Newborn puppies need about 25 kcal per 100 g BW
(Kienzle et al., 1985).
bMaintenance energy requirements of inactive puppies such as pet puppies without opportunity
and/or stimulus to exercise may be lower by 10 to 20 percent, and maintenance energy
requirements of very active puppies, such as Great Danes in kennels, may be higher.
TABLE 15-3 Nutrient Requirements for Growth of Puppies After Weaning


===== PDF PAGE 707 =====
706
aThe values for Amt/kg DM have been calculated assuming a dietary energy density of 4,000
kcal ME/kg. (The term ≡ signifies equivalence.) If the energy density of the diet is not 4,000
kcal ME/kg, then to calculate the Amt/kg DM for each nutrient, multiply the value for the
nutrient in the column labeled Amt/kg DM by the energy density of the pet food (in kcal
ME/kg) and divide by 4,000.
bTo calculate the amount to feed of each nutrient, multiply the value for Amt/1,000 kcal ME for
each nutrient by the energy requirement for the puppy in kcal (calculated from Table 15-2) and
divide by 1,000.
cThe values for Amt/BW0.75 apply only to 5.5-kg puppies of expected mature body weight of
35 kg. To calculate the amount of a nutrient for puppies of different current or expected mature


===== PDF PAGE 708 =====
707
body weights, calculate the energy requirement from Table 15-2 and multiply this by the
nutrient Amt/1,000 kcal and divide by 1,000.
dFor 4 to 14 week-old puppies, 0.01 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein
above 180 g and 225 g, for the MR and RA, respectively, of arginine. For puppies over 14
weeks of age, 0.01 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein above 140 g and 175
g for the MR and RA of arginine, respectively.
eThe quantity of tyrosine required to maximize black hair color may be about 1.5-2.0 times this
quantity.
fThe requirement for α-linolenic acid varies depending upon linoleic acid content of the diet.
The ratio of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acid should be between 2.6 and 16. Note that 0.8 g/kg
DM value shown is the minimum RA of α-linolenic acid at 13 g linoleic acid per kg DM
resulting in a ratio of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acid of approximately 16.
gEicosapentaenoic acid should not exceed 60% of the total amount.
hThe RA for the calcium requirements of weaned puppies (of expected mature body weight
>25 kg) for up to 14 weeks of life should not be less than 0.54 g calcium/kg body weight.
iSome oxide forms of iron and copper should not be used because of low bioavailability.
jFor vitamin A, requirements are expressed as RE (retinol equivalents). One RE is equal to 1 μg
of all-trans retinol, and one IU of vitamin A is equal to 0.3 RE. Safe upper limit values are
expressed as μg retinol.
k1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D3.
lHigher concentrations of vitamin E are recommended for high PUFA diets. One international
unit of vitamin E = 1 mg all-rac-α-tocopheryl acetate (see Chapter 8).
mDogs have a metabolic requirement, but a dietary requirement has not been demonstrated
when natural diets are fed. Adequate vitamin K is probably synthesized by intestinal microbes.
The vitamin K allowance is expressed in terms of the commercially used precursor menadione
that requires alkylation to the active vitamin K.
nFor normal diets not containing raw egg white, adequate biotin is probably provided by
microbial synthesis in the intestine. Diets containing antibiotics may need supplementation.
TABLE 15-4 Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements for Adult Dogs at
Maintenance
Type
Kcal × kg
BW0.75
Average for laboratory kennel dogs or active pet dogsa 130
Above average requirements:
Young adult laboratory dogs or young adult active pet dogs140
Adult laboratory Great Danes or active pet Great Danes200
Adult laboratory terriers or active pet terriers180
Below average requirements:
Inactive pet dogsb 95


===== PDF PAGE 709 =====
708
Type
Kcal × kg
BW0.75
Older laboratory dogs or older active pet dogs or
laboratory Newfoundlands
105
aDogs kept in a domestic environment with strong stimulus and ample opportunity to exercise,
such as dogs in multiple dog households in the country or in a house with a large yard.
bDogs kept in a domestic environment with little stimulus and opportunity to exercise.
Requirements of older or overweight dogs may still be overestimated.
TABLE 15-5 Nutrient Requirements of Adult Dogs for Maintenance
aThe values for Amt/kg DM have been calculated assuming a dietary energy density of 4,000
kcal ME/kg. (The term ≡ signifies equivalence.) If the energy density of the diet is not 4,000
kcal ME/kg, then to calculate the Amt/kg DM for each nutrient, multiply the value for the
nutrient in the column labeled Amt/kg DM by the energy density of the pet food (in kcal
ME/kg) and divide by 4,000.


===== PDF PAGE 710 =====
709
bTo calculate the amount to feed of each nutrient, multiply the value for Amt/1,000 kcal ME for
each nutrient by the energy requirement for laboratory kennel dogs in kcal (calculated from
Table 15-4) and divide by 1,000. For dogs with an unusually low energy intake (below the
suggested requirement), the nutrient concentrations (Amt/1,000 kcal) may not be adequate.
These animals should be fed the nutrient amounts shown in the column Amt/kg BW0.75.
c0.01 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein above 80 g and 100 g for the MR
and RA, respectively.
dThe quantity of tyrosine required to maximize black hair color may be about 1.5-2.0 times this
quantity.
eThe requirement for α-linolenic acid varies depending upon linoleic acid content of the diet.
The ratio of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acid should be between 2.6 and 26. Note that 0.44 g/kg
DM value shown is the minimum RA of α-linolenic acid at 11 g linoleic acid per kg DM,
resulting in a ratio of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acid of approximately 25.
f50-60% of the total amount should be eicosapentaenoic acid, and 40-50% should be
docosahexaenoic acid.
gSome oxides of iron and copper should not be used because of low bioavailability.
hVitamin A requirements expressed as RE (retinol equivalents). One RE is equal to 1 μg of all-
trans retinol, and one IU of vitamin A is equal to 0.3 RE. Safe upper limit values expressed as
μg retinol.
i1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D3.
jHigher concentrations of vitamin E are recommended for high PUFA diets. One international
unit of vitamin E = 1 mg all-rac-α-tocopheryl acetate (see Chapter 8).
kDogs have a metabolic requirement, but a dietary requirement has not been demonstrated
when natural diets are fed. Adequate vitamin K is probably synthesized by intestinal microbes.
The vitamin K allowance is expressed in terms of the commercially used precursor menadione
that requires alkylation to the active vitamin K.
lFor normal diets not containing raw egg white, adequate biotin is probably provided by
microbial synthesis in the intestine. Diets containing antibiotics may need supplementation.
TABLE 15-6 Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements for Bitches in Late Gestation
(4 Weeks After Mating Until Parturition)a
ME (kcal) = maintenance + 26 kcal × kg BW
Average maintenance requirements 130 kcal × kg BW0.75
ME (kcal) = 130 kcal × kg BW0.75 + 26 kcal × kg BW
Example:
Body weight of bitch 22 kg
Maintenance requirements 220.75 × 130 kcal = 10.16 × 130 = 1,320 kcal
Requirements for gestation 22 × 26 kcal = 572 kcal
Total requirements 1,320 kcal + 572 kcal = 1,892 kcal
aFor variations in maintenance requirements, see Table 15-4.


===== PDF PAGE 711 =====
710
TABLE 15-7 Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements for Lactating Bitches Based
on Number of Puppies and Weeks of Lactation
Requirements for lactation:
ME (kcal) = maintenance + BW × (24n + 12m) × L
Extrapolated maintenance energy requirements during lactation:
145 kcal × BW0.75
ME (kcal) = 145 kcal × BW0.75 + BW × (24n + 12m) × L
Where:
BW = body weight of bitch (kg)
n = number of puppies between 1 and 4
m = number of puppies between 5 and 8 (<5 puppies m = 0)
L = correction factor for stage of lactation: week 1, 0.75; week 2, 0.95; week 3, 1.1;
and week 4, 1.2 (see text)
 
Example:
Bitch 22 kg, 6 puppies, third week of lactation
Maintenance requirements = 220.75 × 145 kcal = 10.16 × 145 kcal = 1,473 kcal
Number of puppies = 6: n = 4, m = 2,
Stage of lactation third week: L = 1.1
Requirements for lactation = 22 × (24 × 4 + 12 × 2) × 1.1 kcal = 2,904 kcal
Total requirements = 1,473 kcal + 2,904 kcal = 4,377 kcal
TABLE 15-8 Nutrient Requirements of Bitches for Late Gestation and Peak
Lactationa


===== PDF PAGE 712 =====
711
aFew data could be found for the dietary concentrations for the minimal requirement for
gestation for the bitch. The values for lactation relative to kg DM and 1,000 kcal ME may be
taken as satisfactory for gestation.
bThe values for Amt/kg DM have been calculated assuming a dietary energy density of 4,000
kcal ME/kg. (The term ≡ signifies equivalence.) If the energy density of the diet is not 4,000
kcal ME/kg, then to calculate the Amt/kg DM for each nutrient, multiply the value for the
nutrient in the column labeled Amt/kg DM by the energy density of the pet food (in kcal
ME/kg) and divide by 4,000.
cTo calculate the amount to feed of each nutrient multiply the value for Amt/1 000 kcal ME for
each nutrient by the energy requirement in kcal (calculated from Tables 15-6 and 15-7) and
divide by 1 000.
dThe values for Amt/BW0.75 apply only to a 22-kg bitch in peak lactation with 8 puppies and
consuming 5,000 kcal/day. To calculate the amount for bitches of different body weights or
litter sizes, calculate the energy requirement from Table 15-7 and multiply this value by the
nutrient Amt/1,000 kcal and divide by 1,000. To calculate the amount of a nutrient for gestating
dogs, calculate the energy requirement from Table 15-6 and multi l this value b the nutrient
Amt/1 000 kcal and divide b 1 000
e0.01 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein above 200.


===== PDF PAGE 713 =====
712
fThe quantity of tyrosine required to maximize black hair color may be about 1.5-2.0 times this
quantity.
gThe requirement for α-linolenic acid varies depending upon linoleic acid content of the diet.
The ratio of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acid should be between 2.6 and 16. Note that 0.8 g/kg
DM value shown is the minimum RA of α-linolenic acid at 13 g linoleic acid per kg DM,
resulting in a ratio of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acid of approximately 16.
h50-60% of the total amount should be eicosapentaenoic, acid and 40-50% should be
docosahexaenoic acid.
iSome oxides of iron and copper should not be used because of low bioavailability.
jVitamin A requirements expressed as RE (retinol equivalents). One RE is equal to 1 μg of all-
trans retinol, and one IU of vitamin A is equal to 0.3 RE. Safe upper limit values expressed as
μg retinol.
k1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D3.
lHigher concentrations of vitamin E are recommended for high PUFA diets. One international
unit of vitamin E = 1 mg all-rac-α-tocopheryl acetate (see Chapter 8).
mDogs have a metabolic requirement, but a dietary requirement has not been demonstrated
when natural diets are fed. Adequate vitamin K is probably synthesized by intestinal microbes.
The vitamin K allowance is expressed in terms of the commercially used precursor menadione
that requires alkylation to the active vitamin K.
nFor normal diets not containing raw egg white, adequate biotin is probably provided by
microbial synthesis in the intestine. Diets containing antibiotics may need supplementation.
TABLE 15-9 Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements for Growth of Kittens After
Weaning
ME (kcal) = maintenance amount × 6.7 × [e(–0.189p) – 0.66]
ME (kcal) = 100 × BWa0.67 × 6.7 × [e(–0.189p) – 0.66]
Where:
p = BWa/BWm
BWa = actual body weight at time of evaluation (kg)
BWm = expected mature body weight (kg)
e = base of natural log ≈ 2.718
Example: Kitten, 1 kg BWa, 4 kg BWm
ME (kcal) = 100 × 10.67 × 6.732 × [e(–0.189 × 1/4) – 0.66] = 198 kcal
TABLE 15-10 Nutrient Requirements for Growth of Kittens After Weaning


===== PDF PAGE 714 =====
713
aThe values for Amt/kg DM have been calculated assuming a dietary energy density of 4,000
kcal ME/kg. (The term ≡ signifies equivalence.) If the energy density of the diet is not 4,000
kcal ME/kg, then to calculate the Amt/kg DM for each nutrient, multiply the value for the
nutrient in the column labeled Amt/kg DM by the energy density of the pet food (in kcal
ME/kg) and divide by 4,000.
bTo calculate the amount to feed of each nutrient, multiply the value for Amt/1,000 kcal ME for
each nutrient by the energy requirement in kcal for kittens (calculated from Table 15-9) and
divide by 1,000.
cThe values for Amt/BW0.67 apply only to 800 g kittens with an expected mature body weight
of 4 kg. To calculate the amounts for kittens of different actual or expected mature body
weights, calculate the energy requirement from Table 15-9 and multiply this by the nutrient
Amt/1,000 kcal and divide by 1,000.
d0.02 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein above 180 g and 225 g for the
MR and RA, respectively.
eTo maximize black hair color, an equal quantity or greater of tyrosine to that of phenlyalanine
is required.


===== PDF PAGE 715 =====
714
fThe recommended allowance of taurine for highly digestible purified diets is 0.4 g/kg diet,
whereas the allowances for dry expanded and canned diets are 1.0 g and 1.7 g/kg DM,
respectively.
gIt is advised that eicosapentaenoic acid not exceed 60% of the total eicosapentaenoic +
docosahexaenoic amount.
hSome forms of iron and copper should not be used because of low bioavailability.
iOne IU of vitamin A is equal to 0.3 μg of all-trans retinol or 1 μg retinol = 3.333 IU of vitamin
A. Safe upper limit values expressed as μg retinol.
j1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D3.
kHigher concentrations of vitamin E are recommended for high PUFA diets. One international
unit of vitamin E = 1 mg all-rac-α-tocopheryl acetate (see Chapter 8).
lCats have a metabolic requirement, but a dietary requirement has not been demonstrated when
natural diets (except fish-based diets) are fed. Under most conditions, adequate vitamin K is
probably synthesized by intestinal microbes. The vitamin K allowance is expressed in terms of
the commercially used precursor menadione that requires alkylation to the active vitamin K.
mFor normal diets not containing raw egg white, adequate biotin is probably provided by
microbial synthesis in the intestine. Diets containing antibiotics may need supplementation.
TABLE 15-11 Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements for Adult Cats at
Maintenancea
Type Metabolizable Energy Requirement
Domestic cats, leanb 100 kcal × kg BW0.67
Domestic cats, overweightc 130 kcal × kg BW0.4
Exotic cats 55-260 kcal × kg BW0.75
aRequirements of individual cats may be over- or underestimated by more than 50%.
bBody condition scores (Table 3-7) ≥ 5 on a 9-point scale.
cBody condition scores (Table 3-7) > 5 on a 9-point scale.
TABLE 15-12 Nutrient Requirements of Adult Cats for Maintenance


===== PDF PAGE 716 =====
715
aThe values for Amt/kg DM have been calculated assuming a dietary energy density of 4,000
kcal ME/kg. (The term ≡ signifies equivalence.) If the energy density of the diet is not 4,000
kcal ME/kg, then to calculate the Amt/kg DM for each nutrient, multiply the value for the
nutrient in the column labeled Amt/kg DM by the energy density of the pet food (in kcal
ME/kg) and divide by 4,000.
bTo calculate the amount to feed of each nutrient, multiply the value for Amt/1,000 kcal ME for
each nutrient by the energy requirement for lean cats in kcal ME (calculated from Table 15-11)
and divide by 1,000. For cats with an unusually low energy intake (below the suggested
requirement), the nutrient concentrations (Amt/1,000 kcal) may not be adequate. These animals
should be fed the nutrient amounts shown in the column Amt/kg BW0.67.
cThe values in Amt/BW0.67 have been calculated for a lean cat with an energy intake of 100
kcal × BW0.67. To calculate the amounts for adult cats that are not lean, calculate the energy
requirements from Table 15-11 and multiply this value by the nutrient Amt/1,000 kcal and
divide by 1,000.
d0.02 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein above 200 g for the RA of
arginine.


===== PDF PAGE 717 =====
716
eMethionine presumed to be one-half the sum of the requirement for methionine + cystine
combined.
fTo maximize black hair color, an equal quantity or greater of tyrosine to that of phenylalanine
is required.
gThe recommended allowance of taurine for highly digestible purified diets is 0.4 g/kg diet,
whereas the allowances for dry expanded and canned diets are 1.0 and 1.7 g/kg diet,
respectively.
hIncludes docosahexaenoic acid only; no information is available on eicosapentaenoic acid. It
is advised that eicosapentaenoic acid is included but not exceed 20% of the total
eicosapentaenoic + docosahexaenoic amount.
iSome oxides of iron and copper should not be used because of low bioavailability.
jOne IU of vitamin A is equal to 0.3 μg of all-trans retinol or 1 μg retinol =3.333 IU of vitamin
A. Safe upper limit values expressed as μg retinol.
k1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D3.
lHigher concentrations of vitamin E are recommended for high PUFA diets. One international
unit of vitamin E = 1 mg all-rac-α-tocopheryl acetate (see Chapter 8).
mCats have a metabolic requirement, but a dietary requirement has not been demonstrated when
natural diets (except fish-based diets) are fed. Under most conditions, adequate vitamin K is
probably synthesized by intestinal microbes. The vitamin K allowance is expressed in terms of
the commercially used precursor menadione that requires alkylation to the active vitamin K.
nFor normal diets not containing raw egg white, adequate biotin is probably provided by
microbial synthesis in the intestine. Diets containing antibiotics may need supplementation.
TABLE 15-13 Daily Metabolizable Energy Requirements for Lactating Queens
KittensEnergy Requirement
<3 ME kcal = maintenance + 18 × BW × L
ME kcal = 100 × BW0.67 + 18 × BW × L
3-4 ME kcal = maintenance + 60 × BW × L
ME kcal = 100 × BW0.67 + 60 × BW × L
>4 ME kcal = maintenance + 70 × BW × L
ME kcal = 100 × BW0.67 + 70 × BW × L
L = factor for stage of lactation from week 1 to week 7: 0.9, 0.9, 1.2, 1.2, 1.1, 1.0,
0.8
Example: Queen, 3.5 kg BW at mating, 4 kittens, peak lactation (week 3)
ME kcal = 100 × 3.50.67 + (60 × 3.5 × 1.2) = 231 + 252 = 483 kcal
TABLE 15-14 Nutrient Requirements of Queens in Late Gestation and Peak
Lactationa


===== PDF PAGE 718 =====
717
aWith the exception of amino acids, few data could be found for the dietary concentrations for
the minimal requirement for gestation for the queen. For other nutrients, the values for lactation
relative to kg DM and 1,000 kcal ME may be taken as satisfactory for gestation and lactation in
the queen.
bThe values for Amt/kg DM have been calculated assuming a dietary energy density of 4,000
kcal ME/kg. (The term ≡ signifies equivalence.) If the energy density of the diet is not 4,000
kcal ME/kg, then to calculate the Amt/kg DM for each nutrient, multiply the value for the
nutrient in the column labeled Amt/kg DM by the energy density of the pet food (in kcal
ME/kg) and divide by 4,000.
cTo calculate the amount to feed of each nutrient, multiply the value for Amt/1,000 kcal ME for
each nutrient by the energy requirement in kcal ME (calculated from Table 15-13 for a lactating


===== PDF PAGE 719 =====
718
cat, or by multiplying kg BW0.67 by 140 for a cat during gestation) and divide by 1,000.
dThe values for Amt/BW0.67 only apply to a queen weighing 4 kg in peak lactation with 3-4
kittens consuming 540 kcal ME/day. If the queen does not fit these criteria, calculate the ME
requirement from Table 15-13, multiply this value by nutrient Amt/1,000 kcal and divide by
1,000. To calculate the nutrient requirements for late gestation, compute the energy
requirements from 140 × kg BW0.67 and multiply by Amt/1,000 kcal and divide by 1,000.
e0.02 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein above 170 g and 213 g for the
MR and RA, respectively.
fTo maximize black hair color, an equal quantity or greater of tyrosine to that of phenylalanine
is required.
gThe recommended allowance of taurine for highly digestible purified diets is 0.53 g/kg DM,
whereas the allowances for dry expanded and canned diets are 1.0 and 1.7 g/kg dietary DM,
respectively.
hIt is advised that eicosapentaenoic acid not exceed 60% of the total eicosapentaenoic +
docosahexaenoic amount.
iSome oxides of iron and copper should not be used because of low bioavailability.
jOne IU of vitamin A is equal to 0.3 μg of all-trans retinol or 1 μg retinol = 3.333 IU of vitamin
A. Safe upper limit values expressed as μg retinol.
k1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D3.
lHigher concentrations of vitamin E are recommended for high PUFA diets. One international
unit of vitamin E = 1 mg all-rac-α-tocopheryl acetate (see Chapter 8).
mCats have a metabolic requirement, but a dietary requirement has not been demonstrated when
natural diets (except fish-based diets) are fed. Under most conditions, adequate vitamin K is
probably synthesized by intestinal microbes. The vitamin K allowance is expressed in terms of
the commercially used precursor menadione that requires alkylation to the active vitamin K.
nFor normal diets not containing raw egg white, adequate biotin is probably provided by
microbial synthesis in the intestine. Diets containing antibiotics may need supplementation.
REFERENCES
Adkins, T. O., and D. S. Kronfeld. 1982. Diet of racing sled dogs affects erythrocyte
depression by stress. Can. Vet. J. 23:260-263.
Baker, D. H. 1995. Vitamin bioavailability. Pp. 399-431 in Bioavailability of
Nutrients for Animals. Amino Acids, Minerals, and Vitamins, C. A. Ammerman,
D. H. Baker, and A.J. Lewis, eds. San Diego: Academic Press.
Downey, R. L., D. S. Kronfeld, and C. A. Banta. 1980. Diet of beagles affects
stamina. J. Am. An. Hosp. Assoc. 16:273-277.
Kendall, P. T., S. E. Blaza, and D. W. Holme. 1982. Assessment of endogenous
nitrogen output in adult dogs of contrasting size using a protein-free diet. J. Nutr.
112:1281-1286.
Kienzle, E., H. Meyer, C. Dammers, and H. Lohrie. 1985. Milchaufnahme,
Gewichtsentwicklung, Futterverdaulichkeit sowie Energie- and Nährstoffretention
bei Saugwelpen (Milk intake, weight development, feed digestibility as well as


===== PDF PAGE 720 =====
719
energy and nutrient retention in suckling puppies). Pp. 26-50 in Untersuchungen
zum Energie- und Nährstoffbedarf von Zuchthündinnen und Saugwelpen
(Investigations on Nutrient Requirements in Breeding Bitches and Suckling Pups),
H. Meyer, ed. Volume 16 in Advances in Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition.
Hamburg, Germany: Paul Parey.
Miller, D. S., and P. R. Payne. 1963. A theory of protein metabolism. J. Theoret. Biol.
5:398-411.
National Research Council (NRC). 1985. Nutrient Requirements of Dogs.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). 1986. Nutrient Requirements of Cats. Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). 1987. Vitamin Tolerance of Animals. Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (NRC). 1995. Nutrient Requirements of Laboratory
Animals. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press
Rivers, J. P. W., and I. H. Burger. 1989. Allometric considerations in the nutrition of
dogs. Pp. 67-112 in Nutrition of the Dog and Cat, I. H. Burger and J. P. W. Rivers,
eds. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Rucker, R. B., and F. M. Steinberg. 2002. Vitamin requirements relationship to basal
metabolic need and function. Bioche amd Mol. Bio. Educ. 30:86-89.
Rucker, R., and D. Storms. 2002. Interspecies comparisons of micronutrient
requirements: Metabolic vs. absolute body size. J. Nutr. 132:2999-3000.
Schaeffer, M. C., Q. A. Rogers, and J. G. Morris. 1989. Protein in the nutrition of
dogs and cats. Pp. 159-205 in Nutrition of the Dog and Cat, I. H. Burger and J. P.
W. Rivers, eds. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.


===== PDF PAGE 721 =====
720
Appendix A
About the Authors
Donald C. Beitz, Ph.D. (Chair) is Charles F. Curtiss Distinguished Professor of
Agriculture since 1989 in the Departments of Animal Science and of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and Molecular Biology at Iowa State University, where he has taught
since 1967. His expertise lies primarily in comparative nutrition, with an emphasis in
human and domestic animal nutrition, biochemistry, and molecular biology. His
research interests focus on lipid and vitamin metabolism. He is currently involved in
research on the oral use of Eubacterium coprostanoligenes to decrease blood
cholesterol in animals and humans; use of glucagon to prevent and treat bovine fatty
liver; influence of vitamin D on meat tenderness; and genetic and nutritional
regulation of fatty acid composition of meat and milk. Beitz has served as both a
member (1990-1994) and chair (1995-1998) of NRC’s Committee on Animal
Nutrition. He also served as a member of the NRC Briefing Panel on Biotechnology
in Agriculture (1985). In addition to numerous university-wide committees, Beitz
also has served as a member and officer in professional societies such as the
American Society for Nutritional Sciences (formerly American Institute of
Nutrition), the American Society of Animal Science, American Dairy Science
Association, American Society of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Comparative Nutrition Society, and various U.S. Department of Agriculture advisory
committees. Beitz received his B.S. (1962) in agricultural science and his M.S.
(1963) in dairy science both from the University of Illinois. He received his Ph.D. in
dairy nutrition and biochemistry from Michigan State University in 1967.


===== PDF PAGE 722 =====
721
John E. Bauer, Ph.D., D.V.M. is professor of small animal medicine and surgery
and holder of the Mark L. Morris Professorship of Clinical Nutrition in the College
of Veterinary Medicine at Texas A&M University. He is the immediate past chair of
the Intercollegiate Graduate Faculty of Nutrition at Texas A&M. Bauer’s areas of
specialization are lipid biochemistry, disorders of lipid metabolism, and comparative
biomedicine and nutrition. His studies have included lipoprotein and fatty acid
metabolism of domestic and exotic animals as well as animal models of
hypercholesterolemia and atherogenesis of humans. He has written over 230 peer-
reviewed and other publications, is the recipient of numerous grants, awards, and
honors and is listed in American Men and Women of Science, and Who’s Who in
Veterinary Science and Medicine. He has received several Outstanding Paper
Presentation Awards from the American Oil Chemists’ Society and C. E. Cornelius
Young Investigator Research Award from the University of Florida. Bauer has
chaired and has been an active member on several committees on animal nutrition
over the past 20 years. Bauer received his D.V.M. from University of Illinois as well
as his M.S. and Ph.D. in nutritional sciences.
Keith Behnke, Ph.D. is professor in the Department of Grain Science and Industry
at Kansas State University where he has been a member of the faculty since 1971.
He currently coordinates all feed processing research and the production of all
research feeds manufactured by the Department of Grain Science and Industry. Prior
to his position at Kansas State University, Behnke was a group leader in processing
research of the food division of Far Mar, Co., in Hutchison, KS. Behnke is currently
a member of several professional societies and associations, some of which include
the American Society of Animal Science, Poultry Science Association, American
Feed Industry Association, and the Chinese Feed Manufacturing Association, of
which he is an honorary member. Behnke received his B.S. in feed technology
(1968), his M.S. in grain science (1973), and his Ph.D. in grain science (1975) from
Kansas State University.
David A. Dzanis, D.V.M., Ph.D. is owner of Dzanis Consulting and Collaborations,
which provides post-product development consulting services on matters related to
veterinary nutrition and regulation including services for interpreting state and
federal laws, federal and state labeling issues, and compliance in marketing claims.
Prior to beginning full-time work as a consultant in 1998, Dzanis spent eight years in
the Food and Drug Administration’s Center for Veterinary Medicine of the
Department of Health and Human Services as a veterinary nutritionist. He is
currently a contributing editor for Petfood Industry and was editor-in-chief for
Veterinary Clinical Nutrition. He has served as chairman of the Association of
American Feed Control Official’s Feline Nutrition Expert Subcommittee and Canine
Nutrition Expert Subcommittee. Dzanis has also served in various capacities as a
member of the American College of Veterinary Nutrition (Diplomate 1990),
American Academy of Veterinary Nutrition, and American Veterinary Medical


===== PDF PAGE 723 =====
722
Association. Awards and honors received include the FDA Group Recognition
Award in 1998, Association of American Feed Control Official’s Distinguished
Service Award in 1994, FDA Commissioner’s Special Citation in 1992, FDA
Commendable Service Award in 1991, and the ALPO/ American Veterinary Medical
Association Foundation’s Fellowship in Veterinary Nutrition in 1984. Dzanis has
published scientific and lay articles. He received his D.V.M. from Purdue University
and his Ph.D. from Cornell University.
George C. Fahey, Jr., Ph.D. is professor of animal sciences and nutritional sciences
and assistant dean, Office of Research, Agricultural Experiment Station, College of
Agricultural, Consumer and Environmental Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana-
Champaign. Fahey’s specific areas of research include companion animal nutrition,
oligosaccharides and resistant starches, and plant cell wall structure and its effects on
nutrition of animals and humans. Fahey has served on several editorial boards
(Journal of Animal Science, Journal of Nutrition, Journal of Dairy Science, Archives
of Animal Nutrition, Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition). Fahey has
served as chairman, secretary, and as a member of numerous committees in the
animal science and nutrition fields. Fahey has worked with the NRC on many
occasions; he was a member of Committee on Animal Nutrition, Subcommittee on
Laboratory Animal Nutrition, and Subcommittee on Establishing a North American
Feed Information System. Some of the many awards and honors received by Fahey
include the Companion Animal Biology Award from the American Society of
Animal Science in 2003, the Distinguished Alumnus award from West Virginia
University College of Agriculture, Forestry and Family Resources in 1997, Senior
Faculty Award for Excellence in Research from College of Agricultural, Consumer
and Environmental Sciences at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 1996,
Distinguished Service Award from Farmland Industries in 1994, Pioneer Hi-Bred
International, Inc. Forage Award from American Dairy Science Association in 1992,
and American Feed Industry Association Award for Ruminant Nutrition Research in
1990. Fahey received his M.S. in agricultural biochemistry and his Ph.D. in animal
nutrition from West Virginia University.
Richard C. Hill, VetMB, Ph.D., MRCVS is Waltham Associate Professor of
Clinical Nutrition in the Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, College of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida. He has expertise in dietary effects on
performance of dogs. His research focuses on the nutritional requirements of
exercising dogs, specifically the energy, protein, and antioxidant requirements of
dogs. Hill studies the effects of dietary protein on performance and body
composition in racing greyhounds. Hill is a diplomate of the American College of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, and is a member of the Royal College of Veterinary
Surgeons, the Comparative Gastroenterology Society, and numerous veterinary
medical associations. He received the University of Florida’s Clinical Sciences
Teacher of the Year award in 1997. Hill received his undergraduate degree and his


===== PDF PAGE 724 =====
723
VetMB from Cambridge University in England, and his Ph.D. from the University of
Florida.
Francis A. Kallfelz, D.V.M., Ph.D. is the James Law Professor of Nutrition in the
Department of Clinical Sciences, New York State College of Veterinary Medicine at
Cornell University. Awards that Kallfelz has received include IAEA Expert
Consultant to Government of Indonesia on Mineral Metabolism of Farm Animals,
Special Service Agreement (consultant) for the Animal Production and Health
Section of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division, and Senior Fulbright-Hays Advanced
Research Award. Kallfelz has been in academia for nearly 40 years, and has
published extensively during this time. He has also been invited to speak at a number
of conferences and meetings. Kallfelz is a member of several professional
organizations, including the American Society for Nutritional Sciences, the Society
of Nuclear Medicine, Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine, and the
American Academy of Veterinary Nutrition. He is a charter diplomate of the
American College of Veterinary Nutrition. He is also president-elect of the New
York State Veterinary Medical Society as well as a member of the New York State
Board for Veterinary Medicine. Kallfelz received both his D.V.M. and Ph.D. degrees
from Cornell University.
Ellen Kienzle, Dr. med. vet., Dr. med. vet. habil. is chair of animal nutrition and
dietetics in the Institute of Animal Physiology of the Veterinary Faculty at Ludwig-
Maximilians University in Germany. Kienzle graduated from Tieraerztlichen
Hochschule in Hanover, and received her license to practice veterinary medicine in
1982 and her doctorate medicinae veterinariae in 1983. In 1989, she received her
doctorate medicinae veterinariae habilitation. Kienzle has published extensively on
carbohydrate metabolism, nutrient requirements of adult cats, dogs and puppies, and
computer diet formulation, She is board-certified in veterinary nutrition in Germany
and has received awards for her research by the University of Zuerich, which
presented her with the Walter-Frei-Prize in 1997. Kienzle is a member of the Society
of Nutrition Physiology, German Veterinary Society, previous president and current
member of European Society of Veterinary and Comparative Nutrition, and founding
president of European College of Veterinary and Comparative Nutrition. Kienzle is
currently the coeditor of the Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition.
James Morris, Ph.D. is currently retired from his professorship in the School of
Veterinary Medicine’s Department of Molecular Sciences at the University of
California, Davis where he has been a member of the faculty since 1969. Morris has
served as both the chair (1985-1988) and as a member (1981-1985) of the NRC
Committee on Animal Nutrition. He has also been a member of both the
Subcommittee on Cat Nutrition (1983-1989) and the Subcommittee on Dog Nutrition
(1980-1985). Morris has recently received an Honorary Diplomate of the American
College of Veterinary Medicine (1997), the Osborne Mendel Award from the


===== PDF PAGE 725 =====
724
American Society of Nutritional Sciences (1997), and is a fellow of the American
Society of Nutritional Sciences (1996). He is also the recipient of the Faculty
Research Award School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis
(1992), and the Ralston Purina Small Animal Research Award in Feline Nutrition
(1986). In addition, he is a reviewer for the Journal of Nutrition, JAVMA, AJVR, and
the American Journal of Physiology. Morris received a bachelor’s of agricultural
science (1952, 1954-honors), a bachelor of science (1958) with a major in
physiology and a minor in biochemistry, and a master of agricultural science (animal
nutrition, 1959) from the University of Queensland in Brisbane Australia. Morris
received his Ph.D. in nutrition and biochemistry from Utah State University in 1961.
Quinton R. Rogers, Ph.D. is a professor of physiological chemistry in the School of
Veterinary Medicine at the University of California, Davis. Rogers’ research was the
foundation for the establishment of the taurine requirement of cats. He has published
approximately 300 articles on research topics such as protein and amino acid
nutrition, the role of amino acids in the control of food intake and metabolism, and
nutritional diseases of animals. Rogers has served as associate editor for American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition and is currently a member of the editorial boards for the
Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry and the Journal of Animal Physiology and
Animal Nutrition. He has served as a member of the NRC Committee on Animal
Nutrition and as chair of the Subcommittee for Nutrient Requirements of Cats
(1986). Awards and honors received by Rogers include Honorary Diplomate of the
American College of Veterinary Nutrition in 1997, Osborne Mendel Award from the
American Society of Nutritional Sciences in 1997, Faculty Research Award from the
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California in 1992, and Ralston Purina
Small Animal Medicine Research Award in Nutrition in 1986; he is a fellow of the
American Society of Nutritional Sciences (2003). Rogers received his M.S. and
Ph.D. in biochemistry from University of Wisconsin, Madison.


===== PDF PAGE 726 =====
725
Appendix B
Acronyms and Abbreviations
AA amino acid
AA, 20:4n-6arachidonic acid
AAFCO Association of American Feed Control Officials
ACTH adrenocorticotropic hormone
ADF acid detergent fiber
ADP adenosine diphosphate
AI adequate intake
ALA α-linolenic acid
AMP adenosine monophosphate
AOAC American Organization of Analytical Chemists
ARAT aryl-CoA retinol acyltransferase
Arg arginine
As arsenic
Asp aspartic acid
ATP adenosine triphosphate
ATPase adenosine triphosphatase
B boron
BCKAD branched-chain α-ketoacid dehydrogenase
BCS body condition score
BHA butylated hydroxyanisole
BHT butylated hydroxytoluene
BMR basal metabolic rate
BNF British Nutrition Foundation Task Force on Fatty Acids
BV biological value


===== PDF PAGE 727 =====
726
BW body weight
oC degrees Celsius
Ca calcium
CaCl2 calcium chloride
CaCO3 calcium carbonate
cal calories
CASPER computer-assisted spectrum evaluation of regular polysaccharides
CCK cholecystokinin
CCK-PZ cholecystokinin-pancreozymin
CD4+ cell-surface glycoprotein found on the mature helper T cells and
immature thymocytes, as well as on monocytes and macrophages
CDNA complementary DNA
CE capillary electrophoresis
CEL cellulose
CFU colony forming units
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
Cl– chloride ion
CLA conjugated linoleic acid
CO cyclooxygenase
CoA coenzyme A
CP crude protein
Cr chromium
CRABP cellular retinoic acid-binding protein
CRALBP cellular retinaldehyde-binding protein
CRBP cellular retinal-binding protein
Cu copper
CVM Center for Veterinary Medicine
d day
Da dalton
DBG dried brewer’s grain
DBP vitamin D binding protein
DCM dilated cardiomyopathy
DDGS distiller’s dried grains with solubles
DE digestible energy
DF dietary fiber
DGLA, 20:3n-
6
dihomogammalinolenic acid
DHA, 22:6n-3docosahexaenoic acid
dL deciliter
DM dry matter
DMG dimethylglycine
DNA deoxyribosnucleic acid


===== PDF PAGE 728 =====
727
DP degree of polymerization
DPA, 22:5n-3docosapentaenoic acid
DSHEA Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act
dTMP deoxythymidine monophosphate
dUMP deoxyuridine monophosphate
EAP endogenous acid production
EDTA ethylenediaminetetracetic acid
EFA essential fatty acid
EGR erythrocyte glutathione reductase
EGRAC EGR activity coefficient
EPA, 20:5n-3eicosapentaenoic acid
EPOC excess post-exercise oxygen consumption
ERABP epididymal retinoic acid-binding protein
ERG electroretinogram
E:T essential amino acid nitrogen to total amino acid nitrogen
ETKA ethryocyte transketolase activity
oF degrees Fahrenheit
FA fatty acids
FAD flavin-adenine dinucleotide
FCRD feline central retinal degeneration
FDA U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Fe iron
FFA free fatty acid
FIGLU formiminoglutamic acid
FiO2 fractional concentration of oxygen in inspired air
FIRI fasting insulin resistance index
FMN flavin mononucleotide
g gram
GAG glycosaminoglycans
GE gross energy
GI gastrointestinal
GIP gastric inhibitory peptide
GLA γ-linolenic acid
GLC gas-liquid chromatography
GLP-1 glucagon-like peptide-1
GLP-2 glucagon-like peptide-2
Glu glutamic acid
GLUT-5 Na+-independent glucose transporter system
Gly glycine
GP glycogen phosphorylase
GRAS generally recognized as safe
GRP gastrin-releasing peptide


===== PDF PAGE 729 =====
728
GSH-Px glutathione peroxidase
h hour
ha hectare
HCl hydrochloric acid
HCM high-cellulose mixture
HCO hydrogenated coconut oil
HDL high-density lipoprotein
Hg mercury
His histidine
HPAEC high-performance anion exchange chromatography
HPLC high-performance liquid chromatography
H4PteGlun tetrahydrofolate with n glutamic acid residues
5-HT 5-hydroxytryptamine
I iodine
IF intrinsic factor
Ig immunoglobulin
IL-2 interleukin-2
Ile isoleucine
IU international unit
IVF induced viscosity fiber
K potassium
kcal kilocalories
Kd disassociation constant
kJ kilojoules
Km Michaelis constant
L liter
LA linoleic acid
LACFR low acid canned food regulations
lb pound
LCAT lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase
LCM low-cellulose mixture
LCPUFA long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid
LD50 median lethal dose
LDL low-density lipoprotein
LES lower esophageal sphincter
Leu leucine
LO lipoxygenase
LTB4 leukotriene B4
LTB5 leukotriene B5
LTQ lysine tyrosylquinone
LUTD lower urinary tract disease
Lys lysine


===== PDF PAGE 730 =====
729
m meter
m3 cubic meter
MCT medium-chain triacylglycerol
ME metabolizable energy
MEK methionine enkephalin
MER maintenance energy requirement
Met methionine
mg milligram
Mg magnesium
MK menaquinone
mL milliliter
mm millimeter
MMC migrating motor complex
mmol millimole
Mn manganese
Mo molybdenum
MR minimal requirement
n, N number
Na sodium
NADH nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotede
NAE net urinary acid excretion
NAG N-acetylglutamate
NDF neutral detergent fiber
NE net energy
NFE nitrogen-free extract
Ni nickel
NMB neuromedin
nmol nanomole
NPU net protein utilization
NRC National Research Council
NSHP nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism
NSP non-starch polysaccharide
OCD osteochondritis dissecans
P phosphorus
PAD pulsed amperometric detection
PAI presumed adequate intake
PCr phosphocreatine
PED pulsed electrochemical detection
PEG polyethylene glycol
PER protein efficiency ratio
PGE2 prostaglandin E2
Phe phenylalanine


===== PDF PAGE 731 =====
730
PIVKA protein involved with vitamin K absence
PLP pyridoxal 5′-phosphate
PO43- phosphate
PP pancreatic polypeptide
P-P factor pellagra-preventive factor
PQQ pyrroloquinoline quinone
PTH parathyroid hormone
PUFA polyunsaturated fatty acid
RA recommended allowance
RAR retinoic acid receptor
RBC red blood cell (erythrocyte)
RBP retinol-binding protein
RDI recommended dietary intake
RE retinol equivalents
RFMR resting fed metabolic rate
RNA ribonucleic acid
ROS reactive oxygen species
RQ respiratory quotient
RS resistant starch
RXR retinoid X receptor
S sulfur
SAMe S-adenosylmethionine
SBF sugar beet fiber
SCFA short-chain fatty acid
SCN suprachiasmatic nucleus
SD standard deviation
SDH succinate dehydrogenase
Se selenium
SF soluble fiber
Si silicon
SO42- sulfate
SUL safe upper limit
T3 3,5,3′-triiodothyronine
T4 thyroxine
TAT tyrosine aminotransferase
TBARS thiobarbituric acid reducing substance
TBHQ tertiary butylhydroquinone
TDF total dietary fiber
TE tocopherol equivalent
Thr threonine
TMP thiamin monophosphate
TPN total parenteral nutrition


===== PDF PAGE 732 =====
731
TPP thiamin pyrophosphate
TR thyroid receptor
tRNA transfer RNA
Try tryptophan
TTA tryptophan tryptophylquinone
TTP thiamin triphosphate
U unit
USP United States Pharmacopeia
UWL unstirred water layer
V vanadium
V̇ O2max maximal oxygen capacity
V̇ O2rest oxygen consumption at rest
Val valine
VDR vitamin D receptor
VESRD vitamin E-selenium responsive disease
VIP vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
VLDL very low density lipoprotein
wt weight
y year
Zn zinc


===== PDF PAGE 733 =====
732
Index
A
Absorption. See also Bioavailability of nutrients; Digestion/digestibility of nutrients;
individual nutrients
age and, 55-57, 158
carbohydrates and fiber intake and, 7, 10, 51-52, 54-57, 58, 60-62, 63, 67-68, 69,
156, 160, 163, 166, 217
digestive system characteristics, 7, 11, 63
factors affecting, 51-52, 55-57, 61-62, 67-68, 70, 151, 156, 160, 163, 166
fats and fatty acids, 11, 62, 83, 86-87
macronutrient composition and, 52
quantity of nutrient and, 52, 56
source of nutrient and, 151, 153, 154, 155
viscosity properties and, 63
water, 10, 11
Acetate, 11, 60
Acetyl coenzyme A, 88, 116, 124, 223, 230
Acid-base balance, 145-147, 152, 155, 159, 163, 166
Acid detergent fiber, 30, 51, 61
Adenine triphosphate (ATP), 52, 273
Adequate intake, defined, 1
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 7
Adult cats. See also Gestation; Lactation; Maintenance
absorbable carbohydrates, 54
calcium, 152
chloride, 167-168
energy requirements, 40-42, 366
fats and fatty acids, 103
iodine, 183
iron, 169, 170-171
magnesium, 159


===== PDF PAGE 734 =====
733
mineral deficiencies, 154, 165
nutrient requirement tables, 366-367
phosphorus, 155
potassium, 165
selenium, 181
sodium, 162
zinc, 175
Adult dogs. See also Gestation; Lactation; Maintenance
absorbable carbohydrates, 54
calcium, 147, 148, 149-150
chloride, 167
copper, 171, 172
digestible carbohydrates, 59
energy requirements, 33-34, 35-36, 37, 359
fat and fatty acids, 99, 100-101
fermentable carbohydrates, 61
iodine, 183
iron, 169
magnesium, 157
manganese, 178
nutrient requirement tables, 359-360
phosphorus, 154
potassium, 164
protein, 65
selenium, 180-181
sodium, 160-161
Age factors. See also Adult; Geriatric animals; Kittens; Puppies; Senior animals
absorption of nutrients, 55-57, 158
bioavailability of nutrients, 147-148
calcium requirement, 149
digestibility of nutrients, 17, 53, 55, 56, 57, 60, 87
energy requirements, 34, 36, 37, 40, 42
minimum requirements, 149, 151
obesity/overweight, 66
Alanine, 25, 114, 115, 272
Alaskan huskies, 148, 174, 264-265, 282
Albumin, serum, 114, 122, 126, 218
Alcohol, 303
Aldosterone, plasma concentration, 161, 162
α-Amylase, 7
α-Cellulose, 10
α-Glucans, 49


===== PDF PAGE 735 =====
734
α-Linolenic acid (ALA), 82, 88, 89-90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 97, 98, 99-100, 101-102,
103, 104
α-Tocopherol status, 95. See also Vitamin E
American Heart Association, 98
American Organization of Analytical Chemists, 33, 50, 145
Amino acids. See also Protein, dietary; individual amino acids
adverse effects of excess consumption, 119, 121-127, 129-132, 135, 137
assessing requirements, 116-120
biosynthesis, 88
cats, 121-125, 126, 127-128, 129-130, 131-132, 133, 135-137, 364, 368-369
composition of feed ingredients, 330-333
deficiencies, 24, 112, 121-132, 134-136
digestibility and bioavailability, 71, 112-114
dispensable, 112, 114, 115, 118, 119, 128-130, 134-137
dogs, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 127, 129, 130, 131, 132-133, 134-135, 357, 359,
361
essential, 24, 111-133
for gestation and lactation, 133, 368-369
imbalances and antagonisms, 125, 137-138
and macromineral excretion, 145, 165
maintenance diets, 132-133
metabolism, 88, 114-116, 184, 230
mineral complexes, 173, 176, 179
nutrient requirements tables, 357, 359, 362, 364, 366, 368
palatability/tastes, 24, 25, 112
requirements and allowances, 121-133, 135, 136-137
status assessment, 114, 115
structure and function, 111-112
Ammonia, 115, 146
Ammonium chloride, 164, 165, 166, 167
Amylase activity, 9, 17, 55, 56, 57
Amylopectin, 49, 55, 59
Amylose, 49, 55, 59
Anserine, 122
Antibiotics, 214
Antioxidants
ingredients in feed, 126, 301-303, 345-347
intracytoplasmic, 179
preservatives, 237, 348-349
vitamin E, 179, 206-207, 301-303, 345-346
Apolipoproteins, 195
Apoproteins, enterocyte-synthesized, 87
Arachidonic acid (AA), 24, 88, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 102-103, 104


===== PDF PAGE 736 =====
735
Arginine, 24, 111, 112, 113, 115, 116, 117, 118, 120-122, 123, 125, 132, 138
Arsenic, 184
Arthrogryposis, 177
Ascorbate, 207
Ascorbic acid
antioxidant property, 346
biological function, 234
cats, 234
dogs, 234
exercise and, 303
interaction with other nutrients, 209, 214, 234, 235
processing and storage losses, 237
requirements, 234
Ash, 9, 145
Asparagine, 115, 134
Aspartate, 115
Aspartate aminotransferase activity, 208
Aspartic acid, 112, 115
Association of American Feed Control Officials, 12, 30, 137, 145, 253-254
Association of Official Analytical Chemists International, 84
Atherogenesis, 99
Avidin, 230
B
B vitamins, 24. See also individual vitamins
Bacteria
gastrointestinal populations, 8, 9-10, 50 infections, 45
Bacteroides, 9, 11, 68
Barley, 59
Basal metabolic rate, 33, 34-35, 40, 267
Basset hounds, 12
Beagles, 12, 17, 34, 37, 53, 54, 58, 60, 71, 95, 101, 119, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125,
127, 129, 130, 131, 132, 147, 148, 153, 157, 160, 163, 178, 180, 182-183, 198, 213,
214, 217, 231, 259, 263, 265, 267, 268, 269, 274, 277-278, 280, 283
Bedlington terriers, 171, 172
Bee pollen, 303
Beriberi, 214
β-Carotene, 24, 194-195, 237, 346
β-Glucans, 60, 63
β-Glucuronide, 224
Bicarbonate, 8, 9, 10
Bifidobacterium, 8, 10


===== PDF PAGE 737 =====
736
Bioavailability of nutrients. See also Absorption; Digestion/digestibility of nutrients;
individual nutrients
age and, 147-148
amino acids, 112-114
carbohydrate intake and, 58, 64-66, 71
defined, 112
fat intake and, 83
fiber intake and, 30, 64-66, 136
growth and, 148
iron, 66
measurement of, 112-113
and nutrient requirements, 194, 356
source of nutrient and, 147-148, 152-153
trace minerals, 66, 171
Biological value, 113
Biotin
absorption, 230
biological function, 230-231
cats, 231
deficiency signs, 231
dogs, 231
hypervitaminosis, 231
interactions with other nutrients, 230
processing and storage losses, 237
requirements, 231
Bobcats, 40
Bombesin and bombesin-like peptides, 13
Border collies, 37, 259, 282
Boron, 184
Boston terriers, 229
Breed. See also individual breeds
and activity level, 259-260
and calcium requirement, 149
and energy requirements, 34, 35-36, 37, 38-39
and feeding behavior, 22
and nutrient digestibility, 12, 17
and safe upper limits, 150
weight development in large and giant breeds, 38-39
British Nutrition Foundation Task Force on Fatty Acids, 89
Brittany spaniels, 17
Bulking capacity, 70
Bull terriers, 34
Butylated hydroxytoluene, 237


===== PDF PAGE 738 =====
737
Butyrate, 11, 60, 67
C
Caffeine, 303
Cairn terriers, 12
Calcium, 215, 266
absorption and bioavailability, 58, 83, 147-148, 150-151
adverse effects of excess consumption, 148-149, 151
cats, 9, 24, 58, 147, 150-152
deficiency, 24, 148, 151, 167, 202
dogs, 24, 58, 147-150
exercise and, 298-299
growth and, 148
interactions with other nutrients, 148, 151, 153, 154, 156, 157, 158, 159, 174,
175, 184, 185, 186, 200, 201-202
physiological role, 147
requirements and allowances, 149-152
sources, 147
Calcium carbonate, 146
Cancer, 36, 68, 100, 179, 182, 232
Candida albicans, 9
Canids. See also Dogs; Wolves feeding behavior, 22
Caprylic acid, 25, 102
Carbamoyl phosphate synthase, 116
Carbohydrates, absorbable
definition, 49
digestion, absorption, and utilization, 51-52
and fecal excretion, 52-53
and food intake, 52
geriatric nutrition, 53-54
glycemic response, 54
and growth, 51
health-related characteristics, 54
measurement, 49
nutritive value, 52
osmotic effects, 8, 52
in petfoods, 51
physicochemical effects, 52, 53
physiological effects, 52-54, 58
and reproductive performance, 53
Carbohydrates, digestible
and bioavailability of other nutrients, 58


===== PDF PAGE 739 =====
738
definition, 49
digestion, absorption, and utilization, 7, 54-57, 58, 60
and food intake, 58
and gastrointestinal health, 60
geriatric nutrition, 60
glycemic response, 60-61
and growth performance, 58
health-related characteristics, 60-61
malabsorption, 56
measurement, 49
nutritive value, 57
osmotic effects, 57
in petfoods, 54
physicochemical effects, 53, 57-58
physiological effects, 58-59
and reproductive performance, 58-59
viscosity properties, 57-68
weight control and nutrition of obese animals, 59
Carbohydrates, fermentable
and bioavailability of other nutrients, 64-66
definition, 49-50
digestion, absorption, and utilization, 10, 60-62, 67-68
fecal excretion, 54
and food intake, 63
and gastrointestinal health, 67-68
geriatric nutrition, 66-67
glycemic control, 68-69
and growth performance, 66
health-related characteristics, 53, 67-69
and immune function, 69
measurement, 50-51
nutritive value, 62
osmotic effects, 62
in petfoods, 60
physicochemical effects, 53, 62-63
physiological effects, 53, 63-67, 73
and reproductive performance, 66
sources, 60, 61
transit time, 63-64
viscosity properties, 63, 64, 68
water-binding capacity, 63
weight control and nutrition of obese animals, 66
Carbohydrates, poorly fermentable


===== PDF PAGE 740 =====
739
and bioavailability of other nutrients, 71, 113
bulking capacity, 70
digestion, absorption, and utilization, 69-70
fecal excretion, 70-71
and food intake, 70
and gastrointestinal health, 71-72
and growth performance, 71
health-related characteristics, 53, 71-72
nutritive value, 70
physicochemical effects, 53,70
physiological effects, 53, 70-71
presence in foodstuffs, 69
transit time, 70-71
viscosity, 70
water-binding capacity, 70
weight control and nutrition of obese animals, 71
Carbohydrates and fiber, cats and dogs. See also Fiber, dietary; individual functional
groups
absorption, 7, 10, 51-52, 54-57, 58, 60-62, 63, 67-68, 69, 156, 160, 163, 166
adverse effects of excess intakes, 73
Atwater factor, 29-30
definitions, 49
digestion/digestibility, 8, 10-11, 49, 55, 72
energy from, 29-30
exercise and, 285-287, 292
feed composition, 72-73, 324-325
functional groups, 49-51
macronutrient composition and utilization of, 52
malabsorption, 56, 59
measurement, 49-51
physiological effects, 73
safe upper limits, 72-73
thermic effects of, 35
and water intake, 247
Carboxyl ester hydrolase, 86
Carnitine, 235-236, 303
Carnosine, 122
Carotenoids, 24, 194, 195, 346
Cat food. See also Petfoods
canned (wet), 146-147
corn-poultry by-product meal diet, 8, 9, 11
dry, 146, 155, 249
energy estimates, 30, 40


===== PDF PAGE 741 =====
740
fats and fatty acids, 102
fiber, 30-33, 65-66, 68
heat processing, 10, 56
meat-based diets, 52
metabolizable energy, 30-33
mineral content, 146-147, 155, 158
palatability, 102
preferences, 52, 102
processing, 313
protein, 8, 9, 11, 52, 66
soybean meal-based diet, 8, 9, 11
starch in, 56
Cataracts, 117, 121, 217
Catecholamines, 267, 270
Cats. See also Adult cats; Carbohydrates and fiber, cats and dogs; Digestive
physiology of cats and dogs; Gestation, queens; Kittens; Lactation, queens;
Maintenance, cats; individual nutrients
adaptation to diet, 23
adverse effects of excess consumption, 56, 72, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 128, 131,
135-136, 151, 155, 158-159, 161, 165, 170, 172, 176, 180, 182, 200
amino acid deficiencies, 116, 121-130
arginine, 116, 118, 121-122, 133
basal metabolic rate, 40
basis for requirements, 2
body condition scoring, 42, 43, 45
calcium, 150-152
carbohydrate and fiber digestion, 55, 56-57, 60-61, 68, 70, 72
core body temperature, 23
deficiency signs, 9, 24, 95-96, 102, 121-125, 126, 127-128, 130, 134, 138, 151,
155, 158, 161, 164-165, 169, 172, 176, 179, 180, 182, 199, 204, 209, 212, 215, 217,
220, 223, 225, 227, 231, 233
Δ6 desaturase activity, 88, 95-96, 103
dietary thermogenesis, 40
electrolytes, 7
energy requirements, 39-45
fats and fatty acids, 8, 30, 33, 71, 87-88, 95-97, 98, 102-104
feeding behavior, 23, 119
food preferences, 23, 24-25, 102, 119
gestation, 42, 43, 104, 120, 133
glutamate, 119
growth diets, 45, 102-103, 118-119
hair coat, 95, 96, 123
histidine, 116, 122-123, 133


===== PDF PAGE 742 =====
741
hypervitaminosis, 205, 209-210, 212, 215-216, 218, 220, 223, 225, 227, 231
immune and inflammatory responses, 97
inflammatory bowel disease, 212, 227
isoleucine, 123-124, 133
labyrinthine righting reflexes, 215
lactation, 42, 44-45, 104, 120, 133
leucine, 124-125, 133
lysine, 126, 133
mercury toxicity, 180
metabolic acidosis, 25
methionine and cysteine, 116, 118, 120, 127-128, 133
nitrogen (crude protein), 24, 29, 71, 113, 116, 118-119, 120
nutrition research, 111
osteocalcin, 210-211
phenylalanine and tyrosine, 129-130, 133
predatory behavior, 25
protein, 24, 29, 113, 116. See also Nitrogen requirements
reproductive performance, 95-96
sleep-wake cycle, 23
spayed, 151, 152
taste sensitivity, 25
taurine, 10, 116, 135-137
territorial marking, 126
thermoregulation, 270, 271
thirst drive, 22
threonine, 116, 130-131, 133
tryptophan, 116, 131-132, 133
tyrosine, 116, 118
urinary tract health, 146-147, 157, 161, 205, 249
valine, 132, 133
vegetarian diet, 164-165
water requirements, 22-23, 147, 293
Cavalier King Charles spaniels, 157
Celluflour, 25
Cellular differentiation, 196-197
Cellular retinol-binding proteins, 195
Cellulose, 25, 33, 50, 51, 60-61, 63, 64, 65, 67, 68, 69-72, 160, 163, 166. See also
Carbohydrates, poorly fermentable
Ceramides, 93, 94, 100
Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus), 87-88
Chloride
absorption and bioavailability, 166
adverse effects of excess consumption, 166, 167


===== PDF PAGE 743 =====
742
and calcium deficiency, 167
cats, 166-169
deficiency, 166, 167
dogs, 166-167
exercise and, 296-298
function, 166
interactions with other nutrients, 164, 165, 167, 233
requirements and allowances, 166-168
safe upper limit, 166, 168
sources, 166
Cholangiohepatitis, 212, 227
Cholangitis, 227
Cholecalciferol, 200. See also Vitamin A
processing and storage losses, 237
toxicity, 201, 204, 205
Cholecystokinin, 8-9, 13, 136
Cholesterol, 58, 81, 85, 86, 87, 99, 126, 201
Cholesteryl ester, 84, 85, 195
Cholestyramine, 136
Choline, 222, 223, 231-232
absorption, 232
biological function, 232
cats, 233-234
deficiency signs, 128, 232
dogs, 232-233
excess intakes, 233, 234
interactions with other nutrients, 232, 233
requirements, 232-234
Chondroprotective agents, 344-345
Chromium, 184-185
Chylomicrons, 87, 195
Citrulline, 115, 121-122
Clostridium perfringens, 10, 11, 68
Cobalamin (Vitamin B12), 223
absorption, 225-226
biological function, 226
cats, 227
deficiency signs, 194, 226, 227
dogs, 226-227
hypervitaminosis, 227
interaction with other nutrients, 226, 232
requirements, 226-227
Cocker spaniels, 153, 198, 203, 227


===== PDF PAGE 744 =====
743
Coenzyme A, 223
Coenzyme Q, 236, 303
Colipase, 86
Collagen, 7, 185, 234
Colors
certified, 350-351
iron oxide and titanium dioxide, 351
non-certified, 351
Conjugated linoleic acids (CLAs), 83-84
Copper
absorption and bioavailability, 171
adverse effects of excess consumption, 171-172
cats, 171, 172-173
deficiency, 171, 172, 185
dogs, 171-172
function, 171
interactions with other nutrients, 172, 174, 185, 236
requirements and allowances, 172-173
safe upper limit, 172, 173
sources, 171
Coronary artery disease, 99
Creatine, 301-302
Creatine kinase, 208, 301
Cryptitis, 67
Cyst(e)ine, 24, 111, 113, 114, 115, 116, 118, 126-128, 132-133, 135, 138, 179
Cysteinyltyrosyl radical, 236
Cystokinin, 85
D
Dachshunds, 12
Deficiency signs
adipose tissue changes, 209
alopecia, 93, 182, 217, 231
amino acid metabolism disturbances, 226, 227
anemia, 155, 169, 217, 219, 220, 226, 228
anorexia, 112, 114, 122, 123, 124, 125, 129, 130, 131, 132, 153, 157, 161, 164,
180, 197, 208, 209, 213, 214, 216, 217, 219, 222, 223, 226, 227, 233
apnea, 121
ataxia, 121, 130, 172, 177, 204, 213, 215, 216, 219
black tongue, 124, 220, 222
bleeding and clotting disorders, 211, 212


===== PDF PAGE 745 =====
744
cardiac abnormalities, 119, 132, 135, 157, 158, 160, 184, 209, 213-214, 215, 219,
223
cataracts, 121, 123, 199, 217
cholestasis, 211
cholic acid composition of bile, 9
coat color changes, 129, 132, 171, 172
coat texture changes, 182, 186
coma, 180, 208, 216, 223
congenital defects, 135, 198, 212, 229
coprophagia, 213
corneal lesions, 199, 216, 217
cyanosis, 121
deafness, 135, 136, 197
dehydration, 222
depression, 180, 208, 209
diagnosis of, 193
diarrhea, 121, 169, 186, 214, 222, 227, 231
dyspnea, 180, 208
edema, 208
emprosthotonus, 121
failure to thrive, 226, 227
fatty liver, 95, 212, 232, 233
footpad lesions, 127-128, 174
foul odor, 214, 222
gastrointestinal disorders, 223, 224, 226, 227
goiter, 182
growth depression, 45, 93, 112, 122, 135, 137, 153, 158, 161, 163, 164, 169, 172,
174, 184, 185, 186, 213, 220, 223, 224, 226
hematochezia, 169
hematuria, 170
hemoglobin and hematocrit changes, 123, 169, 170, 228-229
hyperactivity, 121, 129, 160
hyperammonemia, 24, 116, 120, 121, 122, 125
hyperesthesia, 121, 209
hyperglycemia, 184
hypersalivation, 121, 129, 199, 222, 231
hypoalbuminemia, 233
hypochromotrichia, 231
hypothermia, 214, 216
hypotrichosis, 93
immunologic impairment, 45, 93, 99, 123, 135, 136, 197, 199
inflammatory conditions, 93, 94, 212, 222, 227
intestinal bacterial overgrowth, 226


===== PDF PAGE 746 =====
745
learning deficits, 215
lethargy, 122, 127, 169, 170, 202, 216
lipid malabsorption, 212
liver disease, 211, 212, 217, 223
locomotor disturbances, 129, 130, 155, 157, 164, 172, 177, 204, 217
melena, 169, 170, 186
metabolic acidosis, 155, 166
neurological dysfunction, 129, 130, 136, 163, 164, 166, 184, 199, 204, 208, 213-
214, 215, 219, 222
neutropenia, 226
ocular discharge/conjunctivitis, 123, 127, 197, 199, 216
orotic aciduria, 121, 122, 125
pale mucous membranes, 169, 170
perioral lesions, 127, 176, 222, 223
photophobia, 199
pigment gallstones, 127
plasma aldosterone, 161
pneumonitis, 197
polydypsia, 161
polyneuropathy, 93
polyuria, 161
ptyalism, 121
renal dysfunction/lesions, 93, 95, 132, 165, 220
reproductive and developmental disorders, 93, 95, 135-136, 176, 177, 184, 185,
199, 208, 217
respiratory disorders, 223
rickets, 202, 204
scurvy, 235
seizures, 215, 219, 220, 223
skeletal abnormalities, 45, 148, 151, 153, 158, 177, 180, 185, 202, 204
skin lesions and disorders, 92, 93, 123, 127-128, 138, 174, 176, 197, 199, 216,
231
steatitis, 209
temperature elevation, 223
testicular damage, 176, 217
tetanic spasms, 121
tremors, 121, 130
urolithiasis, 157
visual impairment, 92, 93, 99, 134, 135, 184, 197, 208
vocalizations, 121, 129
vomiting, 121, 125, 227, 232
water imbalances, 93, 160
weight gain, 182


===== PDF PAGE 747 =====
746
weight loss, 45, 99, 112, 122-123, 124-125, 127, 129, 130, 153, 157, 166, 170,
197, 199, 213, 216, 217, 219, 222, 227, 228, 231, 232, 233
wound healing delays, 93
xerothalmia, 197
Dermatitis, 127
Diabetes, 59
Diacylglycerols, 85
Diarrhea, 52, 56, 59, 61, 68, 121, 169, 214, 222
Dichloroacetic acid, 304
Dicumarol, 211
Diet formulations. See also Petfoods
and amino acid status, 115, 146
cereal-based, 8, 9, 11, 65, 70
certified, 254
and digestion, 8, 11
meat-based, 8, 52, 61, 68, 70, 71, 148
medical foods, 254-255
nutrient composition of ingredients, 319-343
pure and chemically defined, 254
vegetable source ingredients, 8, 9, 11, 59, 146
Dietary fibers. See Carbohydrates, fermentable, Carbohydrates and fiber, cats and
dogs; Fiber, dietary
Digestible energy
determination, 28-29
protein correction factor, 29
Digestion/digestibility of nutrients. See also Fecal excretion; individual nutrients
age and, 17, 53, 55, 56, 57, 60, 87
amino acids, 112-114
Atwood factor, 30
breed and, 12, 17
carbohydrates and fiber and, 7, 10, 51-52, 54-57, 58, 60-62, 63, 67-68, 69-70,
113-114
energy, 28
factors affecting, 12, 17, 29, 51-52, 55-57, 61-62, 68, 70, 71, 87-88, 113-114
fat and fatty acids, 7, 8, 9, 17, 40, 42, 71, 83, 85-86, 87-88
gender differences, 17
housing and environmental factors, 17
measurement, 12
molecular structure and linkages, 61
poorly fermentable carbohydrates, 69-70
process, 6-7
processing of petfoods and, 56, 62, 70, 113
protein, 112-114


===== PDF PAGE 748 =====
747
source and solubility of nutrient, 61, 87-88, 113
starch, 7, 55, 56, 62, 63
Digestive physiology of cats and dogs. See also Gastrointestinal health
anitbacterial properties, 9, 11
cecum, 5-6, 10, 11
compartments and functions, 6-11
diurnal rhythms, 9
esophagus, 7
and feeding behavior, 7
gastric emptying, 8, 11, 63
gastric mucosa, 5-6, 11
hormonal aspects, 7, 8-9, 10-11, 12, 13-16
information sources, 5
large intestine, 5, 10-11
liver, 9
microflora, 8, 9-10, 11, 50, 55, 62, 68
mouth, 6-7
nutrient digestibility values, 12, 17, 62
pancreas, 8-9, 85, 86
saliva, 6-7
small intestine, 5, 8-10, 12, 113
stomach, 5, 7-8, 85
transit time, 7, 10, 11, 52, 53, 57, 58, 64, 68, 70-71
unstirred water layer, 86
Dihomogammalinolenic acid (DGLA), 94
Dilated cardiomyopathy, 119, 132, 134, 135, 137
Dimethylglycine, 302-303
Disaccharides, 49, 52, 54-55, 56-57, 59, 61. See also Carbohydrates, digestible
Diuresis, 23
Diurnal rhythms, 22-23
Diverticular disease, 71-72
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 88, 90, 92, 95, 96-97, 98, 101, 102, 103
Docosapentaenoic acid (DPA), 88, 95, 101
Dog food. See also Diet formulations; Petfoods
carbohydrates and fiber, 63-64, 65, 66, 67, 72-73
cereal-based, 8
corn-based diet, 65, 70
digestibility, 11
fat and fatty acids, 83, 99, 100
lactose, 72
magnesium, 158
meat-based diets, 8, 61, 68, 70, 71, 148
metabolizable energy, 29-30, 31


===== PDF PAGE 749 =====
748
preferences, 58
processing, 313
starches, 11, 59
Dogs. See also Adult dogs; Carbohydrates and fiber, cats and dogs; Gestation,
bitches; Lactation, bitches; Maintenance, dogs; Puppies; individual nutrients
adverse effects of excess intakes, 121, 123, 124, 125, 127, 129, 130, 148-149,
153, 157, 160, 163, 169, 171-172, 175, 180, 182, 197-199
amino acids, 114, 122-125, 127, 129
anxiety, 35
arginine, 116, 121, 132
basal metabolic rate, 34-35
basis for requirements, 2
black tongue, 124, 220, 222
body condition scoring, 43, 45, 266
cancer, 100
cold-acclimatized, 269-270
deficiency signs, 24, 92-93, 121, 122-125, 127, 129, 130, 134-135, 138, 148, 153,
156-157, 160, 163, 169, 171, 174-175, 179, 180, 182, 197, 201-202, 208, 211, 213-
214, 216, 219, 222, 224, 226, 228-229, 231, 232
dietary thermogenesis, 35, 268-269
dilated cardiomyopathy, 119, 132, 134, 135
distemper, 235
electrolytes, 7
energy requirements, 33-39
fats and fatty acids, 9-10, 83, 87, 92-93, 98-102
growth diets, 38-39, 99-100, 118
hip dysplasia, 235, 265
histidine, 122, 133
hypercholesterolemia, 99
hypertension, 100
hyperthyroidism, 182-183
hypertrophic osteodystrophy, 235
hypervitaminosis, 203-204, 209, 211, 215, 217, 219-220, 222, 225, 227, 231
hypothyroidism, 180
immune and inflammatory response, 69, 94-95, 101, 119
isoleucine, 123, 133
laboratory animals, 101
lactation, 37-38, 101-102, 119-120
leucine, 124, 133
lysine, 125, 133
methionine and cysteine, 127, 132-133
nitrogen (crude protein), 24, 29, 111, 118, 119-120
nutrition research, 111


===== PDF PAGE 750 =====
749
omnivorous characteristics, 24
pancreatitis, 99, 100
phenylalanine and tyrosine, 129, 133
physical activity, 35, 39. See also Exercise
polycythemia and sports anemia, 287-289
preferences, 98-99
requirements and allowances, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 127, 129, 130
resting fed metabolic rate, 35
satiety, 66, 71
size and number of meals, 35
skin and hair coat, 91, 93-94, 98, 100
taurine, 119, 134-135
thermoregulation, 7, 35, 268-269
threonine, 130, 133
total parenteral nutrition, 54
tryptophan, 131, 133
valine, 132, 133
water, 8
Dopamine, 219, 234
Dry matter
digestibility, 12, 17, 71, 87
fat content, 99, 101, 102-103, 104
in feed ingredients, 320-323
water ratio, 23
E
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 88, 90, 95, 97, 98, 100
Electrolytes
fluids during exercise, 298
gastric, 7
Energy content of food. See also Digestible energy; Gross energy; Metabolizable
energy; Net energy
milk, 37, 42, 44
resistant starch, 62
units, 28
Energy deficiency or excess, 45
body condition scoring, 43, 45
Energy density
of diets, 2
of fats, 85, 102
and food intake, 25
Energy digestibility, fiber intake and, 65


===== PDF PAGE 751 =====
750
Energy evaluation of food. See also Cat food; Dog food
Atwater factors, 29-30, 33, 40, 42, 45
methods, 28-29
predictive equations, 2, 29-33
tables, 29
Energy requirements, cats
adult maintenance, 40-42, 44
age and, 40, 42
basal metabolic rate and, 40
basis for establishing, 28, 39-40, 44, 356
body condition score and, 42
dietary thermogenesis, 40
food and environment and, 40
gestation, 42, 43
growth, 45
health status and, 42
laboratory animals, 40, 41-42
lactation, 42, 44-45
lean body mass and, 40, 42
neutering and, 40, 42
nutrient requirement table, 366
overweight/obese animals, 40, 42
for thermoregulation, 270
Energy requirements, dogs
activity level and, 36, 37, 39
adult maintenance, 35-36, 37
age and, 34, 36, 37
basal metabolic rate and, 33, 34-35
basis for establishing, 33-34, 356
breed and, 34, 35-36, 37
calculating, 35, 39
definitions, 33
dietary thermogenesis, 33, 35
environment/housing and, 36, 37, 39
gender and, 36
gestation, 36-37
growth, 38-39
health status and, 36
lactation, 37-38
lean body mass and, 34
maintenance, 33, 38, 39
neutered animals, 36
nutrient requirement tables, 361


===== PDF PAGE 752 =====
751
resting fed metabolic rate and, 33, 35
for thermoregulation, 268-269
units of expression, 2
Energy requirements, general
anxiety and, 267-268
circadian rhythms and, 268
cold-induced thermogenesis, 268-272
exercise and, 273-284
minimal metabolism, 267
nonshivering heat production, 269-270
oxygen reduction at high altitudes and, 272-273
Energy sources
macronutrient contributions, 28
intestinal, 11
English pointers, 121, 125, 174, 267, 283
Enkephalins, 16
Environmental factors. See also Exercise; Laboratory animals
changes in nutrient requirements, 284-285
cold environments, 260, 268-272, 284-285
confinement, 266-267
and energy requirements, 37, 267-275
hot environments, 246, 272, 292-293
and nutrient digestibility, 17
oxygen reduction at high altitude, 272-273
water requirements, 246, 248-249, 292-293
Ergocalciferol, 200. See also Vitamin A
Erythrocyte glutathione reductase activity (EGRA), 216, 217
Erythrocyte transketolase activity (ETKA), 213
Escherichia coli, 9, 10, 68
Essential fatty acids. See also Fats and fatty acids, dietary; Polyunsaturated fatty
acids
biochemical basis of essentiality, 88-90
biosynthesis, 9, 11, 87, 88, 95, 97-98, 103
canine studies, 92-95
cats, 8, 87-88, 95-97, 102-104
comparative studies, 90-92
deficiency, 88, 90, 92-93, 95-96, 99
and Δ6 desaturase activities, 88, 95-96
desaturation and elongation, 88
dogs, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92-95, 98-102
and eicosanoid production, 89, 90-91
extraction and saponification, 84-85
and growth and development, 17, 91-92, 97, 98, 99-100, 101, 102-103


===== PDF PAGE 753 =====
752
and inflammatory and immune responses, 90, 94-95, 99
and lipid-protein interactions, 90
long-chain, see Polyunsaturated fatty acids
and membrane composition and integrity, 90
n-3, 88-90, 93, 94-95
n-6, 88-90, 93, 94, 95
physiologic role, 81, 90-92, 95
ratios, 88-90, 91, 95
recommendations, 97-98
and reproductive performance, 95-96, 98, 101-102, 104
requirements, 98
short-chain, 8, 9, 11, 60, 62, 67-68, 87
and skin and hair coat, 91, 93-94, 96, 97-98
sources, 8
structure, 81
transport, 86-87
units of expression, 2
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 237
Eubacteria, 9
Excess nutrients, adverse effects. See also Obese/overweight animals; Safe upper
limits; individual nutrients
anemia, 128, 175, 180, 250
anorexia, 198, 205, 220
ataxia, 127
cardiovascular, 163
coat dryness and brittleness, 203
coma, 127, 203
in commercial petfoods, 201, 205
dehydration, 155, 203
depression, 155, 205
diarrhea, 198, 223
dyspnea, 205
energy, 45
exophthalmia, 198
gastroenteritis, 163, 170, 175, 203
goiter, 182
growth depression, 125, 203
hemoglobinuria, 250
hyperactivity, 127
hypercalcemia, 203, 205
hyperlacrimation, 182
hypersalivation, 182
learned taste aversions, 125


===== PDF PAGE 754 =====
753
lethargy, 127, 175, 200, 203
liver damage, 180
locomotor abnormalities, 220
metabolic acidosis, 155, 167, 168
methemoglobinemia, 128
muscular atrophy, 203
neurological impairment, 198, 215-216, 220
ocular discharge, 198
ptyalism, 127
renal damage/failure, 203, 205
reproductive impairment, 200
urolithiasis, 205
seizures, 127, 223
skeletal disorders, 45, 148, 153, 183, 199, 200, 203-204
skin and coat dryness, 182
tremors, 127
vomiting, 125, 127, 164, 171, 198, 205
weight loss, 198
Exercise
absence of exercise following training, 273
alactacid debt, 273-274
amount of, 259-260
antioxidants and, 301-303
and body condition, 265-266
and calcium, 298-299
and carbohydrates, 285-287, 292
cats, 260
changes in nutrient requirements, 284-285
and chloride, 296-298
and chromium, 184
and creatine, 300-301
and creatine kinase, 301
diet and health during, 262-265
and digestibility of nutrients, 263
dogs, 259-267, 274-275, 287-289
dynamic vs. steady-state, 273-279
and electrolyte-containing fluids, 298
endurance, 260, 265, 266, 270-271
energy requirements, 273-284
and fats and fatty acids, 285-287, 291-292
feeding times, 263-265
field metabolic rate, 281-284
and food and nutrient intakes, 266


===== PDF PAGE 755 =====
754
and hematocrit, 287-289
hyperthermia, 293-294
intensity, 281
and intestinal function, 262-263
lactic acid debt, 274-275
load carrying, 279
and magnesium, 298-299
metabolic adaptation, 289-290
oxygen consumption and, 279-281
and phosphorus, 298-299
and polycythemia and sports anemia, 287-289
and potassium, 296-298
protein and, 287-292
pulling weights, 279
on rough terrain, 278-279
sled dogs, 248, 260-262
and sodium, 296-298
sprinting, 260, 266
submaximal, 274
supramaximal, 274-276
swimming, 266, 279
and trace minerals, 299-300
traditional diets for racing dogs, 260-262
training, 266-267, 301-302
treadmill, 246, 248, 264, 267, 273, 275, 276-277
types, 260
uphill and downhill, 277-278
and vitamins, 218, 300, 302-303
and water, 246, 248, 293-296
wind resistance, 279
F
Fats and fatty acids, dietary. See also Essential fatty acids
absorption, 11, 62, 83, 86-87
acid hydrolysis, 84
analytical procedures, 84-85
antiatherogenic properties, 84, 99
and bioavailability of other nutrients, 83
cats, 8, 30, 33, 71, 87-88, 95-97, 98, 102-104, 369
composition of fats and oils, 328-329
definition, 84
digestion/digestibility, 7, 8, 9, 17, 33, 40, 71, 83, 85-86, 87-88


===== PDF PAGE 756 =====
755
dogs, 92-95, 98-102
energy and nutrient density, 28, 29, 83, 85, 98
exercise and, 285-287, 291-292
extraction for total lipid analysis, 84-85
in feed ingredients, 28, 83, 84, 98, 320-323, 326-327
fiber intake and, 33, 71
free fatty acids, 85
function, 81, 99
for gestation and lactation, 101-102, 104, 369
for growth, 17, 99-100, 102-103, 364
humans compared to animals, 97-98
hydrogenation, 83
lipase activity, 85, 86
and macromineral absorption, 163, 166
medium-chain triglycerols, 25, 83, 86, 102
nomenclature, 81-82
nutrient requirements tables, 357, 359, 362, 364, 369
palatability, 25, 83, 92, 98-99
preferences, 98-99, 102
protein intake and, 99
recommendations, 97-104
safe upper limit, 100-101, 102
and skin and hair coat, 93-94
sources, 82-84
thermic effects of, 35
trans isomer, see Trans fatty acids
and vitamin E, 99
Fatty liver, 84, 95, 128, 212, 217, 223, 232
Fecal excretion
carbohydrates and, 52-53, 54, 58, 62, 64, 70-71
fiber and, 11, 64, 71
gender and, 17
moisture content, 64, 70
stool weight, 64
Feeding behavior, comparative
absorbable carbohydrates and, 52
control of intake, 25
deficiency or excess in nutrients and, 24, 25
dietary choice, 23, 24-25, 112
and dietary thermogenesis, 35, 40
digestible carbohydrates and, 58
digestive physiology and, 7
diurnal rhythms, 22-23


===== PDF PAGE 757 =====
756
drinking patterns, 22-23
environment and, 24
feral animals, 22
fermentable carbohydrates and, 63-64, 66
and food intake, 63, 162
free-feeding patterns, 22-23, 40, 45
imprinting and social factors and, 23-24, 37
introducing new foods, 24
learned taste aversions, 24-25, 112, 125
meal size, 22, 35
monotonous diets, 23
palatability and, 23-24, 25, 45, 83, 92, 99, 100, 112
poorly fermentable carbohydrates, 70-71
predatory behavior and, 25
preferences, 23, 24-25, 52, 58, 63, 98-99, 102, 112
satiety, 24, 66
stress and, 24
warming refrigerated foods, 24
Feeding husbandry, 146
recommendations, 25-26
Felids. See also Cats
captive wild, 87-88
feeding behavior, 22
Feline central retinal degeneration (FCRD), 134, 135
Feline urologic syndrome, 72
Felinine, 126, 127
Fermentation. See also Carbohydrates, fermentable; Carbohydrates, poorly
fermentable; Digestion/digestibility of nutrients
and energy value of carbohydrates, 70
of fiber, 30, 63, 65, 66
Fiber, dietary. See Carbohydrates, fermentable; Carbohydrates, poorly fermentable;
Carbohydrates and fiber, cats and dogs; Dietary fibers
analysis of food content, 50-51
and bioavailability of other nutrients, 64-66, 71, 72, 113, 136, 166
crude, 30-33
definition, 50
digestibility of, 30, 60-61
and energy intake, 65, 66
and fat digestibility, 33, 71
in feed ingredients, 320-323
and feeding behavior, 63-64, 66
and gastrointestinal health, 67-68
gross energy, 28


===== PDF PAGE 758 =====
757
and growth performance, 66
induced viscosity, 63
processing effects, 70
and satiety, 64, 71
and SCFA production, 67-68
sources, 49, 60
stool bulking effect, 70
water-binding capacity, 70
and weight reduction, 72
Fish oils, 53, 82, 94, 97
Flavors and extracts
artificial, 350
digests, 350
natural, 350
Folic acid, 227-228
absorption, transport, and storage, 228
biological function, 228
cats, 229-230
deficiency signs, 228-229
dogs, 228-229
hypervitaminosis, 230
interaction with other nutrients, 216, 226, 228, 229-230, 232
processing and storage losses, 237
requirements, 229-230
safe upper limit, 229
Food and Agriculture Organization, 101
Food and Drug Administration (U.S.), 84
Food intake. See also Feeding behavior, comparative
carbohydrate, 52, 58
and energy intake by lactating bitches, 38
MCTs and, 83
Fox terriers, 208
Foxhounds, 267, 277-278, 280
Fructose, 49, 51, 54
G
Galactose, 49, 51, 52, 53, 59
Galactosemia, 51
Galactosuria, 51
γ-Aminobutyric acid, 219
γ-Linoleic acid (GLA), 94, 95-96
Gastrin, 8, 13, 120


===== PDF PAGE 759 =====
758
Gastrin-inhibitory peptide, 14
Gastrin-releasing peptide-10, 13
Gastrointestinal health
digestible carbohydrates and, 60
essential fatty acids and, 94
fermentable carbohydrates and, 67-68
poorly fermentable carbohydrates and, 71-72
Gender
and basal metabolic rate, 34
and food intake, 17
Geriatric animals
absorbable carbohydrates, 53-54
defined, 53
diabetes, 60
digestible carbohydrates, 60
energy requirements, 54
fermentable carbohydrates, 66-67
fiber, 72
glucose response, 54, 66-67
hyperglycemia, 67
maintenance, 54
German shepherds, 12, 37, 68, 147, 148, 153, 160-161
Gestation, bitches. See also Reproductive performance
amino acids, 133
basis for requirements, 2
calcium, 150
carbohydrates, 58, 59
chloride, 167
copper, 172
energy requirements, 36-37, 58, 59, 361
fats and fatty acids, 101-102
feeding behavior, 36
fiber, 66, 72
iodine, 183
iron, 170
ketosis, 59
magnesium, 157-158
manganese, 178
nitrogen, 59, 117, 119-120
nutrient requirement tables, 361, 362-363
phosphorus, 154
potassium, 164
selenium, 181


===== PDF PAGE 760 =====
759
sodium, 161
water requirements, 248
weight gain, 36, 42, 43
zinc, 175
Gestation, queens. See also Reproductive performance
amino acids, 133, 368-369
basis for requirements, 2
calcium, 152
chloride, 168
copper, 173
energy requirements, 42, 43, 44-45, 368
fat and fatty acids, 96-97, 98, 104
iodine, 183
iron, 173
magnesium, 159
nitrogen, 117, 120
nutrient requirement tables, 368-369
phosphorus, 156
potassium, 165-166
selenium, 181
sodium, 162
taurine and, 135-136
water, 249
weight gain, 42, 43
zinc, 176-177
Glucagon, 120
Glucagon-like peptide-1, 14
Glucagon-like peptide-2, 11, 14
Gluconeogenesis, 51, 57, 60, 72, 88, 112, 130, 218-219, 230
Glucose, 35, 49, 51, 52, 53, 59, 61, 66-67, 68-69, 73, 186
Glucose tolerance, 54, 184, 185
Glutamate, 115, 116, 119
Glutamic acid, 112, 115
Glutathione, 126, 207, 234
Glutathione peroxidase, 179, 207, 216
Glycemic control, fermentable carbohydrates and, 68-69
Glycemic response
absorbable carbohydrates, 54
digestible carbohydrates, 60-61
Glycine, 112, 114, 115
Glycolipids, 81
Glycosuria, 52
Golden retrievers, 147, 148


===== PDF PAGE 761 =====
760
Great Danes, 17, 34, 35-36, 37, 38, 39, 147, 148-149, 153, 154, 202, 203-204, 269
Greyhounds, 198, 202, 260, 262, 263, 265, 266, 267, 268, 275, 276, 283, 290, 301,
304. See also Racing dogs
Gross energy (GE), 30
defined, 28
transformation into net energy, 28
Growth. See also Kittens; Puppies
absorbable carbohydrates and, 51
and bioavailability of nutrients, 148
calcium and, 148
digestible carbohydrates and, 58
disorders, 38, 149
energy requirements, 38-39, 45, 356
fats and fatty acids, 97, 99-100, 102-103
fermentable carbohydrates and, 66
fiber and, 66
nitrogen and, 117, 118-119
nutrient digestibility and, 17
nutrient requirements tables, 356, 357-358
overfeeding and, 38
poorly fermentable carbohydrates and, 71
starch intake and, 58
stunted, 149
water requirements, 248, 249
weight development in large and giant breeds, 38-39
Gums, 50, 60, 61, 63, 64, 66, 67, 68, 71
H
Health-related characteristics. See also Glycemic response
absorbable carbohydrates, 54
conjugated linoleic acid, 84
digestible carbohydrates, 60-61
fermentable carbohydrates, 66, 67-69
gastrointestinal tract, 60, 67-68, 71-72
poorly fermentable carbohydrates, 71-72
Heinz body anemia, 128
Hemicelluloses, 50, 60
Hemolytic anemia, 128, 175
High-density lipoproteins, 206
Histamine, 97, 122, 219
Histidine, 25, 112, 114, 115, 116, 117, 122-123, 133, 228, 229-230
Homemade or experimental diets, 29, 30


===== PDF PAGE 762 =====
761
Homocysteine, 226
Homocysteinemia, 226
Hunting or tracking dogs, 148, 178, 260, 265
Hyaenidae, 195
Hydrogenated coconut oil, 25
Hydroxyproline, 115
Hyperammonemia, 24, 116, 120, 121, 122, 125
Hypercalcemia, 203
Hypercholesterolemia, 99
Hyperglycemia, 184
Hyperkalemia, 163, 164
Hyperlipidemia, 45
Hyperphosphatemia, 155
Hypertension, 100
Hyperthermia, 293-296
Hyperthyroidism, 182-183
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 158
Hypoalbuminemia, 233
Hypocalcemia, 204
Hypochloremia, 166
Hypochromotrichia, 231
Hypoglycemia, 59
Hypokalemia, 163, 165, 166
Hypomagnesemia, 157
Hypothermia, 214, 216
Hypothyroidism, 180
Hypotrichosis, 93
I
Immune function
enteric, 9, 11
essential fatty acids and, 94, 101
fermentable carbohydrates and, 69
vitamin B6 and, 218
Immunoglobulin A, 11, 69
Inflammatory bowel disease, 212, 227
Inosine, 303
Inositol, 235
Inositol-lipid cycle, 90
Insulin, 59, 120, 121, 184, 186
Interleukin-2, 97


===== PDF PAGE 763 =====
762
Intestinal lymphoma, 227
Intrinsic factors, 225-226
Inulin, 64
Iodine
absorption and bioavailability, 181-182
adverse effects of excess consumption, 182
cats, 181-182, 183-184
deficiency, 182
dogs, 181-183
function, 181
requirements and allowances, 182-184
safe upper limit, 183, 184
sources, 181
Irish wolfhounds, 12
Iron
absorption and bioavailability, 66, 168-169
adverse effects of excess consumption, 169, 170
cats, 168-171
deficiency, 169
dogs, 66, 168-170
function, 168
interaction with other nutrients, 174, 185, 236
requirements and allowances, 169-170
safe upper limits, 170, 171
sources, 168
Isoleucine, 112, 115, 123-124, 125, 133, 138, 230
Isomaltase, 55-56, 57
J
Jowar (Sorghum vulgare), 222
K
Kaolin, 25
Kelpie, 282
Ketosis, 59
Kidney disease, 114, 115
Kittens. See also Growth
amino acids, 114, 115, 134
basis for requirements, 2, 45
calcium, 147, 150, 151-152, 154


===== PDF PAGE 764 =====
763
carbohydrates, 58
chloride, 167
copper, 172-173
energy requirements, 42, 45, 58, 364
fats and fatty acids, 97, 102
fiber, 66
iodine, 183
iron, 169, 170
magnesium, 159
milk intake, 44
mineral deficiencies, 164-165, 172
nitrogen, 117, 118
nutrient digestibility and utilization, 58
nutrient requirement table, 364-365
phosphorus, 154, 155
potassium, 164-165
selenium, 181
sodium, 161-162
weaning, 42, 364
zinc, 176
Klebsiella, 9
L
Laboratory animals
activity levels, 260
amount fed, 255-256
certified diets, 254
energy requirements, 37, 40, 252
fats and fatty acids, 101
feeding management, 255-256
food selection, 252-255
form of food, 255
frequency of feeding, 256
life-stage considerations, 255
overweight/obese, 40
purified and chemically defined diets, 254
requirements, 252
special-purpose foods, 254-255
storage of food, 256
Labrador retrievers, 12, 22, 37, 121, 127, 148, 198, 259, 267, 269, 274, 283
Lactase activity, 50, 55, 57, 72
Lactate, 11, 60


===== PDF PAGE 765 =====
764
Lactation, bitches. See also Milk
basis for requirements, 2
body weight changes, 43
calcium requirements and allowances, 150
carbohydrates, 58
chloride, 167
copper, 172
energy requirement, 37-38, 43, 45, 361
fats and fatty acids, 101-102
fiber, 72
food intake capacity and, 38
iodine, 183
iron, 170
litter size, 38
magnesium, 158
manganese, 178
nitrogen, 117, 119-120
nutrient requirement tables, 361, 362-363
phosphorus, 154
potassium, 164
selenium, 181
sodium, 161
water, 248
zinc, 175
Lactation, queens. See also Milk
basis for requirements, 2, 44
body weight changes, 43, 44
calcium, 152
carbohydrates, 58
chloride, 168
copper, 173
energy requirements for, 44-45, 368
fat and fatty acids, 96, 97, 104
iodine, 183
iron, 173
litter size consideration, 44
magnesium, 159
nitrogen, 117, 120
nutrient requirement tables, 368-369
phosphorus, 156
potassium, 165-166
selenium, 181
sodium, 162


===== PDF PAGE 766 =====
765
water, 249
zinc, 176-177
Lactobacilllus, 8, 9, 10, 11, 68
Lactose, 49, 52, 54, 55, 57, 58, 60, 72, 121, 214. See also Carbohydrates,
fermentable
Lactose intolerance, 52, 59, 61
Lean body mass, 34, 114, 117
Lecithin, 232
Leucine, 25, 112, 115, 124-125, 133, 138, 222
Leukotrienes, 90, 91, 94
Lignin, 28, 50, 51
Linoleate, 24
Linoleic acid (LA), 81-82, 88, 89-90, 91, 92, 94, 95, 98, 99-102, 103, 104, 209
Lions (Panthera leo), 40, 87
Lipase activity, 7, 17, 85
Lipid peroxidation, 209, 234
Lipids. See also Fats and fatty acids, dietary
defined, 81
metabolism, 218
Lipoxins, 90
Low-density lipoproteins, 206, 210
Lutein, 237
Lycopene, 237
Lysine, 24, 25, 112, 113, 114, 115, 125, 133, 138, 173, 196
Lysine tyrolquinone, 236
M
Macrominerals. See also Calcium; Chloride; Magnesium; Phosphorus; Potassium;
Sodium
inorganic sources used in petfoods, 342
Macronutrient composition
and carbohydrate utilization, 52
and weight control, 60
Magendie Commission, 111
Magnesium
absorption and bioavailability, 58, 83, 156, 157, 158
adverse effects of excess consumption, 157, 158-159
cats, 158-159
deficiency, 156-157, 158
dogs, 58, 156-158
exercise and, 298-299
function, 156


===== PDF PAGE 767 =====
766
interactions with other nutrients, 156, 157, 158, 159, 174, 184
requirements and allowances, 157-158, 159
safe upper limits, 158, 159
sources, 156, 157
Maintenance, cats
absorbable carbohydrates, 54
basis for requirements, 2
during lactation, 44
energy requirements, 40-42, 366
fat and fatty acids, 97, 103
nitrogen, 116, 117, 119, 137
nutrient requirement tables, 366-367
water, 249
Maintenance, dogs
absorbable carbohydrates, 54
basis for requirements, 2
calcium, 149-150
during lactation, 38
energy requirements, 35-36, 37, 38, 39, 359
fat and fatty acids, 99, 100-101
laboratory animals, 37
nitrogen, 117, 119
nutrient requirement tables, 359-360
protein and amino acids, 119, 132-133
water, 247-248
Malabsorption, 56, 59, 212
Malamutes, 174
Maltase activity, 55-56
Maltodextrins, 55
Maltose, 49, 54, 57
Manchester terriers, 259
Manganese
absorption and bioavailability, 177
adverse effects of excess consumption, 178
cats, 177-179
deficiency, 177
dogs, 177-178
function, 177
requirements and allowances, 178-179
safe upper limit, 178, 179
sources, 177
Mannitol, 49, 51
Margay, 40


===== PDF PAGE 768 =====
767
Mead acid, 88
Measurement
absorbable carbohydrates, 49
basal metabolic rate, 34
of bioavailability, 112-113
dietary thermogenesis, 35
digestible carbohydrates, 49
ME content of petfoods, 12, 28
nutrient digestibility, 12, 17
Medium-chain triacylglycerols (MCTs), 25, 83, 86, 102
Megaloblastic anemia, 228
Melatonin, 131
Menadione, 211, 212
Menaquinones, 210. See also Vitamin K
Mercury toxicity, 180
Metabolic acidosis, 146, 155, 166, 167, 168. See also Acid-base balance
Metabolic alkalosis, 146
Metabolizable energy (ME)
body weight basis, 355-356
canned cat food, 42
carbohydrates, 58
determination, 12, 28-29
dry matter basis, 355
fat, 85
in feed ingredients, 320-323
mice and birds, 22
for milk production, 37, 361
predictive equations, 29-33
tabular values, 29, 355, 356, 359, 361, 364
Metalloenzymes, 177, 185
Metallothionein, 171
Methionine, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 118, 120, 122, 123, 126-128, 132-133, 135,
138, 173, 179, 226, 230, 232, 233
Methylcelluloses, 70
Methylmalonic aciduria, 226
Methylsulfonylmethane, 303
Microcytic hypochromic anemia, 169, 180, 219, 220
Milk. See also Lactation
calcium concentration, 150
energy content, 37, 42, 44, 58
fat and fatty acid content, 92, 99, 102, 104
nitrogen content, 120
sodium content, 160


===== PDF PAGE 769 =====
768
substitutes, 33, 72, 121, 166
yields, 37, 38, 44, 120
Minerals. See also individual minerals
and acid-base balance, 145-147, 152, 155, 159, 163, 166
composition of feed ingredients, 145, 147, 153, 156, 163, 334-337
essential, 145
nutrient requirements tables, 357-360, 362-363, 364-365, 366-367, 369
Miniature poodles, 17, 113, 147, 148, 149
Minimal Requirements. See also Energy requirements; Nitrogen requirements;
Nutrient requirement tables; individual nutrients
age and, 149, 151
amino acids, 116-120, 121-133, 135, 136-137
arginine, 122
assessing, 116-120
basis for, 2, 194
breed and, 149
defined, 1
fats and fatty acids, 98-104
histidine, 122, 123
isoleucine, 123, 124
leucine, 124, 125
lysine, 125, 126
methionine and cysteine, 127, 128
phenylalanine and tyrosine, 129-130
threonine, 130-131
units of expression, 2
water, 22-23
Mitral valve prolapse, 157
Molybdenum, 185
Mongrel dogs, 34, 35, 147, 202, 264, 271, 277-278, 280
Monosaccharides, 8, 49, 51-54. See also Carbohydrates, absorbable
Monounsaturated fatty acids, 87, 88
Motilin, 15
Mucilages, 50
Mydriasis, 215
Myocarditis, 209
Myositis, 209
Myristate, 223
N
National Research Council, 39
Nephrocalcinosis, 147


===== PDF PAGE 770 =====
769
Net energy (NE), 28
Net protein utilization, 113
Neuromedin, 13
Neurotensin, 16
Newfoundlands, 34, 37, 39, 134
Niacin, 24, 121, 131, 220-221, 223
absorption, 221
biological function, 221-222
cats, 223
deficiency signs, 138, 193-194, 214, 222, 223
dogs, 138, 193-194, 222-223
hypervitaminosis, 222, 223
interaction with other nutrients, 216, 218, 219, 221
processing and storage losses, 237
requirements, 222-223
Nickel, 185-186
Nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide, 186, 221
Nitrogen (crude protein)
balance, 111, 116-117, 119, 137
in feed ingredients, 320-323
up- and down-regulation of catabolic enzymes, 115-116
Nitrogen-free extract (NFE), 28, 29-30, 33
Nitrogen requirements
cats, 113, 116, 118-119, 120, 364, 366, 368
dogs, 111, 118, 119-120, 357, 359, 362
for gestation and lactation, 117, 119-120, 362, 368
for growth, 117, 118-119, 357, 364
for maintenance, 117, 119, 359, 366
tables, 357, 359, 362, 364, 366, 368
variables used in assessing, 116-120
Nonfermentable carbohydrates. See also Carbohydrates, poorly fermentable
definition, 51
measurement, 51
Non-starch polysaccharides (NSPs), 28, 30, 49, 62, 63, 68
Norepinephrine, 219, 234, 271
Nutrient density of fat, 85
Nutrient requirement tables
adult cat maintenance, 366-367
adult dog maintenance, 359-360
bioavailability considerations, 194, 356
bitch gestation and lactation, 361, 362-363
kitten growth, 364-365
metabolizable energy relative to body weight, 355-356, 361, 364, 366, 368


===== PDF PAGE 771 =====
770
metabolizable energy relative to dry matter, 355
puppy growth, 357-358
queen gestation and lactation, 368-369
use of, 355-356
Nutrient value. See also Bioavailability of nutrients; Digestion/digestibility of
nutrients; individual nutrients
dry matter, 12
food processing and, 12
measurement, 12, 17
metabolizable energy, 12
protein, 12
Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism, 148, 151, 153
O
Obese/overweight animals
age and, 66
diabetes, 45, 59
digestible carbohydrates, 59
energy intake, 45, 66
exercise, 265
fat and fatty acids, 99, 100
feeding behavior, 25, 26
fermentable carbohydrates and, 66
in laboratory animals, 40
neutered animals, 66
poorly fermentable carbohydrates and, 71
recommendations, 26
weight control and nutrition, 25, 26, 59, 66, 71
Oleic acid, 96
Oligosaccharides, 11. See also Carbohydrates, digestible; Carbohydrates,
fermentable
bifidogenic effects, 68
and gastrointestinal health, 67-68
and immune function, 69
nondigestible, 49, 60, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69
prebiotics, 49-50, 68
and protein digestibility, 65, 114
quantification, 50
sources, 54, 60
Organic matter, digestibility, 71
Ornithine, 115-116, 121, 122
Orotic aciduria, 117, 120, 121, 125


===== PDF PAGE 772 =====
771
Orthoquinones, 236
Osmotic effects
absorbable carbohydrates, 52
chloride, 166
digestible carbohydrates, 57
fermentable carbohydrates, 62
sodium, 159-160
Osteoarthritis, 45, 94, 265
Osteocalcin, 210-211, 266
Osteochondrosis, 149
Osteomalacia, 146, 148
Osteoporosis, 45
Overfeeding
and growth disorders, 38
and water intake, 247
P
Palmitate, 223
Pancreatic lipase, 7, 85
Pancreatic polypeptide, 15
Pancreatitis, 99, 100, 227
Pangamic acid, 303, 304
Pantothenic acid, 222
absorption, transport, and storage, 223-224
biological function, 224
cats, 225
deficiency signs, 224, 225
dogs, 224-225
hypervitaminosis, 225
processing and storage losses, 237
requirements, 224-225
Parakeratosis, 176
Parasitism, 45
Parathyroid hormone, 148, 201
Pasteurella species, 9
Pectins, 50, 60, 61, 63, 64, 65, 66, 71
Pellagra, 193-194, 220-221, 222
Pepsin, 7
Peptide YY, 16
Peptides, 25, 221
Peripheral sensory neuropathy, 220
Petfoods. See also Cat food; Diet formulations; Dog food


===== PDF PAGE 773 =====
772
alternative forms, 314
amino acid content, 330-333
antioxidants, 126, 301-303, 345-347
ash, 145
baked, 315
canned (wet), 146-147, 316
carbohydrate and fiber content, 28, 30-33, 51, 54, 60, 63-66, 67, 72-73, 324-325
carotenoids, 24, 346, 347
categories, 313-318
chondroprotective agents, 344-345
coloring ingredients, 350-351
digestibility of nutrients, 113
dry, 146, 205, 313-314
dry-expanded, 313-314
fat and fatty acid content, 28, 83, 84, 98, 326-327
flavors and extracts, 350
herbs and botanicals, 347-348
inorganic macromineral sources, 342
inorganic micromineral sources, 343
kibbled, 314
labeling, 30, 33
meal, 314
metabolizable energy, 12, 29-33
mineral content, 147, 153, 156, 163, 334-337
nonnutritive constituents, 348-351
nutrient composition of ingredients, 319-343
pelleted, 314
prebiotics in, 347
preservatives, 213, 348-350
processing effects, 10, 12, 30, 50, 56, 83, 146, 213, 236-237, 313, 316-317
protein, 28, 66, 113
regulatory issues, 316-317
semi-moist, 314-315
snacks, 315-316
soft-expanded, 315
starches, 11, 54, 56, 59, 315
vitamin content, 193, 201, 205, 208, 338-341
Phenylalanine, 9, 112, 114, 115, 128-130, 133, 265
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, 197
Phospholipase A2, 86
Phospholipids, 58, 81, 86, 87, 91
Phosphoric acid, 237
Phosphorus, 266


===== PDF PAGE 774 =====
773
absorption and bioavailability, 152-153, 154-155
adverse effects of excess consumption, 153, 155
cats, 154-156
deficiency, 24, 153, 155
dogs, 153-154
exercise and, 298-299
function, 152
interaction with other nutrients, 148, 151, 153, 154, 156, 158, 184, 200, 201-202,
204
requirements and allowances, 153-154, 155-156
safe upper limits, 154, 156
sources, 152-153
Phylloquinone, 210, 211, 212. See also Vitamin K
Physical activity. See also Exercise
calculations and assumptions, 258-259
energy requirements for, 34, 37, 39, 273-284
and feeding behavior, 25
oxygen consumption, 279-281
water requirements, 248
Physicochemical effects of nutrients. See Osmotic effects; Viscosity properties;
individual nutrients
Physiological effects of nutrients. See Bioavailability of nutrients;
Digestion/digestibility of nutrients; Fecal excretion; Food intake; Geriatric animals;
Growth; Obese/overweight animals; Reproductive performance; individual nutrients
Phytate, 153, 155, 171, 174
Phytic acid, 174
Platelet-activating factor, 232
Polyneuritis, 214
Polysaccharides, nonstructural, 11, 63, 64, 221. See also Carbohydrates, digestible
Polyunsaturated fatty acids
desaturation and elongation, 88
digestibility, 87
and life stage, 96-97
long-chain, 86, 87-88, 90-92, 95-97, 102-103
n-3, 82, 88-90, 91, 93, 94-95, 96, 97-98, 101, 103
n-6, 82, 88-90, 93, 94, 97-98
physiologic role, 81, 90-92
protein interactions, 90
sources, 82, 84, 102
structure, 82
vitamin E and, 206, 207, 208, 209
Potassium
absorption and bioavailability, 163, 164, 165


===== PDF PAGE 775 =====
774
adverse effects of excess consumption, 163, 165
cats, 24, 164-166
deficiency, 24, 163, 164-165, 166, 167
dogs, 24, 163-165
exercise and, 296-298
function, 162-163
interaction with other nutrients, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 185, 222
requirements and allowances, 160, 161, 163-164, 165-166, 167
safe upper limit, 164, 166
sources, 163
water intake and, 166
Prebiotics, 49-50, 68, 347
Preduodenal lipases, 85-86
Pregnancy. See Gestation
Preservatives
ethoxyquin, 348-349
propylene glycol, 349
Proline, 25, 111, 114, 115, 134
Prolyl hydrase activity, 185
Propionate, 11, 60, 226
Prostacyclin, 90
Prostaglandins, 90, 91
Protein, dietary. See also Amino acids; Vegetable protein
amino acid composition, 111
assessing requirements, 116-120
Atwater factor, 29-30
crude, see Nitrogen
deficiency, 24, 114
digestibility and bioavailability, 7-8, 11, 12, 65-66, 71, 83, 112-114
energy, 29-30, 85
and exercise, 287-292
feeding behavior, 24
and hematocrit, 287-289
lipid interactions, 90, 99
and macromineral absorption, 164, 165
metabolic adaptation, 114-116
metabolism during exercise, 289-290
nutrient requirements tables, 357, 359, 362
and polycythemia and sports anemia, 287-289
and reproductive performance, 53
requirements, see Nitrogen requirements
status assessment, 114, 115
thermic effects of, 35


===== PDF PAGE 776 =====
775
and water intake, 247
Protein correction factor, 29
Protein efficiency ratio, 113
Protein-energy malnutrition, 114
Pseudomonas, 9
Psyllium, 64, 66
Puppies. See also Growth
amino acids, 115
basis for requirements, 2
calcium, 147, 149
chloride, 166-167
copper, 171, 172
energy requirements, 38-39, 45, 356
fat and fatty acids, 98, 99, 100
fiber, 66
imprinting, 37
iodine, 182-183
iron, 169
lactase activity, 17
magnesium, 157
manganese, 178
mineral deficiencies, 153, 171, 174-175
nitrogen, 117, 118
nutrient requirements tables, 356, 357-358, 359
phosphorus, 153-154
potassium, 163-164
selenium, 180
skeletal disease, 45
sodium, 160
starch, 58
survival rates, 53
weaning, 37, 356
zinc, 174-175
Pyridoxine, 147, 215, 216, 218, 222, 223, 237
Pyrimidine, 212, 228
Pyrithiamin, 215
Pyrroloquinoline quinone, 236
Q
Queuosine, 236
Quinine, 25


===== PDF PAGE 777 =====
776
R
R binders, 226
Racing dogs, 248-249, 260-262, 279, 303-304
Radius curvus, 149
Rats
dietary thermogenesis, 35
feeding behavior, 24
Recommended Allowance. See also Nutrient requirement tables
defined, 1-2
Reproductive performance. See also Gestation
assistance at whelping, 66
behavioral infertility, 95
birth weight, 53
carbohydrate intake and, 53, 58-59, 66
congenital defects, 96, 135, 136
essential fatty acids and, 95-96, 98, 103
litter size, 38, 44, 53, 66
protein intake and, 53, 60
viability, 58-59, 66, 96
Resistant starch (RS), 11, 50. See also Carbohydrates, fermentable
and carbohydrate digestibility, 62
sources, 60
water-binding capacity, 63
Resting fed metabolic rate, 33, 35, 267
Retinal, 237. See also Vitamin A
Riboflavin, 24, 215, 222, 223
absorption, 216
biological function, 216
cats, 217-218
deficiency signs, 216
dogs, 194, 216-217
hypervitaminosis, 217
interaction with other nutrients, 216, 217
processing and storage losses, 237
requirements, 194, 216-218
Rickets, 202, 204
S
Saccharin, 25
Safe upper limits. See also individual nutrients
breed and, 150


===== PDF PAGE 778 =====
777
cats, 152
defined, 2
dogs, 150
Salmonella, 9, 265
Saluki, 12
Saturated fatty acids, 87, 88
Schnauzers, 17, 37, 113
Secretin, 7, 8-9, 14, 70
Selenium
absorption and bioavailability, 179-180
adverse effects of excess consumption, 180
cats, 179-180, 181
deficiency, 180
dogs, 179-181
function, 179
interaction with other nutrients, 208, 209, 216
requirements and allowances, 180-181
safe upper limit, 181
sources, 179
Senior animals
absorbable carbohydrates, 54
defined, 53
fats and fatty acids, 87, 95
protein requirements, 119
Serine, 114, 115, 228
Serine transhydroxylase, 219
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine), 16, 131
Shigella, 9
Short-chain fatty acids
absorption, 11, 62
biosynthesis, 9
digestion, 11, 87
food processing effects, 62
and gastrointestinal health, 67-68
osmotic effects, 62
sources, 8, 60
Siberian huskies, 269
Silicon, 185
Skye terriers, 171
Sled dogs, 248, 260-263, 266, 269, 279, 280, 282, 301
Society of Nutrition Physiology, 39
Sodium
absorption and bioavailability, 60, 160, 161


===== PDF PAGE 779 =====
778
adverse effects of excess consumption, 23, 160, 161
and aldosterone concentration, 161, 162
cats, 23, 24, 161-162
deficiency, 24, 160, 161
dogs, 60, 160-161
exercise and, 296-298
function, 159-160
interaction with other nutrients, 160, 161, 221
requirements and allowances, 160-162
safe upper limit, 161, 162, 298
sources, 160
and water intake, 162
Sodium chloride, 166, 167
Somatostatin, 15
Sorbitol, 49, 51, 52, 214
Starch, nonresistant, 49. See also Resistant starch
content of petfoods, 54
digestion/digestibility, 55, 56, 63
energy content of, 57
and gastrointestinal health, 59
glycemic response, 59-60, 68-69
and growth performance, 58
and macromineral absorption, 160, 163, 166
nutritive value, 57
viscosity, 57-58
Stearic acid, 87
Steatitis, 209
Streptococcus, 8, 9, 11
Stress, 24, 184, 235, 248-249, 267-268. See also Environmental factors
Stroke, 99
Substance P, 15
Sucrase activity, 50, 55-56, 57
Sucrose, 25, 49, 51, 52, 54, 55, 56, 61, 73, 99, 112, 222
Sugar, 25
Sugar alcohols, 49, 51-54. See also Carbohydrates, absorbable
Sulfites, 213
Sulfonamides, 229
T
Table foods, 30
Tannins, 212
Taurine, 9, 10, 24, 95, 96, 112, 115, 116, 119, 121, 127, 132, 134-137, 199, 200, 219


===== PDF PAGE 780 =====
779
Tetrahydrobiopterin, 236
Tetrathiomolybdate, 172
Thermogenesis, 33, 40
cats, 272
dogs, 35, 268-269, 270-272
energy requirements, 268-270
nonshivering, 269-270
nutrient requirements, 270-272
Thiamin (vitamin B1), 24, 212-213, 222, 223
absorption, 213
biological function, 213
cats, 215-216
deficiency signs, 213-214, 215
dogs, 194, 213-215
hypervitaminosis, 215-216
interaction with other nutrients, 212, 213, 214
processing and storage losses, 213, 237
requirements, 194, 214, 215
Thiaminases, 212
Thiobarbarbituric acid reducing substances, 234
Threonine, 24, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 130-131, 133, 137, 230
Thromboxanes, 90, 91
Thymidylate, 228
Thyroid hormones, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183
Tigers, 40
Toy Pomeranians, 203
Trace minerals. See also Copper; Iodine; Iron; Manganese; Selenium; Zinc
exercise and, 299-300
inorganic sources used in petfoods, 343
Trans fatty acids, 81, 82, 83-84
Trehalose, 49
Triacylglycerols, 195. See also Medium-chain triacylglycerols
digestion, 7
hydrolysis, 84, 85, 86
Trigenolline, 222
Triglycerides, dietary, 81
digestion, 8
palatability, 25
Triglycerides, serum, 58
Trihydroxyphenylalanylquinone, 236
Trisaccharides, 55
Trypsin, 86, 113
Tryptophan, 24, 111, 112, 115, 116, 131-132, 133, 138, 219, 221, 222


===== PDF PAGE 781 =====
780
Tryptophan tryptophylquinone, 236
Tyrosine, 111, 114, 115, 116, 118, 128-130, 133
Tyrosine aminotransferase, 220
U
Ubiquinone, 207
Umami, 25, 112
Urea cycle, 115, 116, 117, 120
Urolithiasis, 146-147, 157, 158, 205, 235
Utilization of nutrients. See individual nutrients
concentration of nutrient and, 61-62
efficiency of, 113, 117, 124, 196
V
Valine, 112, 114, 115, 124, 125, 132, 133, 138, 230
Vanadium, 186
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, 14-15
Vegetable protein
digestion, 7, 87, 113, 114
sodium content, 160
Very low density lipoproteins, 206
Vinegar, 303
Viscosity properties
and absorption, 63
digestible carbohydrates, 57-58
fermentable carbohydrates, 63
poorly fermentable carbohydrates, 70
Vision, 91-92, 97, 99, 101
Vitamin A, 24, 194-195
absorption, transport, and storage, 195-196
biological function, 196-197
cats, 194-195, 199-200
and cellular differentiation, 196-197
deficiency, 180, 193, 197, 199
dogs, 193, 194, 197-199
ferrets, 194-195
and growth, 196
hypervitaminosis, 197-199, 200
and immune response, 196
interactions with other nutrients, 200, 201-202


===== PDF PAGE 782 =====
781
and morphogenesis, 197
requirements, 194, 197, 199-200
and vision, 196
Vitamin B1. See Thiamin
Vitamin B6
absorption, transport, and storage, 218
biological function, 218-219
cats, 220
deficiency signs, 219, 220
dogs, 219-220
exercise and, 218
hypervitaminosis, 219-220
interactions with other nutrients, 219
requirements, 219, 220
Vitamin B12. See Cobalamin
Vitamin C. See Ascorbic acid
Vitamin D, 121, 266
absorption, transport, and storage, 200-201
biological function, 201
calcium and, 148
cats, 204-205
deficiency signs, 184, 193, 201-202, 204
dogs, 193, 201-204
hypervitaminosis, 95, 203-204, 205
interaction with other nutrients, 209, 216
requirements, 202, 204-205
Vitamin E, 199, 205-206
absorption, 206
antioxidant property, 179, 206-207, 301-303, 345-346
biological function, 206-208
cats, 209-210
deficiency signs, 95, 99, 207, 208, 209
dogs, 208-209
exercise and, 302-303
fat and fatty acid intake and, 95, 99, 206, 207, 208
hypervitaminosis, 209-210
interaction with other nutrients, 206, 207, 208, 209, 234, 235
processing and storage losses, 237
requirements, 208-209
Vitamin K
absorption, transport, and storage, 210
biological function, 210-211


===== PDF PAGE 783 =====
782
cats, 212
deficiency signs, 211, 212
dogs, 211
hypervitaminosis, 211, 212
interaction with other nutrients, 209, 216
processing and storage losses, 237
requirements, 211, 212
Vitamin-like substances, 235-236
Vitamins. See also individual vitamins
basis for establishing requirements, 194
composition of feed ingredients, 338-341
deficiency diagnosis, 193
exercise and, 300, 302-303
fat-soluble, 193
functional roles, 193
nutrient requirements tables, 358, 360, 363, 365, 367, 369
premixes added to petfoods, 193
processing and storage losses, 236-237
toxicity, 193
water-soluble, 193
W
Warfarin, 211
Water
absorption, 10, 11
cat requirements, 249-250
deficiency, 247
and digestion, 8
dog requirements, 247-249, 293-296
for environmental stress, 248-249
exercise and, 248-249, 293-296
for growth, 248
at high ambient temperatures, 292-293
imbalances, 93, 160
mineral content, 157
physiological function, 246
potassium intake and, 166
recommendations, 25-26, 249-250
regulation of intake by dogs and cats, 22-23, 246-247
at rest, 293-296
sodium intake and, 162
toxicity, 250


===== PDF PAGE 784 =====
783
and urinary tract health, 249
for work, 248-249
Water balance
food content and, 22-23
Water-binding capacity
fermentable carbohydrates, 63
poorly fermentable carbohydrates, 70
Weight gain or loss. See also Growth; Obese/overweight animals
fiber and, 66
macronutrient proportions and, 60
nitrogen requirement and, 117, 118
West Highland white terriers, 171
Wheat bran, 51, 69-72. See also Carbohydrates, poorly fermentable
Wildlife Conservation Society, 42
Wilson’s disease, 172
Wolves, 22, 34-35, 121, 277
Workshop on the Essentiality of and Recommended Dietary Intakes (RDIs) of
Omega-6 and Omega-3 Fatty Acids, 100
World Health Organization, 101
Wound healing, 93, 95, 119
X
Xylitol, 49, 51
Xylose, 52
Z
Zinc
absorption and bioavailability, 174
adverse effects of excess consumption, 175, 176
cats, 174, 176-177
deficiency, 24, 174-175, 176
dogs, 98, 174-176
function, 98, 173
interactions with other nutrients, 172, 173, 174, 175, 185, 236
requirements and allowances, 175, 176-177
safe upper limit, 176, 177
sources, 173


===== PDF PAGE 785 =====
784
TABLE 1-1 Gastrointestinal Hormone Characteristics of Dogs and Cats
Hormone CellTypeLocation ofAction Primary ActionStimulus forSecretion Data Collected with Dogsand Cats Ref
Bombesin/bombesin-like peptides(gastrin-releasingpeptide [GRP], GRP-10,neuromedin[NMB])
Gastric fundus,antrum,duodenum,jejunum, andileum
Stimulates:Gastric acidsecretion bymodulating gastrinrelease (activates Gcellsvia a Ca++-dependentmechanism)Cholecystokinin(CCK) release andpancreaticenzymesecretionGallbladderemptying, dueeither to bombesinitself or to CCK
Inhibits:gastricemptying
Dog: bombesin stimulatedneurotensin dogsecretion
Bar1
Cat: bombesin increasedloweresophagealsphincter (LES)pressure, mediatedby substance P
Reya
Cat: bombesindecreasedfoodintake
Bad1
Cat: bombesin-likepeptides contractterminal ileum viaGRP receptors
Kora
Cat: GRP-10 and NMBevoked contractionsof esophagus,fundus, andduodenum
Mila
Gastrin TypeG Gastricantrum,duodenum
Stimulates:Secretion of gastricacid, pepsinogen,and glucagonProliferationof gutmucosaPancreatic HCO3production andpancreatic flow(weak)Pancreaticenzymesecretion (strong)LES pressure
Inhibits: gastricemptying
Peptides and aminoacids (AAs) instomach; distentionof stomach
Dog and cat: antral,duodenal, andjejunal mucosacontained sameconcentrationsandmolecular forms ofgastrin in dog andcat
RehUW1
Dog: gastrin stimulatedLES pressureIwa1
Dog: determined thatgastrin plays a rolein the stimulation ofpancreaticsecretionafter a meal
Johna
Dog: gastrin is of majorimportance in gastricacid stimulationcausedby distentionof the stomach bynutrients
Kov1
Cat: gastrin stimulatesgastric acid secretionFerna1
Cat: along with CCK,gastrin plays a rolein postprandialpancreatic secretion
Kona
Cholecystokinin —formerly known ascholecystokinin-pancreozymin(CCK-PZ)
TypeI Duodenum,jejunum Stimulates:Pancreatic enzymesecretionGallbladdercontraction
Inhibits:
Peptides, AAs, andfatty acids (FAs) induodenum
Dog: inhibition of gastricacid secretion byCCK is mediated, inpart, by somatostatin
Kona


===== PDF PAGE 786 =====
785
Hormone CellTypeLocation ofAction Primary ActionStimulus forSecretion Data Collected with Dogsand Cats RefGastricemptyingand secretion(possibly mediatedby nitric oxide)Relaxes sphincterofOddi
Dog: canine parietal cellCCKB receptor has asingle AAsubstitution atposition349 of thehumanCCKB/gastrinreceptor
Beina
Dog: CCK induced bothexcitatory (due toacetylcholine)andinhibitory (due tonitric oxide) actionsin intestine andexcitatory actionofantrum
Verg1
Dog: CCK was a potentand specificpancreaticvasodilator, playingan importantrole inthe regulation of theintestinal phase ofpancreaticcirculation
Naka
Cat: dietsthat causetaurine depletionhave lower proteindigestibilities andcause greaterCCKsecretion than dietsthat maintain bodytaurine status
Bac1
Cat: although catsarestrict carnivores,they secrete CCK inresponse to intactproteins and freeAAs similartohumans
Bac1
Cat: intact proteins resultin greater CCKsecretion than freeAAs
Bac1
Secretin TypeS Duodenum,jejunum Stimulates:Pancreatic HCO3synthesis andsecretionRelease of bile
Inhibits:Gastric motility andsecretionLES pressureNet waterabsorption ingallbladder
Acidic chyme andFAs in duodenumand jejunum
Dog: secretin increasedsomatostatin release;secretin decreasedgastric acidproductionbymodulatinghistamine release
GerP1
Cat: secretin increasedbiliary andpancreatic secretions
Jans1


===== PDF PAGE 787 =====
786
Hormone CellTypeLocation ofAction Primary ActionStimulus forSecretion Data Collected with Dogsand Cats RefGastric inhibitorypeptide (GIP)TypeK Duodenum,jejunum, andileum (mainlyjejunum)
Stimulates: Insulinsecretion and synthesis—main “incretin”factor
Inhibits:Gastric acidsecretionGastric and smallintestinal motility
Glucose, AAs, andFAs in smallintestine, with FAsbeing the mostpotent;somatostatinregulatesrelease
Dog: GIP stimulatedsecretion fromjejunum and ileumwith little change toelectrolyteconcentrations
BarG1
Dog: GIP suppressed thestimulatory effectsof motilin on theduodenum,but hadno effects on spikepotentials producedby CCK-octapeptide
Casa
Dog: jejunumhas 69% ofintestinal K cellsDama
Cat: decreases LESpressure Sina1
Glucagon-likepeptide 1 (GLP-1)—part ofenteroglucagonmeasured in earlyexperiments
TypeL Duodenum,jejunum, andileum (mainlyjejunum)
Stimulates:Insulin secretion—“incretin” factorPart of “ileal brake”
Inhibits:Gastric acidsecretion andmotilityPancreatic enzymesecretionAppetite andfoodintake
FAs in duodenum;release mediated, inpart, by CCK; GIPstimulates release;somatostatinregulatesrelease
Dog: CCK is not anincretin in the dog,but GLP-1 is themajor incretinduringeuglycemia;bothGIP and GLP-1 maybe in-cretins duringhyperglycemia
vane
Dog: GLP-1 mayparticipatein “ilealbrake”
Wen1
Dog: increase in GLP-1mediated, in part, byCCK
Fun1
Dog: jejunum has51% ofintestinal L cells;30% found adjacentto K cells suggestingparacrineinteractionbetweenthe cells
Dama
Glucagon-likepeptide 2 (GLP-2)—part ofenteroglucagonmeasured in earlyexperiments
TypeL Small intestineand colonStimulates:Proliferation of gutmucosaMay be part of“ileal brake”
Inhibits:Gastric secretionand motilityFood intake
Ingestion of food,particularlycarbohydrate and fat;SCFAs stimulaterelease;somatostatinregulates release;release may bemediated by GIP andGRP release
Vasoactive intestinalpolypeptide (VIP)TypeD1,nervecellsandfibers
Gastric, smallintestine, andcolonicmucosa
Stimulates:Blood flow throughgutHCO3, electrolyte,and water secretionfrompancreas
Inhibits:Secretion of gastricacid, pepsin, andintrinsic factorLES pressure
Acetylcholinestimulates releaseDog: VIP inhibitedgallbladdercontractionstimulated byneurotensin andCCK
Mila


===== PDF PAGE 788 =====
787
Hormone CellTypeLocation ofAction Primary ActionStimulus forSecretion Data Collected with Dogsand Cats RefGastric motorfunctionNet waterabsorption ingallbladderRelaxanteffect ofVIP amplified bynitric oxide
Dog:acetylcholine evokedrelease of VIP fromVIP-containingneurons in dogileum
Kim1
Cat:VIP relaxedgallbladder andinduced a net fluidsecretion into lumen
Jans1
Cat: VIPantagonizedresponses to excitatoryneuropeptides(bombesin,substance P, andCCK) ingastricsmoothmuscle
MerC1
Cat: VIP inhibited basalLES tone ParkR1
Motilin TypeEC2
Duodenum,jejunum Stimulates:Motor activity ofgut through releaseof acetylcholine,opiates,andserotoninLES pressureRegulation ofmigrating motorcomplex (MMC)activity
Dog: canine motilin hasAA differences in 5positions comparedwith porcine motilin
Poit1
Dog: motilin decreasedVIP output Man1
Dog: motilin stimulatesrelease of opiateswhich,in turn, inhibitVIP release
Foxe
Dog: acetylcholine is amajor regulator ofmotilin release
Poita
Dog: exogenous motilinstimulated insulinrelease
Suz1
Dog: motilin receptorsmay existin dogcolon as well assmall intestine
Chi2
Cat: sequence homologybetween cat andporcine/humanmotilin was 81.8%
Depa
Cat: gastric corpus andantrum, duodenum,jejunum, and ileumhavemotilinreceptors
Depa
SomatostatinTypeD,nervecellsandfibers
Stomach, smallintestine, andpancreas
Inhibits: secretion ofother enteroendocrinepeptides
Fat and proteinDog: somatostatininhibited gallbladdercontractionstimulated byneurotensin andCCK
Mila


===== PDF PAGE 789 =====
788
Hormone CellTypeLocation ofAction Primary ActionStimulus forSecretion Data Collected with Dogsand Cats RefDog: somatostatininhibited gastrin andhistamine secretionin antrum
Zak1
Dog:somatostatininhibited pancreaticpolypeptide andpeptide YY release
Gom1
Cat: somatostatinselectivelyinhibitedbombesin-induced,but not substance P-induced, LEScontraction
ParkR1
Pancreaticpolypeptide (PP)TypePP PancreasInhibits: pancreaticprotein and HCO3secretion
Protein; bombesin,CCK, andneurotensin stimulatesecretion
Dog: CCK stimulated PPrelease andenhanced PPreleased originatingfrom other stimuli
Jans1
Substance PTypeEC,nervecellsandfibers
Widelydistributedthroughout gutmucosa andnerves
Stimulates:Neuronal activityPepsinogen releaseLES contractionIleocecal sphinctercontractionMay causereleaseof serotoninRegulation ofpancreatic enzymesecretionRegulationofintestinalperistalsis
Hyperosmolarity andacid Dog: canine chief cellspossess substance Preceptors andstimulatepepsinogen release
Vig1
Cat: substance P evenlydistributed alonggut, unlike humans,rats, and pigsthathave distinctregional differences
Hol1
Cat: vagal stimulationreleased substance Pfromduodenum andjejunum, but notdistal ileum;substance P notdetected in felineECcells
Grøa
Cat: substance P andserotonin releasedindependent of oneanothersuggestingdifferentintestinal sources;authors suggestsubstance P releasedfrom neuronsratherthan EC cells
Grøa
NeurotensinTypeN Centralnervoussystem, smallintestine, andlarge intestine(predominantlyinthe distalileum)
Stimulates:Vasodilation andblood flowProliferation of gutmucosaGallbladderpressureand contractionPancreatic secretionConjugated bileacid reabsorptionindistal smallintestine
Many foodcomponents,particularly FAs
Dog: in contrast to earlierfindings, neurotensinstimulated gastricacid secretioninresponse to proteinin the stomach
Eysa


===== PDF PAGE 790 =====
789
Hormone CellTypeLocation ofAction Primary ActionStimulus forSecretion Data Collected with Dogsand Cats RefInhibits:Gastric secretionand emptyingLES pressureMay have aninhibitory orexcitatory action ongut motilitydepending ondose,organ, andspecies
Cat: neurotensin produceda contractileresponseat distalileum, ileocecalsphincter, andproximal colon, butalso hadinhibitoryeffects onthese areas
RotO1
Serotonin (5-hydroxy-tryptamine;5-HT)
TypeECandnervecells
Small andlarge intestineStimulates:Neuronal activityGut motilityVasodilation
Acidic pH,hypertonic solutions,neural stimulation(vagus nerve)
Dog: contractility frommotilin mediatedthrough serotonin
Kel1
Cat: serotonin hadexcitatoryandinhibitory effects onileum and ileocecalsphincter, dependingon doseadministered
OuyC1
Cat: vagal nervestimulationincreased serotoninrelease in duodenumand jejunum,but notin distal ileum
Grøa
EnkephalinsTypeL Stomach,duodenum, andgall bladder
Inhibits:Electrical activityof neuronal cellbodyAcid-stimulatedpancreaticsecretionand secretin release(appears to bemediated bysomatostatin)
Dog: methionineenkephalin (MEK)inhibited pancreaticexocrine secretion
Che1
Dog: MEK reduced VIPoutput Man1
Peptide YY (PYY)Ileum, colonStimulates:Proliferation of gutmucosaSmall intestinalabsorptionPart of“ileal brake”
Inhibits:Gastric emptyingand fasting motilityof stomachGastric,biliary, andpancreaticsecretions
Presence of fat induodenum; gastricacid secretion;release mediated byCCK
Dog: decrease inpancreatic secretionsby PYY is mediated,in part, by adecreasedCCKrelease
Llu1
Dog: PYY participates inthe ileal brakeWen1
Dog: PYY release andmRNAexpressionup-regulated by gastricacid secretion, butdown-regulated bycirculating gastrin
Gom1
Dog: fat-induced ilealbrake depends onPYY
Lin 1


===== PDF PAGE 791 =====
790
Hormone CellTypeLocation ofAction Primary ActionStimulus forSecretion Data Collected with Dogsand Cats RefDog: PYY was increasedby presence offat induodenum andincreased by CCKAreceptor activation
Fun1
Dog: PYY antagonistdidnot alter gastricacid secretion orgastric emptying,which calls intoquestion itsrole inthese functions
Zha1


===== PDF PAGE 792 =====
791
TABLE 3-3 Basal Metabolic Rate in Dogs
Animals Gendera BW (kg) n
Daily BMR (kcal
ME·kg BW–0.75)
Source
Mean ± 2
SD Range
Dogs M 5-26 8 89 ± 24 78-114 Rubnerb
Dogs MF 10-15 7 71 ± 9 63-78 Kundeb
Dogs MF 12-17 4 85 ± 27 76-105 Boothby and
Sandifordb
Dogs F 9-16 11 71 ± 12 60-82 Lusk and
Duboisb
Dogs M 9-27 6 67 ± 14 59-77 Steinhausb
Dogs MF 10-18 13 85 ± 22 72-106 Kitchen, 1924
Bull
terriers
MF 20-27 11 81 ± 4 78-83 DeBeer and
Hjoort, 1938
Dogs M 3-28 31 70 ± 22 48-88 Galvao, 1947
Dogs F 8-10 3 70 ± 20 58-77 Hammel et al.,
1958
MongrelsNA 18 ± 3 5 54 ± 9 Leblanc and
Diamond, 1986
NOTE: SD = standard deviation.
aM = male, F = female, NA = not available.
bCited in Kunde and Steinhaus (1926).


===== PDF PAGE 793 =====
792
TABLE 3-4 Reported Maintenance Energy Requirements of Dogs in Relation to
Breed, Age, Housing, and Activity
Breed, Age (years), Housing,
Activity
ME (kcal ME·kg BW–
0.75)
ReferenceMean ± 2SDa n
Large-sized pet dogs 94 ± 50 Patil and Bisby, 2001
Pet dogs 95 ± 40 28 Wichert et al., 1999
Inactive pet Border collies97 ± 82 9 Burger, 1994
Old laboratory Labradors (9)103 ± 22 6 Finke, 1991
Old laboratory Labradors (>7)104 ± 32 14 Rainbird and Kienzle,
1990
Pet dogs 105 (range 60-
200)
48 Connor et al., 2000
Middle-aged laboratory
Newfoundlands (3-7)
106 ± 26 26 Rainbird and Kienzle,
1990
Old laboratory dogs of various
breeds (>8)
107 ± 14 11 Taylor et al., 1995
Old laboratory beagles (>10)110 ± 26 5 Finke, 1994
Middle-aged laboratory beagles
(3-10)
114 ± 16 8 Finke, 1994
Middle-aged laboratory beagles
(4)
117 ± 18 6 Finke, 1991
Middle-aged laboratory dogs (3-
7)
124 ± 42 86 Rainbird and Kienzle,
1990
Moderately active pet Border
collies
124 ± 88 28 Burger, 1994
Young laboratory dogs of
various breeds (<6)
129 ± 10 12 Taylor et al., 1995
Young to middle-aged
laboratory huskies (1-7)
132 ± 20 5 Finke, 1991
Laboratory beagles 132 ± 40 Patil and Bisby, 2001
Medium-sized pet dogs living in
multiple dog households
133 ± 52 Patil and Bisby, 2001
Laboratory Labradors 138 ± 32 Patil and Bisby, 2001
Young laboratory dogs (1-2)139 ± 42 69 Rainbird and Kienzle,
1990
Young laboratory beagles (1-2)144 ± 28 6 Finke, 1994
Highly active pet Border collies175 ± 170 10 Burger, 1994


===== PDF PAGE 794 =====
793
Breed, Age (years), Housing,
Activity
ME (kcal ME·kg BW–
0.75)
ReferenceMean ± 2SDa n
Laboratory terriers 183 ± 48 Patil and Bisby, 2001
Great Danes, outdoor kennels,
summer
Around 200 7 Zentek and Meyer,
1992
Great Danes, outdoor kennels,
winter
Around 250 7 Zentek and Meyer,
1992
a95 percent of the population are within this range.


===== PDF PAGE 795 =====
794
TABLE 3-5 Recommendations for Growth of Large- and Giant-Breed Dogs
Age
(months)
Medium Breeds
(mature weight 20 kg)
Large Breeds
(mature weight 35 kg)
Giant Breeds
(mature weight 60 kg)
BW (kg)
% mature
BW BW (kg)
% mature
BW BW (kg)
% mature
BW
1 1.8 9 2.5 7 3.6 6
2 4.4 22 7.0 20 8.4 14
3 7.4 37 12.3 35 15.6 26
4 10.4 52 16.8 48 22.8 38
6 14.0 70 22.8 65 36.0 60
12 19.0 95 30.8 88 48.0 80


===== PDF PAGE 796 =====
795
TABLE 3-6 Reported Daily Maintenance Energy Requirements of Cats
Animal Type n Age (yr) BW (kg)
ME
(kcal·kg
BW–1)
Mean ±
2SDa Reference
Results from
indirect
calorimetry,
extrapolation
from metabolic
rate
Laboratory, intact
females,
neutered males,
relatively low-
protein diet
14 3-5 3.95 31 ± 6 Radicke,
1995
Laboratory, most
neutered
24 3-15 4.4 37 Stiefel,
1999
Laboratory, intact
females, neutered
males
14 3-5 4.16 37 ± 11 Radicke,
1995
Laboratory, intact
females, neutered
males
14 3-5 3.92 38 ± 13 Radicke,
1995
Laboratory, intact
females, neutered
males
14 3-5 3.93 39 ± 3 Radicke,
1995
Laboratory, intact
males and females
4 5-6 5.83 39 ± 5 Hauschild,
1993
Laboratory, intact
females, neutered
males
14 3-5 3.58 39 ± 14 Radicke,
1995
Laboratory,
neutered males
6 0.9 5.5 42 Laeuger,
2001
Laboratory 6 2-8 4.1 44 ± 11 Tennant,
1998
Laboratory, intact
males and females
6 1.8-5 3.88 48 ± 2 Hauschild,
1993


===== PDF PAGE 797 =====
796
Animal Type n Age (yr) BW (kg)
ME
(kcal·kg
BW–1)
Mean ±
2SDa Reference
Laboratory, intact
males
6 0.9 4.8 49 Laeuger,
2001
Laboratory, intact
males and females
27 1-2 3.77 50 ± 4 Hauschild,
1993
Laboratory, intact
males and females
9 4.5-13 3.27 51 ± 2 Hauschild,
1993
Laboratory, intact
males and females
4 3-6 3.95 51 ± 4 Hauschild,
1993
Laboratory, intact
males
6 0.8 5.1 54 Laeuger,
2001
Laboratory, intact
males
6 0.8 5.2 54 Laeuger,
2001
Laboratory, intact
males and females
6 1-3 3.10 54 ± 8 Hauschild,
1993
Laboratory, intact
females and males
13 2.5-4.9 55 ± 11 Aub et al.,
1922
Laboratory, intact
males and females
5 1.2-7 3.18 55 ± 3 Hauschild,
1993
Laboratory, intact
females and males
5 2.8-4.2 56 ± 13 Carpenter,
1944
Laboratory, intact
males and females
6 0.8-4 3.25 61 ± 4 Hauschild,
1993
Laboratory 30 1.8-3.8 70 Benedict,
1938
Laboratory, intact
females and males
14 83 ± 13 Caldwell,
1931
Results from
feeding
experiments, weight
constancy, or
extrapolation to
weight constancyb
Laboratory 48 1-14 22-97 Taylor et
al., 1995


===== PDF PAGE 798 =====
797
Animal Type n Age (yr) BW (kg)
ME
(kcal·kg
BW–1)
Mean ±
2SDa Reference
Laboratory 7 6-6.5 37 Earle and
Smith,
1991
Laboratory, cage
rest, neutered
females
10 3.1 40 Flynn et
al., 1996
Laboratory 26 5.5-6 42 Earle and
Smith,
1991
Laboratory 14 12-14 5.1 43 ± 10 Laflamme
and
Ballam,
2001
Laboratory 18 10-12 5.3 43 ± 14 Laflamme
and
Ballam,
2001
Laboratory 53 5-5.5 46 Earle and
Smith,
1991
Laboratory 48 4.5-5 48 Earle and
Smith,
1991
Laboratory 12 8-10 5.0 48 ± 20 Laflamme
and
Ballam,
2001
Laboratory 11 >14 3.8 51 ± 14 Laflamme
and
Ballam,
2001
Laboratory 14 6-8 5.3 52 ± 18 Laflamme
and
Ballam,
2001


===== PDF PAGE 799 =====
798
Animal Type n Age (yr) BW (kg)
ME
(kcal·kg
BW–1)
Mean ±
2SDa Reference
Laboratory,
neutered males
63 1-14 5.2 55 ± 24 Edtstadtler-
Pietsch,
2003
Laboratory,
neutered females
33 1-13 4.1 56 ± 32 Edtstadtler-
Pietsch,
2003
Laboratory 24 3.5-4 59 Earle and
Smith,
1991
Laboratory 5-8 1 60 Miller and
Allison,
1958
Laboratory, cage
rest, intact females
5 2.9 60 Flynn et
al., 1996
Laboratory, caged 32 2-4 60-70 Skultety,
1969
Laboratory 36 4-6 3.9 61 ± 22 Laflamme
and
Ballam,
2001
Laboratory 60 Krehl et
al., 1955
Pet 36 4 5.1 62 ± 30 Parkman et
al., 2000
Laboratory, intact
females
30 1-11 3.9 65 ± 32 Edtstadtler-
Pietsch,
2003
Laboratory, intact
females, neutered
males
6 4 66 ± 26 Kendall et
al., 1983
Laboratory 22 2.5-3 66 Earle and
Smith,
1991


===== PDF PAGE 800 =====
799
Animal Type n Age (yr) BW (kg)
ME
(kcal·kg
BW–1)
Mean ±
2SDa Reference
Laboratory 36 3-3.5 67 Earle and
Smith,
1991
Laboratory, intact
males
4 3-10 67 ± 28 Edtstadtler-
Pietsch,
2003
Laboratory 8 2-4 3.6 69 ± 2 Laflamme
and
Ballam,
2001
Laboratory,
opportunity to
exercise in runs
80-90 Miller and
Allison,
1958
Laboratory, intact
males
7 1 100 ± 52 Edtstadtler-
Pietsch,
2003
Doubly labeled
water
Laboratory,
neutered males
9 3.7 50 Nguyen et
al., 2000
Laboratory,
neutered females
6 53 Nguyen et
al., 2000
Laboratory,
neutered males
6 1.3 55 Nguyen et
al., 2000
Laboratory 3 7 ± 4 4.4 55 ± 2 Ballevre et
al., 1994
Laboratory 14 3.5-4.2 55 Burger et
al., 1984
Laboratory, intact
females
6 57 Nguyen et
al., 2000
Laboratory, intact
males, lean
6 2-3 59 Nguyen et
al., 2000
Laboratory, intact
females
12 2-3 57 ± 4 Martin et
al., 2001


===== PDF PAGE 801 =====
800
Animal Type n Age (yr) BW (kg)
ME
(kcal·kg
BW–1)
Mean ±
2SDa Reference
Laboratory,
neutered females,
overweightc
9 2-3 51 ± 4 Martin et
al., 2001
Laboratory, intact
males
11 2-3 57 ± 4 Martin et
al., 2001
Laboratory,
neutered males,
overweightc
10 2-3 50 ± 4 Martin et
al., 2001
NOTES: Includes lean as well as overweight cats. SD = standard deviation.
a95% of the population is within this range. Figures may be taken from graphs, SD may be
estimated from variation of energy requirements per cat per day.
bME of food predicted or determined by digestion trials and nitrogen correction.
cNeutered females were about 300 g heavier than intact females, and neutered males were 400
g heavier than intact males.


===== PDF PAGE 802 =====
801
TABLE 4-1 Summary of Physicochemical, Physiological, and Health-Related
Effects of Absorbable, Digestible, Fermentable, and Nonfermentable Carbohydrates
in Dog and Cat Nutrition
Item
Carbohydrate Class
AbsorbableDigestibleFermentableNonfermentable
Physicochemical effects
   Osmotic ✓ ✓ ✓ NI
   Water binding capacityNI NI ✓ ✓
   Viscosity NI ✓ ✓ ✓
   Bulking NI NI ✓ ✓
Physiological effects
   Food intake NI ✓ ✓ ✓
   Transit time NI NI ✓ ✓
   Fecal excretion ✓ NI ✓ ✓
   Nutrient availabilityNI ✓ ✓ ✓
   Growth performanceNI ✓ NI ✓
   Reproductive
performance ✓ ✓ ✓ NI
   Weight control NI ✓ ✓ ✓
   Geriatric nutrition NI NI NI NI
Health-related effects
   Gastrointestinal healthNI ✓ ✓ NI
   Glycemic control ✓ ✓ ✓ NI
   Immune function NI NI ✓ NI
Abbreviations used: ✓  = published information available; NI = no information available.


===== PDF PAGE 803 =====
802
TABLE 4-3 Influence of Diet Type on Amylase Activity (U·g–1 wet weight) in
Chyme of Adult Dogs
Intestinal Segment
Treatment
MM + Su
or MM +
La (n = 4)
SBM +
TaS (n = 4)
SBM or
SBM + Fat
(n = 4)
Raw Meat
or Raw
Lungs (n =
4)
Dry Dog
Food (n =
4)
Duodenum 15.8 ± 13.138.1 ± 31.393.8 ± 75.917.3 ± 12.1146.8 ± 4.2
Jejunum 52.6 ± 38.470.9 ± 27.1178.8 ±
70.0
96.0 ± 36.5671.9 ± 2.8
Ileum 97.0 ± 26.439.7 ± 13.343.1 ± 20.2340.4 ±
278.4
613.5 ±
50.4
Cranial large bowel70.9 ± 34.428.6 ± 27.831.0 ± 10.0152.4 ±
14.4
514.0 ±
60.8
Caudal large bowel46.6 ± 35.330.6 ± 25.031.3 ± 20.9129.3 ±
195.5
332.0 ±
23.3
NOTE: MM + Su = meat meal with sucrose; MM + La = meat meal with lactose; SBM + TaS
= soybean meal with tapioca starch; SBM + Fat = soybean meal with fat.
Source: Kienzle, 1988.


===== PDF PAGE 804 =====
803
TABLE 4-4 Average Activity of Disaccharidases (U·g–1 protein) in Small Intestinal
Mucosa of Cats in Relation to Age
Age
(weeks)Maltase Isomaltase Sucrase Lactase n
<1 66 ± 77 30 ± 20 15 ± 8 96 ± 66a 10
3-5 108 ± 45 28 ± 17 26 ± 15 69 ± 63a 13
6-12 105 ± 53 23 ± 15 12 ± 4 13 ± 9b 9
Adult 102 ± 58 35 ± 28 17 ± 23 7 ± 8b 78c
a,bDifferent superscripts within a column indicate statistical differences (P < 0.05).
c26 cats, three different parts of the small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, ileum), all diets.
SOURCE: Kienzle 1993d.


===== PDF PAGE 805 =====
804
TABLE 4-6 Characteristics of Selected Fibers and Their Effects on Intestinal Transit
Time and Fecal Characteristics of Dogs and/or Catsa
Fiber Type
Fiber Propertiesb Animal Effects
FermentabilityViscosity
Wet Fecal
Volume
Fecal
Moisture
Transit
Time
Psyllium Y Y NI NI ↑
Guar gum Y Y NI ↑ ↑
Pectin Y Y NI ↑ ↓
Purified celluloseN N ↑ ↑ ↔
Beet pulp Y N ↑ ↑ ↓
Wheat bran N N ↑ ↑ ↔
aAbbreviations used: Y = yes; N = no; ↑ = increase; ↓ = decrease; ↔ = no effect; NI = no
information available.
bThe dietary fiber characteristics of fermentability and viscosity were chosen based on the
recommendations of the Institute of Medicine (2001) as meaningful alternative labels for the
terms soluble and insoluble fiber.


===== PDF PAGE 806 =====
805
TABLE 4-7 Characteristics of Selected Fibers and Their Effects on Nutrient
Digestibility by Dogs and/or Catsa
Fiber Type
Fiber Propertiesb
Animal Effects
Ileal Nutrient
Digestibility
Total Tract Nutrient
Digestibility
FermentabilityViscosityDM CPc DM CPc
Pectin Y Y ↔ ↔ ↑ ↓
CelluloseN N ↔ ↔ ↓ ↑ ↔
GOSd Y N ↓ ↔ ↓ ↓
Beet pulpY N NI NI ↓ ↓ ↔
FOSe Y N ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔
XOSf Y N ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔
MOSg Y N ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔
aAbbreviations used: Y = yes; N = no; ↑ = increase; ↓ = decrease; ↔ = no effect; NI = no
information available.
bThe dietary fiber characteristics of fermentability and viscosity were chosen based on the
recommendations of the Institute of Medicine (2001) as meaningful alternative labels for the
terms soluble and insoluble fiber.
cCrude protein.
dGlucooligosaccharides.
eFructooligosaccharides.
fXylooligosaccharides.
gMannanoligosaccharides.


===== PDF PAGE 807 =====
806
TABLE 4-8 Characteristics of Selected Carbohydrates and Their Effects on
Gastrointestinal Health Characteristics of Dogs and/or Catsa
Fiber Type
Fiber Propertiesb Animal Effects
FermentabilityViscosity Structurec Functiond Prebiotic
Cellulose N N ↓ ↔ ↔ N
Beet pulp Y N ↑ NI NI
Pectin and gum
arabic
Y Y ↑ NI NI
Beet pulp and
FOSe
Y N ↑ ↑ NI
FOSe Y N ↑ ↑ Y
aAbbreviations used: Y = yes; N = no; ↑ = increase; ↓ = decrease; ↔ = no effect; NI = no
information available.
bThe dietary fiber characteristics of fermentability and viscosity were chosen based on the
recommendations of the Institute of Medicine (2001) as meaningful alternative labels for the
terms soluble and insoluble fiber.
cStructure denotes changes in intestinal muscosa thickness, villus height, or crypt depth.
dFunction denotes changes in intestinal nutrient transporters or nutrient absorption.
eFructooligosaccharides.


===== PDF PAGE 808 =====
807
TABLE 4-9 Safe Upper Limits of Selected Carbohydrates for Adult Dog and Cat
Maintenance Diets (g·kg diet–1, DM basis)
Item Dogs Cats Reference(s)
Glucose ND 50-
150
Drochner and Muller-Schlosser,
1980; Meyer and Kienzle, 1991
Sucrose 350 50-
150
Drochner and Muller-Schlosser,
1980; Meyer and Kienzle, 1991
Lactose 100 50 Drochner and Muller-Schlosser,
1980; Meyer and Kienzle, 1991
Cooked corn starch ND 240 Meyer and Kienzle, 1991
Cooked corn flour 436a ND Murray et al., 1999
Cooked potato flour 504a ND Murray et al., 1999
Cooked rice flour 441a ND Murray et al., 1999
Cooked wheat flour 491a ND Murray et al., 1999
Raffinose/stachyose 50 50 Meyer and Kienzle, 1991
Fructooligosaccharides40b 7.5a Diez et al., 1997a; Sparkes et al.,
1998b; Strickling et al., 2000
Inulin 70a ND Diez et al., 1998
Mannanoligosaccharides5.9a ND Strickling et al., 2000; Zentek et al.,
2002
Xylooligosaccharides 5a ND Strickling et al., 2000
Transgalactooligosaccharides5.9 ND Zentek et al., 2002; Diez et al.,
1997a; Kienzle et al., 1991; Sunvold
et al., 1995b
Cellulose 94a 100 Sunvold et al., 1995c; Zentek, 1996
Guar gum 34 ND Diez et al., 1997a; Diez et al.,
1997b; Zentek, 1996
Pectin 34 ND Diez et al., 1997a; Zentek, 1996
Beet pulp 75 ND Fahey et al., 1990b, 1992
Wheat bran 128 100 Fahey et al., 1990a; Kienzle et al.,
1991
Peanut hulls 67a ND Fahey et al., 1990a
Tomato pomace 87a ND Fahey et al., 1990a
Oat fiber 75a ND Fahey et al., 1992
Fiber blendc 83a 83 Sunvold et al., 1995b,c
NOTE: ND = no experimental data available.


===== PDF PAGE 809 =====
808
aHigher levels not experimentally tested.
bWhen mixed with sugar beet fiber in a 4:1 ratio.
cMixture of Solka Floc and gum arabic in a 3:1 ratio.


===== PDF PAGE 810 =====
809
TABLE 5-1 List of Abbreviations of Selected Fatty Acids and Fatty Acid
Terminology
Fatty Acid
AbbreviationTrivial Name
Omega
Notation
Fatty Acid
Series
PUFA Polyunsaturated fatty acid— General
LCPUFA Long-chain polyunsaturated
fatty acid
— General
LA Linoleic acid 18:2n-6 n-6
AA Arachidonic acid 20:4n-6 n-6
ALA α-Linolenic acid 18:3n-3 n-3
EPA Eicosapentaenoic acid 20:5n-3 n-3
DPA Docosapentaenoic acid 22:5n-3 n-3
DHA Docosahexaenoic acid 22:6n-3 n-3


===== PDF PAGE 811 =====
810
TABLE 6-1 Plasma Amino Acid Concentrations (nmol·mL–1) of Kittens
Amino Acid –AAa MRb AIc SULd
Arginine 28 75 100 400
Histidine 9 55 100 >200
Isoleucine 8 30 75 >3,000
Leucine 25 75 125 >1,600
Lysine 45 60 110 >600
Methionine 11 30 (70)e 45 400
Phenylalanine 11 25 (75)f 65 >900
Tyrosine 10 35 50 310
Threonine 60 80 150 >1,400
Tryptophan 9 25 50 130
Valine 33 66 130 >6,000
Glutamate 50-100 — 50-100 200
aAmino acid concentration from kittens fed, in turn, diets lacking each amino acid.
bAmino acid concentration from kittens fed, in turn, diets containing each amino acid at the
minimum requirement.
cAmino acid concentration from kittens fed, in turn, diets containing each amino acid at 150%
or more of the requirement (i.e., adequate intake).
dAmino acid concentration from kittens fed, in turn, diets containing each amino acid at great
excess, at or below the SUL.
e70, without any cystine in the diet.
f75, without any tyrosine in the diet.
SOURCE: Summarized from Zicker and Rogers (1990) and Taylor et al. (1996, 1998).


===== PDF PAGE 812 =====
811
TABLE 6-2A Plasma Amino Acid Concentrations (nmol·mL–1) of Puppies
Amino Acid –AAa MRb AIc SULd
Arginine 25 72 135 —
Leucine 18 100 150 —
Lysine 30 85 190 —
Phenylalanine30e 85e 60f —
Tyrosine 4e,g 12g 50f —
aAmino acid concentration from puppies fed, in turn, diets lacking each amino acid.
bAmino acid concentration from puppies fed, in turn, diets containing each amino acid at the
minimum requirement.
cAmino acid concentration from puppies fed, in turn, diets containing each amino acid at
150% or more of the requirement (i.e., adequate intake).
dAmino acid concentration from puppies fed, in turn, diets containing each amino acid at great
excess, at or below the SUL.
eConcentration of phenylalanine when tyrosine is not present in the diet.
fConcentration of phenylalanine and tyrosine when both are present in the diet.
gConcentration of tyrosine when it is not present in the diet.
SOURCE: Summarized from the work of Strombeck and Rogers (1978); Czarnecki and Baker
(1984); Milner et al. (1984); Czarnecki et al. (1985); Hirakawa et al. (1986); Delaney et al.
(2001).


===== PDF PAGE 813 =====
812
TABLE 7-1 Clinical Signs of Phosphorus Deficiency in Dogs in Relation to
Physiological Status and Dietary Phosphorus Concentration
Physiological
Status
Dietary P
(g·kg–1 DM) Clinical Signs Reference
German shepherd
puppies
2.3 Reduction and
cessation of weight
gain, poor appetite,
emaciation, and
bowing and
swelling of the
forelimbs and carpi
Jenkins and Phillips
(1960a)
Puppies 3.3 Reduced growthJenkins and Phillips
(1960b)


===== PDF PAGE 814 =====
813
TABLE 8-2 Estimated Minimal Requirement of Vitamin E Needed to Compensate
for the Elevated Vitamin Demand Caused by Some Common Unsaturated Fatty
Acids
Fatty Acid Notation
Double
Bonds
Vitamin E
requirement (mg
RRR-α-
tocopherol·g–1
fatty acid)
Oleic C18:1n-9 1 0.09
Linoleic C18:2n-6 2 0.60
γ-Linolenic C18:3n-6 3 0.90
α-Linolenic C18:3n-3 3 0.90
Dihomo-γ-linolenic C20:3n-6 3 0.90
Arachidonic C20:4n-6 4 1.20
Eicosapentaenoic C20:5n-3 5 1.50
Docosahexaenoic C22:6n-3 6 1.80
SOURCE: Muggli, 1994.


===== PDF PAGE 815 =====
814
TABLE 8-3 Recovery of Vitamins and Carotenoids Added to Extruded Petfoods and
Percentage Loss on Storage
Active Chemical Form
Product
Form
% Recovery After
Processing
Storage
Loss
(% per
month)TypicalLow High
Retinol Retinyl acetate Cross-linked
beadlet
81 63 90 6
Beadlet 65 40 80 30
CholecalciferolCholecalciferol Spray-dried
beadlet
85 75 90 4
Vitamin E all-rac-α-
Tocopheryl acetate
Adsorbate 45 30 85 1
Spray-dried
beadlet
45 30 85 1
RRR-α-TocopherolOil 40 10 60 10
Vitamin K Menadione sodium
bisulfite complex
Crystalline
powder
45 20 65 17
Menadione
nicotinamide
bisulfite
Crystalline
powder
56 40 75 11
Menadione
dimethylpyrimidinol
bisulfite
Crystalline
powder
50 30 70 12
Thiamin Thiamin
mononitrate
Crystalline
powder
90 30 95 4
Thiami
hydrochloride
Crystalline
powder
80 50 85 4
Riboflavin Riboflavin Spray-dried
beadlet
82 70 90 3
Pyridoxine Pyridoxine
hydrochloride
Crystalline
powder
75 70 90 3
D-Pantothenic
Acid
D-Calcium
pantothenate
Crystalline
powder
85 75 95 2
Niacin Nicotinic acid Crystalline
powder
80 64 90 2
Biotin Biotin Spray-dried
beadlet
88 60 95 2


===== PDF PAGE 816 =====
815
Active Chemical Form
Product
Form
% Recovery After
Processing
Storage
Loss
(% per
month)TypicalLow High
Folic Acid Folic acid Spray-dried
beadlet
90 65 95 <1
Vitamin C Ascorbyl-2-
polyphosphate
Spray-dried
beadlet
96 85 100 <1
Ascorbic acid Crystalline
powder
40 0 60 37
Lutein Lutein Spray-dried
beadlet
72 50 80 2
Lycopene Lycopene Spray-dried
beadlet
64 40 75 2
β-Carotene beta-Carotene Beadlet 34 20 50 2
SOURCE: Information supplied by J. W. Wilson, Roche Vitamins Inc.


===== PDF PAGE 817 =====
816
TABLE 11-1 Greyhound Race Distances and Approximate Fastest Times at Tracks
in the United States
Common Name
Distance
(miles)
Approximate
Distance (m)
Approximate
Best Times
(s)
Average
Speed
(km·h–1)
Short Sprint 3/16 300 17 64
Sprint 5/16 500 30 60
Middle Distance 3/8 600 37 59
Marathon 7/16 700 43 59
Super Marathon 9/16 900 57 57
SOURCE: American Greyhound Track Operators Association, 2001.


===== PDF PAGE 818 =====
817
TABLE 11-2 Distances and Reported Times for Some Long-Distance Races
Race Location
Ambient
Temperature
(°C)
Distance
(km)
Duration
(h)
Averagea
Speed
(km·h–1) Reference
Copper
Basin 300
Alaska –10 to –35490 70 7 Hinchcliff
et al.,
1997a
Hinchcliff
et al.,
1997b
Iditarod
Trail Race
Alaska 1,790 Median
254
7 Piercy et
al., 2001b
Winner
222
8
Yukon
Quest
International
Yukon
Territories
and
Alaska
–7 to –30 Hinchcliff
et al.,
1993
Dawson
City (race
midpoint) to
Eagle
256 34 7.5
Eagle to
Fairbanks
664 95 7
aThese values do not take account of rest stops. Dogs will have run faster than this average
between rest stops.


===== PDF PAGE 819 =====
818
TABLE 11-3 Analyses of Diets Fed to Working Sled Dogs in the Antarctic, Mid-
Twentieth Century
Nutrient Content
Sled
Dog
Diet Aa
Sled
Dog
Diet Bb
Sled
Dog
Diet Cc
Seal
Meat
with
Blubberc
Lean
Seal
Meatc
ME (kcal·g–1 as fed) 4.6-4.8 5.3 4.8 4.3 1.2
Moisture (% as fed) 4-9 8-9 5 45 72
Protein (g·1,000 kcal–1) 129-14056 43 42 216
% ME 44-48 23-24 15 18 99
Fat (g·1,000 kcal–1) 58-62 72-79 84 90 3
% ME 52-55 64-69 67 82 1
Carbohydrate (g·1,000 kcal–1) 0-4 21-34 48 0 0
% ME 0-2 8-13 18
Calcium (g·1,000 kcal–1) 0.2-1.6 2.1-3.0 4.3 0.02 0.03
Phosphorus (g·1,000 kcal–1) 0.5-1.1 1.6-2.0 2.1 0.2 1.8
Magnesium (g·1,000 kcal–1) 0.04-
0.07
0.14-
0.16
0.13 0.03 0.21
Sodium (g·1,000 kcal–1) 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.2 0.4
Potassium (g·1,000 kcal–1) 0.3 1.1-1.2 1.0 0.04 3.8
Chloride (g·1,000 kcal–1) 0.9 1.1 1.2 0.2 0.4
Iron (g·1,000 kcal–1) 0.05-
0.07
0.01 — 0.02 —
Protein digestibility (%) 61-79 89-90 75 92 98
Fat digestibility (%) 93-97 94-97 87 99 41
aTaylor et al. (1958); Wyatt (1963); Orr (1966).
bWyatt (1963).
cOrr (1966).


===== PDF PAGE 820 =====
819
TABLE 11-4 Effect of Changes in Ambient Temperature on Energy Utilizationa in
Acclimatized and Unacclimatized Cats
Subjects n
BW
(kg)
Ambient
Temperature
(°C)
Daily Energy
Utilization (mean
± 2 SD)
Reference
(kcal·kg
BW–1)
(kcal·kg
BW–
0.67)
Unacclimatized cats6 25-28 52 ± 22 Stuart et
al., 1961
0-5 140 ±
53
Adult male or female
intact cats
5 2-3 Adams,
1963
Unacclimatized (at
25°C)
23 86 117b
10 144 195b
0 168 228b
Acclimatized at 5°C 23 90 122b
10 140 190b
0 187 254b
Adult female, intact
short-haired cats
5 2.0-
3.33
41 86b 118 Adams et
al., 1970
38 73b 100
35 73b 100
32 87b 120
29 98b 135
26 116b 160
23 138b 189
20 152b 210
Unacclimatized adult
cats
2 2.36c 36 ± 3 52 and
35 69c Jacobson
and
31 ± 1 45 and
35 60c Squires,
1970
25 ± 1 69 and
55 92c


===== PDF PAGE 821 =====
820
Subjects n
BW
(kg)
Ambient
Temperature
(°C)
Daily Energy
Utilization (mean
± 2 SD)
Reference
(kcal·kg
BW–1)
(kcal·kg
BW–
0.67)
5 ± 3 104 and
90 138c
Adult domestic male
and female cats after
2-3 days of
acclimatization
9 2.8-4.643 47 74b Doris and
Baker,
40 38 59b 1981
38 33 52b
35 43 67b
Unacclimatized adult
female and male cats
4 3.0-4.424-27 53 ± 4 83 ± 14Gautier et
al., 1989
3-8 86 ± 21136 ±
46
Unacclimatized 2-
day-old kittens
9 155 ±
24 g
30 166 ±
42 89b Mortola
and
20 270 ±
83 145b Matsuoka,
1993
aMeasured as oxygen consumption using indirect calorimetry.
bValue is approximate as it has been calculated using the mean body weight or the midpoint
between maximum and minimum body weights.
cWeight of only one cat was reported.


===== PDF PAGE 822 =====
821
TABLE 11-5 Rate of Energy Utilization in Greyhounds
Segment of Run (s)
0-7.5 7.5-15 15-30 30-45 45-60
Distance (m)
    Per segment 100 130 222 198 165
    Cumulative 100 230 452 650 815
End segment velocity (km·h–1) 68 64 54 44 38
Total energy cost per segment
(kcal·kg BW–1·km–1)
2.84 1.02 1.00 1.01 0.82
Rate of energy generation per
segment (kcal·kg BW–1·min–
1)
    Aerobic 0.24 0.52 0.58 0.69 0.40
    Lactate 1.06 0.30 0.31 0.11 0.14
    Oxygen stores 0.52 0.24 0 0 0
    ATP or creatine phosphate0.45 0 0 0 0
SOURCE: Adapted from Staaden, 1984.


===== PDF PAGE 823 =====
822
TABLE 11-6 Cost of Standing and Running During Steady-State Exercise on a Treadmill
for Dogs and Cats
Subjectsn
BW
(kg)
Midpoint
or
Meana
Standing
(intercept)
Running (slope of
curve)
Speed
(km·h–
1) Reference
(kcal·kg
BW–
1·h–1)
(kcal·kg
BW–
0.75·d–
1)
(kcal·kg
BW–
1·km–1)
(kcal·kg
BW–
0.75·km–
1)
Mongrel
dogs
1 2.6 2.6 3.6 110 1.6 2.1 1.5-10Taylor et
al., 1970
Dogs 2 4.4 4.1 144b 1.9 1.3b 2-20 Taylor et
al., 1982
Male
beagles
6 8.8-
12.5
10.6 2.4 105b 1.0 1.7b 6 Young et
al., 1959c
Male
mongrel
dogs
3 6.7-
17.3
12.8 2.5 115 0.9 1.6 3-6 Raab et
al., 1976
Mongrel
dogs
1 18 18 3.1 154 0.8 1.7 1.5-10Taylor et
al., 1970
Dogs 21 1.5 79b 1.1 2.3b Taylor et
al., 1982
Female
foxhounds
1021.8
±
1.4
21.8 4.7 243b 1.4 3.1b 4.8-6.4Ordway
et al.,
1984
Mongrel
dogs
5 19-
29
24 1.9 99b 0.9 2.0b 4-16 Ordway
et al.,
1984
Wolf 2 23.1 2.2 118b 1.1 2.4b 2-18 Taylor et
al., 1982
Domestic
cats
2 3.9 0.7 28c 1.9 3.0c 0.5-5 Taylor et
al., 1982
aA mean is reported where this is known; otherwise, the midpoint between maximum and minimum
is reported.
bValues are approximate because they were calculated using the mean or midpoint value to the 0.75
power.
cValues are reported relative to kg BW0.67 and are approximate because they were calculated using
the mean to the 0.67 power.


===== PDF PAGE 824 =====
823
TABLE 11-7 Efficiency of Gaining and Losing Height When Running
Subjects n
Speed
(km·h–
1)
BW
(kg)
Slope
(%)
Energy Utilization
Efficiency
(%) Reference
(kcal·kg
BW–
1·km–1
along
treadmill)
(kcal·kg
BW–
1·km–1
gained
vertically)
Male
mongrel
dogs
3 3-6 7-1720 2.4 7.5 31 Raab et al.,
1976
12 1.6 6.7 35
7 1.3 5.5 42
0 0.85 — —
–7 0.7 2.6a 111a
–12 0.6 2.3a 97a
–20 0.6 1.4a 59a
2-4-year-
old
mongrel
dogs
5 4-16 19-
29
20 2.5 8.2 28 Cerretelli
et al., 1964
10 1.7 7.8 30
5 1.2 6.7 35
0 0.9 — —
1-1.5-year-
old female
foxhounds
10 6 22 ±
1
20 4.2 14 17 Ordway et
al., 1984
16 3.6 13 17
12 3.1 14 17
8 2.3 11 21
4 2.2 19 12
0 1.4 — —
11-month-
old male
beagles
5 6 9-1237 6.5 14.7 16 Young et
al., 1959c
33 4.9 12.2 19
28 4.4 12.4 19
21 3.6 12.6 18


===== PDF PAGE 825 =====
824
Subjects n
Speed
(km·h–
1)
BW
(kg)
Slope
(%)
Energy Utilization
Efficiency
(%) Reference
(kcal·kg
BW–
1·km–1
along
treadmill)
(kcal·kg
BW–
1·km–1
gained
vertically)
14 2.5 10.7 22
7 2.2 18.1 13
0 1.0 — —
aValues represent potential energy saved compared to running on the level.


===== PDF PAGE 826 =====
825
TABLE 11-8 Maximal Oxygen Consumption in Dogs
Subjects Age GenderTrainingn
BW
(kg)
ConditionsVo2max
Reference
Speed
(km·h–
1)
Slope
(%)
(L
O2·
kg–
1·h–
1)
(kcal·
kg–
0.75·h–
1)
Beagles 10-
14
yrs
F N 7 10
± 1
6 23 4.8 ±
1.2
42 ±
10a
Haidet,
1989
2-3
yrs
M N 7 10
± 1
7 30 7.1 ±
0.6
61 ±
5a
Beagles 11
mos.
M Y 5 9-
12
6 37 8.1 70a Young et
al., 1959c
5
mos.
3.6
MongrelsAdultMF Y 8 9-
13
8-13 8-20 5.8 ±
0.5
50 ±
4a
Lucas et
al., 1980
Dogs Y 8 10-
14
5 28 >5.1±
1.2b
>46 ±
11
Donald
and
Ferguson,
1966
Mongrels Y 4 15-
17
>8 10 5.6 54a Marconi
et al.,
1982
Dogs AdultM Y 5 17-
20
13 18 >3.7
±
0.7b
>37 ±
8
Bailie et
al., 1961
Alaskan
sled dogs
   >24%
ME as
protein
diet
N 2 20
± 3
10.3
± 4.6
105 ±
46a
Reynolds
et al.,
1999
Y 4 19
± 2
10.6
± 4.1
106 ±
41a
   19% ME
as protein
diet
N 20
± 3
>5 >5 9.5 ±
4.4
97 ±
45a


===== PDF PAGE 827 =====
826
Subjects Age GenderTrainingn
BW
(kg)
ConditionsVo2max
Reference
Speed
(km·h–
1)
Slope
(%)
(L
O2·
kg–
1·h–
1)
(kcal·
kg–
0.75·h–
1)
Y 8 19
± 2
7.8 ±
2.2
78 ±
22a
Mongrels3-4
yrs
M Y 4 18-
25
0-16 10 Piiper et
al., 1966
   21% O2 >6.0b >62a
   15% O2 4.5 47a
   11% O2 3.0 31a
Foxhounds1-1.5
yrs
F N 7 22
± 1
>6.4 20-
24
6.7 ±
1.2
70 ±
12a
Ordway
et al.,
1984
Foxhounds1-2
yrs
F N 1022
± 1
>6.4 20-
24
6.8 ±
0.7
71 ± 7Musch et
al., 1985
Y 22
± 1
8.8 ±
0.6
92 ± 7
Mongrels M Y 8 20-
27
12 20 8.1 ±
0.5
89 ±
6a
Wagner et
al., 1977
16 16
Mongrels2-4
yrs
Y 5 19-
29
16
10
10
20 >6b >66a Cerretelli
et al.,
1964
Foxhounds2-4
yrs
M Y 1025
± 2
10-130-25 7.8 ±
0.7
84 ±
7a
Wu et al.,
2001
Dogs Y 2 19,
32
36 24 10.2,
9.0
102,
103
Weibel et
al., 1983
aValues are approximate since they were calculated using the mean or midpoint value to the 0.75
power.
bThe V̇ O2max must be higher than the highest value measured because oxygen consumption did
not reach a plateau.


===== PDF PAGE 828 =====
827
TABLE 11-9 Field Metabolic Rate in Dogs
AnimalsGenderTrainingn BW(kg)Age(yr)Temperature(°C) Nature ofExerciseMethod
Daily EnergyConsumption
Reference(kcal)(kcal·kg–
0.75)Alaskansled dogsMF Y 1823 ±6 1-4–10 to –35Race for490 kmover 70 hat 7 km·h–
1
DLW 11,260±2,820
1,052 ±192 Hinchcliffet al.,1997b
        MEa 10,660980  
  Y 4   –10 to –35Sedentaryin kennelsDLW 2,510±1,625
263 ± 96 
  N 6   20 Sedentaryin kennelsMEa  130 ± 29 
Alaskanhuskies Y 1319   634 kmover 8 dDLW 4,014±3,084
438b Decombazet al., 1995
        ME 2,089± 438228b  
Sled dogsM Y 8 39-43 0.7-9 –8 32 km·d–1
pullingheavyload overice
ME 4,368270 ± 17Orr, 1966
   7 35-38  AntarcticTetheredto 2-mchains
 2,184145 ± 7 
Cross-bredAlaskanhuskies
 Y  20-25  –12 to 2–4 to 7 10 km·d–1
6 km·d–1
 4,000-5,0002,000-2,500
440220 Kronfeld etal., 1977
            Kelpie M Y 1 17   Sheepdogworkedfor 2afternoonsof 8 d, 40-
min rundaily andshortwalks
DLW 1,426167 Frankeland Bell,1994
       MEa 1,257147  
Bordercolliesc   10   High: 3-6h MEa  174 ±179 Burger,1994
   28   Moderate:1-3 h   124 ± 89 
   9    Low: <1 h  97 ± 82 


===== PDF PAGE 829 =====
828
AnimalsGenderTrainingn BW(kg)Age(yr)Temperature(°C) Nature ofExerciseMethod
Daily EnergyConsumption
Reference(kcal)(kcal·kg–
0.75)Bordercolliesc MF Y 3117 ±6 1-12  Kennels;15 min to3 h workdaily onfell andvalleysheepfarm
MEa 1,640-2,190138-184bDowns etal., 1997b
Bordercolliesc        MEa   ButterwickandHawthorne,1998   Pets   7    3-6 h·d–1   177 ±132  
   28   1-3 h·d–1   108 ± 51 
   5    <1 h·d–1   120 ± 59 
   Working  11   3-6 h·d–1   174 ±118  
   10   1-3 h·d–1   184 ± 40 
   7    <1 h·d–1   143 ± 64 
EnglishpointersMF Y 1020 ±1 1-11 Hot andhumid 11-m2
run; 3 hhuntingdaily
ME 2,300(1,900-2,600)
240b
(200-280)
Davenportet al., 2001
LabradorretrieversF Y 6 23-30 5-11  Heatedkennelswithoutsideruns; 10-min walkdaily butgained 2kg BW
ME 1,120-1,44093-121b Downs etal., 1997a
GreyhoundsMF Y 7 34 ±4 1-311 to 253-m2
kennels;900-m2
paddockfor 30 mindaily;500-mrace twiceweekly
ME 2,160± 330155±18Hill et al.,2000
GreyhoundsMF Y 8 32 ±6 2-4–4 to 15As aboveME 2,070± 720152 ± 46Hill et al.,2001bGreyhoundsMF Y 9  2-5 As aboveME   Hill et al.,1999b• Free-choice    30 ±7      155 ± 34 


===== PDF PAGE 830 =====
829
AnimalsGenderTrainingn BW(kg)Age(yr)Temperature(°C) Nature ofExerciseMethod
Daily EnergyConsumption
Reference(kcal)(kcal·kg–
0.75)• Restricted   28 ±6      137 ± 22 
BeaglesF Y 1012.31.3 200 kmper weekon 15%slope
Energy1,530± 600233 ±92b Arokoski etal., 1993
  N 10   1-m2 cageonly  1,030± 450156 ±69b  
BeaglesF  2 17,118  3-m2
kennelswithoutsideruns
DLW 874 122 Ballevre etal., 1994
ME a 784 109
NOTE: DLW double labeled water method; energy is energy equivalent, but type of energy is not stated.aME was calculated using recommendations of the NRC (1985) and would be approximately 4 percent higher if calculatedwith the recommendations in this report.bApproximate estimates obtained using published mean body weight.cWhether there is some overlap in the dogs and data used in these studies is unclear.


===== PDF PAGE 831 =====
830
TABLE 11-12 Daily Water Loss from Hydrated and Dehydrated Dogs and Cats as
Affected by Temperature
Subjects n
BW
(kg)
Ambient
Temperature
(°C)
Mean Daily Water Loss
(mL·kg BW–0.75 in
dogs; mL·kg BW–0.67
in cats)
ReferenceHydratedDehydrated
Male and female
mongrel dogs
7 32 ± 325 119 44 Baker, 1984
35 152 70
40 196 103
45 214 136
Male and female
domestic cats
9 3-5 35 42 25 Doris and
Baker, 198138 59 35
40 91 90
45 130 163
Female short-
haired domestic
cats
5 2-3 20 27 Adams et al.,
197026 24
32 21
35 35
38 62
41 137


===== PDF PAGE 832 =====
831
TABLE 13-1 Proximate Analysis of Selected Feed Ingredients (as fed)a
Feed
name/descriptionIFNb DMc
(%)
CPd
(%)
Fat
(%)
TDFe
(%)
CFf
(%)
Ash
(%)
ME,g
kcal/g
(dog)
ME,g
kcal/g
(cat)
Ingredients of animal origin
Bacon
Pork, cured 68.408.70 57.500.00 2.10
N 251 321 202 1 50
Beef
Meat,
mechanically
separated
40.6015.0023.500.00 2.10 2.72 2.60
N 56 56 64 1 56
Broth (or
bouillon),
dehydrated
96.7016.008.90 0.00 48.202.38 2.34
N 3 3 3 1 3
Heart, raw 24.4017.103.80 0.00 1.00 1.13 1.11
N 15 4 4 1 10
Kidney, raw 23.0016.603.10 0.00 1.10 1.03 1.01
N 28 5 9 1 11
Liver, raw 31.0020.003.90 0.00 1.30 1.38 1.36
N 50 6 15 1 11
Tripe, raw 18.6014.604.00 0.00 0.40 0.94 0.92
N 6 11 6 1 4
Chicken
Meat and
skin, raw
38.2017.6020.300.00 1.00 2.53 2.43
N 1 1 1 1 1
Broth (or
bouillon),
dehydrated
97.7016.7013.900.00 49.20
N 4 4 4 1 4
Gizzard 23.8018.204.20 0.00 0.90 1.13 1.11
N 13 15 14 1 12
Liver 26.4018.003.90 0.00 1.20 1.20 1.18
N 18 13 54 1 12
Egg
Dried, whole 96.6047.2041.100.00 0.00 3.60 5.91 5.70


===== PDF PAGE 833 =====
832
Feed
name/descriptionIFNb DMc
(%)
CPd
(%)
Fat
(%)
TDFe
(%)
CFf
(%)
Ash
(%)
ME,g
kcal/g
(dog)
ME,g
kcal/g
(cat)
N 3 3 3 1 1 3
Fish
Meal,
menhaden
5-
02-
009
91.2062.509.50 1.00 18.003.72 3.67
N 136 148 144 1 114
Meal, tuna5-
02-
023
93.0053.0011.00 5.00 25.003.35 3.30
N 1 1 1 1 1
Meal, white5-
02-
025
91.0061.804.30 0.90 24.003.22 3.20
N 2 2 2 2 1
Lamb
Ground 40.5016.6023.400.00 0.90 2.77 2.65
N 1 1 1 1 1
Liver 28.6020.405.00 0.00 1.40 1.34 1.31
N 17 1 1 1 1
Meat,
mechanically
separated
41.3015.0023.500.00 1.20 2.72 2.60
N 5 1 6 1 1
Meat
Meal,
rendered
5-
09-
323
93.9054.1011.80 2.50 21.803.62 3.56
N 79 67 33 1 13
Meal, with
bone,
rendered
5-
00-
388
94.0050.909.80 2.80 19.203.61 3.56
N 63 63 55 1 13
Poultry
By-product
meal
5-
03-
798
93.5059.0013.50 2.00 16.003.96 3.89
N 2 2 2 2 1


===== PDF PAGE 834 =====
833
Feed
name/descriptionIFNb DMc
(%)
CPd
(%)
Fat
(%)
TDFe
(%)
CFf
(%)
Ash
(%)
ME,g
kcal/g
(dog)
ME,g
kcal/g
(cat)
Shrimp
Meat, mixed
species
24.1020.301.70 0.00 1.20 1.00 1.00
N 212 201 100 1 161
Milk
Skimmed,
dried
5-
01-
175
92.5034.600.80 0.10 8.00 3.71 3.71
N 2 2 2 2 1
Turkey
Mechanically
deboned
30.9013.3016.000.00 1.10 1.97 1.89
N 21 21 21 1 10
Whey
Dried 4-
01-
182
93.5012.500.80 0.10 9.70 3.65 3.64
N 2 2 2 2 1
Ingredients of plant origin
Barley
Grain 4-
00-
549
90.2012.302.20 17.305.30 2.30 3.81 3.80
N 9 14 8 1 2 15
Beet (sugar)
Pulp, dried4-
00-
669
88.308.80 1.00 21.006.40 2.95 2.95
N 200 183 124 1 55
Carrots
Whole, raw 12.201.00 0.20 3.00 1.10 0.90 0.46 0.46
N 238 183 29 1 1 47
Cereal
Cereal by-
product
4-
00-
466
88.508.10 3.30 1.50 2.90 3.99 3.97
N 62 62 37 1 22


===== PDF PAGE 835 =====
834
Feed
name/descriptionIFNb DMc
(%)
CPd
(%)
Fat
(%)
TDFe
(%)
CFf
(%)
Ash
(%)
ME,g
kcal/g
(dog)
ME,g
kcal/g
(cat)
Chicory
Root 20.001.40 0.20 0.90
N 1 1 1 1
Corn, yellow
Bran, crude 95.308.40 0.90 85.50 0.40 3.84 3.84
N 6 6 6 1 6
Distillers
grain, dried
5-
02-
842
94.0027.009.00 13.002.20 3.84 3.80
N 1 1 1 1 1
Distillers
grain w/
solubles,
5-
02-
843
dried and
5-
28-
236
90.2026.809.00 8.50 4.70 3.92 3.88
N 893 880 465 1 135
Gluten feed,
dried
5-
28-
243
and
5-
02-
903
89.4021.303.10 10.006.10 3.51 3.49
N 132 187 69 1 26
Gluten meal5-
28-
242
86.5056.302.20 1.30 2.90 3.94 3.93
N 67 58 43 1 20
Grits 90.008.80 1.20 1.60 0.40 3.64 3.64
N 157 156 156 1 156
Grain 4-
02-
935
89.309.10 4.40 2.10 1.20 4.09 4.07
N 12 9 6 2 5


===== PDF PAGE 836 =====
835
Feed
name/descriptionIFNb DMc
(%)
CPd
(%)
Fat
(%)
TDFe
(%)
CFf
(%)
Ash
(%)
ME,g
kcal/g
(dog)
ME,g
kcal/g
(cat)
Meal,
degermed
88.408.50 1.70 7.40 0.60 3.59 3.59
N 513 127 128 1 127
Meal, whole
kernel
89.708.10 3.60 7.30 1.10 3.72 3.71
N 10 7 7 1 7
Starch 91.700.30 0.10 0.90 0.10 3.67 3.67
N 5 5 3 1 4
Syrup, dark 77.200.00 0.00 0.00 4.00 3.06 3.06
N 5 1 5 1 4
Flaxseed (linseed)
Whole 92.2021.0034.7027.906.30 4.00 5.32 5.15
N 3 3 3 2 1 3
Molasses
Beet, sugar4-
00-
668
78.006.70 0.10 0.00 9.00 3.64 3.64
N 22 13 4 1 10
Oats
Grain 4-
03-
309
90.0011.904.60 10.803.00 3.68 3.66
N 177 309 146 1 104
Groats 4-
03-
331
92.0016.006.00 2.60 2.20 4.11 4.08
N 1 1 1 1 1
Peas
Green, raw 21.105.40 0.40 5.10 0.90 0.83 0.83
N 10 7 7 1 7
Potato
Flesh and
skin, raw
8.00 2.00 0.00 2.40 0.80 0.29 0.29
N 9 9 9 9 9
Rice


===== PDF PAGE 837 =====
836
Feed
name/descriptionIFNb DMc
(%)
CPd
(%)
Fat
(%)
TDFe
(%)
CFf
(%)
Ash
(%)
ME,g
kcal/g
(dog)
ME,g
kcal/g
(cat)
Bran 4-
03-
928
90.6014.0013.80 11.409.40 3.86 3.79
N 73 87 78 1 69
Brewers
(broken)
4-
03-
932
89.008.70 0.70 9.80
N 1 1 1 1
Brown,
medium
grain
87.607.50 2.70 3.40 1.30 3.59 3.57
N 4 7 5 1 4
Flour, brown 88.007.20 2.80 4.60 1.50 3.60 3.58
N 3 3 3 1 3
Flour, white 88.106.00 1.40 2.40 0.60 3.57 3.56
N 2 2 2 1 2
Hulls 1-
08-
075
92.003.00 0.50 44.0020.001.47 1.46
N 1 1 1 1 1
Sorghum
Grain 4-
20-
893
87.008.80 2.90 2.30
N 1 1 1 1
Soybean
Flour,
defatted
92.8051.501.20 17.50 6.20 3.70 3.70
N 6 6 6 1 2
Flour, full
fat, roasted
96.2038.1021.90 5.90 4.84 4.73
N 58 52 31 16
Hulls 1-
04-
560
90.9012.602.40 36.504.40 2.49 2.48
N 131 139 78 1 46


===== PDF PAGE 838 =====
837
Feed
name/descriptionIFNb DMc
(%)
CPd
(%)
Fat
(%)
TDFe
(%)
CFf
(%)
Ash
(%)
ME,g
kcal/g
(dog)
ME,g
kcal/g
(cat)
Meal,
solvent,
(44% CP)
5-
20-
637
and
5-
04-
604
89.1044.501.40 7.00 5.90 3.56 3.55
N 12 112 88 1 66
Meal,
solvent,
5-
20-
638
without hulls
(48% CP)
and
5-
04-
612
89.5048.201.00 3.90 5.70 3.66 3.66
N 562 550 42 1 119
Sugar
Granulated 100.000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.00 4.00
N 9 1 3 1 6
Brown 98.400.00 0.00 0.00 0.90 3.89 3.89
N 5 1 1 1 5
Wheat
Flour, whole
grain
89.7013.701.90 12.20 1.60 3.62 3.61
N 15 16 10 1 14
Germ 88.9023.209.70 13.20 4.20 3.87 3.82
N 10 7 8 1 9
Germ meal5-
05-
218
89.0025.007.00 3.50 5.30 4.00 3.96
N 1 1 1 1.00 1
Flour, white,
unenriched
88.1010.301.00 2.70 0.50 3.55 3.55
N 72 61 29 1 61


===== PDF PAGE 839 =====
838
Feed
name/descriptionIFNb DMc
(%)
CPd
(%)
Fat
(%)
TDFe
(%)
CFf
(%)
Ash
(%)
ME,g
kcal/g
(dog)
ME,g
kcal/g
(cat)
Middlings 4-
05-
205
89.5016.604.00 7.50 4.50 3.72 3.70
N 294 246 212 1 87
Mill run 90.0015.504.10 8.30 5.30 3.66 3.64
N 1 1 1 1 1
Yeast
Brewers,
Torula, dried
7-
05-
534
93.0047.902.30 2.60 8.00 3.69 3.68
N 2 2 2 2 1
aFor each ingredient two numbers are given: the first is the % composition of each respective
dietary component in the ingredient; the second, the number (N) of observations on which the
data are based.
bInternational Feed Number.
cDry Matter.
dCrude Protein.
eTotal Dietary Fiber.
fCrude Fiber.
gMetabolizable Energy.


===== PDF PAGE 840 =====
839
TABLE 13-2 Carbohydrate and Lignin Concentrations of Some Common Ingredients in Canine and Feline Foods (g/kg drymatter)a
CommonName No. ofSamplesGenus/species
Low-Molecular-Weight Sugars Sol
Monosac-charidesSucroseRaffinoseStachyoseTotalSugarsStarchFrutanβ-GlucanTotNCBarley Hordeumvulgare    Hulled10 4 12 5 1 21 587 4 42 56    Hulless6 n.m.e n.m.e n.m.e n.m.e n.m.e 645 n.m.e 42 50    Dehulled1 2 7 4 1 15 654 5 44 50    Hull meal1 4 17 10 2 32 174 7 16 20Maize 3 Zea mays4 13 2 1 20 690 6 1 9    Feed meal2 6 29 4 1 40 566 2 1 10    Glutenfraction1 2 2 1 1 6 207 0 1 6
    Glutenfeed 2 6 25 5 2 41 282 2 2 34
    Flour2 4 6 1 0 10 902 2 1 8    Bran 2 5 21 4 1 32 376 4 2 32Wheat 5 Triticumaestivum3 11 4 2 19 651 15 8 25
    Flour2 1 8 3 3 17 820 16 4 16    Bran 3 7 30 12 4 53 222 20 24 29    Middlings1 4 20 9 3 36 575 23 26 71Oats Avena sativa    Hulled3 2 11 3 2 17 468 3 28 40    Hulless4 n.m.e n.m.e n.m.e n.m.e n.m.e 557 n.m.e 41 54    Feed meal2 2 12 2 2 17 623 2 42 42    Rolled1 2 12 3 2 19 646 1 42 48    Hull meal1 4 7 2 1 14 213 2 14 13Soybean Glycine max    Meal6 7 70 10 47 137 27 — — 63    Protein1 4 0 2 14 21 69 — — 81    concentrate
CommonName No. ofSamplesGenus/species
Insoluble Noncellulosic PolysaccharidesTotal I-NCPc RhamnoseArabinoseXyloseMannoseGalactoseGluBarley Hordeum vulgare    Hulled10 88 0 22 50 2 2 8    Hulless6 64 0 17 24 3 2 17    Dehulled1 58 0 17 29 2 0 8    Hull meal1 267 0 48 184 3 5 12Maize 3 Zea mays 66 0 19 28 1 4 9    Feed meal2 114 0 32 46 1 8 10    Glutenfraction1 14 0 3 3 0 0 6
    Glutenfeed 2 242 0 61 97 4 15 14
    Flour2 13 0 3 3 0 0 5    Bran 2 240 0 66 111 3 18 10Wheat 5 Triticum aestivum 74 0 22 38 1 2 7    Flour2 17 0 6 8 1 0 4    Bran 3 273 0 83 138 4 7 27    Middlings1 101 0 27 36 6 4 21Oats


===== PDF PAGE 841 =====
840
CommonName No. ofSamplesGenus/species
Low-Molecular-Weight Sugars Sol
Monosac-charidesSucroseRaffinoseStachyoseTotalSugarsStarchFrutanβ-GlucanTotNC    Hulled3 110 0 15 78 1 5 5    Hulless4 49 0 10 21 2 2 11    Feed meal2 39 0 8 15 1 1 10    rolled1 37 0 6 11 2 1 13    Hull meal1 295 0 26 212 1 9 12Soybean Glycine max    Meal6 92 2 17 17 8 25 1Proteinconcentrate1 67 1 12 7 7 24 2
aAdapted from Bach-Knudsen, 1997.bSoluble noncellulosic polysaccharides.cInsoluble noncellulosic polysaccharides.dNonstarch polysaccharides.eNot measured.


===== PDF PAGE 842 =====
841
TABLE 13-3 Total Fat Concentration and Fatty Acid Composition of Selected Feed Ingredients
Ingredient
TotalFat(% asis)
Percent of total fatty acids
10:012:013:013:1 14:0 14:115:016:016:1n-7 17:017:118:018:1n-9ChickenMeal 12.900.000.040.000.00 0.60 0.210.0823.886.500.160.127.5836.41
N = 64SD1.670.010.030.000.00 0.10 0.080.031.010.660.060.11 0.771.43LambMeal 13.800.070.170.010.01 2.71 0.170.6321.051.721.560.5422.0030.49
N = 42SD1.630.050.100.040.03 0.69 0.100.151.020.410.220.333.221.35BeefMeal 13.160.050.090.000.00 2.39 0.410.4222.792.681.170.4717.2832.10
N = 8 SD0.880.020.020.000.00 0.49 0.140.291.820.200.390.301.964.26WheatBran 4.930.000.000.000.00 0.12 0.000.1316.630.150.120.001.11 17.30
N = 4 SD0.380.000.000.000.00 0.04 0.000.000.790.020.010.000.050.18WheatFlour 3.410.000.000.000.00 0.16 0.000.1417.260.090.120.001.7314.10
N = 6 SD0.580.000.000.000.00 0.12 0.000.071.140.070.040.000.881.92WholeWheat 2.980.000.000.000.00 0.08 0.000.1017.390.160.100.041.1313.79
N = 4 SD0.170.000.000.000.00 0.01 0.000.000.280.010.030.050.090.29Rice Bran4.150.000.020.000.00 0.45 0.010.0416.700.220.030.002.0040.26N = 8 SD0.500.000.010.000.00 0.34 0.150.230.420.370.430.072.532.75RiceProtein 6.730.000.000.000.00 0.70 0.010.0323.790.150.060.022.2329.31
N = 4 SD0.150.000.000.000.00 0.23 0.020.003.000.020.000.020.052.51RiceGluten 5.150.000.000.000.00 0.84 0.000.0529.840.11 0.000.002.8326.01
N = 2 SD0.050.000.000.000.00 0.02 0.000.000.620.030.000.000.060.16Rice(Whole)1.900.000.000.000.00 0.79 0.000.0219.140.150.000.004.11 34.67
N = 8 SD0.700.000.000.000.00 0.16 0.000.021.460.060.030.001.742.10CornGluten 5.970.000.000.000.00 0.05 0.020.0311.480.160.080.022.2425.09
N = 6 SD1.310.000.000.000.00 0.00 0.020.000.280.020.000.020.030.30Beet Pulp1.700.000.000.000.00 0.35 0.000.4020.160.450.070.061.4614.66N = 2 SD0.100.000.000.000.00 0.05 0.000.060.030.070.070.060.480.57HerringMeal 12.400.060.050.000.00 4.46 0.080.4116.243.890.080.003.3716.65
N = 2 SD0.000.000.010.000.00 0.39 0.000.030.390.060.000.000.310.19
Ingredient 20:1n-9 20:2n-6 20:3n-9 20:3n-6(5,11,14)20:3n-6(8,11,14)20:3n-3 20:4n-6 20:5n-3 22:022:1n-9 22:2n-6 23:022:4n-6Chicken Meal0.320.250.010.01 0.28 0.011.370.020.150.010.030.000.36N = 64SD 0.11 0.080.040.06 0.14 0.050.370.080.060.030.050.000.10LambMeal 0.300.100.000.00 0.07 0.000.620.210.230.060.040.020.11
N = 42SD 0.230.200.000.00 0.14 0.000.250.130.120.140.090.070.09BeefMeal 0.500.260.000.00 0.28 0.160.620.020.120.200.080.000.17
N = 8 SD 0.210.260.000.00 0.24 0.300.230.050.030.230.140.000.07WheatBran 0.910.120.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.250.120.010.000.04
N = 4 SD 0.090.030.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.010.010.030.000.05WheatFlour 0.820.120.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.260.180.000.000.02
N = 6 SD 0.190.030.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.010.050.000.000.03


===== PDF PAGE 843 =====
842
Ingredient
TotalFat(% asis)
Percent of total fatty acids
10:012:013:013:1 14:0 14:115:016:016:1n-7 17:017:118:018:1n-9WholeWheat 0.950.120.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.270.160.000.000.04
N = 4 SD 0.070.010.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.030.050.000.000.08Rice Bran 0.440.11 0.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.820.000.170.000.14N = 8 SD 0.11 0.210.000.00 0.23 0.210.000.050.11 0.170.100.000.07RiceProtein 0.360.000.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.220.000.020.000.03
N = 4 SD 0.020.000.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.000.010.040.000.03RiceGluten 0.170.090.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.350.000.000.000.00
N = 2 SD 0.040.090.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.040.000.000.000.00Rice(Whole) 0.420.000.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.340.000.11 0.000.04
N = 8 SD 0.040.040.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.030.000.070.000.03CornGluten 0.270.010.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.400.000.000.000.09
N = 6 SD 0.010.020.000.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.050.000.000.000.01Beet Pulp 0.481.190.370.00 0.00 0.000.100.000.770.200.080.001.65N = 2 SD 0.000.060.020.00 0.00 0.000.000.000.000.010.000.000.05HerringMeal 6.500.220.000.00 0.04 0.000.675.490.1410.360.180.000.19
N = 2 SD 0.080.010.000.00 0.00 0.000.020.300.010.040.010.000.02


===== PDF PAGE 844 =====
843
TABLE 13-4 Fatty Acid Composition of Selected Fats and Oilsa
Lipid IFNb
Selected Fatty Acids, % of Total Fatty Acids
<C10C12:0C14:0C16:0C1:1C18:0C18:1C18:2n-6 C18:3n-3 C18:4n-3 C20:1C20:4n-6 C20:5n-3 C2Animal fats    Beeftallow 4-08-127
0 0.9 2.7 24.94.218.936.03.1 0.6
    Choicewhite grease0.2 0.2 1.9 21.55.714.941.111.6 0.4
    Lard4-04-790
0.1 0.2 1.3 23.82.713.541.210.2 1.0
    Poultry fat4-09-319
0.0 0.1 0.9 21.65.76.0 37.319.5 1.0
    Restaurantgrease 1.9 16.22.510.547.517.5 1.9
Fish oils    Anchovy 7.4 17.410.54.0 11.61.2 0.8 3.0 1.6 0.1 17.0 1.2    Herring7-08-048
0.2 6.4 12.78.80.9 12.71.1 0.6 1.7 14.10.3 8.4 20
    Menhaden7-08-049
7.3 19.09 4.2 13.21.3 0.3 2.8 2.0 0.2 11 0.6
    Capelin7-16-709
7.9 11.111.11.0 17.01.7 0.4 2.1 18.90.1 4.6 14
    Cod liver7-01-994
3.2 13.59.82.7 23.71.4 0.6 0.9 7.4 1.6 11.2 5.1
    Redfish 4.9 13.213.22.2 13.30.9 0.5 1.1 17.20.3 8.0 18    Salmon(sea caught) 3.7 10.28.74.7 18.61.2 0.6 2.1 8.4 0.9 12.0 5.5
Vegetableoils    Babassu11.142.416.89.3 3.5 14.22.4    Borage 0.0 0.0 0.0 11.5 4.9 19.540.3    Canola(rapeseed)4-06-144
0.0 0.0 0.0 4.0 0.21.8 56.120.3 9.3
    Coconut4-09-320
14.144.616.88.2 0.02.8 5.8 1.8 0.0
    Corn4-07-882
0.0 0.0 0.0 10.90.01.8 24.259.0 0.7
    Linseed4-14-502
0.0 0.0 0.0 5.3 0.04.1 20.212.7 53.3
    Cottonseed4-20-836
0.0 0.0 0.8 22.70.82.3 17 51.5 0.2
    Olive 0.0 0.0 0.0 11.00.82.2 72.57.9 0.6    Palm 0.0 0.1 1.0 43.50.34.3 36.69.1 0.2    Palmkernel 6.7 48.216.28.4 2.5 15.32.3


===== PDF PAGE 845 =====
844
Lipid IFNb
Selected Fatty Acids, % of Total Fatty Acids
<C10C12:0C14:0C16:0C1:1C18:0C18:1C18:2n-6 C18:3n-3 C18:4n-3 C20:1C20:4n-6 C20:5n-3 C2    Peanut4-03-658
0.0 0.0 0.1 9.5 0.12.2 44.832.0
    Safflower4-20-526
0.0 0.0 0.1 6.2 0.42.3 11.774.1 0.4
    Safflower(high oleic) 0.1 6.8 0.12.3 12.077.7 0.4 0.1
    Sesame 0.0 0.0 0.0 8.9 0.24.8 39.341.3 0.3    Soybean4-07-983
0.0 0.0 0.1 10.30.23.8 22.851.0 6.8
    Sunflower(high oleic) 3.7 0.15.4 81.39.0
    Sunflower4-20-833
0.0 0.0 0.0 5.4 0.23.5 45.339.8 0.2
aCertain fats and oils have significant amounts of fatty acids other than those listed above. Examples include:Butter oil: C4:0, 3.65%; C6:0, 2.2%; C15:0, 2.1%; C14:1, 0.8%Peanut oil: C24:0, 1.5%Rapeseed (high erucic acid rape oil): C24:0, 1.0%; C22:1, 41.1%; C20:2, 0.7%Canola (low erucic acid rape) oil: C24:0 0.2%; C22:1, 0.7%; C20:2, 0.0%Borage seed oil: C16:0, 11.5%; C18:0, 4.9%; C18:1n-9, 19.5%; C18:2n-6, 40.3%;C18:3n-6, 22.1%Evening primrose oil: C16:0, 6.5%; C18:0, 1.8%; C18:1n-9, 8.6%; C18:2n-6, 73.5%; C18:3n-6, 8.7%Black currant seed oil: C16:0, 6.7%; C18:0, 1.6%; C18:1n-9, 11.3%; C18:2n-6, 47.1%, C18:3n-6, 15.3%; C18:3n-3, 13.1%bInternational Feed Number.cSaturated fatty acids.dPolyunsaturated fatty acids.eMonosaturates are not included in this calculation.SOURCE: Belch and Hill, 2000; Khan and Shahidi, 2000; Senanayake and Shahidi, 1999; Spurvey and Shahidi, 2000.


===== PDF PAGE 846 =====
845
TABLE 13-5 Amino Acid Composition of Selected Feed Ingredients (% as fed)a
Feed Name DescriptionIFNb DMc
(%) CPd
(%)Arg(%)His(%)Ile(%)Leu(%)Lys(%)Met(%)Cys(%)Phe(%)Tyr(%)Thr(%)Trp(%)Tau(%)Val(%)Ingredients of animal originBaconPork, cured 68.408.700.530.250.350.600.640.190.090.330.250.330.08 0.42N251 3219 10 10 10 10 10 4 10 10 10 4 10Beef Meat,mechanicallyseparated
40.6015.001.150.440.581.201.160.430.230.640.380.470.170.0080.92
N56 56 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 1 1 30Broth (orbouillon),dehydrated
96.7016.00
N3 3Heart, raw 24.4017.101.140.470.751.511.410.440.220.770.620.800.190.0650.89N15 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 1Kidney, raw 23.0016.600.970.430.681.331.100.350.050.500.620.800.230.0231.04N28 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 9 4Liver, raw 31.0020.001.260.550.921.881.390.510.311.070.790.920.290.0691.24N50 6 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 8 1Tripe, raw 18.6014.601.000.360.590.951.040.320.170.470.400.500.11 0.61N6 11 6 5 6 6 7 9 4 8 7 7 5 6ChickenMeat andskin, raw 38.2017.601.100.520.881.281.430.470.230.680.570.730.20 0.85
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Broth (orbouillon),dehydrated
97.7016.70
N4 4Gizzard 23.8018.201.310.370.861.281.260.480.240.760.550.840.16 0.82N13 15 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Liver 26.4018.001.100.480.951.621.360.430.240.890.630.800.250.1101.13N18 13 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Egg Dried, whole96.6047.202.841.122.584.053.401.481.102.521.932.270.58 2.89N3 3 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Fish Meal,menhaden5-02-009
91.2062.503.641.642.484.464.741.730.532 2.690.580.3202.91
N136 1482 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2Meal, tuna5-02-023
93.0053.003.201.802.403.803.901.500.402.50 2.500.710.1062.80
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 1Meal, white5-02-025
91.0061.084.111.642.914.434.421.670.752.541.832.590.69 2.48
N2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 2LambGround 40.5016.600.980.520.801.291.460.430.200.670.560.710.19 0.89


===== PDF PAGE 847 =====
846
Feed Name DescriptionIFNb DMc
(%) CPd
(%)Arg(%)His(%)Ile(%)Leu(%)Lys(%)Met(%)Cys(%)Phe(%)Tyr(%)Thr(%)Trp(%)Tau(%)Val(%)N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Liver 28.6020.401.140.480.881.671.100.440.210.910.730.880.24 1.12N17 1 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6Meat,mechanicallyseparated
41.3015.001.060.530.841.141.140.42 0.58 0.53 0.72
N5 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Meat Meal,rendered5-09-323
93.9054.103.821.111.603.412.910.770.611.93 1.830.36 2.40
N79 67 436436436436436436436436 436436 436Meal, withbone,rendered
5-00-388
94.0050.903.550.961.413.122.640.710.521.711.201.670.30 2.14
N63 63 2282282282282282282282281 228228 228PoultryBy-productmeal 5-03-798
93.5059.003.891.342.254.202.841.020.992.041.682.100.460.3052.76
N2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 12 2ShrimpMeat, mixedspecies 24.1020.301.780.410.991.611.770.570.230.860.680.820.280.0390.96
N212 2011 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Milk Skimmed,dried 5-01-175
92.5034.601.160.941.973.452.700.940.361.671.831.670.480.0072.33
N2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 1 2TurkeyMechanicallydeboned 30.9013.300.870.500.501.081.150.370.100.550.470.640.110.0930.54
N21 21 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 1WheyDried 4-01-182
93.5012.500.370.190.861.201.040.200.300.370.250.850.200.0660.69
N2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 1 2Ingredients of plant originBarleyGrain 4-00-549
90.2012.300.620.280.450.850.470.240.270.700.360.420.20 0.61
N9 14 62 62 62 62 67 63 40 62 59 62 30 62Beet(sugar)Pulp, dried4-00-669
88.308.800.290.220.280.470.410.100.090.270.400.310.08 0.42
200 18313 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 1 13 13 13CarrotsWhole, raw 12.201.000.040.020.040.040.040.010.010.030.020.040.01 0.04N238 18359 59 60 60 64 64 12 60 13 60 57 60


===== PDF PAGE 848 =====
847
Feed Name DescriptionIFNb DMc
(%) CPd
(%)Arg(%)His(%)Ile(%)Leu(%)Lys(%)Met(%)Cys(%)Phe(%)Tyr(%)Thr(%)Trp(%)Tau(%)Val(%)CerealCereal by-product4-00-466
88.508.100.400.200.360.800.300.160.160.40 0.280.09 0.40
N62 62 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1ChicoryRoot 20.001.40N1 1Corn,yellowBran, crude 95.308.40N6 6Distillersgrain, dried5-02-842
94.0027.001.000.600.932.600.900.450.320.60 0.300.21 1.20
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Distillersgrain withsolubles,dried
5-02-843and5-28-236
90.2026.801.080.550.992.580.600.500.491.30 0.920.23 1.26
N893 88013 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 13Gluten feed,dried 5-28-243and5-02-903
89.4021.300.830.630.651.910.580.360.460.78 0.750.12 0.96
N132 18712 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12Gluten meal5-28-242
86.5056.301.801.202.319.430.951.331.013.573.071.900.30 2.61
N67 58 1191191191191191191191191 119119 119Grits 90.008.800.440.270.311.080.250.180.160.430.360.330.06 0.44N157 1561 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Grain 4-02-935
89.309.100.470.280.331.150.260.200.170.460.370.350.07 0.47
N12.009 33 21 37 37 10336 32 37 36 37 18 36Meal,degermed 88.408.50
N513 127Meal, wholekernel 89.708.100.410.250.291.000.230.170.150.400.330.310.06 0.41
N10 7 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Starch 91.700.300.010.010.010.040.010.010.010.010.010.010.00 0.01N5 5 11 11 11 11 68 10 10 11 11 11 76 10Syrup, dark 77.200.00N5 1Flaxseed (linseed)Whole 92.2021.00


===== PDF PAGE 849 =====
848
Feed Name DescriptionIFNb DMc
(%) CPd
(%)Arg(%)His(%)Ile(%)Leu(%)Lys(%)Met(%)Cys(%)Phe(%)Tyr(%)Thr(%)Trp(%)Tau(%)Val(%)N3.003.00MolassesBeet, sugar4-00-668
78.006.703.251.052.942.38 0.150.551.79 1.040.30 2.22
N22 13 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Oats Grain 4-03-309
90.0011.900.810.290.450.870.500.200.330.610.530.410.14 0.62
N177 30919 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 1 19 19 19Groats 4-03-331
92.0016.000.900.250.501.000.450.200.260.65 0.500.18 0.65
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Peas Green, raw 21.105.400.430.110.200.320.320.080.030.200.110.200.04 0.24N10 7 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1PotatoFlesh andskin, raw 8.002.000.100.050.080.120.130.030.030.090.080.080.03 0.12
N9 9 9 9 7 7 7 7 6 7 6 7 6 7Rice Bran 4-03-928
90.6014.001.090.390.480.990.650.290.310.660.420.540.16 0.73
N73 87 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 1 15 15 15Brewers(broken)4-03-932
89.008.700.740.260.370.740.430.220.210.480.330.360.10 0.54
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Brown,mediumgrain
87.607.500.570.190.320.620.290.170.090.390.280.280.10 0.44
N4 7 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Flour, brown 88.007.20N3 3Flour, white 88.106.000.520.150.240.490.210.140.110.320.310.210.07 0.35N2 2 30 30 30 30 31 19 27 29 29 30 20 30Hulls 1-08-075
92.003.00
N1 1SorghumGrain 4-20-893
87.008.800.350.220.351.140.210.160.170.470.340.290.08 0.44
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1SoybeanFlour,defatted 92.8051.503.651.272.283.933.130.630.762.451.782.040.68 2.35
N6 6 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Flour, fullfat, roasted 96.2038.102.700.941.692.832.320.470.561.821.321.510.51 1.74


===== PDF PAGE 850 =====
849
Feed Name DescriptionIFNb DMc
(%) CPd
(%)Arg(%)His(%)Ile(%)Leu(%)Lys(%)Met(%)Cys(%)Phe(%)Tyr(%)Thr(%)Trp(%)Tau(%)Val(%)N58 52 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Hulls 1-04-560
90.9012.600.650.360.490.820.790.150.220.55 0.450.14 0.58
N131 1398 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8Meal,solvent,(44% CP)
5-20-637and5-04-604
89.1044.503.281.232.033.472.790.640.682.341.911.770.57 2.09
N12 112 3463463463463463463463461 346346 346Meal,solvent,without hulls(48% CP)
5-20-638and5-04-612
89.5048.203.521.332.203.763.030.690.722.531.951.910.61 2.23
N562 5502962962962962962962962961 296296 296SugarGranulated 100.000.00N9 1Brown 98.400.00N5 1WheatFlour, wholegrain 89.7013.700.640.320.510.930.380.210.320.650.400.400.21 0.62
N15 16 26 26 25 25 26 26 20 25 24 25 12 25Germ 88.9023.201.870.640.851.571.470.460.460.930.700.970.32 1.20N10 7 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 12 13 3 13Germ meal5-05-218
89.0025.001.830.620.791.101.370.420.460.93 0.940.30 1.12
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Flour, white,unenriched 88.1010.300.420.230.360.710.230.180.220.520.310.280.13 0.42
N72 61 51 51 68 68 69 67 63 58 56 67 39 58Middlings4-05-205
89.5016.600.970.450.571.100.600.260.340.730.450.510.21 0.77
N294 2461211211211211211211211211 121121 121Mill run 90.0015.50N1 1Yeast Brewers,Torula, dried7-05-534
93.0047.902.601.402.903.503.800.800.603.00 2.600.500.0112.90
N2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 1
aFor each ingredient two numbers are given: the first is the % composition of each respective amino acid in the ingredient; the second,the number (N) of observations on which the data are based.bInternational Feed Number.cDry matter.


===== PDF PAGE 851 =====
850
dCrude protein.


===== PDF PAGE 852 =====
851
TABLE 13-6 Mineral Content of Selected Ingredients (% or mg/kg, as fed)a
Feed Name/DescriptionIFNb DMc
(%) Ca(%)P(%)
Bio-availP(%)Mg(%)K(%)Na(%)CI(%)S(%)Cu(mg/kg)Fe(mg/kg)Mn(mg/kg)Se(mg/kg)Zn(mIngredients of animaloriginBaconPork, cured 68.400.010.14 0.010.150.73 0.64 6.00 0.00 0.25 12N251 2 20 0 15 20 18 20 18 14 19Beef Meat,mechanicallyseparated
40.600.490.32 0.020.280.06 0.56 57.000.00 0.21 36
N56 55 28 1 1 1 20 36 1 1 47Broth (orbouillon),dehydrated
96.700.060.32 0.050.4516.98 0.00 10.005.00 0.28
N3 1 2 2 2 3 1 1 3 1 1Heart, raw 24.400.000.17 0.020.270.06 3.61 46.000.00 0.22 24N15 7 7 7 7 11 8 10 2 3 38Kidney, raw 23.000.010.21 0.020.260.18 4.69 74.001.00 1.49 19N28 9 9 9 8 8 509 13 231 9 25Liver, raw 31.000.010.32 0.020.320.07 33.3968.003.00 0.41 39N50 1 10 13 10 9 311 33 232 6 29Tripe, raw 18.600.010.08 0.010.270.05 0.90 20.000.00 0.46 25N6 1 1 1 1 1 1 4 1 1 10ChickenMeat andskin, raw 38.200.010.17 0.020.200.07 0.74 10.000.00 0.14 12
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Broth (orbouillon),dehydrated
97.700.190.17 0.060.3118.59 0.00 10.002.00 0.28 1.
N4 1 2 2 1 3 1 1 1 1 1Gizzard 23.800.010.14 0.020.240.08 0.96 35.001.00 0.56 0.N13 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 1 8Liver 26.400.010.27 0.020.230.080.00 3.95 86.003.00 0.64 3N18 10 10 10 10 10 10 20 10 10 6 8Egg Dried, whole96.600.220.82 0.040.490.52 1.96 68.001.00 1.20 53N3 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2Fish Meal,menhaden5-02-009
91.204.872.782.610.180.680.620.751.046.41 518.0029.002.06 10
N136 113112 64 66 67 3 35 65 66 66 31 63Meal, tuna5-02-023
93.008.404.204.200.300.400.70 6.00 650.0010.004.00 24
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Meal, white5-02-025
91.007.163.663.500.200.970.880.500.487.00 131.0011.001.56 85
N2 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 2LambGround 40.500.020.16 0.020.220.06 1.01 16.000.00 0.19 34


===== PDF PAGE 853 =====
852
Feed Name/DescriptionIFNb DMc
(%) Ca(%)P(%)
Bio-availP(%)Mg(%)K(%)Na(%)CI(%)S(%)Cu(mg/kg)Fe(mg/kg)Mn(mg/kg)Se(mg/kg)Zn(mN1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Liver 28.600.010.36 0.020.310.07 69.7974.002.00 0.82 47N17 1 1 1 1 1 520 1 13 13 8Meat,mechanicallyseparated
41.300.160.34 0.020.290.06 0.58 59.000.00 0.20 37
N5 5 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1MeatMeal,rendered5-09-323
93.908.313.94 0.250.460.750.660.4819.56655.0023.000.42 10
N79 63 63 63 63 63 2 30 63 63 11 35 11Meal, withbone,rendered
5-00-388
94.009.974.46 0.240.970.670.510.389.26 564.0021.000.25 88
N63 52 52 52 52 52 3 14 52 52 52 1 52PoultryBy-productmeal 5-03-798
93.503.502.05 0.210.580.350.550.5114.00470.0011.000.78 12
N2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2ShrimpMeat, mixedspecies 24.100.050.21 0.040.190.15 2.64 24.001.00 0.38 11
N212 117112 6 27 26 285 8 1 15 27Milk Skimmed,dried 5-01-175
92.501.271.011.000.120.840.520.900.3211.7529.002.00 0.12 39
N2 2 2 1 2 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 2 1TurkeyMechanicallydeboned 30.900.150.12 0.010.170.05 0.93 16.000.00 0.27 29
N21 6 1 1 1 1 1 6 1 1 6WheyDried 4-01-182
93.500.920.780.790.131.131.301.501.0444.55145.007.00 0.07 3.
N2 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2Ingredients of plantoriginBarleyGrain 4-00-549
90.200.040.290.150.130.460.010.150.155.28 40.0019.000.15 28
N9 18 11 1 18 18 17 2 2 27 21 23 2 30Beet (sugar)Pulp, dried4-00-669
88.300.800.08 0.200.840.270.150.269.74 564.0055.000.12 19
N200 172154 15415415418 57 154 154 154 11 15CarrotsWhole, raw 12.200.030.04 0.020.320.04 0.47 5.00 1.00 0.01 2.N238 236237 237239243 90 241 229 6 22


===== PDF PAGE 854 =====
853
Feed Name/DescriptionIFNb DMc
(%) Ca(%)P(%)
Bio-availP(%)Mg(%)K(%)Na(%)CI(%)S(%)Cu(mg/kg)Fe(mg/kg)Mn(mg/kg)Se(mg/kg)Zn(mCerealCereal by-product4-00-466
88.500.150.260.180.090.290.530.720.093.57 219.0024.000.40 70
N62 49 49 1 49 49 49 6 25 49 49 49 1 49ChicoryRoot 20.000.040.06 0.020.290.05 0.77 0.00 2.00 0.01 3.N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Corn, yellowBran, crude 95.300.040.07 0.060.040.01 2.48 28.001.00 0.17 16N6 5 4 5 5 5 5 3 2 1 5Distillersgrain, dried5-02-842
94.000.090.410.170.200.160.470.070.4330.00300.0023.000.35 55
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Distillersgrain w/solubles,dried
5-02-843and5-28-236
90.200.200.750.400.300.990.270.230.407.28 161.0024.000.35 59
N893 6506501 64964964891 279649 266 649 13 64Gluten feed,dried 5-28-243and5-02-903
89.400.060.890.220.381.310.120.190.395.57 177.0021.000.17 67
N132 1451451 14514584 3 66 145 145 145 13 14Gluten meal5-28-242
86.500.050.52 0.120.400.040.070.733.84 124.0013.000.35 42
N67 57 58 58 58 58 2 24 58 58 58 12 58Grits 90.000.000.07 0.030.140.00 0.75 10.001.00 0.17 4.N157 1 1 1 22 154 4 1 4 1 4Grain 4-02-935
89.300.010.230.090.110.300.030.040.083.11 29.006.00 0.13 2
N12 6 7 1 3 3 3 2 2 8 8 5 7 7Meal,degermed 88.400.010.08 0.040.160.00 0.78 11.001.00 0.08 7.
N513 8 8 8 24 114 23 1 3 13 27Meal, wholekernel 89.700.010.24 0.130.290.04 1.93 35.005.00 0.16 18
N10 9 3 6 6 6 6 9 3 1 6Starch 91.700.000.01 0.000.000.01 0.50 5.00 1.00 0.03 1.N5 7 3 7 7 4 2 6 3 8 6Syrup, dark 77.200.020.01 0.010.040.16 0.53 4.00 1.00 0.01 0.N5 1 1 1 1 2 5 1 5 1 5Flaxseed (linseed)Whole 92.200.200.50 0.360.700.03 10.4162.0033.000.06 42N3 6 6 5 6 5 5 5 5 5 5Molasses


===== PDF PAGE 855 =====
854
Feed Name/DescriptionIFNb DMc
(%) Ca(%)P(%)
Bio-availP(%)Mg(%)K(%)Na(%)CI(%)S(%)Cu(mg/kg)Fe(mg/kg)Mn(mg/kg)Se(mg/kg)Zn(mBeet, sugar4-00-668
78 0.120.02 0.234.731.151.300.4717.2071.0046.00 14
N22 14 12 11 11 9 1 10 8 9 8 5Oats Grain 4-03-309
90.000.100.36 0.140.470.030.110.177.20 95.0039.000.43 37
N177 222229 2062051021 31 184 185 194 69 19Groats 4-03-331
92.000.070.450.170.090.340.05 0.206.40 35.0029.00
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Peas Green, raw 21.100.030.11 0.030.240.01 1.76 15.004.00 0.02 12N10 8 8 8 10 7 7 8 7 1 7PotatoFlesh andskin, raw 8.000.010.06 0.020.440.01 1.08 10.002.00 0.00 3.
N9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 299 9Rice Bran 4-03-928
90.600.061.61 0.741.430.030.080.179.13 216.00172.000.18 64
N73 70 70 62 67 55 3 27 58 58 24 9 56Brewers(broken)4-03-932
89.000.080.08 0.110.130.070.080.06 18.000.27 17
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Brown,mediumgrain
87.600.030.26 0.140.270.00 2.77 18.0037.00 20
N4 1 3 1 4 1 1 5 1 1Flour, brown 88.000.010.34 0.110.290.01 2.30 20.0040.00 25N3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 3 3Flour, white 88.100.010.10 0.040.080.00 1.30 4.00 12.000.15 8.N2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2Hulls 1-08-075
92.000.040.10 0.400.080.070.08
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1SorghumGrain 4-20-893
87.000.040.30 0.150.350.010.090.0810.0045.0015.000.20 15
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1SoybeanFlour,defatted 92.800.240.67 0.292.380.02 40.6592.0030.0017.0025
N6 17 11 13 13 13 14 13 13 1 14Flour, fullfat, roasted 96.200.190.48 0.372.040.01 22.2158.0021.000.08 36
N58 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1


===== PDF PAGE 856 =====
855
Feed Name/DescriptionIFNb DMc
(%) Ca(%)P(%)
Bio-availP(%)Mg(%)K(%)Na(%)CI(%)S(%)Cu(mg/kg)Fe(mg/kg)Mn(mg/kg)Se(mg/kg)Zn(mHulls 1-04-560
90.900.570.15 0.231.370.010.050.119.09 549.0024.000.19 32
N131 82 80 73 72 75 5 37 72 73 74 4 73Meal,solvent,(44% CP)
5-20-637
89.100.350.63 0.281.980.030.080.4119.75162.0031.000.19 50
and5-04-604N12 27 30 20 22 13 2 7 16 16 16 43 14Meal,solvent,without hulls
5-20-638
89.500.310.63 0.262.160.030.120.3514.32184.0036.000.12 52
(48% CP)and5-04-612N562 257257 24424723897 143244 238 238 35 23SugarGranulated 100.000.000.00 0.000.000.00 0.43 1.00 0.00 0.01 0.N9 19 12 24 21 12 16 23 18 2 17Brown 98.400.090.02 0.030.350.04 2.98 19.003.00 0.01 2.N5 6 4 6 6 6 6 6 7 4 6WheatFlour, wholegrain 89.700.030.00 0.140.410.01 3.82 39.0038.000.71 29
N15 8 8 6 7 7 11 8 10 3 11Germ 88.900.040.84 0.240.890.01 7.96 63.00133.000.79 12N10 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 9 1 6Germ meal5-05-218
89.000.011.000.310.220.900.020.080.3110.0041.00100.000.60 11
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Flour, white,unenriched 88.100.020.11 0.020.110.00 1.44 12.007.00 0.34 7.
N72 11347 12994 82 49 1 48 46 13Middlings4-05-205
89.500.140.91 0.371.230.030.090.169.00 141.00112.000.45 82
N294 196197 18218317117 59 176 178 176 10 17Mill run 90.000.101.02 0.47N1 1 1 1Yeast Brewers,Torula, dried7-05-534
93.000.541.640.450.131.790.090.100.3213.7095.0013.001.00 99
N2 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
aFor each ingredient two numbers are given: the first is the percent composition of each respective amino acid in the ingredient; the second,the number (N) of observations on which the data are based.bInternational Feed Number.cDry matter.


===== PDF PAGE 857 =====
856
TABLE 13-7 Vitamin Content of Selected Ingredients (mg/kg, as fed)a
Feed Name DescriptionIFNb Biotin(mg/kg)Choline(mg/kg)Folate(mg/kg)Niacin(mg/kg)
PantothenicAcid(mg/kg)Riboflavin(mg/kg)Thiamin(mg/kg)B6(mg/kg)B12(mg/kg)Ca(mIngredients of animaloriginBaconPork, cured 0.02 28.003.50 1.00 3.70 1.40 0.01N 7 18 6 18 18 18 15Beef Meat,mechanicallyseparated
0.05 25.002.80 1.20 0.70 2.90 0.03
N 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Broth (orbouillon),dehydrated
0.32 45.003.00 2.40 0.70 2.00 0.01
N 1 2 1 2 1 1 1Heart, raw 0.02 95.0023.20 10.20 1.90 4.30 0.14N 1 1 1 1 1 2 2Kidney, raw 0.80 80.0036.40 25.50 3.80 5.10 0.27N 4 1 2 1 2 3 2Liver, raw 2.48 128.0076.20 27.80 2.60 9.40 0.69N 9 3 2 3 2 4 9Tripe, raw 0.02 1.00 5.60 1.70 0.10 0.40 0.02N 1 1 1 3 6 1 1ChickenMeat andskin, raw 0.06 63.009.20 1.70 1.10 3.30 0.00
N 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Broth (orbouillon),dehydrated
0.32 25.006.00 4.30 1.00 1.00 0.00
N 1 2 1 2 1 1 1Gizzard 0.52 47.007.50 1.90 0.30 1.40 0.02N 3 8 1 8 8 6 2Liver 7.38 93.0061.80 19.60 1.40 7.60 0.23N 3 8 6 10 8 7 4Egg Dried, whole 1.71 3.00 59.10 15.40 2.00 3.90 0.04N 2 2 2 2 2 2 2Fish Meal,menhaden5-02-009
0.15 3080.001.00 55.008.80 4.80 0.20 0.15
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Meal, tuna5-02-023
3050.00 65.008.80 8.80 0.14
N 1 1 1 1 1Meal, white5-02-025
0.80 3575.000.30 49.007.30 6.90 1.60 5.90 0.08
N1 2 1 2 2 2 2 1 2LambGround 0.18 60.006.50 2.10 1.10 1.30 0.02N 1 1 1 1 1 1 1


===== PDF PAGE 858 =====
857
Feed Name DescriptionIFNb Biotin(mg/kg)Choline(mg/kg)Folate(mg/kg)Niacin(mg/kg)
PantothenicAcid(mg/kg)Riboflavin(mg/kg)Thiamin(mg/kg)B6(mg/kg)B12(mg/kg)Ca(mLiver 2.30 161.0061.30 36.30 3.40 9.00 0.90N 4 1 1 1 1 1 19Meat,mechanicallyseparated
0.05 25.00 1.20 0.70 1.10 0.03
N 1 1 1 1 1 1MeatMeal,rendered5-09-323
0.14 2200.000.60 59.005.80 5.20 0.20 0.09
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Meal, withbone,rendered
5-00-388
0.14 1996.000.30 46.004.10 4.40 0.80 12.8070.00
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1PoultryBy-productmeal 5-03-798
0.30 5966.001.00 40.0010.60 10.50 1.00 4.40 0.31
N1 2 1 2 2 2 1 1 2ShrimpMeat, mixedspecies 0.03 26.002.80 0.30 0.30 1.00 0.01
N 1 6 2 6 5 3 19Milk Skimmed,dried 5-01-175
0.33 1322.000.62 12.0035.80 20.60 3.50 0.40 0.03
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2TurkeyMechanicallydeboned 0.07 20.006.70 1.30 0.50 2.10 0.00
N 1 1 1 1 1 1 1WheyDried 4-01-182
0.37 1675.000.90 11.0045.90 28.50 3.90 4.00 0.02
N2 2 1 2 2 2 2 1 2Ingredients of plantoriginBarleyGrain 4-00-549
0.18 1009.000.20 53.005.70 2.40 5.00 3.10 0.00
N2 2 8 3 3 4 4 4 1Beet(sugar)Pulp, dried4-00-669
809.00 19.001.10 0.90 0.30 1.90 0.00 5.0
N 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 2CarrotsWhole, raw 0.14 9.00 2.00 0.60 1.00 1.50 0.00N 9 23 11 177 179 21 1Cereal


===== PDF PAGE 859 =====
858
Feed Name DescriptionIFNb Biotin(mg/kg)Choline(mg/kg)Folate(mg/kg)Niacin(mg/kg)
PantothenicAcid(mg/kg)Riboflavin(mg/kg)Thiamin(mg/kg)B6(mg/kg)B12(mg/kg)Ca(mCereal by-product4-00-466
1230.000.15 18.0014.501.50 1.50 5.00 25.
N 1 1 1 1 1 1 1ChicoryRoot 0.23 4.00 3.20 0.30 0.40 2.40 0.00N 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Corn,yellowBran, crude 0.04 27.006.40 1.00 0.10 1.50 0.00N 4 4 4 6 5 4 1Distillersgrain, dried5-02-842
0.40 1850.000.00 42.005.90 2.80 1.60 2.0
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 15-02-843andDistillersgrain w/solubles,dried
5-28-236
N0.30 3400.000.88 80.0011.40 9.00 3.50 4.0
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 15-28-2433andGluten feed,dried 5-02-903
0.22 2420.000.20 75.0017.80 2.40 2.00 8.0
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Gluten meal5-28-242
0.15 330.000.20 55.003.00 2.20 0.30 6.20
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Grits 0.05 12.004.90 0.40 1.30 1.50 0.00N 3 1 1 1 1 1 1Grain 4-02-935
0.07 860.000.24 27.004.00 1.40 3.30 6.50 0.00 2.0
N2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 1 1Meal,degermed 0.48 10.003.10 0.50 1.40 2.60 0.00
N 23 1 25 1 1 5 1Meal, wholekernel 0.25 36.004.30 2.00 3.90 3.00 0.00
N 1 8 6 9 8 3 1Starch 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00N 1 1 1 1.0 1 1 1Syrup, dark 0.00 0.00 0.20 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.00N 2 2 2 2 2 2 1Flaxseed (linseed)Whole 2.78 14.0015.30 1.60 1.70 9.30 0.00N 1 1 1 1 1 1 1


===== PDF PAGE 860 =====
859
Feed Name DescriptionIFNb Biotin(mg/kg)Choline(mg/kg)Folate(mg/kg)Niacin(mg/kg)
PantothenicAcid(mg/kg)Riboflavin(mg/kg)Thiamin(mg/kg)B6(mg/kg)B12(mg/kg)Ca(mMolassesBeet, sugar4-00-608
48.004.60 2.40
N 1 1 1Oats Grain 4-03-309
0.27 946.000.30 12.007.80 1.10 6.00 1.00
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Groats 4-03-331
0.20 1232.000.30 18.0011.00 1.30 6.80
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1Peas Green, raw 0.65 21.001.00 1.30 2.70 1.70 0.00N 1 7 1 7 7 7 1PotatoFlesh andskin, raw 0.28 14.003.70 0.20 0.70 1.80 0.00
N 9 9 9 8 9 9 1Rice Bran 4-03-928
0.42 1135.002.20 293.0023.00 2.50 22.5014.00
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Brewers(broken)4-03-932
0.08 800.000.20 30.008.00 0.70 1.40 28.00
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Brown,mediumgrain
0.20 43.0014.90 0.40 4.10 5.10 0.00
N 1 5 1 5 5 1 1Flour, brown 0.16 63.0015.90 0.80 4.40 7.40 0.00N 6 3 3 3 3 3 1Flour, white 0.04 26.008.20 0.20 1.40 4.40 0.00N 2 2 2 2 2 2 1Hulls 1-08-075NSorghumGrain 4-20-893
0.26 668.000.20 41.0012.40 1.30 3.00 5.20
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1SoybeanFlour,defatted N 3.05 26.0020.00 2.50 7.00 5.70 0.00
7 5 5 5 5 5 1Flour, fullfat, roasted 2.27 33.0012.10 9.40 4.10 3.50 0.00
N 1 1 1 1 1 1 1


===== PDF PAGE 861 =====
860
Feed Name DescriptionIFNb Biotin(mg/kg)Choline(mg/kg)Folate(mg/kg)Niacin(mg/kg)
PantothenicAcid(mg/kg)Riboflavin(mg/kg)Thiamin(mg/kg)B6(mg/kg)B12(mg/kg)Ca(mHulls 1-04-560NMeal, solvent(44% CP)5-20-637and5-04-604
0.32 2794.001.30 29.0016.00 2.90 4.50 6.00
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Meal,solvent,without hulls(48% CP)
5-20-638and5-04-612
0.32 2731.001.30 22.0015.00 2.90 3.20 5.00
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1SugarGranulated 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.20 0.00 0.00 0.00N 3 3 3 3 1 3 1Brown 0.01 1.00 1.10 0.10 0.10 0.30 0.00N 2 5 5 4 5 5 1WheatFlour, wholegrain 0.44 64.0010.10 2.20 1.20 3.40 0.00
N 7 8 2 20 20 3 1Germ 2.81 68.0022.60 5.00 18.8013.000.00N 10 7 6 7 7 7 1Germ meal5-05-218
3175.002.80 23.20 6.10 21.90
N 1 1 0 1 1 1 0Flour, white,unenriched 0.26 13.004.40 0.40 1.20 0.40 0.00
N 15 1 10 1 1 45 1Middlings4-05-205
0.37 1439.000.80 98.0013.00 2.20 16.509.00
N1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Mill run NYeast Brewers,Torula, dried7-05-534
1.25 2871.0011.86498.0078.00 55.80 6.20 36.300.00
N2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1
aFor each ingredient two numbers are given: the first is the percent composition of each respective amino acid in the ingredient; the second,the number (N) of observations on which the data are based.bInternational Feed Number.


===== PDF PAGE 862 =====
861
TABLE 13-8 Composition of Selected Inorganic Macro-mineral Sources Used in
Petfood
Mineral
Source IFNa Calcium
%
Phosphorus
%
Sodium
%
Potassium
%
Chloride
%
Magnesium
%
Ammonium
chloride
8-
08-
814
— — — — 66.28 —
Ammonium
phosphate,
monobasic
6-
09-
338
— 24.74 — — — —
Ammonium
phosphate,
dibasic
6-
00-
370
— 20.60 — — — —
Bone meal,
steamed
6-
00-
400
30.71 12.86 5.69 — — —
Calcium
carbonate
6-
01-
069
39.39 — — — — —
Calcium
chloride,
anhydrous
6-
20-
774
36.11 — — — 63.89 —
Calcium
chloride,
dihydrate
N/A 27.53 — — — 48.23 —
Calcium
hydroxide
6-
14-
014
54.09 — — — — —
Calcium
oxide
6-
14-
003
71.47 — — — — —
Calcium
phosphate,
dibasic
6-
01-
080
22.00 19.30 — — — —
Calcium
phosphate,
monobasic
6-
01-
082
16.40 24.60 — — — —
Limestone,
ground
6-
02-
635
34.00 — — — — 2.06


===== PDF PAGE 863 =====
862
Mineral
Source IFNa Calcium
%
Phosphorus
%
Sodium
%
Potassium
%
Chloride
%
Magnesium
%
Magnesium
carbonate
6-
02-
754
— — — — — 30.81
Magnesium
chloride,
hexahydrate
6-
20-
872
— — — — 34.88 11.96
Magnesium
oxide
6-
02-
756
— — — — — 56.20
Magnesium
sulfate
6-
02-
758
— — — — — 9.80
Oystershell
flour
6-
03-
481
38.00 — — — — —
Phosphate,
defluorinated
6-
01-
780
32.00 18.00 4.90 — — —
Phosphoric
acid
(H3PO4)
6-
03-
707
— 31.60 — — — —
Potassium
bicarbonate
6-
29-
493
— — — 39.05 — —
Potassium
carbonate
6-
09-
336
— — — 56.58 — —
Potassium
chloride
6-
03-
755
— — 1.00 57.00 47.30 —
Potassium
iodide
6-
03-
759
— — — 21.00 — —
Potassium
sulfate
6-
06-
098
— — — 41.84 — —
Sodium
bicarbonate
6-
04-
272
— — 27.00 — — —


===== PDF PAGE 864 =====
863
Mineral
Source IFNa Calcium
%
Phosphorus
%
Sodium
%
Potassium
%
Chloride
%
Magnesium
%
Sodium
carbonate
6-
12-
316
— — — — — —
Sodium
chloride
6-
04-
152
— 39.34 — 60.66 —
Sodium
phosphate,
monobasic
6-
04-
288
— 22.50 16.68 — — —
Sodium
selenate,
decahydrate
6-
26-
014
— — 12.46 — — —
Sodium
selenite
6-
26-
013
— — 26.60 — — —
Sodium
sulfate,
decahydrate
6-
04-
292
— — 14.27 — — —
aInternational Feed Number.


===== PDF PAGE 865 =====
864
TABLE 13-9 Composition of Selected Inorganic Micro-mineral Sources Used in Petfood
MineralSource ChemicalFormula IFNa Copper(mg/kg)Iodine(mg/kg)Iron(mg/kg)Manganese(mg/kg)Selenium(mg/kg)Zinc(mg/kg)Cobalt(mg/kg)
Calciumiodate Ca(IO3)2 6-16-610
— 651,000— — — — —
CobaltcarbonateCoCO3 6-01-566
— — — — — — 450,000
Cobaltsulfate,heptahydrate
CoSO4·7H2O 6-01-564
30 — 10 20 — — 210,000
CupriccarbonateCuCO3 6-01-703
530,000— — — — — —
Cupricchloride,dihydrate
CuCl2·2H2O 6-01-705
372,000— — — — — —
Cupric oxideCuO 6-01-711
798,800— — — — — —
Cupricsulfate,pentahydrate
CuSO4·5H2O 6-01-720
254,500— — — — — —
Cuprousiodide CuI 6-01-721
333,600666,400— — — — —
Cuprousoxide Cu2O 6-28-224
888,200— — — — — —
FerrouscarbonateFeCO3 6-01-863
3,000— 430,0003,500 — — —
Ferroussulfate,heptahydrate
FeSO4·7H2O 6-20-734
— — 210,0001,200 — 100 —
ManganesecarbonateMnCO3 6-03-036
— — — 478,000— — —
Manganesechloride MnCl2 6-03-038
— — — 430,000— — —
Manganeseoxide MnO 6-03-056
2,000— 34,000600,000— — —
Manganesesulfate,monohydrate
MnSO4·H2O N/A— — 400 325,069— — —
Manganesesulfate,pentahydrate
MnSO4·5H2O N/A— — — 227,891— — —


===== PDF PAGE 866 =====
865
MineralSource ChemicalFormula IFNa Copper(mg/kg)Iodine(mg/kg)Iron(mg/kg)Manganese(mg/kg)Selenium(mg/kg)Zinc(mg/kg)Cobalt(mg/kg)Potassiumiodide KI 6-03-759
— 681,700— — — — —
Sodiumselenate,decahydrate
Na2SeO4·10H2O6-26-014
— — — — 213,920— —
Sodiumselenite Na2SeO3 6-26-013
— — — — 456,000— —
ZinccarbonateZnCO3 6-05-549
— — — — — 521,400—
Zincchloride ZnCl2 6-05-551
— — — — — 479,700—
Zinc oxideZnO 6-05-533
— — — — — 780,000—
Zinc sulfate,monohydrateZnSO4·H2O 6-05-555
— — — — — 363,600—
aInternational Feed Number.


===== PDF PAGE 867 =====
866
TABLE 15-3 Nutrient Requirements for Growth of Puppies After Weaning
Nutrient
Minimal RequirementAdequate IntakeRecommendedAllowance Safe Upper LimitAmt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt.kgBW0
Growing Puppies 4-14Weeks OldCrude Protein (g) 180 45 12.5 225 56.315.7Amino AcidsArginine (g)d 6.3 1.580.44 7.9 1.980.55Histidine (g)3.1 0.780.22 3.9 0.980.27Isoleucine (g)5.2 1.300.36 6.5 1.630.45Methionine (g)2.8 0.700.19 3.5 0.880.24Methionine &Cystine (g)5.6 1.400.39 7.0 1.750.49
Leucine (g)10.32.580.72 12.93.220.90Lysine (g)7.0 1.750.49 8.8 2.200.61 >20 >5.0>1.39Phenylalanine (g)5.2 1.300.36 6.5 1.630.45Phenylalanine &Tyrosine (g)e 10.42.600.72 13.03.250.90
Threonine (g)6.5 1.630.45 8.1 2.030.56Tryptophan (g)1.8 0.450.13 2.3 0.580.16Valine (g) 5.4 1.350.38 6.8 1.700.47Growing Puppies 14Weeks and OlderCrude Protein (g) 140 35 9.7 175 43.812.2Amino AcidsArginine (g)d 5.3 1.330.37 6.6 1.650.46Histidine (g)2.0 0.500.14 2.5 0.630.17Isoleucine (g)4.0 1.000.28 5.0 1.250.35Methionine (g)2.1 0.530.15 2.6 0.650.18Methionine &Cystine (g)4.2 1.050.29 5.3 1.330.37
Leucine (g)6.5 1.630.45 8.2 2.050.57Lysine (g)5.6 1.400.39 7.0 1.750.49 >20 >5.0>1.39Phenylalanine (g)4.0 1.000.28 5.0 1.250.35Phenylalanine &Tyrosine (g)e 8.0 2.000.56 10.02.500.70
Threonine (g)5.0 1.250.35 6.3 1.580.44Tryptophan1.4 0.350.10 1.8 0.450.13Valine (g) 4.5 1.130.31 5.6 1.400.39Growing Puppies AfterWeaningTotal Fat (g) 85 21.35.9 85 21.35.9 330a 82.523.0Fatty AcidsLinoleic Acid (g) 11.8 3.0 0.8 13 3.3 0.8 65a 16.34.5α-Linolenic Acid(g)f 0.7 0.180.05 0.8 0.2 0.05
ArachidonicAcid (g) 0.3 0.080.0220.3 0.080.022
Eicosapentaenoic&DocosahexaenoicAcid (g)g 0.5 0.130.0360.5 0.130.03611a 2.8 0.77


===== PDF PAGE 868 =====
867
Nutrient
Minimal RequirementAdequate IntakeRecommendedAllowance Safe Upper LimitAmt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt.kgBW0
MineralsCalcium (g)h 8.0 2.0 0.56 12h 3.0h 0.68h 18 4.5 1.25Phosphorus (g) 10 2.5 0.68 10 2.5 0.68Magnesium (mg)180 45 12.5 400 10027.4Sodium (mg) 2,20055010 0 2,200550100
Potassium ( ) 4 4 1 1 0 30 4 4 1 1 0 30Chloride (mg) 2,900720200 2,900720200Iron (mg)i 72 18 5.0 88 22 6.1
Copper (mg)i 11 2.7 0.76 11 2.7 0.76Zinc (mg)40 10 2.7 100 25 6.84Manganese (mg) 5.6 1.4 0.38 5.6 1.4 0.38Selenium (μg)210 52.513.7 350 87.525.1Iodine(μg) 880 22061.0 880 22061.0VitaminsVitamin A (RE)j 1,21230384 1,515379105 15,000j 3,750j 1,044Cholecalciferol(μg)k 11.0 2.750.76 13.83.4 0.96 80 20 5.6
Vitamin E (α-tocopherol) (mg)l 24 6.0 1.7 30 7.5 2.1
Vitamin K    (Menadione)(mg)m 1.3 0.330.0901.640.410.11
Thiamin (mg) 1.080.270.0751.380.340.096Riboflavin (mg) 4.2 1.050.27 5.251.320.37Pyridoxine (mg) 1.2 0.3 0.0841.5 0.3750.10Niacin (mg) 13.63.4 0.94 17.04.251.18Pantothenic Acid(mg) 12 3.0 0.84 15.03.751.04
Cobalamin (μg) 28 7 1.95 35 8.752.4Folic Acid (μg) 216 54 15.0 270 68 18.8Biotinn
Choline (mg) 1,36034095 1,700425118
aThe values for Amt/kg DM have been calculated assuming a dietary energy density of 4,000 kcal ME/kg. (The term ≡ signifies equivalence.)If the energy density of the diet is not 4,000 kcal ME/kg, then to calculate the Amt/kg DM for each nutrient, multiply the value for the nutrientin the column labeled Amt/kg DM by the energy density of the pet food (in kcal ME/kg) and divide by 4,000.bTo calculate the amount to feed of each nutrient, multiply the value for Amt/1,000 kcal ME for each nutrient by the energy requirement forthe puppy in kcal (calculated from Table 15-2) and divide by 1,000.cThe values for Amt/BW0.75 apply only to 5.5-kg puppies of expected mature body weight of 35 kg. To calculate the amount of a nutrient forpuppies of different current or expected mature body weights, calculate the energy requirement from Table 15-2 and multiply this by thenutrient Amt/1,000 kcal and divide by 1,000.dFor 4 to 14 week-old puppies, 0.01 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein above 180 g and 225 g, for the MR and RA,respectively, of arginine. For puppies over 14 weeks of age, 0.01 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein above 140 g and 175g for the MR and RA of arginine, respectively.eThe quantity of tyrosine required to maximize black hair color may be about 1.5-2.0 times this quantity.fThe requirement for α-linolenic acid varies depending upon linoleic acid content of the diet. The ratio of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acidshould be between 2.6 and 16. Note that 0.8 g/kg DM value shown is the minimum RA of α-linolenic acid at 13 g linoleic acid per kg DMresulting in a ratio of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acid of approximately 16.gEicosapentaenoic acid should not exceed 60% of the total amount.hThe RA for the calcium requirements of weaned puppies (of expected mature body weight >25 kg) for up to 14 weeks of life should not beless than 0.54 g calcium/kg body weight.


===== PDF PAGE 869 =====
868
iSome oxide forms of iron and copper should not be used because of low bioavailability.jFor vitamin A, requirements are expressed as RE (retinol equivalents). One RE is equal to 1 μg of all-trans retinol, and one IU of vitamin A isequal to 0.3 RE. Safe upper limit values are expressed as μg retinol.k1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D3.lHigher concentrations of vitamin E are recommended for high PUFA diets. One international unit of vitamin E = 1 mg all-rac-α-tocopherylacetate (see Chapter 8).mDogs have a metabolic requirement, but a dietary requirement has not been demonstrated when natural diets are fed. Adequate vitamin K isprobably synthesized by intestinal microbes. The vitamin K allowance is expressed in terms of the commercially used precursor menadionethat requires alkylation to the active vitamin K.nFor normal diets not containing raw egg white, adequate biotin is probably provided by microbial synthesis in the intestine. Diets containingantibiotics may need supplementation.


===== PDF PAGE 870 =====
869
TABLE 15-5 Nutrient Requirements of Adult Dogs for Maintenance
Nutrient
Minimal RequirementAdequate IntakeRecommendedAllowance Safe Upper LimitAmt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75
Crude Protein (g)80 20 2.62 100 25 3.28Amino Acids    Arginine (g)c 2.8 0.700.092 3.5 0.880.11    Histidine (g)1.5 0.370.048 1.9 0.480.062    Isoleucine (g)3.0 0.750.098 3.8 0.950.12    Methionine (g)2.6 0.650.085 3.3 0.830.11    Methionine &Cystine (g) 5.2 1.300.17 6.5 1.630.21
    Leucine (g)5.4 1.350.18 6.8 1.700.22    Lysine (g) 2.8 0.700.092 3.5 0.880.11    Phenylalanine3.6 0.900.12 4.5 1.130.15    Phenylalanine &Tyrosine (g)d 5.9 1.480.19 7.4 1.850.24
    Threonine (g)3.4 0.850.11 4.3 1.080.14    Tryptophan (g)1.1 0.280.036 1.4 0.350.046    Valine (g) 3.9 0.980.13 4.9 1.230.16Total Fat (g) 40 10 1.3 55 13.81.8 330a 82.5 10.8Fatty Acids    Linoleic Acid (g) 9.5 2.4 0.3 11 2.8 0.3665a 16.3 2.1    α-LinolenicAcid(g)e 0.360.090.0120.440.11 0.014
    Arachidonic Acid(g)    Eicosapentaenoic+ 0.440.11 0.030.440.11 0.0311a 2.8 0.37
      DocosahexaenoicAcid (g)f
Minerals    Calcium (g)2.0 0.500.059 4.0 1.0 0.13    Phosphorus (g) 3.0 0.750.103.0 0.750.10    Magnesium (mg)180 45 5.91 600 15019.7    Sodium (mg)300 75 9.85 800 20026.2>15 g    Potassium (g) 4.0 1.0 0.144.0 1.0 0.14    Chloride (mg) 1,20030040 1,20030040 23.5 g    Iron (mg)g 30 7.5 1.0 30 7.5 1.0
    Copper (mg)g 6 1.5 0.2 6 1.5 0.2    Zinc (mg) 60 15 2.0 60 15 2.0    Manganese (mg) 4.8 1.2 0.164.8 1.2 0.16    Selenium (μg) 350 87.511.8 350 87.511.8    Iodine (μg)700 17523.6 880 22029.6≥ 4 mgVitamins    Vitamin A (RE)h 1,21230340 1,51537950 64,000h16,000h2,099h
    Cholecalciferol(μg)i 11.0 2.750.3613.83.4 0.4580 20 2.6
    Vitamin E (α-tocopherol) (mg)j 24 6.0 0.8 30 7.5 1.0


===== PDF PAGE 871 =====
870
Nutrient
Minimal RequirementAdequate IntakeRecommendedAllowance Safe Upper LimitAmt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.75
    Vitamin K(Menadione) (mg)k 1.3 0.330.0431.630.410.054
    Thiamin (mg) 1.8 0.450.0592.250.560.074    Riboflavin (mg)4.2 1.050.138 5.251.3 0.171    Pyridoxine (mg) 1.2 0.300.041.5 0.3750.049    Niacin (mg) 13.63.4 0.4517.04.250.57    Pantothenic Acid(mg) 12 3.0 0.3915 3.750.49
    Cobalamin (μg) 28 7 0.9235 8.751.15    Folic Acid (μg) 216 54 7.1 270 67.58.9    Biotinl
    Choline (mg) 1,36034045 1,70042556
aThe values for Amt/kg DM have been calculated assuming a dietary energy density of 4,000 kcal ME/kg. (The term ≡ signifiesequivalence.) If the energy density of the diet is not 4,000 kcal ME/kg, then to calculate the Amt/kg DM for each nutrient, multiply thevalue for the nutrient in the column labeled Amt/kg DM by the energy density of the pet food (in kcal ME/kg) and divide by 4,000.bTo calculate the amount to feed of each nutrient, multiply the value for Amt/1,000 kcal ME for each nutrient by the energy requirementfor laboratory kennel dogs in kcal (calculated from Table 15-4) and divide by 1,000. For dogs with an unusually low energy intake (belowthe suggested requirement), the nutrient concentrations (Amt/1,000 kcal) may not be adequate. These animals should be fed the nutrientamounts shown in the column Amt/kg BW0.75.c0.01 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein above 80 g and 100 g for the MR and RA, respectively.dThe quantity of tyrosine required to maximize black hair color may be about 1.5-2.0 times this quantity.eThe requirement for α-linolenic acid varies depending upon linoleic acid content of the diet. The ratio of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acidshould be between 2.6 and 26. Note that 0.44 g/kg DM value shown is the minimum RA of α-linolenic acid at 11 g linoleic acid per kgDM, resulting in a ratio of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acid of approximately 25.f50-60% of the total amount should be eicosapentaenoic acid, and 40-50% should be docosahexaenoic acid.gSome oxides of iron and copper should not be used because of low bioavailability.hVitamin A requirements expressed as RE (retinol equivalents). One RE is equal to 1 μg of all-trans retinol, and one IU of vitamin A isequal to 0.3 RE. Safe upper limit values expressed as μg retinol.i1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D3.jHigher concentrations of vitamin E are recommended for high PUFA diets. One international unit of vitamin E = 1 mg all-rac-α-tocopheryl acetate (see Chapter 8).kDogs have a metabolic requirement, but a dietary requirement has not been demonstrated when natural diets are fed. Adequate vitamin Kis probably synthesized by intestinal microbes. The vitamin K allowance is expressed in terms of the commercially used precursormenadione that requires alkylation to the active vitamin K.lFor normal diets not containing raw egg white, adequate biotin is probably provided by microbial synthesis in the intestine. Dietscontaining antibiotics may need supplementation.


===== PDF PAGE 872 =====
871
TABLE 15-8 Nutrient Requirements of Bitches for Late Gestation and Peak Lactationa
Nutrient
Minimal RequirementAdequate IntakeRecommendedAllowance Safe Upper LimitAmt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.75d
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.75d
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.75d
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.75d
Crude Protein 200 50 24.6 200 50 24.6Amino Acids    Arginine (g)e 10.02.501.23 10.02.501.23    Histidine (g) 4.4 1.100.54 4.4 1.100.54    Isoleucine (g) 7.1 1.780.87 7.1 1.780.87    Methionine (g) 3.1 0.780.38 3.1 0.780.38    Methionine &Cystine (g) 6.2 1.550.76 6.2 1.550.76
    Leucine (g) 20.05.002.46 20.05.002.46    Lysine (g) 9.0 2.251.11 9.0 2.251.11    Phenylalanine (g) 8.3 2.081.02 8.3 2.081.02    Phenylalanine &Tyrosine(g)f 12.33.081.51 12.33.081.51
    Threonine (g) 10.42.601.28 10.42.601.28    Tryptophan (g) 1.2 0.300.15 1.2 0.300.15    Valine (g) 13.03.251.60 13.03.251.60Total Fat (g) 85 21.310.5 85 21.310.5 330b 82.540.6Fatty Acids    Linoleic Acid (g) 11 2.8 1.4 13 3.3 1.6 65b 16.38.0    α-Linolenic Acid(g)g 0.7 0.180.09 0.8 0.2 0.10
    Arachidonic Acid(g)    Eicosapentaenoic+ 0.5 0.130.06 0.5 0.130.06 11b 2.8 1.4
      DocosahexaenoicAcid (g)h
Minerals    Calcium (g) 8.0 1.9 0.82 8.0 1.9 0.82    Phosphorus (g) 5.0 1.2 0.58 5.0 1.2 0.58    Magnesium (mg) 600 15069 600 15069    Sodium (mg) 2,000500238 2,000500238    Potassium (g) 3.6 0.9 0.4303.6 0.9 0.43    Chloride (mg) 3,000750358 3,000750358    Iron (mg)i 70 17 8.67 70 17 8.67
    Copper (mg)i 12.43.1 1.52 12.43.1 1.52    Zinc (mg) 96 24 11.7 96 24 11.7    Manganese (mg) 7.2 1.8 .87 7.2 1.8 .87    Selenium (µg) 350 87.543 350 87.543    Iodine (μg) 880 220108 880 220108Vitamins    Vitamin A (RE)j 1,212303149 1,515379186 15,000j 3,750j 1,846j
    Cholecalciferol(μg)k 11.0 2.751.35 13.83.4 1.70 80 20 9.8
    Vitamin E (α-tocopherol) (mg)l 24 6.0 3.0 30 7.5 3.7


===== PDF PAGE 873 =====
872
Nutrient
Minimal RequirementAdequate IntakeRecommendedAllowance Safe Upper LimitAmt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.75d
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.75d
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.75d
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.75d
    Vitamin K(Menadione)(mg)m 1.3 0.330.16 1.6 0.410.20
    Thiamin (mg) 1.8 0.450.22 2.250.560.28    Riboflavin (mg) 4.2 1.050.52 5.3 1.3 0.64    Pyridoxine (mg) 1.2 0.300.15 1.5 0.3750.185    Niacin (mg) 13.63.4 1.67 17 4.252.09    Pantothenic Acid(mg) 12 3.0 1.48 15 3.751.84
    Cobalamin (μg) 28 7 3.45 35 8.754.3    Folic Acid (μg) 216 54 26.6 270 67.533.2    Biotinn
    Choline (mg) 1,360340167 1,700425209
aFew data could be found for the dietary concentrations for the minimal requirement for gestation for the bitch. The values for lactationrelative to kg DM and 1,000 kcal ME may be taken as satisfactory for gestation.bThe values for Amt/kg DM have been calculated assuming a dietary energy density of 4,000 kcal ME/kg. (The term ≡ signifiesequivalence.) If the energy density of the diet is not 4,000 kcal ME/kg, then to calculate the Amt/kg DM for each nutrient, multiply the valuefor the nutrient in the column labeled Amt/kg DM by the energy density of the pet food (in kcal ME/kg) and divide by 4,000.cTo calculate the amount to feed of each nutrient multiply the value for Amt/1 000 kcal ME for each nutrient by the energy requirement inkcal (calculated from Tables 15-6 and 15-7) and divide by 1 000.dThe values for Amt/BW0.75 apply only to a 22-kg bitch in peak lactation with 8 puppies and consuming 5,000 kcal/day. To calculate theamount for bitches of different body weights or litter sizes, calculate the energy requirement from Table 15-7 and multiply this value by thenutrient Amt/1,000 kcal and divide by 1,000. To calculate the amount of a nutrient for gestating dogs, calculate the energy requirement fromTable 15-6 and multi l this value b the nutrient Amt/1 000 kcal and divide b 1 000e0.01 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein above 200.fThe quantity of tyrosine required to maximize black hair color may be about 1.5-2.0 times this quantity.gThe requirement for α-linolenic acid varies depending upon linoleic acid content of the diet. The ratio of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acidshould be between 2.6 and 16. Note that 0.8 g/kg DM value shown is the minimum RA of α-linolenic acid at 13 g linoleic acid per kg DM,resulting in a ratio of linoleic acid to α-linolenic acid of approximately 16.h50-60% of the total amount should be eicosapentaenoic, acid and 40-50% should be docosahexaenoic acid.iSome oxides of iron and copper should not be used because of low bioavailability.jVitamin A requirements expressed as RE (retinol equivalents). One RE is equal to 1 μg of all-trans retinol, and one IU of vitamin A is equalto 0.3 RE. Safe upper limit values expressed as μg retinol.k1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D3.lHigher concentrations of vitamin E are recommended for high PUFA diets. One international unit of vitamin E = 1 mg all-rac-α-tocopherylacetate (see Chapter 8).mDogs have a metabolic requirement, but a dietary requirement has not been demonstrated when natural diets are fed. Adequate vitamin K isprobably synthesized by intestinal microbes. The vitamin K allowance is expressed in terms of the commercially used precursor menadionethat requires alkylation to the active vitamin K.nFor normal diets not containing raw egg white, adequate biotin is probably provided by microbial synthesis in the intestine. Diets containingantibiotics may need supplementation.


===== PDF PAGE 874 =====
873
TABLE 15-10 Nutrient Requirements for Growth of Kittens After Weaning
Nutrient
Minimal RequirementAdequate IntakeRecommendedAllowance Safe Upper LimitAmt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Crude Protein 180 45 9.40 225 56.311.8Amino Acids    Arginine (g)d 7.7 1.930.40 9.6 2.4 0.50 35 8.751.83    Histidine (g)2.6 0.650.14 3.3 0.830.17 >22 >5.5>1.15    Isoleucine (g)4.3 1.080.23 5.4 1.4 0.29 >87 >21.7>4.54    Methionine (g)3.5 0.880.18 4.4 1.1 0.23 13 3.250.68    Methionine &Cystine (g)7.0 1.750.37 8.8 2.2 0.46
    Leucine (g)10.22.550.53 12.83.2 0.67 >87 >21.7>4.54    Lysine (g)6.8 1.700.35 8.5 2.1 0.44 >58 >14.5>3.03    Phenylalanine (g)4.0 1.000.21 5.0 1.3 0.27 >29 >7.25>1.51    Phenylalanine &Tyrosine (g)e 15.33.830.80 19.14.8 1.00 68 17 3.55
    Threonine (g)5.2 1.300.27 6.5 1.6 0.33 >51 >12.7>2.66    Tryptophan (g)1.3 0.330.069 1.6 0.400.08417 4.250.89    Valine (g) 5.1 1.280.27 6.4 1.6 0.33 >87 >21.7>4.54    Glutamic Acid(g) 75 18.83.92
    Taurine (g)f 0.320.0800.017 0.400.100.021>8.9>2.22>0.46Total Fat (g) 90 22.54.7 90 22.54.7 >330c >82.5>17.2Fatty Acids    Linoleic Acid (g) 5.5 1.4 0.29 5.5 1.4 0.29 55c 13.82.9    α-Linolenic Acid(g) 0.2 0.050.0100.2 0.050.010
    Arachidonic Acid(g) 0.2 0.050.0100.2 0.050.001
    Eicosapentaenoic& 0.1 0.0250.0050.1 0.0250.005
    Docosahexaenoic(g)g
Minerals    Calcium (g)5.2 1.3 0.274 8.0 2.0 0.410    Phosphorus (g)4.8 1.2 0.251 7.2 1.8 0.372    Magnesium (mg)160 40 8.3 400 10020    Sodium (mg)1,24031065 1,40035074 >10 g    Potassium (g)2.680.670.14 4.0 1.0 0.209    Chloride (mg)760 19042 900 22546.5    Iron (mg)h 70 17 3.2 80 20 4.2
    Copper (mg)h 4.5 1.1 0.23 8.4 2.1 0.44    Zinc (mg)50 12.52.6 75 18.53.9    Manganese (mg) 4.8 1.2 0.25 4.8 1.2 0.25    Selenium (μg)120 30 6.23 300 75 15.8    Iodine (μg) 1,80045093 1,80045093Vitamins    Vitamin A (μgretinol)i 800 20042 1,00025052 80,000j 20,000j 4,180j


===== PDF PAGE 875 =====
874
Nutrient
Minimal RequirementAdequate IntakeRecommendedAllowance Safe Upper LimitAmt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
    Cholecalciferol(μg)j 2.780.700.14 5.6 1.4 0.29 750 188 39
    Vitamin E (α-tocopherol) (mg)k 30 7.5 1.6 38 9.4 2.0
    Vitamin K(Menadione) (mg)l 1.0 0.250.05 1.0 0.250.05
    Thiamin (mg)4.4 1.1 0.23 5.5 1.4 0.29    Riboflavin (mg) 3.2 0.800.17 4.0 1.0 0.21    Pyridoxine (mg)2.0 0.5 0.10 2.500.6250.13    Niacin (mg) 32 8.0 1.7 40 10.02.1    Pantothenic Acid(mg) 4.6 1.150.24 5.701.430.30
    Cobalamin (μg) 18 4.5 0.9 22.55.6 1.18    Folic Acid (μg)600 15031 750 18839    Biotin (μg)m 60 15 3.1 75 18.753.9    Choline (mg)2,040510107 2,550637133
aThe values for Amt/kg DM have been calculated assuming a dietary energy density of 4,000 kcal ME/kg. (The term ≡ signifiesequivalence.) If the energy density of the diet is not 4,000 kcal ME/kg, then to calculate the Amt/kg DM for each nutrient, multiply the valuefor the nutrient in the column labeled Amt/kg DM by the energy density of the pet food (in kcal ME/kg) and divide by 4,000.bTo calculate the amount to feed of each nutrient, multiply the value for Amt/1,000 kcal ME for each nutrient by the energy requirement inkcal for kittens (calculated from Table 15-9) and divide by 1,000.cThe values for Amt/BW0.67 apply only to 800 g kittens with an expected mature body weight of 4 kg. To calculate the amounts for kittensof different actual or expected mature body weights, calculate the energy requirement from Table 15-9 and multiply this by the nutrientAmt/1,000 kcal and divide by 1,000.d0.02 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein above 180 g and 225 g for the MR and RA, respectively.eTo maximize black hair color, an equal quantity or greater of tyrosine to that of phenlyalanine is required.fThe recommended allowance of taurine for highly digestible purified diets is 0.4 g/kg diet, whereas the allowances for dry expanded andcanned diets are 1.0 g and 1.7 g/kg DM, respectively.gIt is advised that eicosapentaenoic acid not exceed 60% of the total eicosapentaenoic + docosahexaenoic amount.hSome forms of iron and copper should not be used because of low bioavailability.iOne IU of vitamin A is equal to 0.3 μg of all-trans retinol or 1 μg retinol = 3.333 IU of vitamin A. Safe upper limit values expressed as μgretinol.j1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D3.kHigher concentrations of vitamin E are recommended for high PUFA diets. One international unit of vitamin E = 1 mg all-rac-α-tocopherylacetate (see Chapter 8).lCats have a metabolic requirement, but a dietary requirement has not been demonstrated when natural diets (except fish-based diets) are fed.Under most conditions, adequate vitamin K is probably synthesized by intestinal microbes. The vitamin K allowance is expressed in terms ofthe commercially used precursor menadione that requires alkylation to the active vitamin K.mFor normal diets not containing raw egg white, adequate biotin is probably provided by microbial synthesis in the intestine. Dietscontaining antibiotics may need supplementation.


===== PDF PAGE 876 =====
875
TABLE 15-12 Nutrient Requirements of Adult Cats for Maintenance
Nutrient
Minimal RequirementAdequate IntakeRecommendedAllowance Safe Upper LimitAmt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Crude Protein 160 40 3.97 200 50 4.96    Amino Acids    Arginine (g)d 7.7 1.930.19 7.7 1.930.19    Histidine (g) 2.6 0.650.0642.6 0.650.064    Isoleucine (g) 4.3 1.080.11 4.3 1.080.11    Methionine (g)e 1.350.340.033 1.7 0.430.042    Methionine &Cystine (g)2.7 0.680.067 3.4 0.850.084
    Leucine (g) 10.22.550.25 10.22.550.25    Lysine (g)2.7 0.680.067 3.4 0.850.084    Phenylalanine (g) 4.0 1.000.0994.0 1.000.099    Phenylalanine &Tyrosine (g)f 15.33.830.38 15.33.830.38
    Threonine (g) 5.2 1.300.13 5.2 1.300.13    Tryptophan (g) 1.3 0.330.0321.3 0.330.032    Valine (g) 5.1 1.280.13 5.1 1.280.13    Taurine (g)g 0.320.0800.0079 0.400.100.0099Total Fat (g) 90 22.52.2 90 22.52.2 330a 82.58.2Fatty Acids    Linoleic Acid (g) 5.5 1.4 0.14 5.5 1.4 0.14 55a 13.81.4    α-Linolenic Acid(g)    Arachidonic Acid(g) 0.020.0050.00050.060.0150.00152a 0.5 0.049
    Eicosapentaenoic& 0.1 0.0250.00250.1 0.0250.0025
    DocosahexaenoicAcid (g)h
Minerals    Calcium (g)1.6 0.400.040 2.9 0.720.071    Phosphorus(g)1.4 0.350.035 2.6 0.640.063    Magnesium (mg)200 50 4.9 400 1009.5    Sodium (mg)650 16016.0 680 17016.7 >15 g    Potassium (g) 5.2 1.3 0.13 5.2 1.3 0.13    Chloride (mg) 960 24023.7 960 24023.7    Iron (mg)i 80 20 1.98 80 20 1.98
    Copper (mg)i 5.0 1.2 0.119 5.0 1.2 0.119    Zinc (mg) 74 18.51.9 74 18.51.9 >600    Manganese (mg) 4.8 1.2 0.119 4.8 1.2 0.119    Selenium (μg) 300 75 6.95 300 75 6.95    Iodine (μg)1,30032031.6 1,40035035Vitamins    Vitamin A (μgretinol)j 800 20019.8 1,00025024.7 100,000j 25,000j 2,469j
    Cholecalciferol(μg)k 5.6 1.4 0.14 7 1.750.17 750 188 19


===== PDF PAGE 877 =====
876
Nutrient
Minimal RequirementAdequate IntakeRecommendedAllowance Safe Upper LimitAmt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)a
Amt./1,000kcalMEb
Amt./kgBW0.67c
    Vitamin E (α-tocopherol) (mg)l 30 7.5 0.74 38 10 0.94
    Vitamin K(Menadione) (mg)m 1.0 0.250.0251.0 0.250.025
    Thiamin (mg) 4.4 1.1 0.11 5.6 1.4 0.14    Riboflavin (mg) 3.2 0.800.0794.0 1.0 0.099    Pyridoxine (mg)2.0 0.5 0.05 2.500.6250.06    Niacin (mg) 32 8.0 0.79 40 10.00.99    Pantothenic Acid(mg) 4.6 1.150.11 5.751.440.14
    Cobalamin (μg) 18 4.5 0.44 22.55.6 0.56    Folic Acid (μg)600 15015 750 18819    Biotin (μg)n 60 15 1.5 75 18.751.9    Choline (mg)2,04051050 2,55063763
aThe values for Amt/kg DM have been calculated assuming a dietary energy density of 4,000 kcal ME/kg. (The term ≡ signifies equivalence.)If the energy density of the diet is not 4,000 kcal ME/kg, then to calculate the Amt/kg DM for each nutrient, multiply the value for thenutrient in the column labeled Amt/kg DM by the energy density of the pet food (in kcal ME/kg) and divide by 4,000.bTo calculate the amount to feed of each nutrient, multiply the value for Amt/1,000 kcal ME for each nutrient by the energy requirement forlean cats in kcal ME (calculated from Table 15-11) and divide by 1,000. For cats with an unusually low energy intake (below the suggestedrequirement), the nutrient concentrations (Amt/1,000 kcal) may not be adequate. These animals should be fed the nutrient amounts shown inthe column Amt/kg BW0.67.cThe values in Amt/BW0.67 have been calculated for a lean cat with an energy intake of 100 kcal × BW0.67. To calculate the amounts foradult cats that are not lean, calculate the energy requirements from Table 15-11 and multiply this value by the nutrient Amt/1,000 kcal anddivide by 1,000.d0.02 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein above 200 g for the RA of arginine.eMethionine presumed to be one-half the sum of the requirement for methionine + cystine combined.fTo maximize black hair color, an equal quantity or greater of tyrosine to that of phenylalanine is required.gThe recommended allowance of taurine for highly digestible purified diets is 0.4 g/kg diet, whereas the allowances for dry expanded andcanned diets are 1.0 and 1.7 g/kg diet, respectively.hIncludes docosahexaenoic acid only; no information is available on eicosapentaenoic acid. It is advised that eicosapentaenoic acid isincluded but not exceed 20% of the total eicosapentaenoic + docosahexaenoic amount.iSome oxides of iron and copper should not be used because of low bioavailability.jOne IU of vitamin A is equal to 0.3 μg of all-trans retinol or 1 μg retinol =3.333 IU of vitamin A. Safe upper limit values expressed as μgretinol.k1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D3.lHigher concentrations of vitamin E are recommended for high PUFA diets. One international unit of vitamin E = 1 mg all-rac-α-tocopherylacetate (see Chapter 8).mCats have a metabolic requirement, but a dietary requirement has not been demonstrated when natural diets (except fish-based diets) are fed.Under most conditions, adequate vitamin K is probably synthesized by intestinal microbes. The vitamin K allowance is expressed in terms ofthe commercially used precursor menadione that requires alkylation to the active vitamin K.nFor normal diets not containing raw egg white, adequate biotin is probably provided by microbial synthesis in the intestine. Diets containingantibiotics may need supplementation.


===== PDF PAGE 878 =====
877
TABLE 15-14 Nutrient Requirements of Queens in Late Gestation and Peak Lactationa
Nutrient
Minimal RequirementAdequate IntakeRecommendedAllowance Safe Upper LimitAmt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.67d
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.67d
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.67d
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.67d
Gestating Adult CatsCrude Protein 170 43 5.90 213 53 7.40Amino Acids    Arginine (g)e 15 3.750.52 15 3.750.52    Histidine (g) 4.3 1.080.15 4.3 1.080.15    Isoleucine (g) 7.7 1.930.27 7.7 1.930.27    Methionine (g) 5.0 1.250.1705.0 1.250.170    Methionine &Cystine (g) 9.0 2.250.31 9.0 2.250.31
    Leucine (g) 18 4.500.63 18 4.500.63    Lysine (g) 11 2.750.38 11 2.750.38    Phenylalanine (g)    Phenylalanine &Tyrosine(g)f 15.33.830.53 19.14.780.66
    Threonine (g) 8.9 2.230.31 8.9 2.230.31    Tryptophan (g) 1.9 0.480.0661.9 0.480.066    Valine (g) 10 2.500.35 10 2.500.35    Taurine (g)g 0.420.1050.015 0.530.130.018Lactating Adult CatsCrude Protein 240 60 12.9 300 75 16.10Amino Acids    Arginine (g)e 15 3.8 0.81 15 3.8 0.81    Histidine (g) 7.1 1.8 0.39 7.1 1.8 0.39    Isoleucine (g) 12 3.0 0.64 12 3.0 0.64    Methionine (g) 6.0 1.5 0.32 6.0 1.5 0.32    Methionine &Cystine (g) 10 2.6 0.56 10.42.6 0.56
    Leucine (g) 20 5.0 1.07 20 5.0 1.07    Lysine (g) 14 3.5 0.75 14 3.5 0.75    Phenylalanine (g)    Phenylalanine &Tyrosine (g)f 15.33.830.52 0.82 19.14.8 1.03
    Threonine (g) 10.82.7 0.58 10.82.7 0.58    Tryptophan (g) 1.9 0.480.1001.9 0.480.100    Valine (g) 12 3.0 0.64 12 3.0 0.64    Taurine (g)g 0.420.1050.015 0.530.130.018Total Fat (g) 90 22.54.8 90 22.54.8 330b 82.517.6Fatty Acids    Linoleic Acid (g) 5.5 1.4 0.3 5.5 1.4 0.3 55b 13.82.93    α-Linolenic Acid(g) 0.2 0.0500.011 0.2 0.050.011
    Arachidonic Acid(g) 0.2 0.0500.011 0.2 0.0500.011
    Eicosapentaenoic& 0.1 0.02500.00670.1 0.0250.0044
      DocosahexaenoicAcid (g)h
Minerals


===== PDF PAGE 879 =====
878
Nutrient
Minimal RequirementAdequate IntakeRecommendedAllowance Safe Upper LimitAmt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.67d
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.67d
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.67d
Amt./kg DM(≡4,000kcal)b
Amt./1,000kcalMEc
Amt./kgBW0.67d
    Calcium (g) 10.82.7 0.56510.82.7 0.565    Phosphorus (g)4.9 1.22.261 7.6 1.9 0.411    Magnesium (mg)416 10422 500 12532    Sodium (mg) 2,680670 142 2,680670142    Potassium (g) 5.2 1.3 .277 5.2 1.3 0.277    Chloride (mg) 4,0001,000213 4,0001,000213    Iron (mg)i 80 20 4.3 80 20 4.3
    Copper (mg)i 8.8 2.2 0.47 8.8 2.2 0.47    Zinc (mg)42 10.52.2 60 15 3.2    Manganese (mg) 7.2 1.8 0.38 7.2 1.8 0.38    Selenium (μg) 300 75 16 300 75 16    Iodine (μg) 1,800450 96 1,80045096Vitamins    Vitamin A (μgretinol)j 1,600400 85 2,000500107 100,000j 25,000j 5,333j
    Cholecalciferol(μg)k 5.6 1.4 0.30 7.0 1.750.37 750 188 40
    Vitamin E (α-tocopherol) (mg)l 30 7.5 1.6 31 7.8 1.67
    Vitamin K(Menadione) (mg)m 1.0 0.250.18 1.0 0.250.18
    Thiamin (mg) 5.0 1.250.27 6.3 1.560.32    Riboflavin (mg) 3.2 0.800.17 4.0 1.0 0.21    Pyridoxine (mg)2.0 0.5 0.10 2.50 0.6250.11    Niacin (mg) 32 8.0 1.71 40 10.02.10    Pantothenic Acid(mg) 4.6 1.150.25 5.75 0.190.31
    Cobalamin (μg) 18 4.5 0.80 22.55.6 1.0    Folic Acid (μg)600 15027 750 187 33    Biotin (μg)n 60 15 2.7 75 18.753.3    Choline (mg)2,04051091 2,550637113
aWith the exception of amino acids, few data could be found for the dietary concentrations for the minimal requirement for gestation for thequeen. For other nutrients, the values for lactation relative to kg DM and 1,000 kcal ME may be taken as satisfactory for gestation andlactation in the queen.bThe values for Amt/kg DM have been calculated assuming a dietary energy density of 4,000 kcal ME/kg. (The term ≡ signifies equivalence.)If the energy density of the diet is not 4,000 kcal ME/kg, then to calculate the Amt/kg DM for each nutrient, multiply the value for the nutrientin the column labeled Amt/kg DM by the energy density of the pet food (in kcal ME/kg) and divide by 4,000.cTo calculate the amount to feed of each nutrient, multiply the value for Amt/1,000 kcal ME for each nutrient by the energy requirement inkcal ME (calculated from Table 15-13 for a lactating cat, or by multiplying kg BW0.67 by 140 for a cat during gestation) and divide by 1,000.dThe values for Amt/BW0.67 only apply to a queen weighing 4 kg in peak lactation with 3-4 kittens consuming 540 kcal ME/day. If the queendoes not fit these criteria, calculate the ME requirement from Table 15-13, multiply this value by nutrient Amt/1,000 kcal and divide by 1,000.To calculate the nutrient requirements for late gestation, compute the energy requirements from 140 × kg BW0.67 and multiply by Amt/1,000kcal and divide by 1,000.e0.02 g arginine should be added for every g of crude protein above 170 g and 213 g for the MR and RA, respectively.fTo maximize black hair color, an equal quantity or greater of tyrosine to that of phenylalanine is required.gThe recommended allowance of taurine for highly digestible purified diets is 0.53 g/kg DM, whereas the allowances for dry expanded andcanned diets are 1.0 and 1.7 g/kg dietary DM, respectively.hIt is advised that eicosapentaenoic acid not exceed 60% of the total eicosapentaenoic + docosahexaenoic amount.iSome oxides of iron and copper should not be used because of low bioavailability.jOne IU of vitamin A is equal to 0.3 μg of all-trans retinol or 1 μg retinol = 3.333 IU of vitamin A. Safe upper limit values expressed as μgretinol.


===== PDF PAGE 880 =====
879
k1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D3.lHigher concentrations of vitamin E are recommended for high PUFA diets. One international unit of vitamin E = 1 mg all-rac-α-tocopherylacetate (see Chapter 8).mCats have a metabolic requirement, but a dietary requirement has not been demonstrated when natural diets (except fish-based diets) are fed.Under most conditions, adequate vitamin K is probably synthesized by intestinal microbes. The vitamin K allowance is expressed in terms ofthe commercially used precursor menadione that requires alkylation to the active vitamin K.nFor normal diets not containing raw egg white, adequate biotin is probably provided by microbial synthesis in the intestine. Diets containingantibiotics may need supplementation.


===== PDF PAGE 881 =====
880
Table of Contents
TITLE PAGE 1
COPYRIGHT PAGE 2
CONTENTS 11
OVERVIEW 24
1 COMPARATIVE DIGESTIVE PHYSIOLOGY OF DOGS
AND CATS 30
Introduction 31
Digestive Compartments and Functions 34
Mouth 34
Esophagus 35
Stomach 35
Gastric Emptying 37
Small Intestine, Pancreas, and Liver 37
Large Intestine 41
Hormonal Aspects of Digestion 44
Measurement of, and Factors Affecting, Digestibility 44
References 48
2 FEEDING BEHAVIOR OF DOGS AND CATS 59
Food Ingestion by Feral Dogs and Cats 59
Diurnal Rhythms, and Feeding and Drinking Patterns 60
Role of Imprinting and Social Factors on Feeding Behavior62
Dietary Choice, Palatability, Learned Taste Aversions, and Preferences63
Control of Food Intake 65
Feeding Recommendations 66
References 67
3 ENERGY 71
Introduction 71
Energy Evaluation and Requirements: Two Ways of Looking at the
Issue 71
Energy Evaluation 72
Methods of Estimating Energy in Food 72
Prediction of Energy Content 73


===== PDF PAGE 882 =====
881
Energy Requirements of Dogs 81
Definitions 81
Basis for Establishing Energy Requirements 81
Basal Metabolic Rate 83
Diet-Induced Thermogenesis and Resting Fed Metabolic Rate83
Adult Maintenance 85
Gestation 86
Lactation 88
Growth 90
Physical Activity 91
Energy Requirements of Cats 91
Basis for Establishing Energy Requirements 91
Basal Metabolic Rate and Dietary Thermogenesis 92
Adult Maintenance 93
Gestation 96
Lactation 97
Growth 101
Energy Deficiency and Excess in Dogs and Cats 101
Body Condition 102
References 102
4 CARBOHYDRATES AND FIBER 112
Definition, Classification, and Measurement 112
Absorbable Carbohydrates 112
Digestible Carbohydrates 113
Fermentable Carbohydrates 113
Nonfermentable Carbohydrates 115
Absorbable Carbohydrates (Monosaccharides and Sugar Alcohols)115
Presence in Foodstuffs 116
Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization 116
Factors Affecting Digestibility, Absorption, and Utilization 117
Nutritive Value 118
Physicochemical Effects 118
Physiological Effects 119
Health-Related Characteristics 122
Digestible Carbohydrates (Disaccharides, Certain Oligosaccharides, and
Nonstructural Polysaccharides) 122
Presence in Foodstuffs 122


===== PDF PAGE 883 =====
882
Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization 122
Factors Affecting Digestibility, Absorption, and Utilization 125
Nutritive Value 128
Physicochemical Effects 128
Physiological Effects 129
Health-Related Characteristics 132
Fermentable Carbohydrates (Lactose, Certain Oligosaccharides, Dietary
Fibers, and Resistant Starch) 133
Presence in Foodstuffs 133
Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization 134
Factors Affecting Digestibility, Absorption, and Utilization 136
Nutritive Value 138
Physicochemical Effects 138
Physiological Effects 140
Health-Related Characteristics 146
Poorly Fermentable Carbohydrates (Cellulose and Wheat Bran)151
Presence in Foodstuffs 151
Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization 151
Factors Affecting Digestibility, Absorption, and Utilization 152
Nutritive Value 152
Physicochemical Effects 152
Physiological Effects 153
Health-Related Characteristics 156
Carbohydrates in Dog and Cat Diet Formulations 156
References 159
5 FAT AND FATTY ACIDS 178
Importance of Dietary Fats and Fatty Acids 178
Types and Sources of Dietary Fats and Fatty Acids 178
Nomenclature 178
Sources 180
Trans Fatty Acids 181
Medium-Chain Triacylglycerols 182
Conjugated Linoleic Acid 182
Other Sources 183
Analytical Procedures 184
Acid Hydrolysis 184


===== PDF PAGE 884 =====
883
Extraction and Saponification of Fatty Acids 184
Extraction for Total Lipid Analysis 184
Fat Energy and Nutrient Density 185
Digestion and Absorption 185
Preduodenal Lipase 185
Pancreatic Lipase 186
Other Lipases 186
Summary of Triacylglycerol Hydrolysis 187
Absorption 188
Digestibility 189
Biochemical Basis of Fatty Acid Essentiality 190
Biosynthesis 190
Desaturation and Elongation 191
Fatty Acid Ratios 192
Essential Fatty Acid Utilization for Structure and Function194
Comparative Studies 194
Membrane Composition and Integrity 194
Lipid-Protein Interactions 195
Eicosanoid Production 195
Growth and Development 197
Canine Studies 198
Signs of Deficiency or Excess 199
Skin and Hair Coat 200
Inflammatory and Immune Cell Structure and Function201
Feline Studies 204
Signs of Deficiency or Excess 204
Evidence for Limited Δ6 Desaturase Activities 205
Dietary LCPUFA and Feline Life Stage 205
Immune, Inflammatory, and Platelet Cell Functions 207
Requirements, Recommendations, and Allowances 207
Essential Fatty Acids for Dogs and Cats 209
Dogs 210
Fat Content of Diets: Preferences, Minima, and Maxima210
Growth 211
Adult Maintenance 212
Gestation and Lactation 215
Cats 216


===== PDF PAGE 885 =====
884
Fat Content of Diets: Preferences, Minima, and Maxima216
Growth 217
Adult Maintenance 218
Gestation and Lactation 219
References 220
6 PROTEIN AND AMINO ACIDS 237
Basic Concepts 237
Introduction 237
Structure and Function 238
Essentiality of Amino Acids 239
Digestibility and Bioavailability of Protein and Amino Acids240
Assessing Protein and Amino Acid Status 243
Requirements, Allowances, and Tolerances of Protein and Amino Acids244
Role of Metabolic Adaptation in Protein and Amino Acid Nutrition244
Nitrogen (Crude Protein) Minimum Requirements, Recommended
Allowances, and Adequate Intakes 249
Amino Acid Minimum Requirements, Recommended Allowances,
Adequate Intakes, and Safe Upper Limits 256
Dispensable Amino Acids 285
Amino Acid Imbalances and Antagonisms 292
References 294
7 MINERALS 313
Introduction 313
Minerals and Acid-Base Balance 314
Macrominerals 316
Calcium 317
Phosphorus 328
Magnesium 335
Sodium 342
Potassium 349
Chloride 355
Trace Minerals 360
Iron 360
Copper 366
Zinc 371
Manganese 379


===== PDF PAGE 886 =====
885
Selenium 382
Iodine 387
Other Minerals 393
Arsenic 393
Boron 393
Chromium 394
Molybdenum 395
Silicon 396
Nickel 396
Vanadium 397
Miscellaneous Minerals 397
References 397
8 VITAMINS 415
Introduction 415
Vitamin A 418
Absorption, Transport, and Storage 418
Biological Function 421
Dogs 423
Cats 426
Vitamin D 429
Absorption, Transport, and Storage 430
Biological Function 430
Dogs 432
Cats 436
Vitamin E 439
Absorption 440
Biological Function 441
Dogs 444
Cats 446
Vitamin K 448
Absorption, Metabolism, and Excretion 448
Biological Function 449
Dogs 450
Cats 451
Thiamin (Vitamin B1) 453
Absorption 454


===== PDF PAGE 887 =====
886
Biological Function 454
Dogs 455
Cats 458
Riboflavin 459
Absorption 460
Biological Function 460
Dogs 461
Cats 463
Vitamin B6 464
Absorption, Transport, and Storage 464
Biological Function 465
Dogs 466
Cats 468
Niacin 469
Absorption 470
Biological Function 471
Dogs 472
Cats 474
Pantothenic Acid 475
Absorption, Transport, and Storage 475
Biological Function 476
Dogs 477
Cats 478
Cobalamin (Vitamin B12) 479
Absorption 480
Biological Function 480
Dogs 481
Cats 482
Folic Acid 483
Absorption, Transport, and Storage 484
Biological Function 484
Dogs 485
Cats 487
Biotin 488
Absorption 488
Biological Function 489
Dogs 490


===== PDF PAGE 888 =====
887
Cats 490
Choline 492
Absorption 492
Biological Function 492
Dogs 493
Cats 495
Ascorbic Acid 496
Biological Function 496
Dogs 498
Cats 499
Vitamin-Like Substances 499
Vitamin Losses During Processing and Storage of Dog and Cat Foods501
References 503
9 WATER 526
General Principles 526
Function 526
Regulation of Intake by Dogs and Cats 526
Deficiency in Dogs and Cats 528
Requirements of Dogs 529
Requirements for Maintenance 529
Requirements for Other Life Stages 530
Requirements for Work and Environmental Stress 530
Requirements of Cats 532
Requirements for Maintenance and Other Life Stages 532
Water and Feline Lower Urinary Tract Health 532
Recommended Allowances 533
Toxicity in Dogs and Cats 534
References 534
10 SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR LABORATORY
ANIMALS 537
Requirements 537
Energy 537
Nutrients Other Than Energy 538
Food Selection 538
General 538
Certified Diets 540


===== PDF PAGE 889 =====
888
Purified and Chemically Defined Diets 541
Foods for Specific Dietary Purposes (e.g., Medical Foods)542
Feeding Management 543
Life-Stage Designation of Food 543
Form of Food 544
Amount Fed 544
Frequency of Feeding 544
Storage of Food 545
References 546
11 PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND ENVIRONMENT548
Introduction 548
Calculations and Assumptions 549
How Much Exercise Do Dogs and Cats Undertake? 550
Dogs 550
Cats 551
Types of Exercise: Sprinting Versus Endurance 552
Sprint Exercise Over a Distance of Less Than One Kilometer552
Endurance Exercise Over Distances Greater Than One Kilometer552
Traditional Diets Fed to Racing Dogs 553
Sled Dogs 553
Greyhounds 555
Diet and Health During Exercise 556
Effect of Exercise on Intestinal Function 556
Exercise and Digestibility 557
When to Feed Exercising Dogs 558
Exercise and Body Condition 561
Effect of Confinement and Training 563
Energy Requirements 566
Minimal Metabolism 566
Anxiety 566
Circadian Rhythms 566
Cold-Induced Thermogenesis 567
Nutrients in a Warm Environment 575
Effect of Reduced Oxygen at High Altitude 575
Effect of Exercise on Energy Requirements 576
Effect of Exercise on Energy Required in the Absence of Exercise576


===== PDF PAGE 890 =====
889
Energy Required for Exercise: Dynamic Exercise (Short Runs) Versus
Steady-State Exercise (Long Runs)
577
Maximal Oxygen Consumption 589
Intensity of Exercise 591
Field Metabolic Rate 591
Nutrient Requirements 595
How May Nutrient Requirements Change with Exercise or in the Cold?595
Sources of Energy: Fat Versus Carbohydrate 596
Protein and Exercise 601
Studies That Have Altered Both Fat and Protein in the Diet of
Exercising Dogs 607
Dietary Carbohydrate and Exercise 609
Importance of Water and Water Requirements at High Ambient
Temperatures 611
Exercised-Induced Hyperthermia and the Importance of Water During
Exercise 612
Water Requirements at Rest and During Exercise 614
Sodium, Potassium, and Chloride 618
Fluids Containing Electrolytes 622
Calcium, Phosphorus, and Magnesium 622
Trace Minerals 624
Vitamins 624
Other Nutrients 632
References 632
12 DIET FORMULATION AND FEED PROCESSING655
Petfood Processing 655
General Considerations 655
Dogs 655
Cats 656
Petfood Categories 656
Dry Petfoods 656
Semi-moist Petfoods 658
Soft-Expanded (Soft Dry) Petfoods 659
Baked Petfoods 659
Starch-Lipid Complexes 660
Snacks for Pets 660
Canned (Wet) Petfoods 661


===== PDF PAGE 891 =====
890
Homemade Diets 663
Diet Formulation 663
Summary 664
References 665
13 NUTRIENT COMPOSITION OF INGREDIENTS USED IN
DOG AND CAT FOODS 667
References 678
14 OTHER FOOD CONSTITUENTS 679
Constituents Intended for Nutritive Value 679
Introduction 679
Chondroprotective Agents 680
Antioxidants 681
Probiotics (Direct-Fed Microbials) and Enzymes 685
Herbs and Botanicals 686
Other 686
Constituents Intended for Technical or Nonnutritive Effects on Food 687
Introduction 687
Preservatives 687
Flavors and Extracts 691
Colors 692
Other Additives 693
References 693
15 NUTRIENT REQUIREMENTS AND DIETARY NUTRIENT
CONCENTRATIONS 700
Use of Nutrient Requirement Tables 702
Recommendations Relative to ME Compared with Requirements
Relative to DM 702
Requirements Relative to ME in the Food Compared with
Requirements Relative to BW 703
Note on Bioavailability 704
References 718
APPENDIXES 720
A ABOUT THE AUTHORS 720
B ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 725
INDEX 732
