

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====


===== PDF PAGE 2 =====


===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
Nutritional Management of  
Hospitalized Small Animals

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
This title is also available as an e‐book. 
For more details, please see 
www.wiley.com/buy/9781444336474 
or scan this QR code:


===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
Nutritional 
Management  
of Hospitalized 
Small Animals
EdiTEd by
Daniel L. Chan, DVM, DACVECC, DECVECC,  
DACVN, FHEA, MRCVS
Professor of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
Clinical Nutritionist, Head of Nutritional Support Service
Section Head of Emergency and Critical Care
department of Veterinary Clinical Science and Services
The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
This edition first published 2015 © 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Registered Office 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial Offices 
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2dQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
1606 Golden Aspen drive, Suites 103 and 104, Ames, iowa 50010, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to  
apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at  
www.wiley.com/wiley‐blackwell.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the 
UK Copyright, designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of 
the publisher.
designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand 
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered 
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor 
mentioned in this book. it is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering 
professional services. if professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a 
competent professional should be sought.
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and discussion 
only and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specific 
method, diagnosis, or treatment by health science practitioners for any particular patient. The publisher 
and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of 
the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied 
warranties of fitness for a particular purpose.  in view of ongoing research, equipment modifications, 
changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of medicines, 
equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the 
package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, any 
changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions.  Readers should 
consult with a specialist where appropriate.  The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this 
work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the 
publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may 
make.  Further, readers should be aware that internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or 
disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.  No warranty may be created or 
extended by any promotional statements for this work.  Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable 
for any damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging‐in‐Publication Data
Nutritional management of hospitalized small animals / edited by daniel L. Chan.
  p. ;  cm.
 includes bibliographical references and index.
 iSbN 978-1-4443-3647-4 (cloth)
1. Animal nutrition. 2. Veterinary nursing. 3. Animal feeding. 4. Veterinary diet therapy.  
i. Chan, daniel L., 1973– , editor. 
 [dNLM: 1. Animal Nutritional Physiological Phenomena. 2. Nutritional Support–veterinary.  
3. Nutritional Requirements. 4. Nutritional Status. 5. Veterinary Medicine–methods. SF 95]
 SF95.N888 2015
 636.08′52–dc23
 2015007221
A catalogue record for this book is available from the british Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not 
be available in electronic books.
Set in 9.5/12pt Meridien by SPi Global, Pondicherry, india
1 2015

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
v
Contributors, vii
Preface, ix
Acknowledgements, xi
1 Nutritional assessment in small animals, 1
Kathryn E. Michel
2 Estimating energy requirements of small animal patients, 7
Daniel L. Chan
3 Routes of nutritional support in small animals, 14
Sally Perea
4 Nasoesophageal feeding tubes in dogs and cats, 21
Isuru Gajanayake
5 Esophagostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats, 29
Laura Eirmann
6 Gastrostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats, 41
Isuru Gajanayake and Daniel L. Chan
7 Jejunostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats, 54
F. A. (Tony) Mann and Robert C. Backus
8 Minimally invasive placement of postpyloric feeding tubes, 65
Matthew W. Beal
9 Tube feeding in small animals: diet selection and preparation, 80
Iveta Becvarova
10 Intravenous access for parenteral nutrition in small animals, 92
Sophie Adamantos
11 Parenteral nutrition in small animals, 100
Daniel L. Chan and Lisa M. Freeman
12 Pathophysiology and clinical approach to malnutrition in dogs  
and cats, 117
Jason W. Gagne and Joseph J. Wakshlag
13 Appetite stimulants in dogs and cats, 128
Lisa P . Weeth
14 Adverse food reactions in small animals, 136
Cecilia Villaverde and Marta Hervera
Contents

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
vi   Contents
15 Nutritional management of short bowel syndrome in dogs and cats, 152
Daniel L. Chan
16 Refeeding syndrome in small animals, 159
Daniel L. Chan
17 Feeding small animal patients with gastrointestinal motility disorders, 165
Karin Allenspach and Daniel L. Chan
18 Immune modulating nutrients in small animals, 172
Daniel L. Chan
19 Nutritional management of superficial necrolytic dermatitis in dogs, 183
Andrea V . Volk and Ross Bond
20 Nutritional support in acute kidney injury in dogs and cats, 193
Denise A. Elliott
21 Nutritional support in hepatic failure in dogs and cats, 199
Renee M. Streeter and Joseph J. Wakshlag
22 Nutritional management of the septic patient, 210
Daniel L. Chan
23 Nutritional support during acute pancreatitis, 219
Kristine B. Jensen and Daniel L. Chan
24 Nutritional support in the mechanically ventilated small  
animal patient, 228
Daniel L. Chan
25 Nutritional support in exotic pet species, 234
Jeleen A. Briscoe, La’Toya Latney and Cailin R. Heinze
Index, 247

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
vii
Sophie Adamantos, BVSc, DACVECC, DECVECC, MRCVS, FHEA
Langford Veterinary Services, University of Bristol, UK
Karin Allenspach, Dr.med.vet., FVH, DECVIM‐CA, PhD, FHEA, MRCVS
Professor of Internal Medicine, Department of Clinical Science and Services, The Royal 
Veterinary College, University of London, UK
Robert C. Backus, MS, DVM, PhD, DACVN
Associate Professor, Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, University of Missouri, USA
Matthew W. Beal, DVM Diplomate ACVECC
Associate Professor, Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Director of Interventional 
Radiology Services, College of Veterinary Medicine, Michigan State University, USA
Iveta Becvarova, DVM, MS, Diplomate ACVN
Director, Academic Affairs, Hill’s Pet Nutrition Manufacturing, Czech Republic
Ross Bond, BVMS, PhD, DVD, DECVD, MRCVS
Professor of Dermatology, Department of Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal 
Veterinary College, University of London, UK
Jeleen A. Briscoe, VMD, DABVP (Avian)
Animal Care Program, United States Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health 
Service, Riverdale, MD, USA
Daniel L. Chan, DVM, DACVECC, DECVECC, DACVN, FHEA, MRCVS
Professor, Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, Clinical Nutritionist, Department 
of Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University 
of London, UK
Laura Eirmann, DVM, DACVN
Oradell Animal Hospital; Nestle Purina PetCare, Ringwood, NJ, USA
Denise A. Elliott, BVSc (Hons) PhD, DACVIM, DACVN
Head of Research, Waltham Centre for Pet Nutrition, Waltham on the Wolds, 
Leicestershire, UK
Lisa M. Freeman, PhD, DVM, DACVN
Professor of Nutrition, Department of Clinical Sciences, Tufts Cummings School of 
Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, MA, USA 
Contributors

===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
viii   Contributors
Jason W. Gagne, DVM, DACVN 
Nestle Purina Incorporated, St Louis, MO, USA
Isuru Gajanayake, BVSc, CertSAM, DACVIM, MRCVS
Willows Veterinary Centre and Referral Service, Shirley, Solihull, West Midlands, UK
Cailin R. Heinze, VMD, MS, DACVN
Assistant Professor, Department of Clinical Sciences, Tufts Cummings School of 
Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, MA, USA
Marta Hervera, BVSc, PhD, DECVCN
Servei de Dietètica i Nutrició, Fundació Hospital Clínic Veterinari, Universitat Autònoma 
de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain
Kristine B. Jensen, DVM, MVetMed, DACVIM, MRCVS
Djursjukhuset Malmö, Cypressvägen Malmö, Sweden 
La’Toya Latney, DVM 
Exotic Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Veterinary Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA
F. A. (Tony) Mann, DVM, MS, DACVS, DACVECC
Professor, Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA
Kathryn E. Michel, DVM, MS, DACVN
Professor, Department of Clinical Studies, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Sally Perea, DVM, MS, DACVN
Mars Pet Care, Mason, OH, USA
Renee M. Streeter, DVM
Liverpool, NY, USA
Cecilia Villaverde, BVSc, PhD, DACVN, DECVCN
Servei de Dietètica i Nutrició, Fundació Hospital Clínic Veterinari, Universitat Autònoma 
de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain
Andrea V. Volk, DVM, Dr med.vet, MVetMed, DipECVD, MRCVS
Dermatology Service, Department of Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal 
Veterinary College, University of London, UK
Joseph J. Wakshlag, DVM, PhD, DACVN, DACVSMR
Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine, Ithaca, NY, USA
Lisa P. Weeth, DVM, DACVN
Weeth Nutrition Services, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK

===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
ix
After many years of nutritional support in many veterinary hospitals amounting 
to “too little and too late” there is finally concrete recognition that nutritional 
support is a key aspect of successful patient recovery. The application, techniques 
and strategies of nutritional support in small animals have gone through many 
changes in the past several years and effective nutritional support is a hallmark 
of high quality standard of care. Perhaps it is the close interface between nutri-
tion and all other aspects of care that ensures that the art and science of nutrition 
remains dynamic as it evolves with advances in patient care. This is what makes 
nutritional support a very exciting and challenging field in which to practice. In 
the management of many ill animals, clinicians face numerous challenges of 
providing optimal nutritional care. In formulating the best plans, clinicians must 
not only possess a keen understanding of nutritional principles, techniques and 
strategies, but also have a strong foundation in physiology, pathophysiology and 
therapeutics.
It is worth emphasizing that no single nutritional therapeutic plan will be 
applicable to all patient populations. Medical treatments and interventions, 
including nutritional therapies, vary significantly among different patient popu-
lations and veterinary facilities. With various disease states, there may be signifi-
cant alterations in the physiologic and metabolic pathways that can impact the 
nutritional plan. The goals of this book are to provide a comprehensive reference 
on the principles and practice of nutritional support in small animals that require 
hospitalization. The primary target for this book includes general practitioners, 
advanced practitioners, specialists, veterinary nurses, technicians, support staff 
and those studying and researching the science of nutritional support.
The first section of the book comprises chapters exploring techniques for 
assessing the nutritional status and energy needs of small animal patients, routes 
of nutritional support, the various options for feeding tubes, the techniques for 
placing these feeding tubes, and the formulation and use of parenteral nutrition. 
The second section of the book deals with the issues and the strategies for 
 providing nutritional support in various conditions affecting hospitalized small 
animals. There are chapters that discuss the pathophysiology of malnutrition, 
appropriate use of appetite stimulants, common conditions requiring specific 
nutritional alterations, such as kidney disease, hepatic failure, acute pancreatitis, 
and less common situations where nutritional recommendations are sparse 
and largely untested, such as sepsis, short‐bowel syndrome, respiratory failure, 
refeeding syndrome and patients with gastrointestinal motility disorders. The 
final chapter is devoted to the nutritional management of hospitalized small 
exotic species, which are becoming more popular in practice and present 
 particular challenges in terms of nutritional support.
Preface

===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
x   Preface
Chapters have been written by a prominent group of authors, who have 
committed their careers to their area of interest and in many cases currently 
practise in the subject area about which they wrote. It is hoped that this should 
allow them to share some greater insight of the nuances of the practice of 
nutritional support for the hospitalized small animal patient. The vision for this 
book is that it becomes an indispensable nutritional resource for small animal 
practitioners and the reference book of choice as a practical and useful guide for 
the nutritional support of hospitalized small animal patients.
It is also the intent of the book to describe clinically applicable techniques that 
can be incorporated in most practice environments. The scientific evidence behind 
these recommendations is briefly explored, providing the reader with references 
for further reading if desired. Many of the contributors are practising nutritionists 
who are providing practical solutions for their patients. Others contributors are 
specialists in their fields and show how nutritional support can be effectively 
used to manage problems they encounter in their practice. In summary, it is an 
exciting time for the continued development of nutritional care in veterinary 
patients and this book attempts to capture this excitement.
It is our sincere hope that this book becomes a valuable resource in a wide 
range of practice settings from small practices to large multi‐disciplinary referral 
centers and that optimal nutritional support becomes the standard of care for 
every patient.
Daniel L. Chan
DVM, DACVECC, DECVECC, DACVN, MRCVS

===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
xi
Needless to say, a project such as this doesn’t just happen. It takes a tremendous 
amount of work, dedication, perseverance and, perhaps most of all, patience. 
I would first like to thank the team at Wiley for their total support of this project 
and particularly for their patience. I would also like to thank a group of people 
whose invaluable guidance has gotten me to where I am today – no one gets to 
where they are alone. I have been extremely fortunate to have a number of 
people who I am proud to call my mentors. Lisa Freeman, John Rush and Liz 
Rozanski have had a great influence on my career and I hope I can impart 
some of their wisdom to my residents, interns and students. There are many 
people that can teach, but few that can inspire. Last but not least, I would espe-
cially like to thank my wife Liz and my family for all of their love and support 
over the years, their sacrifice, endless patience, understanding and inspiration.
Acknowledgements

===== PDF PAGE 14 =====


===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
1
Introduction
It is generally believed that hospitalized patients experiencing malnutrition are at 
greater risk of morbidity and mortality. There is ample evidence in human patients 
that this is the case, and while this association has not been clearly established in 
small animal patients, caloric intake has been found to be positively associated 
with hospital discharge (Mullen et al., 1979, Brunetto et al., 2010). Despite the 
lack of a proven direct causal relationship between impaired nutritional status 
and poor clinical outcome, the assumption is that the prevention or correction of 
nutritional deficiencies should minimize or eliminate the risk of nutritionally 
associated morbidity and mortality.
Inadequate food intake is a very common presenting complaint in small 
animal practice and only a minority of dogs and cats achieve adequate volun­
tary food intake during hospitalization (Remillard et al., 2001). The task of 
identifying and determining the magnitude of malnutrition in a patient and 
deciding whether steps need to be taken to address the problem is complicated 
by several factors. First, the degree of malnutrition and its impact on a patient’s 
body composition, metabolism and functional status varies considerably with 
the extent of insufficiency of calorie and nutrient intake, the patient’s illness 
and other physiological demands (See Chapter 11). Furthermore, as many of 
the parameters used to assess the nutritional status of patients are substantially 
affected by  illness and injury, it is therefore difficult, if not impossible, to gauge 
the extent to which malnutrition, as opposed to the underlying disease, has 
contributed to changes in any given parameter. Alterations in visceral proteins 
(e.g., albumin, trans ferrin), markers of immune function (e.g., total lympho­
cyte counts, intradermal skin testing), and body composition (e.g., weight loss, 
skin fold thickness, body condition scoring) have all been explored as markers 
of nutritional status in both human and small animal patients (Mullen et al., 
1979, Otto et al., 1992, Michel 1993). Additionally, functional tests such as grip 
strength and peak expiratory flow rate and sophisticated body composition 
analysis using dual X‐ray absorptiometry, bioelectrical impedance and other 
modalities have been investigated in human patients (Hill, 1992). Ultimately, 
Nutritional assessment 
in small animals
Kathryn E. Michel
Department of Clinical Studies, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Chapter 1

===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
2   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
however, the diagnostic accuracy of these tests remains unknown because there 
is still no universally accepted “gold standard” of malnutrition with which these 
tests can be compared.
The recognition that a true “diagnostic test” for malnutrition might not be 
forthcoming caused a shift in perspective on nutritional assessment. Many of the 
parameters used to assess malnutrition have been found to be associated with 
clinical outcome. While they might not be specific markers of nutritional status 
(many could be deranged for reasons other than malnutrition), they could be 
used as prognostic indicators. Thus nutritional assessment has evolved into a 
prognostic, rather than a diagnostic instrument. The techniques that are used to 
assess nutritional status are those known to be associated with malnutrition, and 
these have proven to be useful in predicting which patients are more likely to 
suffer complications. Patients are selected for nutritional support not simply 
because they are malnourished but rather on the basis of whether nutritional 
support might have an impact on their clinical outcome. The corollary is that 
there are malnourished patients for whom providing nutritional support, with 
its inherent risks and cost, will confer no benefit.
Indications for nutritional assessment
The importance of nutritional assessment is receiving growing recognition in 
small animal medicine (Freeman et al., 2011). All hospitalized patients should 
undergo nutritional assessment as part of their initial work up. Given the likeli­
hood that the majority of patients will have inadequate voluntary food intake 
throughout their hospitalization, the task of nutritional assessment will allow 
early identification of that subset of patients who are truly at risk, and thus 
enable prioritization of time and resources for addressing the needs of those 
patients. The process of nutritional assessment can also facilitate decision‐  
making with regard to selecting an appropriate diet for the patient, deciding 
whether assisted feeding is indicated and, if it is indicated, determining the best 
route of assisted feeding for that patient. Furthermore, a properly done nutri­
tional assessment will permit the clinician to anticipate potential complications 
and develop a feeding plan that will monitor for and minimize the risk of those 
complications.
Methods of nutritional assessment
There have been only limited investigations of prognostic markers of nutritional 
status in small animal patients. Admission serum albumin concentration has been 
shown to correlate with risk of mortality in critically ill dogs (Michel, 1993). In 
the same population, admission body condition score and lymphocyte count did 
not correlate with outcome. Intradermal skin testing has been shown to be a fea­
sible means of evaluating cell‐mediated immunity in cats but whether this test is 
associated with nutritional status or is predictive of clinical outcome has not yet 
been investigated (Otto et al., 1992). Also noted in feline patients is an association 

===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
Nutritional assessment in small animals   3
between elevation of serum creatinine kinase activity and anorexia which resolves 
upon reintroduction of food (Fascetti, Mauldin and Mauldin, 1997).
For human patients a rapid, simple, ‘bedside’ prognostic tool for nutritional 
assessment called subjective global assessment (SGA) has been in use for approxi ­
mately 3 decades (Baker et al., 1982). The technique was designed to utilize 
readily available historical and physical parameters to identify malnourished 
patients who are at increased risk for complications and who will presumably 
benefit from nutritional intervention. The assessment involves determining 
whether nutrient assimilation has been restricted because of decreased food 
intake, maldigestion or malabsorption, whether any effects of malnutrition on 
organ function and body composition are evident, and whether the patient’s 
disease process influences its nutrient requirements. The findings of the histori­
cal and physical assessment are used to categorize the patient as A: well nour ­
ished, B: moderately malnourished or at risk of becoming malnourished, and C: 
severely malnourished. SGA has been investigated for its ability to identify 
patients at risk of medical complications in diverse patient populations, and has 
been shown to have excellent inter‐observer agreement and better predictive 
accuracy than traditional markers of nutritional status (Keith, 2008).
The SGA can easily be adapted to veterinary patients. The patient history 
should be assessed for indications of malnutrition, including evidence of weight 
loss and the time frame in which it has occurred, sufficiency of dietary intake 
including the nutritional adequacy of the diet, the presence of persistent gastro­
intestinal signs, the patient’s functional capacity (e.g., evidence of weakness, 
exercise intolerance) and the metabolic demands of the patient’s underlying 
 disease state. The physical exam should focus on changes in body composition, 
presence of edema or ascites, and appearance of the patient’s hair coat. With 
regard to assessing changes in body composition, it is important to recognize that 
while metabolically stressed patients experience catabolism of lean tissue, these 
changes may not be noted using standard body condition scoring systems if the 
patient has normal or excessive body fat (Figure 1.1). Since catabolism of lean 
tissue can have deleterious consequences for outcome, it is important that along 
with evaluation of body fat, patients undergo evaluation of muscle mass to assess 
lean tissue status (Freeman et al., 2011). A muscle mass scoring system that has 
been used in dogs and cats is outlined in Table 1.1 (Michel, Sorenmo and Shofer, 
2004, Michel et al., 2011).
Figure 1.1 An example of a patient 
exhibiting significant wasting of the epaxial 
musculature despite having excessive 
body fat.

===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
4   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
The next step of nutritional assessment is to determine whether or not the 
patient’s voluntary food intake is sufficient. To do this one must have a caloric 
goal, select an appropriate food and formulate a feeding recommendation for 
the patient. This will permit an accurate accounting of how much food is offered 
to the patient and will allow evaluation of the patient’s intake based on how 
much of the food is consumed. A reasonable initial caloric goal for hospitalized 
dogs and cats is based on an estimate of resting energy requirement (see 
Chapter 2).
Clearly patients that are already significantly malnourished at the time of 
presentation (Figure 1.2) should receive nutritional support. However, given the 
catabolic stress associated with critical illness, patients who have experienced or 
are anticipated to experience substantially reduced food intake for longer than 3 
days also deserve attention (Figure 1.3). Furthermore, as the clinical course of a 
hospitalized patient may change rapidly, it is important that nutritional assess ­
ment is viewed as an ongoing process so that the feeding plan can be adjusted in 
a timely fashion.
If a patient is deemed a candidate for assisted feeding, the nutritional assess­
ment will encompass several additional steps. If enteral feeding is being con­
templated, gastrointestinal tract function must be evaluated (e.g., presence of 
vomiting, ileus, ischemia) as well as the patient’s ability to tolerate the feeding 
tube and tube placement (e.g., anesthesia required, abnormal hemostasis). 
A critical step is to assess the patient’s level of consciousness and gag reflex. One 
of the most serious complications of enteral feeding is aspiration pneumonia, 
which can be a fatal complication in critically ill patients. If parenteral nutrition 
Table 1.1 Description of a muscle mass scoring system for dogs and cats.
Score Muscle Mass
0 On palpation over the spine, muscle mass is severely wasted
1 On palpation over the spine, mass is moderately wasted
2 On palpation over the spine, muscle mass is mildly wasted
3 On palpation over the spine, muscle mass is normal
Figure 1.2 A dog with advanced 
malnutrition in which nutritional support 
is indicated.

===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
Nutritional assessment in small animals   5
is under consideration, it is necessary to assess the patient’s fluid tolerance, 
determine whether dedicated venous access is possible and whether that access 
will be central or peripheral. Furthermore, patients receiving parenteral  nutrition 
require close monitoring for technical and metabolic complications and should 
be cared for in a facility that has 24 h nursing care and the ability to perform 
point of care serum biochemistry.
Summary
In conclusion, nutritional assessment of veterinary patients is a largely subjective 
process that should identify those patients at risk of malnutrition‐associated 
complications, rather than just malnourished patients. All hospitalized patients 
should undergo nutritional assessment with the goal to identify those patients 
for whom nutritional intervention is likely to improve clinical outcome. 
Furthermore, a nutritional assessment will facilitate decision‐making with regard 
to selecting appropriate diet, deciding whether assisted feeding is indicated and, 
when it is indicated, determining the best route of assisted feeding. It will also 
permit optimization of a feeding plan that will maximize the benefits to the 
patient while minimizing the risks of complications.
Figure 1.3 A dog with severe trauma to 
oral and nasal cavity that places this dog 
at high risk of becoming malnourished if 
a route of nutrition is not identified.
Key p o Int S
•	 All hospitalized patients should undergo nutritional assessment with the goal to identify 
those patients for whom nutritional intervention is likely to improve clinical outcome.
•	 Through subjective evaluation of historical and physical data, a patient’s degree of 
malnutrition and the need for nutritional intervention can be determined.
•	 Nutritional assessment will also aid in development of the feeding plan including 
determining a route of assisted feeding, selecting a diet and optimizing the plan to 
minimize complications.
•	 Nutritional assessment should be viewed as an ongoing process so that the feeding plan 
can be adjusted in a timely fashion in the event that the condition of the patient 
changes.

===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
6   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
references
Baker, J.P., Detsky, A.S., Wesson, D.E. et al. (1982) Nutritional assessment: A comparison of 
clinical judgment and objective measurements. New England Journal of Medicine, 306, 
969–972.
Brunetto, M.A., Gomes, M.O.S., Andre, M.R. et al. (2010) Effects of nutritional support on 
hospital outcome in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 20, 
224–231.
Fascetti, A.J., Mauldin, G.E. and Mauldin, G.N. (1997) Correlation between serum creatinine 
kinase activities and anorexia in cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 11, 9–13.
Freeman, L., Becvarova, I., Cave, N. et al. (2011) WSAVA Nutritional Assessment Guidelines. 
Journal of Small Animal Practice, 52, 385–396.
Hill, G.L. (1992) Body composition research: Implications for the practice of clinical nutrition. 
JPEN: Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition, 16, 197–218.
Keith, J.N. (2008) Bedside nutrition assessment­past, present, and future: A review of the 
subjective global assessment. Nutrition in Clinical Practice, 23, 410–116.
Michel, K.E. (1993) Prognostic value of clinical nutritional assessment in canine patients. 
Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 3, 96–104.
Michel, K.E., Sorenmo, K. and Shofer, F.S. (2004) Evaluation of body condition and weight loss 
in dogs presenting to a veterinary oncology service. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 18, 
692–695.
Michel, K. E., Anderson, W., Cupp, C. et al. (2011) Correlation of a feline muscle mass score 
with body composition determined by DXA. British Journal of Nutrition, 106, S57–S59.
Mullen, J.L., Gertner, M.H., Buzby, G. P. et al. (1979) Implications of malnutrition in the surgical 
patient. Archives of Surgery, 114, 121–125.
Otto, C. M., Brown, K. A., Lindl, P. A. et al. (1992) Clinical evaluation of cell‐mediated immunity 
in the cat. Proceedings of the International Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium 
September 20–23, San Antonio, USA, p. 838.
Remillard, R.L., Darden, D.E., Michel, K.E. et al. (2001) An investigation of the relationship 
between caloric intake and outcome in hospitalized dogs. Veterinary Therapeutics, 2, 301–310.

===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
7
Introduction
One of the main objectives of initiating nutritional support in hospitalized 
patients is to minimize catabolism and maintain lean muscle mass without 
overly stressing the patient’s metabolic system with excess nutrients. Ideally, 
nutritional support should provide ample substrates for gluconeogenesis, 
 protein synthesis and the energy necessary to maintain homeostasis. Estimating 
the energy requirements of hospitalized patients is a considerable challenge in 
clinical practice. Ensuring that sufficient calories are being provided to sustain 
critical physiologic processes necessitates measuring an individual patient’s 
total energy expenditure. However, precise measurements of energy expendi-
ture in clinical veterinary patients are seldom performed. While a few studies 
have measured energy expenditure in select populations of clinical veterinary 
patients, the technique, the equipment, and expertise required for this 
 technique is not feasible in clinical practice. As such, the use of mathematical 
formulas remains the only practical means for estimating the energy needs of 
patients. It is, however, important to appreciate the limitations of relying on 
mathematical equations of energy requirements and to understand the issues 
that make accurate assessment of energy needs in clinical patients challenging. 
This chapter will cover the basics relating to measurement of energy expendi-
ture in animals and the use of mathematical formulas to estimate energy 
needs, and will discuss the recommended procedure for devising appropriate 
nutritional plans.
Assessing energy requirements
The prevailing view is that nutritional support plays a key role in the manage-
ment of hospitalized animals. Malnutrition has been well documented to result in 
lean muscle loss, poor wound healing, immunosuppression, compromised organ 
function, and increased morbidity and mortality (Barton, 1994; Biolo et al., 1997; 
Estimating energy requirements 
of small animal patients
Daniel L. Chan
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
ChApter 2

===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
8   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Biffl et al., 2002). Unfortunately, providing either excessive or insufficient 
 calories appears to adversely impact patient outcome (Krishnan et al., 2003; 
Stappleton, Jones and Hayland, 2007; Dickerson, 2011; Heyland et al., 2014). 
Although a relationship between increasing energy delivery and positive out-
comes has been demonstrated in critically ill animals (Brunetto et al., 2010), 
overfeeding may contribute to additional complications, such as hyperglycemia, 
volume overload, excessive nitrogenous waste production (e.g, increased blood 
urea nitrogen) and vomiting or regurgitation (Chan, 2014). A mismatch between 
predicted energy expenditure and actual energy requirements remains a chal-
lenge in the care of critically ill human patients and this also appears to hold true 
in veterinary medicine (Walton et al., 1996; Krishman et al., 2003; O’Toole et al., 
2004; Stappleton et al., 2007; Dickerson, 2011). Therefore, in the delivery of 
nutritional support to critically ill and hospitalized animals, it is imperative that 
estimation of energy needs should be as accurate as possible with an emphasis 
on avoiding overfeeding patients.
Methods for determining energy needs
Direct calorimetry is one method of determining energy expenditure. This method 
measures heat production by the animal and extrapolates energy expenditure. 
The major assumption with direct calorimetry is that during the maintenance 
phase, total energy consumed is expended and released solely as heat (no net 
gain in body energy) and that there is no energy or heat storage in the animal. 
Direct calorimeters typically take the form of chambers that precisely measure 
heat within the chamber. These calorimetry systems are accurate but not feasible 
for clinical patients.
Indirect calorimetry is a more manageable method for assessing energy 
expenditure in animals and has been used in both dogs and cats. The method of 
measuring energy expenditure is also called ‘indirect respiratory calorimetry’ 
and requires accurate measurement of oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide 
production (Figure 2.1). These measurements are usually made via a face mask, 
a hood, canopy, helmet or within a chamber. A major limitation, however, is 
that use of face masks, hoods or helmets can be stressful to dogs and cats and 
measurements are likely to be higher than the true energy expenditure of the 
animal. Acclimatizing procedures are needed to minimize this effect, however, 
this process can take weeks although some studies only allowed 15 minutes for 
animals to acclimatize to the device and this may have adversely impacted the 
results (Hill, 2006; Ramsey, 2012). The principle of calculating energy from oxy-
gen consumption and carbon dioxide production is based on the fact that heat 
released during oxidation of a substrate is constant. The ratio of carbon dioxide 
production to oxygen consumption (CO
2/O2) is termed the respiratory quotient 
(RQ) and is indicative of the predominant substrate being oxidized. For example, 
a RQ of 0.7 indicates that lipids are being metabolized, a RQ of 0.8 indicates that 
proteins are being metabolized and a RQ of 1.0 indicates that carbohydrates are 
predominantly being used for energy (Blaxter, 1989). With the derivation of RQ 
what is also known is the amount of heat released per liter of oxygen consumed 

===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
Estimating energy requirements of small animal patients   9
and liter of carbon dioxide produced. If a reasonable estimate of the expected 
RQ of an animal can be made (e.g., RQ = 0.8), the energy expenditure can be 
calculated from the consumption of O2 or production of CO2. With the addition 
of urea nitrogen, energy expenditure can be calculated via the Weir equation 
(Weir, 1949):
 
Energy expenditurek calL OL CO gu rinary() .( ). () .(39 41 11 21 722 nitrogen)
Although the reliability of indirect calorimeters has improved and equipment 
has become more streamlined (Sion‐Sarid et al., 2013) it is unlikely that it will 
become standard practice in every hospital, human or veterinary. Nevertheless, 
indirect calorimetry studies are important as they can be used to assess the utility 
of predictive energy equations. (O’Toole et al., 2001, Walton et al., 1996)
p redictive equations of energy needs
Because of the impracticalities associated with measurement of indirect calo -
rimetry in clinical patients, the use of mathematical predictive equations is the 
most feasible method for estimating their energy needs (Walker and Heuberger, 
2009). By using the body weight (the author uses the current body weight in 
hospitalized animals rather than ideal body weight), one is able to predict energy 
expenditure by use of a number of proposed equations. The equation that is 
most commonly cited for energy estimation in animals was proposed by Kleiber 
(1961) and is used to predict the resting energy requirement (RER) of both dogs 
and cats. The RER is generally defined as the number of calories required for 
Figure 2.1 An example of a modern 
indirect respiratory calorimeter that can 
be used to estimate energy expenditures 
in animals.

===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
10   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
maintaining homeostasis at rest in a thermoneutral environment while the 
animal is in a postabsorptive state (Gross et al., 2010) and is calculated as follows:
RERc urrent body weight inkg70 07 5() .
For animals weighing between 2 and 30 kg, there is also a linear formula that 
provides a reasonable estimation of RER:
RERc urrent body weight in kg()30 70
It is worth noting, however, that these formulas were determined from studies 
in normal healthy animals. Disease states can change the energy requirements 
dramatically and extensive thermal burns are an example where energy require-
ments can more than double (Chan and Chan, 2009). Until recently, there was 
a recommendation to multiply the RER by an illness factor between 1.1 and 2.3 
to account for increases in metabolism associated with different diseases and 
injuries. (Donoghue, 1989). However, less emphasis is now being placed on 
such subjective and extrapolated factors and the current recommendation is to 
use more conservative energy estimates, that is, start with the animal’s RER, 
to avoid overfeeding. Overfeeding can result in metabolic and gastrointestinal 
complications, hepatic dysfunction and increased carbon dioxide production. 
(Ramsey, 2012). Although controversial, results of indirect calorimetry studies 
in dogs support the recent trend of formulating nutritional support to meet RER 
rather than more generous illness energy requirements. The reason that overall 
energy requirements of ill patients may be closer to RER despite the presence 
of  pathological processes that increase energy expenditure (Figure  2.2) (e.g., 
pyrexia, inflammation, oxidative stress) may be negated by the decrease in 
physical activity because of illness, confinement during hospitalization and even 
the use of sedatives.
Although there were some methodological concerns in the studies by Walton 
et al. (1996), and O’Toole et al. (2004), both of these studies demonstrated that 
energy expenditure as measured by indirect respiratory calorimetry in ill dogs 
more closely matched the calculated RER without the use of illness factors. 
When studies evaluating parenteral nutritional support in animals are com -
pared, those that applied an illness factor in the calculation of energy needs 
Figure 2.2 Studies using indirect 
calorimetry have shown that the energy 
requirements of critically ill patients are 
closer to resting energy requirement and 
do not require application of illness 
factors. The increase in energy needs 
associated with disease processes are 
counterbalanced by the decreased 
physical activity experienced by 
hospitalized ill animals.

===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
Estimating energy requirements of small animal patients   11
demonstrated higher complication rates than studies with more conservative 
energy estimates (Lippert, Fulton and Parr, 1993, Reuter et al., 1998, Chan et al., 
2002, Pyle et al., 2004, Crabb et al., 2006). Given the probable increased risk 
of complications when ill animals are overfed, combined with the lack of any 
evidence that feeding above energy requirements is beneficial, the current rec -
ommendation for calculating the energy needs of ill cats and dogs is to start at 
RER and to increase or decrease the amount fed only depending on the animal’s 
tolerance and response to feeding (Hill, 2006, Chan, 2014). However, determin-
ing the energy requirements of ill dogs and cats remains an area that requires 
further investigation.
Summary
Despite the current limitations in the knowledge of energy requirements of 
critically ill dogs and cats, there are certain points that can serve to guide nutri -
tional support of critically ill animals. The preservation of lean body mass should 
be a primary goal of nutritional support and, as such, close monitoring of the 
patient’s body weight, fluid distribution, response or tolerance to feedings, and 
changes in the underlying condition should dictate whether to increase the 
number of calories provided in the nutritional plan. Typically, if an animal con-
tinues to lose weight on nutritional support, the number of calories provided 
should be increased by 25% and the plan should be reassessed in a few days. 
The nutritional plan should also be flexible enough to meet the changing needs 
of the patient and so regular reassessment is paramount in the successful nutri-
tional management of critically ill patients. Until new findings can better dis -
cern the nutritional and energy requirements of hospitalized patients, provision 
of nutritional support must continue to be guided by sound clinical judgment 
and continual reassessment of the patient.
Key po Int S
•	 Estimating	the	energy	requirements	of	hospitalized	patients	continues	to	be	a	
considerable	challenge	in	clinical	practice.
•	 Precise	measurements	of	energy	expenditure	in	clinical	veterinary	patients	(e.g.,	via	
indirect	calorimetry)	are	seldom	performed.
•	 The	technique,	the	equipment	and	expertise	required	to	use	indirect	calorimetry	in	
clinical	patients	is	rarely	available.
•	 The	use	of	mathematical	formulas	remains	the	only	practical	means	for	estimating	
energy	needs	of	patients.
•	 The	resting	energy	requirement	for	hospitalized	dogs	and	cats	is	predicted	using	the	
equation	RER	(kcal/day)	=	70	 	kg	BW0.75	or	(30	 	kg	BW)	+	70	if	patients	weigh	between	
2	and	30	kg.
•	 The	use	of	illness	factors	as	multipliers	of	RER	for	energy	estimation	requirements	for	
hospitalized	animals	is	not	recommended.

===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
12   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
references
Barton, R.G. Nutrition support in critical illness. (1994) Nutrition Clinical Practice, 9,127–139.
Biffl, W.L., Moore, E.E., Haenel, J.B. et al. (2002) Nutritional support of the trauma patient. 
Nutrition, 18,960–965.
Biolo G., Toigo G., Ciocchi B. et al. (1997) Metabolic response to injury and sepsis: Changes in 
protein metabolism. Nutrition, 13,52S–57S.
Blaxter, K. (1989) Energy Metabolism in Animals and Man, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Brunetto, M.A., Gomes, M.O.S., Andre, M.R. et al. (2010) Effects of nutritional support on 
hospital outcome in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 20, 
224–231.
Chan, D.L. (2014) Nutrition in critical care, in Kirk’s Current Veterinary Therapy XV, (eds J.D. 
Bonagura and D.C. Twedt), Elsevier Saunders, St Louis, pp. 38–43.
Chan, D.L., Freeman, L.M., Labato, M.A. et al. (2002) Retrospective evaluation of partial par -
enteral nutrition in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 16, 440–445.
Chan, M.M. and Chan, G.M. (2009) Nutritional therapy for burns in children and adults. 
Nutrition, 25, 261–269.
Crabb, S.E., Chan, D.L., Freeman, L.M. et al. (2006) Retrospective evaluation of total parenteral 
nutrition in cats: 40 cases (1991–2003). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 16, 
S21–26.
Dickerson, R.N. (2011) Optimal caloric intake for critically ill patients: First, do no harm. 
Nutrition in Clinical Practice, 26, 48–54.
Donoghue, S. (1989) Nutritional support of hospitalized patients. Veterinary Clinics of North 
America: Small Animal Practice, 19, 475–95.
Gross, K.L., Yamka, R. M., Khoo, C. et al. (2010) Macronutrients, in Small Animal Clinical 
Nutrition, 5th edn (eds M.S. Hand, C.D. Thatcher, R.L. Remillard, P. Roudebush, and B.J. 
Novotny) Mark Morris Institute, Topeka, KS, pp. 49–105.
Heyland, D.K., Dhaliwal, R., Wang, M. et al. (2014) The prevalence of iatrogenic underfeeding 
in the nutritionally ‘at‐risk’ critically ill patient: Results of an international, multicenter, pro-
spective study. Clinical Nutrition, doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2014.07.008.
Hill, R.C. (2006) Challenges in measuring energy expenditure in companion animals: A clini-
cian’s perspective. Journal of Nutrition, 136, 1967S–1972S.
Kleiber, M. (1961) The Fire of Life, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.
Krishnan, J.A., Parce, P.B., Martinez, A. et al. (2003) Caloric intake in medical intensive care 
unit patients: Consistency of care with guidelines and relationship to clinical outcomes. Chest, 
124, 297–305.
Lippert, A.C., Fulton, R.B. and Parr, A.M. (1993) A retrospective study of the use of total par -
enteral nutrition in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7, 52–64.
O’Toole, E., Miller, C.W., Wilson, B.A. et al. (2004) Comparison of the standard predictive equa-
tion for calculation of resting energy expenditure with indirect calorimetry in hospitalized 
and healthy dogs. Journal of American Veterinary Medical Association, 225, 58–64.
O’Toole, E., McDonell, W.N., Wilson, B.A. et al. (2001) Evaluation of accuracy and reliability of 
indirect calorimetry for the measurement of resting energy expenditure in healthy dogs. 
American Journal of Veterinary Research, 62, 1761–67.
Pyle, S.C., Marks, S.L., Kass, P.H. et al. (2004) Evaluation of complication and prognostic factors 
associated with administration of parenteral nutrition in cats: 75 cases (1994–2001). Journal 
of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 225, 242–250.
Ramsey, J.J. (2012) Determining energy requirements, in Applied Veterinary Clinical Nutrition, 1st 
edn (eds A.J. Fascetti and S. J. Delaney) Wiley‐Blackwell Chichester, pp. 23–45.
Reuter, J.D., Marks, S.L., Rogers, Q. R. et al. (1998) Use of total parenteral nutrition in dogs: 
209 cases (1988–1995) Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 8, 201–213.
Sion‐Sarid, R., Cohen, J., Houri, Z. et al. (2013) Indirect calorimetry: a guide for optimizing 
nutrition support in the critically ill child. Nutrition, 29, 1094–1099.
Stappleton, R.D., Jones, N. and Heyland, D.K. (2007) Feeding critically ill patients: What is the 
optimal amount of energy? Critical Care Medicine, 35, S535–540.

===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
Estimating energy requirements of small animal patients   13
Walker, R.N. and Heuberger, R.A. (2009) Predictive equations for energy needs for the critically 
ill. Respiratory Care, 54, 509–520.
Walton, R.S., Wingfield, W.E., Ogilvie, G.K. et al. (1996) Energy expenditure in 104 postopera-
tive and traumatically injured dogs with indirect calorimetry. Journal of Veterinary Emergency 
and Critical Care, 6, 71–79.
Weir, J.B. de V. (1949) New methods of calculating metabolic rate with special reference to 
protein metabolism. Journal of Physiology, 109, 1–9.

===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
14
Introduction
Determination of the route of nutritional support is an important step in the 
assessment and management of critical care patients. Routes of nutritional support 
are broadly categorized into enteral and parenteral routes. Enteral routes to be 
considered include nasoesophageal, esophagostomy, gastrostomy and jejunos-
tomy feeding tubes, while parenteral routes include peripheral and central venous 
catheters. The route or combination of routes selected for each patient will be 
influenced by the patient’s medical and nutritional status, the anticipated length of 
required nutritional support, and the nutritional needs and diet limitation and 
advantages presented by each route.
Enteral routes of nutritional support
Nasoesophageal tube feeding
Nasoesophageal feeding is a relatively easy and convenient method of nutri-
tional delivery for patients who require short‐term (fewer than 5 days) nutri-
tional support, and/or for patients who are not candidates for general anesthesia 
(see Chapter 4). Nasoesophageal feeding tubes provide the advantages of being 
relatively easy to place and being inexpensive. However, because of the risk of 
aspiration, nasoesophageal feeding should not be implemented in patients 
with vomiting or who lack a gag reflex. The major disadvantage of nasoesoph-
ageal feeding tubes is their smaller diameter (typically 3.5–5 French in cats and 
6–8 French in dogs), which limits diet selection to liquid enteral formulas. 
Liquid formulations may be delivered via continuous or intermittent bolus 
feedings. Although continuous feeding can be helpful in pets in which high 
feeding volumes may not be tolerated, a recent study demonstrated that gastric 
residual volumes and clinical outcome did not differ between the two feeding 
methods (Holahan et al., 2010).
Common complications of nasoesophageal feeding include epistaxis, rhinitis, 
and tracheal intubation with secondary pneumonia (Marks, 1998). An Elizabethan 
Routes of nutritional support 
in small animals
Sally Perea
Mars Pet Care, Mason, OH, USA
ChaptEr 3

===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
Routes of nutritional support in small animals   15
collar should be placed to prevent the patient from physically removing the tube 
(Figure  3.1). Removal of the feeding tube secondary to sneezing, coughing or 
vomiting, despite the continuous use of Elizabethan collars, is also a common 
complication with nasoesophageal feeding in cats (Abood and Buffington, 1992). 
Radiographic confirmation of nasoesophageal tube placement is recommended to 
minimize risks associated with inappropriate placement of the feeding tube prior 
to implementation of feeding.
Esophagostomy tube feeding
Placement of an esophagostomy feeding tube requires general anesthesia for 
placement, but is still a relatively quick and simple procedure (see Chapter 5). 
Compared to nasoesophageal feeding tubes, esophagostomy tubes can be used for 
an extended period of time with a feeding period of ~23 days (1 to 557 days) 
(Crowe and Devey, 1997a; Levine, Smallwood and Buback, 1997). Other advan-
tages include increased comfort for the animal and an increased tube diameter 
(12–14 French), allowing a wider selection of diets that may be fed through the 
tube. The most common complication associated with esophagostomy tubes is 
wound infection at the ostomy site where the tube exits the skin (Crowe and 
Deveya, 1997; Devitt and Seim, 1997). To help prevent infection, daily care and 
cleaning of the ostomy site is recommended. Other reported complications include 
kinking or obstruction of the tube, tracheal intubation, vomiting,  displacement of 
the tube, and swelling of the head (Crowe and Devey, 1997a; Devitt and Seim, 
1997). In general, the complications associated with esophagostomy tubes are 
easily managed, and minor compared with more severe complications that can be 
associated with gastrostomy tubes (Ireland et al., 2003).
Gastrostomy tube feeding
Gastrostomy tubes require general anesthesia, and can be placed via laparot -
omy or by using a percutaneous technique (Figure  3.2) (see Chapter  6). 
Although gastrostomy tubes require longer anesthesia and procedure 
 duration, they provide the advantage of bypassing the esophagus for animals 
with esophageal disease. Similar to the step‐up from nasoesophageal to 
esophagostomy tube, the gastrostomy tube allows for a longer period of 
 placement for patients where assisted feeding is expected to be prolonged. 
Figure 3.1 Elizabethan collars are often 
necessary to prevent premature removal 
of feeding tubes.

===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
16   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
One retrospective study comparing the use of esophagostomy to gastrostomy 
tubes in cats found that the gastrostomy tubes remained in place for a signifi -
cantly longer period of time with a median duration of 43 days versus 26 days 
(Ireland et al., 2003). Because of their anatomical location, gastrostomy tubes 
may be less susceptible to premature removal or stoma site infection second -
ary due to the patient scratching or pawing at the tube (Figure 3.3). However, 
as previously mentioned, oesophagostomy tubes have been used clinically for 
periods of greater than one year. Therefore, both methods are suitable for 
extended periods of feeding. Another advantage of gastrostomy tubes is their 
larger diameter (18–20 French), which may allow for an increased selection of 
foods that can be fed through the tube. The larger diameter also requires less 
water dilution for blenderization of canned foods, which can help to increase 
the energy density of the slurry.
Complications associated with gastrostomy tubes include cellulites around 
the ostomy site, gastric pressure necrosis, tube migration, pyloric outflow 
obstruction, inadvertent tube removal, leaking of food around the ostomy site 
(Figure 3.4), and vomiting with secondary aspiration pneumonia (Levine et al., 
1997; Glaus et al., 1998; Marks, 1998). Although tube migration or premature 
removal are not very common, if these complications occur prior to adequate 
healing at the fistula (< 14 days) they can lead to more serious consequences 
such as life‐threatening peritonitis.
Figure 3.2 A dog undergoing 
percutaneous endoscopic‐guided 
gastrostomy tube placement.
Figure 3.3 A dog with a gastrostomy tube 
in place.

===== PDF PAGE 31 =====
Routes of nutritional support in small animals   17
Jejunostomy tube feeding
Placement of jejunostomy tubes require general anesthesia and they are general 
placed by surgical methods (Crowe and Devey, 1997b; Daye, Huber and Henderson, 
1999) (see Chapter 7). However, endoscopic techniques are being improved, and 
successful management of endoscopically placed nasojejunal and gastrojejunos-
tomy tubes have been reported in dogs and cats (Jennings et al., 2001; Jergens 
et al., 2007; Pápa et al., 2009) (see Chapter 8). Placement of a nasojejunal feeding 
tube using fluoroscopic guidance has also been described in the dog (Wohl, 2006; 
Beal and Brown, 2011). Jejunostomy tubes are indicated for patients with gastric 
outlet obstruction, recurrent aspiration, gastroparesis and pancreatitis (Marks, 
1998). In general, jejunostomy tubes are used for a shorter time period than 
oesophagostomy or gastrostomy feeding tubes, with reported feeding periods rang-
ing from 9 to 14 days (Daye et al., 1999; Swann, Sweet and Michel, 2002).
Complications of jejunostomy tubes include cellulites at the ostomy site, 
leaking of food around the ostomy site, dehiscence, tube migration, vomiting, 
diarrhoea, abdominal discomfort, retrograde movement of tube, tube obstruc -
tion, and inadvertent tube removal with subsequent peritonitis (Daye et al., 
1999; Swann et al., 2002).
parenteral nutrition
For patients that cannot tolerate enteral feeding, parenteral nutrition may be an 
appropriate feeding route alternative (Figure 3.5) (Chapter 11). Indications for 
parenteral nutrition include intractable vomiting or diarrhea; anesthesia or lack 
of a gag reflex; recovery from severe gastric or intestinal resection; poor anes -
thetic candidate for proper feeding tube placement; or inability to meet full 
energy requirements via the enteral route. Parenteral nutrition has commonly 
been employed for pets suffering from pancreatitis; however, a recent pilot study 
demonstrated that early enteral nutrition via an esophagostomy tube was well 
tolerated and resulted in fewer complications than parenteral nutrition in a 
group of 10 dogs with pancreatitis (Mansfield et al., 2011).
Figure 3.4 A dog with an infected and 
leaking gastrostomy site that requires 
tube removal and surgical management.

===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
18   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Parenteral nutrition may be administered via a central or peripheral 
venous catheter (see Chapter 10). While peripheral venous access is easier 
to  establish, peripheral solutions are limited to a lower osmolarity (< 750 
mOsmol/L) to reduce risk of thrombophlebitis. When central venous access 
is obtainable, central parenteral nutrition (CPN) is generally preferred due 
to  fewer restrictions in solution formulation, easier ability to meet full 
energy requirements and reduced incidence of thrombophlebitis. However, 
suc cessful administration of peripheral parenteral nutrition (PPN) in dogs 
and cats has been described, and may be a more practical tool for practition -
ers who do not routinely place central catheters (Zsombor‐Murray and 
Freeman, 1999; Chan et al., 2002). Shorter durations of admini  stration and 
the use of   lipid‐containing admixtures can also help to reduce the incidence 
of thrombo  phlebitis (Chandler, Guilford and Payne‐James, 2000; Griffiths 
and Bongers, 2005).
Mechanical complications associated with parenteral nutrition include cath-
eter dislodgement, thrombophlebitis, catheter occlusion, chewed lines, and 
kinking of catheter (Chan et al., 2002; Pyle, Marks and Kass, 2004). Metabolic 
complications of parenteral and enteral nutrition are discussed in detail in sub -
sequent chapters (see Chapters 9 and 10).
Combined enteral and parenteral approach
Although most patients who are initially started on parenteral nutrition are 
not candidates for enteral nutrition, many may tolerate a slow weaning onto 
enteral nutrition, or a proportion of their energy and nutrient needs simul -
taneously administered by the enteral route (Figure  3.6) (Griffiths and 
Bongers, 2005). One retrospective study evaluating PPN in dogs and cats 
demonstrated improved survival in patients receiving concurrent enteral 
nutrition (Chan et al., 2002). Concurrent administration of enteral feeding 
may help to maintain intestinal integrity, immune and gut‐barrier functions 
(Heidegger et al., 2007).
Figure 3.5 A dog whose gastrointestinal 
tract is severely dysfunctional and is 
receiving parenteral nutritional support.

===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
Routes of nutritional support in small animals   19
Summary
Implementing a nutritional support plan is a key component to the successful 
management of hospitalized canine and feline patients. The variety of routes in 
which nutritional support can be delivered provide multiple options that can be 
tailored to the patient’s specific needs and limitations. The subsequent chapters 
provide further detail for each route of nutritional support, indications, placement 
technique, and proper monitoring.
r eferences
Abood, S.K. and Buffington, C.A.T. (1992) Enteral feeding of dogs and cats: 51 cases (1989–1991). 
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 4, 619–622.
Beal, M.W. and Brown, A. J. (2011) Clinical experience utilizing a novel fluoroscopic technique 
for wire‐guided nasojejunal tube placement in the dog: 26 cases (2006–2010). Journal of 
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 21,151–157.
Chan, D.L., Freeman, L.M., Labato, M.A. et al. (2002) Retrospective evaluation of partial 
 parenteral nutrition in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine , 16, 440–445.
Figure 3.6 Cat being managed with a 
combination of parenteral and enteral 
nutritional support.
KEy po Int S
•	 Determining	the	route	of	nutritional	support	is	an	important	step	in	the	assessment	and	
management	of	critical	care	patients.
•	 Enteral	routes	to	be	considered	include	nasoesophageal,	esophagostomy,	gastrostomy	
and	jejunostomy	feeding	tubes.
•	 For	patients	that	cannot	tolerate	enteral	feeding,	parenteral	nutrition	may	be	an	
appropriate	feeding	route	alternative.
•	 Indications	for	parenteral	nutrition	include	intractable	vomiting,	diarrhea	or	lack	of	gag	
reflex,	recovery	from	severe	gastric	or	intestinal	resection,	poor	anesthetic	candidate	for	
proper	feeding	tube	placement	or	inability	to	meet	energy	requirements	via	enteral	route	
alone.
•	 The	variety	of	routes	in	which	nutritional	support	can	be	delivered	provides	multiple	
options	that	can	be	tailored	to	the	patient’ s	specific	needs	and	limitations.

===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
20   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Chandler, M.L. Guilford, W.G. and Payne‐James, J. (2000) Use of peripheral parenteral 
nutritional support in dogs and cats. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 
216 (5), 669–673.
Chandler, M.L. and Payne‐James, J. (2006) Prospective evaluation of a peripherally admin-
istered three‐in‐one parenteral nutrition product in dogs. Journal of Small Animal Practice, 
47, 518–523.
Crowe, D.T. and Devey, J.J. (1997a) Esophagostomy tubes for feeding and decompression: 
Clinical experience in 29 small animal patients. Journal of the American Animal Hospital 
Association, 33, 393–403.
Crowe , D.T. and Devey, J.J. (1997b) Clinical experience with jejunostomy feeding tubes in 47 
small animal patients. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 7, 7–19.
Daye, R.M., Huber, M.L. and Henderson, R.A. (1999) Interlocking box jejunostomy: A new tech-
nique for enteral feeding. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 35, 129–134.
Devitt, C.M. and Seim, H.B. (1997) Clinical evaluation of tube esophagostomy in small animals. 
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 33, 55–60.
Glaus, T.M., Cornelius, L.M., Bartges, J.W. et al. (1998) Complications with non‐endoscopic 
percutaneous gastrostomy in 31 cats and 10 dogs: a retrospective study. Journal of Small 
Animal Practice, 39, 218–222.
Griffiths, R.D. and Bongers, T. (2005) Nutrition support for patients in the intensive care unit. 
Postgraduate Medical Journal, 81(960), 629–636.
Heidegger, C.P., Romand, J.A., Treggiari, M.M. et al. (2007) Is it now time to promote mixed enteral 
and parenteral nutrition for the critically ill patient? Intensive Care Medicine, 33, 963–969.
Holahan, M., Abood, S., Hautman, J. et al. (2010) Intermittent and continues enteral nutrition 
in critically ill dogs: A prospective randomized trial. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 24, 
520–536.
Ireland, L.A., Hohenhaus, A.E., Broussard, J.D. et al. (2003) A comparison of owner management 
and complications with 67 cats with esophagostomy and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy 
feeding tubes. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 39, 241–246.
Jergens, A.E., Morrison, J.A., Miles, K.G. et al. (2007) Percutaneous endoscopic gastrojejunostomy 
tube placement in healthy dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 21, 18–24.
Jennings M., Center S.A., Barr S.C. et al. (2001) Successful treatment of feline pancreatitis 
using an endoscopically placed gastrojejunostomy tube. Journal of the American Animal Hospital 
Association, 37,145–152.
Levine, P.B., Smallwood, L.J. and Buback, J.L. (1997) Esophagostomy tubes as a method of 
nutritional management in cats: A retrospective study. Journal of the American Animal Hospital 
Association, 33, 405–410.
Marks, S.L. (1998) The principles and practical application of enteral nutrition. Veterinary Clinics 
of North America (Small Animal), 28, 677–708.
Mansfield, C.S., James, F.E., Steiner, J.M. et al. (2011) A pilot study to assess tolerability of early 
enteral nutrition via esophagostomy tube feeding in dogs with severe acute pancreatitis. 
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 25, 419–425.
Pápa, K., Psáder, R., Sterczer, A. et al. (2009) Endoscopically guided nasojejunal tube placement 
in dogs for short‐term postduodenal feeding. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 
19(6), 554–563.
Pyle, S.C., Marks, S.L. and Kass, P.H. (2004) Evaluation of complications and prognostic factors 
associated with administration of total parenteral nutrition in cats: 75 cases (1994–2001). 
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 225(2), 242–250.
Swann, H.M., Sweet, D.C. and Michel. K. (2002) Complications associated with use of jejunos-
tomy tubes in dogs and cats: 40 cases (1989–1994). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical 
Association, 12, 1764–1767.
Wohl, J.S. (2006) Nasojejunal feeding tube placement using fluoroscopic guidance: tech-
nique and clinical experience in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 16, 
S27–S33.
Zsombor‐Murray, E. and Freeman, L.M. (1999) Peripheral Parenteral Nutrition. Compendium on 
Continual Education for the Practicing Veterinarian, 21(6), 1–11.

===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
21
Introduction
Indications, contraindications and patient selection
Nasoesophageal feeding tubes are placed into the distal esophagus via the nares. 
This can be a very useful feeding technique in clinical cases where a relatively 
short‐term nutritional intervention (e.g., for about 3 to 5 days) is required 
(Figure 4.1). This type of feeding tube does not require any specialized equipment 
or expertise for placement and thus can be a very useful tool in general practice. 
In addition, nasoesophageal feeding tubes can be placed without the need for 
general anesthesia (or heavy sedation) and, as such, they can act as a temporary 
intervention in patients where anesthesia may be contraindicated.
Nasoesophageal feeding tubes are unlikely to be tolerated for extended periods 
of time and thus are not suitable for long‐term or home feeding. Furthermore, 
patients with nasal pathology (e.g., rhinitis, neoplasia, maxillary fractures) or those 
with esophageal disease (e.g., esophagitis or megaesophagus) may not tolerate 
these tubes, as they are likely to augment discomfort or worsen clinical signs. 
Patients with a poor gag reflex, protracted vomiting or with reduced  mentation 
would be at high risk of aspiration with this feeding technique and as such this 
should be avoided. Nasoesophageal feeding tubes may also not be an appropriate 
technique in overly aggressive patients, as feeding and management of the tube 
will require handling of the head. Finally, as there are limited choices of diets that 
can be administered via nasoesophageal feeding tubes, the  characteristics of these 
diets can be quite limiting (i.e., high fat and protein content) and may lead to this 
technique not being suitable for certain patients.
Procedure for tube placement and confirmation 
of correct positioning
Materials required for nasoesophageal feeding tube placement:
1 A nasoesophageal feeding tube of the appropriate size
2 Sedative agent (e.g., butorphanol) may be useful but is not required
Nasoesophageal feeding tubes 
in dogs and cats
Isuru Gajanayake
Willows Veterinary Centre and Referral Service, Shirley, Solihull, West Midlands, UK
ChaPter 4

===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
22   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
3 Topical local anesthetic agent (e.g., proparacaine, proxymetacaine)
4 Adhesive tape
5 Lubricating gel (with or without topical anesthetic)
6 Suture material (non‐absorbable suture) or tissue glue
7 Syringe and saline
8 Radiography, fluouroscopy or end‐tidal carbon dioxide monitor.
Choosing feeding tube type and size
Nasoesophageal feeding tubes can be made of different materials, including 
 polyurethane, polyvinylchloride, silicone and red rubber. Polyurethane tubes 
are stronger while silicone tubes are more biocompatible. Polyvinylchloride 
tubes can lead to mucosal irritation with prolonged use but this may not be a 
concern with nasoesophageal tubes as they are intended for short‐term use. The 
external diameter of these tubes range from 4 French (1.3 mm) to 10 French 
(3.3 mm). Tube choice is thus dependent on the size of the patient (the size of 
the nares being the limiting factor) but in general tubes sizes between 3.5 and 5 
French are adequate for most cats, whereas tubes with sizes >6 French may be 
appropriate for a medium to large dog. In brachycephalic dogs and cats it may be 
necessary to place a smaller tube due to the smaller external nares.
Tube placement technique
1 Position the conscious or sedated patient in sternal recumbency.
2 Apply 1–2 drops of local anesthetic (e.g., proxymetacaine) into one nostril 
with the head held up so that the anesthetic agent flows caudally into the 
nasal cavity (Figure 4.2).
3 While waiting for the local anesthetic to take effect (usually 1 or 2 minutes), 
measure the tube from the nares to the 7th or 8th intercostal space – mark this 
position on the tube with some adhesive tape.
4 Lubricate the tube with gel.
5 Hold the head at a normal angle and direct the tube ventrally and medially (i.e., 
toward the opposite ear) for passage into the ventral nasal meatus (Figure 4.3); in 
dogs it may be necessary to pass the tube dorsally initially (for about 1 cm) over 
the ventral ridge and then in a ventral and medial direction while holding the 
external nares in a dorsal position (Abood and Buffington, 1991).
Figure 4.1 A dog with a nasoesophageal 
feeding tube in place.

===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
Nasoesophageal feeding tubes in dogs and cats   23
 6 The tube should pass without resistance and the patient may swallow as the 
tube passes the oropharynx (Figure 4.4).
 7 If resistance is met the tube should be withdrawn and steps 4–6 should be 
repeated.
 8 Once the tube has been passed to the level of the tape marker it should be 
secured as closely as possible to the nostril using a single suture or tissue glue to 
attach the tape marker to the skin with a single suture or to the fur with glue.
 9 A second tape marker is then placed further along the tube to attach the tube 
via a suture or glue to the skin or fur on the head between the eyes (care 
must be taken to avoid the tube touching the whiskers in cats).
10 An Elizabethan collar is then placed to avoid inadvertent removal of the tube 
by the patient (Figure 4.5).
Confirmation of accurate placement
Several techniques are available to check accurate placement of a nasoesophageal 
feeding tube and include:
1 Applying suction to the tube using a 5 or 10 mL syringe; if negative pressure 
is not achieved the tube may be in the airways (or stomach).
2 Injecting 5–10 mL of air to the tube and auscultating the cranial abdomen for 
borborygmal sounds.
3 Instilling 3–5 mL of sterile saline into the tube and observing for a cough 
response (this indicates incorrect placement in the airway).
Figure 4.2 A cat being prepared for 
nasoesophageal tube placement by the 
application of a local anesthetic (e.g., 
proxymetacaine) into the left nostril.
Figure 4.3 Nasoesophagel feeding tube 
being fed through the nostril of a cat.

===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
24   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
4 Applying a capnograph to the tube (Figure 4.6). If a CO2 trace is seen on the 
monitor, this indicates that the tube is in the airway (Chau et al., 2011).
5 Performing thoracic radiography to check for correct placement of the tube in 
the distal esophagus and ensuring there is no kinking of the tube.
Monitoring and ongoing care
The tube exit site from external nares should be checked once to twice daily for 
any discharge or bleeding. Any crusting can be cleaned using moistened cotton 
wool. The tube should be checked for patency.
Figure 4.4 The nasoesophageal tube 
should pass without resistance from the 
nasal passage into the oropharynx and 
into the esophagus.
Figure 4.5 A cat is fitted with an 
Elizabethan collar to prevent inadvertent 
removal of the tube by the patient.
Figure 4.6 Capnography can be used to 
confirm that the nasoesophageal feeding 
tube is not in the airway by the lack of a 
CO2 tracing being produced.

===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
Nasoesophageal feeding tubes in dogs and cats   25
Diets and tube feeding
Nasoesophageal feeding tubes are somewhat limited in the choices of diets that 
can be administered through them as the narrow lumen of these tubes limits 
anything other than a pure liquid diet. These diets tend to be relatively energy 
dense (i.e, 1  kcal/ml) and have high concentrations of protein and salt. For 
these reasons, these diets and thus nasoesophageal feeding tubes may be 
 relatively contraindicated in patients with intolerance to high protein (e.g., 
renal or hepatic failure) or to high sodium (e.g., cardiac failure). However, some 
of the diets have a lower protein and sodium content that may be tolerated in 
this subset of patients. Alternatively the diets can be further diluted with water, 
however in this case, a relatively large volume may be necessary to meet the 
energy requirements of the patients.
Feeding via nasoesophageal tubes can be performed either via bolus admin -
istration or as a constant rate infusion. For bolus feeding, the daily amount of the 
diet to be delivered is divided into 3–6 meals to find a balance between  practicality 
and individual meal sizes. In general, a meal size (including tube flush volumes) 
should not exceed 10–12 mL/kg. Setting up a constant rate infusion using liquid 
diets is relatively straightforward as these diets can be administered using a 
syringe driver or fluid pump (Figure 4.7). However, it is vital to ensure that the 
enteral nutrition bag, syringes and infusion lines are clearly labelled to prevent 
accidental administration of enteral feed into intravenous catheters (Figure 4.8).
Prior to each bolus feeding, a small volume (e.g., 3–5 mL) of sterile water 
or saline should be administered via the tube to confirm patency and correct 
position. If resistance is encountered or if the patient coughs after the flush, 
the planned  feeding should be stopped and measures taken to investigate 
and correct the problem. This may include thoracic radiography (and or cap -
nography) to confirm correct tube position or steps to unblock the tube 
(see troubleshooting). The tube should also be flushed with a small volume 
(5 mL) of water at the end of feeding to prevent blockages. When using a 
 constant rate infusion to feed via a nasoesophageal feeding tube the patient 
should be hospitalized in an area where it will be monitored  constantly, for 
example, an intensive care unit. This is to prevent inadvertent  feeding into 
the airways if the tube dislodges from the oesophagus to the trachea.
Figure 4.7 Nasoesophageal feedings may 
be delivered as constant rate infusion via 
syringe drivers or fluid pumps.

===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
26   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Complications and troubleshooting
The complications associated with nasoesophageal feeding tubes are relatively 
minor and are unlikely to result in death or significant morbidity. In one 
study, the most common complications seen with the use of nasogastric 
 feeding tubes were vomiting, diarrhea and inadvertent tube removal, which 
occurred in 37% of patients (Abood and Buffington, 1992). Other minor 
 complications (e.g.,  irritation of nasal passages, sneezing) can occur during 
the placement of the tube or as a consequence of the in‐dwelling tube. A 
recent study  comparing complications associated with nasoesophageal versus 
nasogastric feeding tubes found no difference in rates of complications (Yu 
et  al., 2013). To prevent  inadvertent use of the nasoesophageal tube for 
 anything other than feeding, the feeding tube should be clearly labelled. The 
use of special safety enteral feeding syringes 1,2 and tube adaptors also prevents 
 accidental injection of food into intravenous catheters (e.g., jugular catheters) 
(Guenter et al., 2008).
Tracheal intubation
The most serious complication associated with placement of this type of tube is 
inadvertent tracheal intubation. This can be avoided by careful technique and 
confirmation of correct placement within the oesophagus. It is also possible 
that a previously correctly placed tube can be vomited and then inadvertently 
passes into the trachea. For this reason, it is important to confirm that the tube 
is still in the correct place prior to each feeding. If there is any concern that 
tracheal intubation may have occurred, follow‐up thoracic radiography should 
be performed.
Figure 4.8 A bag of enteral feeding clearly 
labelled to indicate that it must not be 
administered intravenously.

===== PDF PAGE 41 =====
Nasoesophageal feeding tubes in dogs and cats   27
Vomiting
Vomiting may occur with nasoesophageal tubes but this may be less frequently 
encountered than with esophagostomy feeding tubes. Patients that are expe-
riencing frequent vomiting as a pre‐existing condition prior to tube placement 
may require an alternate feeding technique or have vomiting controlled with 
anti‐emetic therapy before implementation of tube feeding. Despite these 
concerns, recent studies have not reported an increase in vomiting episodes 
following implementation of nasoesophageal feeding (Mohr et al., 2003, 
Campbell et al., 2010, Holahan et al., 2010).
Tube blockage
Nasoesophageal tubes may be particularly prone to blockage due to their narrow 
lumen diameter. Tube blockages are best prevented by using pure liquid diets 
and by flushing the tube following each feeding using a small volume of water 
(i.e. 5 mL). If a blockage does occur, flushing and applying suction using warm 
water may dislodge the blockage. Alternatively a combination of pancreatic 
enzymes and sodium bicarbonate in water should be injected into the clogged 
feeding tube and left for a few minutes before attempting flushing again with 
water to release the blockage (Parker and Freeman, 2013). Other compounds 
such as carbonated drinks may also be attempted but this has been shown to be 
less effective than water in an in vitro experiment (Parker and Freeman, 2013).
Rhinitis, epistaxis and dacrocystitis
Local irritation of the nasal cavity and tear ducts may occur with nasoesophageal 
tubes. These complications are especially likely following lengthy periods of use 
and if there is pre‐existing disease in these areas. Tube removal may be necessary 
if these signs are particularly severe.
Reflux esophagitis
Regurgitation and reflux esophagitis may occur if the tube is inadvertently 
placed (across the lower esophageal sphincter) into the stomach. However, this 
complication is rarely reported and believed to be more common with large bore 
feeding tubes such as esophageal feeding tubes than with narrower nasoesopha-
geal feeding tubes.
removal and transition to oral feeding
Food can be offered to the patient throughout the period this feeding tube is in 
place as its presence is unlikely to cause any hindrance to the patient’s appetite 
or swallowing. In one study into the use of nasogastric feeding tubes, about half 
of the patients started eating voluntarily while still hospitalized (Abood and 
Buffington, 1992).
Nasoesophageal feeding tubes enable nutrition to be provided while a patient 
is stabilized with other treatments. Once the patient has been stabilized (and if 
it is still inappetent), a longer term feeding tube option (e.g., esophagostomy or 
gastrostomy feeding tube) can be placed.

===== PDF PAGE 42 =====
28   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
references
Abood, S.K. and Buffington, C.A. (1991) Improved nasogastric intubation technique for admin-
istration of nutritional support in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 
199(5), 577–579.
Abood, S.K. and Buffington, C.A. (1992) Enteral feeding of dogs and cats: 51 cases (1989–1991). 
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 201(4), 619–622.
Campbell, J.A., Jutkowitz, L.A., Santoro, K. A. et al. (2010) Continuous versus intermittent 
delivery of nutrition via nasoenteric feeding tubes in hospitalized canine and feline patients: 
91 patients (2002–2007). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 20(2), 232–236.
Chau, J.P., Lo, S.H., Thompson, D.R. et al (2011) Use of end‐total carbon dioxide detection to 
determine correct placement of nasogastric tube: a meta‐analysis. International Journal of 
Nursing Studies, 48(4), 513–521.
Guenter, P., Hicks, R.W., Simmons, D. et al. (2008) Enteral feeding misconnections: A 
Consortium Position Statement. The Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Patient Safety, 
34(5), 285–292.
Holahan, M., Abood, S., Hauptman, J. et al. (2010) Intermittent and continuous enteral nutrition 
in critically ill dogs: a prospective randomized trial. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 24(3), 
520–526.
Mohr, A.J., Leisewitz, A. L., Jacobson, L. S. et al. (2003) Effect of early enteral nutrition on 
intestinal permeability, intestinal protein loss, and outcome in dogs with severe parvoviral 
enteritis. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 17(6), 791–798.
Parker, V. J. and Freeman, L. M. (2013) Comparison of various solutions to dissolve critical care 
diet clots. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 23(3), 344–347.
Yu, M. K., Freeman, L. M., Heinze, C. R. et al. (2013) Comparison of complications in dogs with 
nasoesophageal versus nasogastric tubes. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 
23(3) 300–304.
Key PoInts
•	 Nasoesophageal	feeding	tubes	can	be	a	very	useful	feeding	technique	in	clinical	cases	
where	a	relatively	short‐term	nutritional	intervention	is	required.
•	 This	type	of	feeding	tube	does	not	require	any	specialized	equipment	or	expertise	for	
placement	and	thus	can	be	a	very	useful	technique	in	general	practice.
•	 Nasoesophageal	feeding	tubes	are	unlikely	to	be	tolerated	for	extended	periods	of	time	
and	thus	are	not	suitable	for	long‐term	or	at	home	feeding.
•	 Tube	choice	is	dependent	on	the	size	of	the	patient	but	in	general,	tube	sizes	between	
3.5	and	5	French	are	adequate	in	cats,	whereas	tubes	with	sizes	>	6	French	may	be	
appropriate	in	dogs.
•	 Food	can	be	offered	to	the	patient	throughout	the	period	the	feeding	tube	is	in	place	as	
its	presence	is	unlikely	to	cause	any	hindrance	to	the	patient’ s	voluntary	food	intake.

===== PDF PAGE 43 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
29
Introduction
Esophagostomy tube feeding was first described as a means to provide n utritional 
support for people with cranial esophageal cancer in 1951 (Klopp, 1951). In the 
mid‐1980s Crowe developed a similar technique for veterinary patients (Crowe, 
1990). Esophagostomy tube feeding proved to be a safe and effective means of 
providing enteral nutrition for appropriate patients. This modality of nutritional 
support entails a relatively easy placement technique that is minimally invasive 
and well tolerated. Placement of the feeding tube into the midcervical region 
mitigates complications associated with p haryngostomy tubes, including gagging 
and partial airway obstruction (Crowe, 1990). Esophagostomy tubes can provide 
at‐home nutritional support for weeks to months for patients unable or unwill­
ing to meet nutritional needs orally. The larger diameter tube compared to nasoe­
sophageal or jejunostomy tubes allows for a wider selection of diet options, 
including blenderized pet foods formulated for specific medical conditions.
Indications and contraindications for  
esophagostomy tubes
Enteral feeding is preferred over the parenteral route because it is p hysiologically 
sound, less costly, and safer (Prittie and Barton, 2004). Physiological benefits 
include maintenance of intestinal mucosal integrity and preservation of gastroin­
testinal immune function. General contraindications for enteral n utrition include 
u ncontrolled vomiting, ileus, gastrointestinal obstruction, severe m aldigestion or 
malabsorption and an inability to protect the airway.
An esophagostomy feeding tube allows delivery of nutrients to patients 
with inadequate intake who cannot prehend, masticate, or swallow food in a 
normal or safe manner. It can be used to meet the nutritional needs of anorexic 
patients, such as cats with hepatic lipidosis. This device is indicated in patients 
with nasal, oral, or pharyngeal disease since the midcervical placement of the 
Esophagostomy feeding tubes 
in dogs and cats
Laura Eirmann 
Oradell Animal Hospital; Nestle Purina PetCare, Ringwood, NJ, USA
Chapter 5

===== PDF PAGE 44 =====
30   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
tube bypasses these anatomic regions. Patients with oropharyngeal neoplasia, 
mandibular or maxillary trauma, oronasal fistulas or dysphagia are potential 
candidates for an esophagostomy feeding tube.
Patients must undergo general anesthesia for placement of the feeding tube, so 
the anesthetic risk must be considered. Sedation alone for placement of esophago­
stomy is not recommended as suppression of the gap reflex is not achieved, mak­
ing placement extremely difficult. Esophagostomy tube placement should be 
considered contraindicated in patients with coagulopathy as this would lead to an 
unacceptable risk of bleeding. The esophagus and more distal gastrointestinal tract 
must be functional for this mode of nutrition to be effective. Patients with megae­
sophagus, esophagitis, or esophageal strictures are not good candidates for an 
esophagostomy tube, but may benefit from a more distally placed feeding device 
such as a gastrostomy tube. Patients at risk of vomiting must be able to protect 
their airway. A summary of indications and contraindications and a list of advan­
tages and disadvantages are provided in Table 5.1 and Table 5.2.
esophagostomy tube placement and feeding 
guidelines
Several techniques are described for placing esophagostomy tubes including 
percutaneous techniques utilizing curved forceps, needle catheters, or feeding 
tube applicators (Crowe, 1990; Rawlings, 1993; Crowe and Devey, 1997; 
Table 5.1 Indications and contraindications for esophagostomy feeding tubes.
Indications Contraindications
Prolonged inadequate intake High risk for general anesthesia or coagulopathy
Anticipated need for nutritional support > 7 
days
Esophageal disease or marked gastrointestinal 
dysfunction precluding the enteral feeding route
Nasal, oral or pharyngeal disease or surgery Inability to protect the airway (poor mentation, 
poor gag reflex)
Table 5.2 
Advantages and disadvantages of esophagostomy feeding tubes.
Advantages Disadvantages
Relatively easy and fast placement Requires general anesthesia
Cost effective Risk of cellulitis or infection at stoma site
Does not require specialized equipment Esophagus and more distal gastrointestinal 
tract must be functional
Well tolerated by the patient Potential to dislodge if patient vomits
Broad options for diet selection when larger 
feeding tubes are placed
Potential esophageal reflux or irritation if 
malpositioned
Can be used immediately and removed 
immediately if necessary
Appropriate for long‐term and at‐home use

===== PDF PAGE 45 =====
Esophagostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   31
Devitt and Seim 1997, Levine, Smallwood and Buback, 1997; Von Werthern 
and Wess, 2001). A recent prospective study comparing the forceps technique 
(discussed in  detail in this chapter) versus applicator according to Von 
Werthern in dogs and cats showed similar rapid placement time but identi ­
fied some serious c  omplications in some cases (Hohensinn et al., 2012). The 
technique preferred by the author is demonstrated in Figures 5.1–5.11 and 
detailed below:
1 The patient is anesthetized, intubated, and placed in right lateral recumbency 
(Figure 5.1) with the mouth held open by an oral speculum.
2 The surgical field is aseptically prepared from the mandibular ramus to the t horacic 
inlet and extended to the dorsal and ventral midlines. Placement of the tube on the 
left side is preferred due to the anatomical location of the esophagus.
3 A feeding tube is premeasured and marked from the midcervical esophagus 
caudal to the larynx to the 7th to 8th intercostal space so that the aboral 
(d istal) tip will lie in the distal esophagus. Termination in the distal  esophagus 
rather than the stomach decreases the risk of gastroesophageal reflux (Balkany 
et al., 1997). The feeding tube should be long enough to allow several centi ­
metres to remain exterior to the skin post‐placement. The size of the feeding 
tube depends upon patient size but commonly ranges from 12 to 14 French 
for cats and up to 20 French for dogs. Red rubber, polyurethane, or silicone 
tubes may be used (Marks, 2010). Selection of catheter material depends 
upon clinician preference recognizing differences in stiffness, flexibility and 
internal diameter (DeLegge and DeLegge, 2005).
4 Depending upon the feeding tube, the distal rounded end may be removed or 
the exit side hole may be elongated to facilitate passage of the gruel (Figure 5.2).
5 Curved forceps (e.g., Kelly, Carmalt, Mixter, or Schnidt, based on the size of 
the patient) are placed in the mouth and advanced to the midcervical 
 esophagus distal to the hyoid apparatus. With the patient in lateral r ecumbency, 
the curved tip of the forceps is pushed dorsally, tenting the skin, and palpated 
externally (Figure 5.3). The jugular groove is identified to avoid major vascu­
lature and nerves.
6 A small incision is made on the tented skin over the tip of the forceps through 
the esophageal wall (Figure 5.4).
7 The forceps tip is exteriorized by blunt dissection and excision of the  esophageal 
mucosa (Figure 5.5).
Figure 5.1 Patient is anesthetized and 
positioned on right lateral recumbency 
for placement of esophagostomy tube.

===== PDF PAGE 46 =====
Figure 5.3 A curved Carmalt forceps 
clamp is placed through the oral cavity 
and its tip is palpated in the cervical area 
to identify the site of surgical incision.
Figure 5.4 A small incision is made over 
the tips of the forceps through the skin 
and esophageal wall.
Figure 5.5 The tips of the forceps are 
exteriorized through the incision.
Figure 5.2 The distal exit side hole may be 
elongated with a blade to facilitate 
passage of food.

===== PDF PAGE 47 =====
Esophagostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   33
 8 The distal end of the feeding tube is grasped with the forceps and pulled 
through the incision and out of the oral cavity (Figures 5.6 and 5.7). The 
tongue is retracted to facilitate redirection of the feeding tube.
 9 The end of the tube is lubricated, retroflexed, and pushed down the  esophagus 
while the proximal end of the tube is slowly retracted a few c  entimetres 
(Figures 5.8 and 5.9).
10 The proximal end of the tube will rotate cranially as the tube straightens to the 
proper orientation (Figure 5.10). The tube should slide easily back and forth a 
few millimetres and can be advanced to the premarked site on the tube.
Figure 5.6 The tip of the feeding tube is 
grasped with the forceps.
Figure 5.7 The feeding tube is pulled 
through the oral cavity.
Figure 5.8 The tip of the feeding tube is 
retroflexed and redirected into the 
esophagus.

===== PDF PAGE 48 =====
34   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
11 The oropharynx is visually inspected to confirm that the tube is no longer 
present.
12 The incision site is re‐scrubbed and the tube is secured with purse‐string 
and  Chinese finger‐trap sutures using polypropylene suture material 
(Figure 5.11).
13 Several techniques may be performed to verify correct placement of the 
feeding tube, including use of capnography (Figure 5.12); however, radio ­
graphic confirmation is recommended (Figure 5.13).
14 Antibiotic ointment on a non‐adherent pad is placed over the surgical site 
and a light wrap is applied.
15 The tube is marked at the exit site to monitor for migration. The tube should 
be flushed with sterile saline to assess for a cough response and to introduce 
a column of liquid in the tube. The tube remains capped when not in use.
16 To avoid accidental administration of food into an intravenous catheter 
(termed ‘enteral misconnection’) all feeding tubes should be clearly labelled 
(Figure 5.14).
Additional measures to prevent inadvertent feeding into intravenous c  atheters 
include the implementation of enteral feeding safety devices. 1,2 This entails 
c apping every feeding tube with special adaptors that are non‐luer lock  compliant 
and that can only be connected to special color‐coded safety enteral syringes or 
tubing (Figures  5.15, 5.16, 5.17). These precautionary measures can be cost 
e ffective (i.e., are relatively inexpensive) but can be quite effective in preventing 
Figure 5.9 While the retroflexed tube is 
pushed into the oropharynx, gentle 
traction is applied to the end of the tube 
until it “flips” into its intended 
orientation.
Figure 5.10 The feeding tube is advanced 
such that the tip lies in the caudal 
esophagus prior to suturing.

===== PDF PAGE 49 =====
Figure 5.11 The tube is secured with a 
purse string suture and a ‘Chinese Finger 
Trap’ sutures pattern is applied.
Figure 5.12 Capnography may be 
attached to the feeding tube to confirm 
correct placement as the esophagus 
should produce no discernible carbon 
dioxide tracing.
Figure 5.13 Confirmation of appropriate 
placement of esophageal feeding tube 
within the distal esophagus is best 
determined with fluouroscopy or 
radiography.
Figure 5.14 Feeding tubes should be 
clearly labelled to decrease risk of 
inadvertent feeding into intravenous 
catheters.

===== PDF PAGE 50 =====
36   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
serious, if not fatal, medical errors associated with feeding (Guenter et al., 2008). 
Although these are not yet adopted universally in human medicine, there is 
growing pressure to make such measures mandatory (Guenter et al., 2008).
The esophagostomy tube can be used as soon as the patient recovers from 
anesthesia. Diet selection and preparation will be addressed in a later chapter 
(see Chapter 9). Veterinary liquid diets or properly blenderized pet foods can be 
u tilized. Food may be delivered via multiple bolus feedings or by constant rate 
infusion. Bolus feeding can be continued at home. The daily caloric require ­
ment is c alculated and divided by the number of meals per day (often 4–6 meals 
Figure 5.15 A special safety enteral 
syringe with non‐luer tip (on right) is 
compared with a standard syringe with 
luer compatible tip.
Figure 5.16 The dog in this image is being 
fed through its esophagostomy tube using 
a safety enteral feeding system that 
includes fitting the tube with a non‐luer 
adaptor (purple adaptor) and 
administering food via special safety 
enteral syringes.
Figure 5.17 A cat receiving 
esophagostomy enteral feeding via a 
continuous rate infusion. Note that a 
special enteral infusion set is connected to 
a non‐luer lock compliant safety feeding 
adaptor.

===== PDF PAGE 51 =====
Esophagostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   37
per day initially). Based on nutritional assessment, the clinician may initiate 
feeding at 1/3–1/2 of the calculated energy requirement (t ypically resting 
energy requirement) on the first day, not to exceed 5 mL gruel/kg body weight 
per meal (Delaney, Fascetti and Elliott, 2006). Caloric intake is increased based 
on patient tolerance over the f ollowing days to reach the c alculated goal. In 
most cases, the volume a dministered per meal can be increased up to 15 mL/kg 
and the number of meals per day can be decreased to 3 to 4 to accommodate an 
owner’s s chedule. Prior to feeding, the position of the tube should be inspected 
for migration and the tube should be flushed with warm water. Coughing may 
indicate tube m igration. The patient should not be fed until the proper position 
of the tube has been verified. The patient should be comfortably positioned in 
an upright or sternal position. The gruel should be warmed to near body tem­
perature and administered over 10–15 minutes, followed with a warm water 
flush (Vannatta and Bartges, 2004). Feeding should be discontinued if there 
is nausea, vomiting, coughing or d iscomfort and the patient and tube should 
be reassessed.
Monitoring
The stoma site should be examined daily for the first week for evidence of 
infection or food leakage and the site should be cleaned with an antiseptic 
solution (Marks, 2010). Daily nutritional assessment includes body weight, 
physical exam, review of previous 24 hour caloric intake and diagnostics based 
on the underlying disease. Oral food can be offered when deemed appropriate 
and voluntary intake recorded. Tube feeding can be reduced or discontinued 
based on the amount of voluntary intake. Patients with chronic disease may 
need a feeding tube indefinitely. The tube should not be removed until the 
patient’s body weight is stable and the voluntary intake has been consistently 
sufficient for at least 1–2 weeks. The tube should be flushed with water twice 
daily if it is not being utilized. The tube is removed by cutting the anchoring 
suture, occluding the tube, and pulling gently. The ostomy site should be kept 
clean and a light dressing may be applied for the first 24 hours or until sealed. 
The wound will heal by second intention and should not be sutured closed.
Complications
Complications associated with esophagostomy feeding tubes are relatively 
uncommon and typically minor to moderate (Crowe and Devey, 1997; Levine 
et al., 1997). There was no difference in complication rate or severity in 
one  retrospective study comparing esophagostomy tubes to percutaneous 
e ndoscopic gastrostomy tubes (Ireland et al., 2003). Serious complications, such 
as i nadvertent placement in the airway or mediastinum, or damage to the major 
vessels and nerves can be avoid by proper placement technique and verifying 
the position of the tube radiographically. Midcervical placement minimizes the 
risk of gagging and partial airway obstruction (Crowe, 1990). Ensuring the tube 
terminates in the mid to distal esophagus rather than the stomach decreases 

===== PDF PAGE 52 =====
38   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
the  risk of g astroesophageal reflux with secondary esophagitis or stricture 
(Balkany et al., 1997). Proper tube size and material decrease the risk of 
 esophageal irritation. Proper patient evaluation to ensure the pet can protect his 
airway in the event of vomiting is critical to lessen the risk of pulmonary aspira­
tion. If the patient vomits, tube placement should be verified to ensure it has 
not been displaced.
Complications related to the stoma site or mechanical issues with the tube 
are possible. Peristomal cellulitis, infection or abscess may occur (Crowe and 
Devey, 1997: Devitt and Seim, 1997; Levine et al., 1997; Ireland et al., 2003). 
Peristomal inflammation is a more common complication (Levine et al., 1997). 
It can be managed in mild cases with through cleaning and topical antibiotics 
(Levine et al., 1997) while more severe cellulitis or abscessation may require 
systemic antibiotics and tube removal (Michel, 2004). These risks can be 
m inimized by ensuring the tube is secured properly and the stoma site is kept 
clean and protected (Michel, 2004). Mechanical issues with the tube include 
premature removal, kinking or clogging. Risk of premature removal can be 
minimized by using an appropriate tube size for patient comfort. The tube 
should be securely sutured and wraps should be comfortable. An Elizabethan 
collar may be needed in some cases. Kinking can occur during tube placement 
or after vomiting and can be detected radiographically. Completely flushing the 
tube with water after every use decreases the risk of tube obstruction. The gruel 
should be a proper consistency and administration of medications through the 
tube should be avoided or done with caution (Michel, 2004). Tube obstructions 
may dislodge with warm water by applying pressure and suction. Other 
 methods include infusing a carbonated beverage or a solution of pancreatic 
enzyme and sodium bicarbonate (Ireland et al., 2003; Michel, 2004; Parker and 
Freeman, 2013).
As with any mode of enteral support, gastrointestinal and metabolic 
c omplications can occur. Nutritional assessment, monitoring, and treatment 
modifications are indicated for every patient. Vomiting may occur if the gruel 
is not warmed to a proper temperature or delivered too quickly. Decreasing the 
bolus volume and increasing feeding frequency may help patients with 
v omiting or diarrhea. Antiemetics or motility modifiers may also be indicated. 
The n utrient composition of the diet or some medications may contribute to 
adverse gastrointestinal signs and may need to be modified.
Summary
Esophagostomy tube feeding is a safe and well‐tolerated technique and offers 
an effective means of enteral nutritional support in animals. Appropriate patient 
selection and adherence to proper placement and feeding techniques are 
i mperative. As with any mode of nutritional support, diligent patient m oni­
toring and client education are required. Several studies have documented 
owner s atisfaction with this mode of nutritional support (Devitt and Seim, 
1997; Ireland et al., 2003).

===== PDF PAGE 53 =====
Esophagostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   39
references
Balkany, T.J., Baker, B.B., Bloustein, P.A. et al. (1997) Cervical esophagostomy in dogs: 
e ndoscopic, radiographic, and histopathologic evaluation of esophagitis induced by feed­
ing tubes. Annals of Otology, Rhinology and Laryngology, 86, 588–593.
Crowe, D.T. (1990) Nutritional support for the hospitalized patient: An introduction to tube 
feeding. Compendium for Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian, 12(12), 1711–1721.
Crowe, D.T. and Devey J.J. (1997) Esophagostomy tubes for feeding and decompression: 
clinical experience in 29 small animal patients. Journal of the American Animal Hospital 
Association, 33, 393–403.
Delaney, S.J., Fascetti, A.J. and Elliott, D.A. (2006) Critical care nutrition of dogs, in Encyclopedia 
of Canine Clinical Nutrition (eds P. Pibot, V. Biourge and D Elliott) Aniwa SAS, Aimrgues, 
France, pp. 426–450.
DeLegge, R.L. and DeLegge, M.H. (2005) Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy evaluation of 
device material: are we “failsafe”? Nutrition in Clinical Practice, 20, 613–617.
Devitt, C.M. and Seim, H.B. (1997) Clinical evaluation of tube esophagostomy in small animals. 
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 33, 55–60.
Guenter, P., Hicks, R.W., Simmons, D. et al. (2008) Enteral feeding misconnections: A 
Consortium Position Statement. The Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Patient Safety, 
34(5), 285–292.
Hohensinn, N., Doerfelt, R., Doerner, J. et al. (2012) Comparison of two techniques for 
oesophageal feeding tube placement (Abstract). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical 
Care, 22(S2), S21.
Ireland, L.M., Hohenhaus, A.E., Broussard, J.D. et al. (2003) A comparison of owner man­
agement and complications in 67 cats with esophagostomy and percutaneous endoscopic 
gastrostomy feeding tubes. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 39, 241–246.
Klopp, C.T. (1951) Cervical esophagostomy. Journal of Thoracic Surgery, 21, 490–491.
Levine, P.B., Smallwood, L.J. and Buback, J.L. (1997) Esophagostomy tubes as a method of 
nutritional management in cats: a retrospective study. Journal of the American Animal Hospital 
Association, 33, 405–410.
Key poIntS
•	 Esophagostomy feeding tubes are a safe and effective means of providing enteral 
nutritional support for appropriately selected veterinary patients.
•	 Candidates for esophagostomy feeding tubes must have a functional gastrointestinal 
tract distal to the oropharynx, be able to undergo short duration general anesthesia, and 
not have a coagulopathy that would place them at risk of hemorrhage.
•	 Proper placement technique, tube management, and feeding protocols minimize 
complication risks.
•	 Esophagostomy feeding tubes can be managed by clients long‐term with a variety of 
diets.
•	 Potential complications include improper placement or displacement of the tube, 
mechanical or infectious complications, and gastrointestinal complications.
•	 Nutritional assessment and monitoring is critical for successful patient outcome.
notes
1 Safety syringes. Medicina. Blackrod, Bolton, UK.
2 BD Enteral syringe, UniVia. BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA.

===== PDF PAGE 54 =====
40   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Marks, S.L. (2010) Nasoesophageal, esophagostomy, gastrostomy, and jejunal tube placement 
techniques, in Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edn (eds S.J. Ettinger and  
E.C. Feldman) Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis. pp. 333–340.
Michel, K.E. (2004) Preventing and managing complications of enteral nutritional support. 
Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice, 19(1), 49–53.
Parker, V.J. and Freeman, L.M. (2013) Comparison of various solutions to dissolve critical care 
diets. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 23(3), 344–347.
Prittie, J. and Barton, L. (2004) Route of nutrient delivery. Clinical Techniques in Small Animal 
Practice, 1(1), 6–8.
Rawlings, C.A. (1993) Percutaneous placement of a midcervical esophagostomy tube: new 
technique and representative cases. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 29, 
526–530.
Vannatta, M. and Bartges, J. (2004) Esophagostomy feeding tubes. Veterinary Medicine, 99, 
596–600.
Von Werthern, C.J. and Wess, G. (2001) A new technique for insertion of esophagostomy tubes 
in cats. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 37, 140–144.

===== PDF PAGE 55 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
41
Introduction
The advent of gastrostomy tubes (G‐tubes) in small animal medicine has 
 dramatically facilitated feeding of animals with a variety of diseases and condi-
tions. Gastrostomy tubes include several different types of tubes that vary in 
their composition and technique of placement, but they all allow delivery of 
nutrients distal to the esophagus, enabling enteral feeding in patients with oral, 
pharyngeal or esophageal disease. Gastrostomy tubes are generally well toler -
ated (Seaman and Legendre, 1998; Yoshimoto et al., 2006), can be placed with 
less invasive techniques (i.e., percutaneously placed with endoscopy), and are 
highly effective as a means of providing nutritional support (Smith et al., 1998; 
McCrakin et al., 1993). They also permit bolus meal feeding, and can be used for 
long‐term at‐home feeding.
Gastrostomy tubes can be placed percutaneously in one of two ways: blindly 
using a special tube placing device (e.g., the Eld device)
1 or with the aid of an 
endoscope (i.e., percutaneous endoscopic‐guided gastrostomy (PEG) tube). 
Gastrostomy tubes can also be placed surgically and this is an especially useful 
technique when abdominal surgery is already being performed for other reasons 
(e.g., intestinal surgery, biopsy). Gastrostomy tubes can also be used as a conduit 
to the jejunum, allowing the upper gastrointestinal tract to be completely 
bypassed without the need for a surgical jejunostomy (Cavanaugh et al., 2008; 
Jergens et al., 2007). Additionally, G‐tubes can also be replaced with low‐profile 
gastrostomy feeding tubes (Figure  6.1) suitable for long‐term use (Bright, 
DeNovo and Jones, 1995).
Gastrostomy feeding tubes 
in dogs and cats
Isuru Gajanayake1 and Daniel L. Chan2
1 Willows Veterinary Centre and Referral Service, Shirley, Solihull, West Midlands, UK
2 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
Chapter 6

===== PDF PAGE 56 =====
42   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Indications and contraindications for  
gastrostomy tubes
Gastrostomy feeding tubes have three main advantages: (i) they by‐pass the 
pharynx and esophagus, (ii) they generally have the widest bore and so can 
accommodate almost any diet and (iii) they can be used for long‐term feeding 
(Table 6.1). Bypassing the pharynx and esophagus is important when there is 
disease in these areas (especially in esophageal disease such as megaesophagus 
or esophagitis). The use of wide‐bore feeding tubes such as G‐tubes is useful in 
patients with specific nutritional requirements (e.g., pancreatitis, adverse food 
reactions) that require diets not normally available as liquid diets, as almost any 
therapeutic diet can be modified to enable feeding through G‐tubes. Finally, in 
some patients that require very long‐term assisted feeding (e.g., neoplasia, kid -
ney failure, megaesophagus) G‐tubes have been used effectively.
Despite several advantages, G‐tubes may not be a viable option when there 
are contraindications for enteral feeding (e.g., severe vomiting, ileus), for anesthe-
tizing the patient, due to cardiovascular instability or for performing surgery 
(e.g., coagulopathy, compromised wound healing due to severe hypoproteinemia) 
Figure 6.1 Picture of a low profile 
gastrostomy tube and introducer tool 
which is used to elongate the tube and 
facilitate its placement into an existing and 
mature stoma site. This is a more cosmetic 
and practical approach for animals with 
very long term need for assisted feeding.
Table 6.1 Advantages and disadvantages of gastrostomy feeding tubes.
Advantages Disadvantages
Relatively easy and fast placement Requires general anesthesia
Ready‐to‐use kits readily available Risk of cellulitis or infection at stoma site
Well tolerated by the patient Risk for peritonitis secondary to leakage
Broad options for diet selection – can liquidize  
pet foods
Requires specialized equipment
Appropriate for long‐term and at‐home use Must wait 14 days before safe removal
Allows for placement of jejunal tubes through 
gastrostomy tubes
Endoscopic placement may affect gastric 
motility for up to 72 hours
Gastrostomy tubes can be replaced with low‐profile  
tubes for prolonged use

===== PDF PAGE 57 =====
Gastrostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   43
(Table 6.2). This mode of nutritional support may also be ineffective when there is 
severe gastric pathology present (e.g., gastric lymphoma).
Gastrostomy tube placement
Surgical placement of a gastrostomy tube can be performed at the time of 
abdominal surgery for another reason (e.g., mass excision or biopsy collection). 
With surgical placement, the tube is secured with sutures to the abdominal wall 
and this site is sealed with omentum to minimize the risk of leakage of luminal 
contents. For this technique, balloon‐tipped Foley catheters designed for use in 
the urinary bladder should be avoided owing to the possibility of balloon rupture 
and displacement of the catheter, thereby increasing the risk of peritoneal cavity 
contamination and septic peritonitis.
Techniques for blind placement of gastrostomy tubes have been described 
(Glaus et al., 1998; Fulton and Dennis, 1992) but the risk of complications 
such as laceration and impalement of the spleen would be greater than with 
endoscopic placement (Marks, 2010).
Requirements for peg feeding tube placement
Although a pezzer catheter tube can be modified (Figure 6.2) for use as a gas -
trostomy catheter and placed via endoscopy, commercial PEG tube kits are avail-
able that contain the appropriate tube and necessary equipment for placement 
(e.g,. large bore needle, suture reel and tube attachments (Figure 6.3). One end 
Table 6.2 Indications and contraindications for gastrostomy feeding tubes.
Indications Contraindications
Prolonged inadequate food intake High risk for general anesthesia or  
coagulopathy
Anticipated need for nutritional support  
> 7 days
Gastrointestinal dysfunction  
precluding the enteral feeding route
Nasal, oral, pharyngeal, esophageal  
disease or surgery
Figure 6.2 This pezzer catheter has been 
modified to be used as a gastrostomy tube.

===== PDF PAGE 58 =====
44   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
of the tube contains a mushroom tip (i.e., the end that ends up inside the stomach) 
and the other end tapers to a point with a swaged on loop of suture (i.e., the end 
of the tube that ends up outside the stomach). Detailed instructions are usually 
provided in these commercial kits to demonstrate accurate  placement of the 
tube. Tube sizes vary depending on the available kits but in general a 15 French 
tube is suitable for cats and small dogs and a 20–24 French tube for medium‐
sized dogs. PEG tube placement also requires flexible video endoscopy and com-
petency in its use (Armstrong and Hardie, 1990).
Technique for peg tube placement
A step‐by‐step description of the PEG tube technique is described below:
1 The patient is anesthetized and placed in right lateral recumbency.
2 The skin on the left flank is clipped and surgically prepared encompassing an 
area extending from the costal arch to the mid‐abdomen in a cranial to caudal 
direction, and from the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae to the 
level of the ventral end of the last rib in a dorso‐ventral direction (Figure 6.4).
3 The endoscope is passed into the stomach and the stomach is distended with 
air (Figure 6.5).
4 The endoscopist finds an appropriate place for the feeding tube placement in 
the stomach in an area of the gastric body (e.g., away from the pylorus) – this 
position on the external body wall can be identified by trans‐illuminating the 
area with the endoscope.
Figure 6.3 Commercially available kit for 
percutaneous endoscopically guided 
gastrostomy tubes containing all 
necessary components.
Figure 6.4 For placement of percutaneous 
endoscopically guided gastrostomy tube, 
patient should be anesthetized, placed in 
right lateral recumbency and a wide skin 
clip and aseptic preparation is required.

===== PDF PAGE 59 =====
Gastrostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   45
5 This position is then confirmed by an assistant pushing into the abdominal 
wall with a finger, whilst the endoscopist observes the indentation on the 
internal surface of the stomach via the endoscope. This procedure also con -
firms that there are no organs between the gastric and abdominal walls 
(Figure 6.6).
6 A small stab incision is made at this site with a scalpel blade.
7 A large bore needle is then passed through this stab incision into the inflated 
stomach (Figure 6.7) (the entry of the needle into the stomach can be visual-
ized endoscopically).
Figure 6.5 The endoscope is passed down 
the esophagus and into the stomach, which 
should be insufflated with air to enable 
visualization and allow percutaneous 
placement of gastrostomy tube.
Figure 6.6 To ensure that there is nothing 
between the abdominal wall and stomach 
wall, an assistant should press into the 
body wall with a finger and the 
endoscopist should confirm seeing the 
indentation of the stomach wall before a 
trocar catheter is inserted percutaneously 
into the stomach.
Figure 6.7 A wide bore trocar catheter is 
inserted percutaneously into the 
insufflated stomach. The catheter should 
be visualized inside the stomach via 
endoscopy.

===== PDF PAGE 60 =====
46   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
 8 The long suture reel is then fed through this needle into the stomach by the 
assistant, without releasing the external end (Figure 6.8).
 9 The suture inside the stomach is grabbed with endoscopic forceps (Figure 6.9) 
and the suture is pulled out of the stomach while gently retracting the endo-
scope out of the stomach and mouth (Figure 6.10). This leaves a suture line 
running down the mouth and esophagus into the stomach and out through 
the gastric and abdominal wall to the assistant.
10 The mouth end of the suture is then looped and knotted to the swaged‐on 
suture at the end of the feeding tube (Figure 6.11).
Figure 6.8 A suture with a loop at the end 
is inserted into the stomach via the trocar 
and visualized via the endoscope.
Figure 6.9 Endoscopic forceps are used to 
grab the suture from the stomach.
Figure 6.10 The suture obtained with 
endoscopic forceps should be gently 
pulled from the stomach through the 
mouth with the endoscope.

===== PDF PAGE 61 =====
Gastrostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   47
11 The feeding tube is lubricated with gel to facilitate passage within the esoph-
agus and stomach.
12 The assistant holding the suture line at the abdominal wall then gently pulls 
on this, thereby pulling the feeding tube into the esophagus and stomach 
(Figure 6.12).
13 With further pressure the tube will be pulled out of the abdominal wall, but 
it may be necessary to widen the skin incision slightly to enable easy passage 
of the tube (Figure 6.13).
Figure 6.11 The gastrostomy catheter is 
secured to the suture before it is pulled 
into the stomach via the suture.
Figure 6.12 Gentle and firm traction is 
applied to the suture to pull the 
gastrostomy catheter into the stomach 
and out through body wall.
Figure 6.13 The suture attached to the 
gastrostomy catheter is pulled until the 
mushroom tip is against the stomach 
wall. This can be confirmed 
endoscopically.

===== PDF PAGE 62 =====
48   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
14 Once the mushroom end of the tube feels firmly against  the abdominal wall, 
the internal position of the tube can be checked with endoscopy to ensure 
the mushroom tip is against the gastric wall.
15 The tube can then be secured to the abdominal wall using the flanges pro -
vided with the kit – it may also be necessary to place an additional Chinese 
finger trap suture to prevent tube migration (Figure 6.14).
16 Once the tube is secured, the endoscope can be removed and the external 
end of the feeding tube is cut to a suitable length to enable placement of the 
feeding adaptors (Figure 6.15).
17 Finally a sterile dressing is applied at the tube stoma site and the remainder 
of the tube is secured with a light body wrap or stockinet so that the patient 
cannot reach and pull out the tube (an Elizabethan collar may also be neces-
sary for this purpose).
Feeding via gastrostomy tubes
Gastrostomy feeding tubes allow the use of liquid, semi‐solid and gruel‐type diets. 
Because of their wider bore, there is less risk of these tubes becoming blocked with 
food as long as proper precautions are taken (e.g., flushing the tube with water 
before and after each feed). Traditionally, there was a recommendation that feeding 
Figure 6.14 Once correct placement is 
confirmed, the catheter is secured to the 
external body wall to prevent movement.
Figure 6.15 This picture shows the 
gastrostomy tube anchored to the body 
wall with its clamps and adaptors.

===== PDF PAGE 63 =====
Gastrostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   49
through gastrostomy tubes placed endoscopically should be withheld for the first 
24 hours to allow the formation of a fibrin seal at the stoma site. However, more 
recent recommendations regarding the use of percutaneously placed gastrostomy 
tubes downplay the importance of delaying feeding. In people, PEG tubes can be 
placed on an outpatient basis and feeding can start on the same day of placement 
(Stein et al., 2002).
There is also some controversy regarding the effects of percutaneous place-
ment of gastrostomy tubes on gastric motility. Smith and others (1998) found 
that placement of PEG tubes in healthy cats did not delay gastric emptying (as 
assessed by nuclear scintigraphy of radiolabelled food). However, a subsequent 
study documented delayed gastric emptying for up to 5 days after tube place-
ment (Foster, Hoskinson and Moore, 1999). For this reason, patients should not 
be fed the full‐prescribed amount of food until 72 hours following placement. 
Once placed, gastrostomy tubes should be left in place for at least 10–14 days 
prior to removal. In some instances, such as when delayed wound healing is 
likely to be present due to hypoalbuminemia or immune‐compromise, the tube 
will need to be left in for a longer period.
Monitoring of gastrostomy tubes, transition to oral 
feeding and tube removal
The stoma site should be examined once daily for the first week, for evidence 
of infection or food leakage and following examination the site should be 
cleaned with an antiseptic solution (Marks, 2010). The patient should also be 
assessed each day to monitor vital parameters (especially body temperature), 
body weight, caloric intake and tolerance of feeding. Oral food can be offered 
when deemed appropriate and the amount of food eaten should be recorded. 
Tube feedings can then be reduced or discontinued on the basis of the amount 
of voluntary intake. Patients with chronic disease may need a feeding tube in 
place indefinitely. The tube should not be removed until the patient’s body 
weight is stable and the voluntary intake has been consistently sufficient for 
at least 1–2 weeks. The tube should be flushed with water twice daily if it is 
not being used for feeding.
Tube removal
When the animal is deemed to be eating an appropriate amount of food volun-
tarily (e.g., 75% resting energy requirements (RER), the G‐tube can be 
removed. In medium‐ to large‐sized dogs, the tube can be cut and the mush-
room tip left to pass in the faeces. To do this, the anchoring attachments are 
removed and the tube is cut close to the skin and pushed in (Figure 6.16). 
However, in smaller dogs and cats there is a risk that the mushroom tip will 
lead to an intestinal obstruction. As such, endoscopic removal of the mush-
room tip is necessary (Figure 6.17). Following removal, the tube stoma site is 
kept clean with a light dressing for the first 24 hours or until it seals. The 
wound is left to heal by second intention.

===== PDF PAGE 64 =====
50   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Complications
Major complications associated with G‐tubes include abdominal visceral injury 
during percutaneous placement, or peritonitis if stomach contents leak into the 
abdominal cavity secondary to tube dislodgement or dehiscence of the stoma 
(Armstrong and Hardie 1990; Fulton and Dennis, 1992; Glaus et al., 1998). As 
with any surgically placed feeding device, cellulitis or infection at the stoma site 
is also possible. Improperly placed G‐tubes may cause pyloric outflow obstruc -
tion. Pressure necrosis of the gastric wall may also occur if the tube is secured too 
tightly, and this can ultimately lead to dislodgement of the tube (Elliott, Riel and 
Rodgers, 2000).
Many complications associated with gastrostomy feeding tubes can be easily 
prevented by careful patient evaluation, patient selection, appropriate feeding 
tube selection, adhering to good feeding protocols and close patient monitoring. 
Most enteral feeding complications are minor in nature but aspiration, tube dis-
lodgement and certain metabolic derangements can be life threatening. Intolerance 
to enteral feeding may manifest as vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain and ileus. 
Signs of gastrointestinal intolerance commonly lead to failure to reach target 
Figure 6.16 This picture depicts a 
gastrostomy tube being removed. In 
larger dogs, the catheter is simply cut at 
the level of the skin and the remaining 
portion is pushed into the stomach.
Figure 6.17 In smaller patients, the 
internal disk of the catheter should be 
retrieved endoscopically and the tube is 
not cut until the tip is secured.

===== PDF PAGE 65 =====
Gastrostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   51
 provision of nutritional support as feedings may be reduced or suspended. 
Intolerance to enteral feeding may also arise when patients may have impaired 
gastrointestinal motility or perfusion. Ileus may be minimized by warming the 
food (to approximate body temperature) prior to feeding. Use of prokinetic ther-
apy may also help to address ileus (see Chapter 17).
Anticipating specific intolerances during the nutritional assessment and 
 setting initially conservative caloric goals (i.e., not exceeding the patient’s RER), 
may minimize risk for metabolic complications. Refeeding syndrome (Chapter 16) 
is a life‐threatening metabolic complication that may occur in certain patients 
after prolonged anorexia or with certain catabolic states. Briefly, this syndrome 
is thought to result from rapid shifts of key intracellular electrolytes (e.g., potas-
sium, phosphorus and magnesium) from the intravascular to intracellular 
space, a process that is triggered by reintroduction of feeding.
Aspiration is a potentially life‐threatening complication that could be 
minimized by careful patient selection and monitoring. The development of 
vomiting, regurgitation, pyrexia, tachypnea or dyspnea should prompt 
patient evaluation. Infections may occur at the stoma site, along fascial 
planes or within the peritoneum. In one study, stoma site complications were 
noted in 46% of patients, but all dogs in this study had chronic kidney dis -
ease which may have resulted in compromised immunity and healing (Elliot 
et al., 2000). Infectious complications can be minimized with proper tube 
placement technique and careful monitoring of the tube site (e.g., daily 
bandage and stoma checks). Systemic prophylactic antimicrobials are not 
recommended but may become indicated if the stoma site becomes infected.
Mechanical complications include obstructed tubes or tube migration. If the 
latter complication is suspected, a contrast radiographic study can be performed 
to check for correct tube positioning. To perform this, a small amount of iodi -
nated radiographic contrast medium is instilled into the tube and if the tube is 
correctly positioned in the stomach the contrast will be visible within the gastric 
rugal folds (Figure 6.18). Tube blockages can be prevented by proper tube man-
agement, such as flushing the tube with warm water before and after feeding. 
Using feeding tubes for administration of medications (especially sucralfate or 
aluminum hydroxide) should also be avoided as they can obstruct tubes. Proper 
preparation of the food (e.g., using a blender) before tube feeding can also 
Figure 6.18 In cases requiring checking 
whether there is any leakage of contents 
from the stoma in the stomach, iodinated 
contrast media can be injected through 
the gastrostomy tube and the abdomen is 
immediately radiographed.

===== PDF PAGE 66 =====
52   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
reduce the risk of tube obstruction. Liquidized diets should have a smooth 
 consistency and be easily syringed without much resistance. Tubes that become 
obstructed can sometimes be unobstructed by forcibly flushing with warm water. 
Use of carbonated soft drinks, solutions containing pancreatic enzymes and 
bicarbonate have been reported as ways to unobstruct feeding tubes (Ireland 
et al., 2003; Michel, 2004; Parker and Freeman, 2013).
Summary
Gastrostomy tube feeding is one of the most effective means of providing enteral 
nutritional support to small animals. There are various options in regards to tube 
types and placement techniques and this enables the clinician to choose the most 
appropriate type of tube to be used on a particular patient. Appropriate patient 
selection and adherence to proper placement and feeding techniques are imper-
ative. As with any mode of nutritional support, diligent patient monitoring and 
client education are required.references
Armstrong, P.J. and Hardie, E.M., (1990) Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy. A retrospective 
study of 54 clinical cases in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 4, 202–206.
Bright, R.M., DeNovo, R.C. and Jones, J.B. (1995) Use of a low‐profile gastrostomy device for 
administrating nutrients in two dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 
207(9), 1184–1186.
Key poIntS
•	 Gastrostomy feeding tubes are one of the most effective means of providing enteral 
nutritional support for appropriately selected veterinary patients.
•	 Candidates for gastrostomy feeding tubes must have a functional gastrointestinal tract 
distal to the stomach, be able to undergo short duration general anesthesia, and not 
have a coagulopathy that would place them at risk of hemorrhage.
•	 Proper placement technique, tube management, and feeding protocols minimize 
complication risks.
•	 Placement techniques include percutaneous techniques (e.g., endoscope guided or blind) 
and surgical techniques.
•	 Gastrostomy tubes may also be replaced with low‐profile gastrostomy ports for long‐
term usage.
•	 Gastrostomy feeding tubes can be managed by clients long‐term with a variety of diets.
•	 Potential complications include improper placement or displacement of the tube, 
mechanical or infectious complications and gastrointestinal complications.
•	 Nutritional assessment and monitoring is critical for successful patient outcome.
note
1 ELD gastrostomy tube applicator. Jorgensen Labs Inc., Loveland, CO.

===== PDF PAGE 67 =====
Gastrostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   53
Cavanaugh, R.P., Kovak, J.R., Fischetti, A.J. et al. (2008) Evaluation of surgically placed gastro-
jejunostomy feeding tubes in critically ill dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical 
Association, 232(3), 380–388.
DeLegge, R.L. and DeLegge, M.H. (2005) Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy evaluation of 
device material: are we “failsafe”? Nutrition in Clinical Practice, 20, 613–617.
Elliot, D.A., Riel, D.L. and Rodgers, Q.R. (2000) Complications and outcomes associated with 
the use of gastrostomy tubes for nutritional treatment of dogs with renal failure. Journal of the 
American Veterinary Medical Association, 217, 1337–1342.
Foster, L.A., Hoskinson, J.J. and Moore, T.L. (1999) Effect of implanting a gastrostomy tube on 
gastric emptying in cats. (Abstract) Proceedings of the Purina Forum, St. Louis, MO.
Fulton R.B. and Dennis, J.S. (1992) Blind percutaneous placement of a gastrostomy tube for 
nutritional support in dogs and cats. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 201, 
697–700.
Glaus, T.M., Cornelius , L.M., Bartges, J.W. et al. (1998) Complications with non‐endoscopic 
percutaneous gastrostomy in 31 cats and 10 dogs: a retrospective study. Journal of Small 
Animal Practice, 39, 218–222.
Ireland, L.M., Hohenhaus, A.E., Broussard, J.D. et al. (2003) A comparison of owner manage-
ment and complications in 67 cats with esophagostomy and percutaneous endoscopic gas-
trostomy feeding tubes. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 39, 241–246.
Jergens, A.E., Morrison, J.A., Miles, K.G. et al. (2007) Percutaneous endoscopic gastrojejunos-
tomy tube placement in healthy dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 21, 
18–24.
McCrakin, M.A., DeNovo, R.C., Bright, R.M. et al. (1993) Endoscopic placement of a percuta-
neous gastroduodenostomy feeding tube in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical 
Association, 203, 792–797.
Marks, S.L. (2010) Nasoesophageal, esophagostomy, gastrostomy, and jejunal tube placement 
techniques. in Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 7th edn (eds S.J. Ettinger and E.C. 
Feldman) Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis. pp. 333–340.
Michel, K.E. (2004) Preventing and managing complications of enteral nutritional support. 
Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice, 19(1), 49–53.
Parker, V. J. and Freeman, L. M. (2013) Comparison of various solutions to dissolve critical care 
diet clots. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 23 (3), 344–347.
Seaman, R. and Legendre, A.M. (1998) Owner experience with home use of gastrostomy tubes 
in their dogs or cat. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 212,1576–1578.
Smith, S.A., Ludlow, C.L., Hoskinson, J.J. et al. (1998) Effect of percutaneous endoscopic gas-
trostomy on gastric emptying in clinically normal cats. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 
59(11), 1414–1416.
Stein, J., Schulte‐Bockholt, A., Sabin, M. et al. (2002) A randomized trial of immediate vs. 
next‐day feeding after percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy in intensive care patients. 
Intensive Care Medicine, 28, 1656–1660.
Yoshimoto, S.K., Marks, S.L., Struble, A.L. et al. (2006) Owner experience and complications 
with home use of a replacement low profile gastrostomy device for long‐term enteral feeding 
in dogs. Canadian Veterinary Journal, 47, 144–150.

===== PDF PAGE 68 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
54
Introduction
Optimal wound healing requires ample nutrition and animals undergoing 
abdominal surgery often have multiple factors contributing to nutritional com­
promise. The underlying disease or trauma may have led to anorexia or increased 
metabolic demands. Vomiting and diarrhoea may also have been components of 
the underlying disease, contributing to a malnourished state. Abdominal surgery 
itself causes tissue trauma and the manipulation of organs may contribute to 
postoperative nausea and vomiting. Unquestionably, nutritional support will 
improve clinical outcomes in postoperative abdominal surgery patients, but 
achieving this can be challenging, especially when vomiting is a clinical sign. 
Parenteral nutritional support may be used, but enteral feeding is preferred 
because it is more physiologically sound, associated with fewer infectious and 
metabolic complications, and is generally less expensive. (Hegazi et al., 2011).
Indications for a jejunostomy feeding tube
When vomiting is a persistent clinical sign, the most effective feeding tube may 
be one that delivers nutrients distal to the stomach. Nasojejunal feeding tubes is 
one such example in patients not undergoing abdominal surgery (Wohl, 2006; 
Beal and Brown, 2011) but use of this technique is currently limited. If the 
abdominal cavity is exposed because of the necessity for celiotomy, then surgical 
jejunostomy tube placement should be considered. Although performing an 
abdominal surgery for the mere placement of a feeding tube would be c onsidered 
rather invasive, if performed as part of an already planned abdominal s urgery, 
jejunostomy tube placement can be quickly and effectively  accomplished, a dding 
less than 10 minutes to the surgical duration. At the authors’ institution the 
indication for jejunostomy tube placement includes any abdominal surgery 
p erformed in a patient that has vomiting as a clinical sign of illness or may have 
Jejunostomy feeding tubes 
in dogs and cats
F. A. (Tony) Mann1 and Robert C. Backus2
1 Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA
2 Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Missouri, USA
Chapter 7

===== PDF PAGE 69 =====
Jejunostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   55
vomiting as a consequence of the surgical manipulations. Because of the latter 
indication, most patients undergoing abdominal surgery at the authors’ institu­
tion receive a jejunostomy tube. This pre‐emptive approach may result in tubes 
placed in some animals that do not necessarily need the tube but, using the 
interlocking box jejunopexy technique described in this chapter, the tube can be 
removed as soon after surgery as desired. Removing an unnecessary j ejunostomy 
tube is simple; whereas, trying to later provide nutritional support in a post­
operative vomiting patient can be quite difficult and may be limited to paren ­
teral nutrition administration. In the authors’ experience, though, very few 
jejunostomy tubes go unused, because many abdominal surgery patients will be 
on pain medication and sedatives that alter mentation and contribute to nausea 
and anorexia in the early postoperative period. Jejunostomy feedings permit 
early institution of enteral support, even in neurologically obtunded patients.
Jejunostomy feeding tube placement technique
1 A small diameter (5, 8 or 10 French) tube is chosen for jejunostomy. Most 
commonly, 8 French is used. Multiple tube biomaterial choices are available. 
Some common choices are red rubber, 1 polyurethane, 2 polyvinyl chloride, 3 
and silicone4 tubes. Silicone (Figure 7.1) is preferred because of minimal tissue 
reactivity compared to other tube biomaterials (Apalakis, 1976). If not dam ­
aged, silicone tubes can be cleaned, steam sterilized and used again.
2 Upon completion of the surgical procedures for which the celiotomy was per­
formed, the surgeon should identify the site in the abdominal wall where the 
tube will exit. The exit stoma for the tube should be located in the right lateral 
Figure 7.1 Silicone nasogastric tube for use as a jejunostomy tube. Manufacture of the white 
tube was discontinued in 2009 but is used in this chapter for ease of viewing in the 
illustrations. The clear tube substitute is less stiff, more stretchable, and a little more collapsible 
than the white tube. (Mann et al., 2011. Reproduced with permission from Wiley & Sons.).

===== PDF PAGE 70 =====
56   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
abdominal wall in the mid‐abdomen caudal to where a gastropexy would 
typically be performed (Figure  7.2). Whereas a left abdominal wall stoma 
would be acceptable, the authors find the right abdominal wall more practical 
for a right‐handed surgeon and more  anatomically appropriate for the seg ­
ment of small intestine that will accommodate the tube.
3 The loop of intestine into which the jejunostomy tube will be introduced 
should be isolated and a stay suture should be placed to maintain orientation 
(Figure 7.3). The tube should enter the jejunum as cranially as is practical. It 
Figure 7.2 Location for jejunostomy tube entry in the middle portion of the right abdominal 
wall. (Cranial is to the right; view is from the perspective of an assistant to a right‐handed 
surgeon.) Note the location of the incisional gastropexy cranial to the proposed jejunostomy 
tube entry site. The number 11 scalpel blade points to the proposed tube exit site. (Mann 
et al., 2011. Reproduced with permission from Wiley & Sons.).
Figure 7.3 A 3‐0 poliglecaprone 25 stay suture placed just cranial to the proposed 
jejunostomy site. (Cranial is to the left; view is from a right‐handed surgeon’s perspective.) 
A full‐thickness bite of intestine is made, the stay suture is tagged with mosquito hemostatic 
forceps, and the jejunal loop is moved to the animal’s left. The stay suture maintains 
orientation while the tube is introduced into the abdomen. (Mann et al., 2011. Reproduced 
with permission from Wiley & Sons.)

===== PDF PAGE 71 =====
Jejunostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   57
is acceptable for the tube to span an enterotomy or anastomosis site, but 
h aving the tip of the tube come to rest at such sites should be avoided.
4 The tube is introduced into the abdomen before placing it in the jejunum 
(Figure 7.4). From within the abdomen, a tiny stab incision is made with 
a n umber 11 scalpel blade in the transversus abdominis muscle in the mid‐
abdomen just caudal to the typical gastropexy location and approximately 
4 cm from the midline incision.
5 A mosquito hemostatic forceps is introduced into the stab incision and force 
applied in a craniolateral direction until the tip can be palpated just lateral to 
the nipples of the mammary chain.
6 A tiny stab incision is made in the skin over the tip of the forceps, taking care 
to not make the incision any larger than necessary to permit exposure of the 
forceps’ tip.
7 Then, the tip of the jenunostomy tube is grasped with the forceps and the 
tube is pulled into the abdomen.
8 After it is in the abdomen, the tube is placed into the jejunum (Figure 7.5).
9 A purse‐string suture (or horizontal mattress suture, as preferred by the 
p rincipal author) is placed in the antimesenteric border of the previously 
isolated c  ranial segment of jejunum using 3‐0 absorbable monofilament 
suture material (such as poliglecaprone 25 or glycomer 631).
10 A tiny stab incision just large enough to accommodate the tube is made with 
a number 11 blade in the centre of the horizontal mattress suture, and the 
jejunostomy tube is introduced into the stab and advanced caudally for a 
Figure 7.4 Pulling the jejunostomy tube into the abdomen. (Cranial is to the right; view is 
from an assistant surgeon’s perspective, assuming that the surgeon is right‐handed.) After a 
tiny puncture is made in the transversus abdominis muscle with a number 11 scalpel blade, a 
mosquito hemostatic forceps is introduced into the tiny puncture and advanced in a 
craniolateral direction until the tip can be felt under the skin just lateral to the nipple line. A 
number 11 scalpel blade is used to make a tiny incision over the forceps’ tips just large enough 
to permit the tips to exit the skin immediately lateral to the nipple line. Then, the forceps’ tips 
are opened to grab the tip of the tube and pull the tube into the abdominal cavity. (Mann 
et al., 2011. Reproduced with permission from Wiley & Sons.).

===== PDF PAGE 72 =====
58   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
generous distance (one long intestinal loop, the length supplied by at least 
three vascular arcades).
11 The mattress suture is tied and the jejunum is secured to the body wall using 
3‐0 monofilament suture (e.g., poliglecaprone 25 or glycomer 631) in an 
interlocking box pattern (Figure 7.6).
12 The interlocking box pattern is chosen instead of simple interrupted sutures 
that tack the jejunum to the body wall because the interlocking boxes keep 
fluid that might leak around the tube in the intestine. Fluid could poten ­
tially leak around the tube into the subcutaneous tissues, but intestinal fluid 
should not be able to leak into the abdominal cavity. There is no need to 
wait for adhesions to seal the area around the tube for safe tube removal as 
is the case with simple tacking sutures. With the interlocking box technique 
the tube may be safely removed at any time (Daye, Huber and Henderson, 
1999), and there should be little concern for peritonitis if the tube is prema­
turely removed by the patient. Prior to the development of the interlocking 
box suture pattern, jejunostomy tubes were left in place for 5 to 7 days to 
wait for the adhesive seal, regardless of whether or not the feeding tube was 
being used.
Figure 7.5 Placing the jejunostomy tube into the intestine. (Cranial is to the right; view is 
from an assistant surgeon’s perspective, assuming that the surgeon is right handed.) The 
tube is positioned in the cranial aspect of the field while the purse‐string suture (actually a 
horizontal mattress suture) is placed using full‐thickness bites. The properly executed 
mattress suture resembles a “smiley face”. A number 11 blade is used to make a hole in the 
centre of the mattress suture (a “nose” in the “smiley face”). The blade is held upside down 
with the sharp edge toward the “eyes” of the “smiley face” to avoid cutting the suture as 
could occur if the blade penetrated too close to the “mouth” of the “smiley face”. Note that 
the cranial stay suture has been removed and the tube is threaded into the hole made in 
the intestine. The hole in the intestine should be just large enough to accommodate the 
tube. The tube is threaded caudally in the jejunum while gentle counter tension is applied 
to the tagged ends of the mattress suture. Saline is periodically injected via the tube into 
the intestine to provide mild distention and lubrication for ease of tube passage. The tube is 
advanced for a generous distance (the amount of intestine supplied by about three vascular 
arcades). Then, the horizontal mattress suture is tied to prevent leakage around the tube 
during remaining manipulations. The tube can still slide through the hole in the intestine 
so care must be taken to make sure the tube does not back out during the remainder of the 
procedure. The strands of the tied mattress suture are cut and the jejunum is aligned with 
the body wall in preparation for jejunopexy. (Mann et al., 2011. Reproduced with 
permission from Wiley & Sons.).

===== PDF PAGE 73 =====
Jejunostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   59
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e)
Figure 7.6 Artistic summary of the interlocking box jejunopexy. (These drawings are oriented 
from the perspective of a right‐handed surgeon, with cranial to the left and caudal to the 
right.) a) The red (caudal) suture represents the first box with suture passes in the following 
order: (1) caudal to cranial in the body wall superficial to the tube, (2) superficial to deep in 
the intestine cranial to the tube, (3) cranial to caudal in the body wall deep to the tube, and 
(4) deep to superficial in the intestine caudal to the tube. The black (cranial) suture represents 
the second box with suture passes in the following order: (1) superficial to deep in the body 
wall cranial to the tube, (2) cranial to caudal in the intestine deep to the tube, (3) deep to 
superficial in the body wall caudal to the tube, and (4) caudal to cranial in the intestine 
superficial to the tube. b) The first box is completed and the (red) suture strands tagged with 
the forceps in the caudal aspect of the surgical field. c) Both boxes are completed with the 
black suture strands tagged with forceps in the cranial aspect of the surgical field. d) When 
the strands of both boxes are pulled the tube is no longer visible. e) The holes in the body wall 
and jejunum are juxtaposed and sandwiched between the jejunum and body wall within the 
interlocking boxes. Therefore, any fluid around the tube will stay in the intestine or could 
potentially leak into the subcutaneous tissues, but intestinal fluid should not be able to leak 
into the abdominal cavity. The suture strands are retained in this drawing for orientation 
purposes, but would be knotted and cut at this point. (Mann et al., 2011. Reproduced with 
permission from Wiley & Sons.).

===== PDF PAGE 74 =====
60   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
13 The feeding tube is placed into the intestine as described above before the 
interlocking box sutures are placed. Then, the box sutures are placed in the 
following order (Figure 7.6).
14 The first box is started by passing caudocranially in the abdominal wall 
v entral (superficial) to the jejunostomy site.
15 The suture is then passed transversely across the jejunum (full‐thickness 
bite) ventrodorsally just cranial to the jejunostomy.
16 The third pass is from cranial to caudal in the abdominal wall dorsal (deep) 
to the jejunostomy, and the final pass is from dorsal to ventral transversely 
in the intestine caudal to the jejunostomy. The suture strands are left long 
and tagged with hemostats.
17 The second box is started by passing ventrodorsally in the abdominal wall 
cranial to the jejunostomy.
18 The second suture is passed craniocaudally in the intestine dorsal (deep) to 
the jejunostomy.
19 The third suture is passed dorsoventrally in the body wall caudal to the jeju­
nostomy, and the final pass is from caudal to cranial in the intestine ventral 
(superficial) to the jejunostomy. All suture passages in the jejunum are full‐
thickness bites.
20 The cranial suture strands are pulled together as are the previously placed 
caudal strands.
21 The caudal strands are tied to secure the first box and the cranial strands are 
tied to secure the second box.
22 Externally, the jejunostomy tube is anchored to skin and underlying fascia 
with four interrupted friction sutures placed 1 cm apart (Song, Mann and 
Wagner‐Mann; Figure 7.7). Size 2‐0 nylon or polypropylene is preferred for 
anchoring 8 French and 10 French tubes; size 3‐0 is used for 5 French tubes.
Figure 7.7 Anchoring the jejunostomy tube to the skin and underlying fascia with four 
friction sutures on the right side of the abdomen. (Cranial is to the left.) The first friction 
suture is placed as soon as the interlocking box jejunopexy is complete so that inadvertent 
tube withdrawal does not occur during remaining surgical manipulations. The first friction 
suture is placed immediately cranial and slightly lateral to the tube exit site, ensuring that the 
friction suture penetrates underlying fascia without entering the abdomen. Saline is injected 
into the tube after each friction suture is placed to make sure that the lumen of the tube is not 
obstructed by the suture. Three additional friction sutures are placed after the abdominal 
incision is closed. (Mann et al., 2011. Reproduced with permission from Wiley & Sons.)

===== PDF PAGE 75 =====
Jejunostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   61
23 Inject a small amount (0.5 to 1.0 mL) of saline into the tube after each  friction 
suture is placed to ensure that the friction suture has not occluded the tube 
lumen.
administration of liquid diets
The small diameter of jejunostomy tubes dictates the use of liquid diets. Of the 
many liquid diets available on the market, the authors have most experience 
with Canine/Feline CliniCare
5 (Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, IL) and 
Formula V EnteralCare™ HPL 6 (PetAg, Hampshire, IL). These diets are alike 
in their formulations, being isotonic and containing polymeric ingredients 
that are principally mixtures of intact and hydrolyzed milk protein fractions 
and maltodextrins. Manufacturers of both diets claim that the nutrient  profiles 
of their products meet established adult maintenance requirements of dogs 
and cats. However, compared to most commercially available maintenance 
diets for dogs, these two diets are much higher in protein (30% of metaboliz­
able energy) and fat (40 to 45% of metabolizable energy) and lower in fibre 
(< 1% crude fibre as dry weight). The CliniCare product uniquely contains a 
marine fish oil, which through activity of long‐chain n‐3 fatty acids might 
modulate the systemic inflammatory response (Weimann et al., 1998). The 
EnteralCare HPL (“high protein‐level”) has been discontinued and substituted 
with a lower protein formulation called EnteralCare MPL
7 (“moderate 
protein‐level”).
These liquid diets have been administered via constant rate infusion using a 
specifically designed liquid diet feeding pump 8 and feeding administration set, 9 
but intravenous fluid pumps, fluid bags and administration sets may be adapted 
for enteral feeding. In the latter case, particular attention must be paid to avoid 
inadvertent connection of an enteral feeding line to an intravenous catheter. 
The use of enteral safety devices with non‐luer connections may prevent these 
inadvertent connections (see Chapter 5). The amounts and concentrations of 
enteral diet infused have varied but administration is typically begun within 
24 hours of surgery (often within a couple hours of anaesthetic recovery) at a 
slow (5 mL per hour) rate with a ramping rate at the clinician’s discretion to 
e ventually meet resting energy requirement (RER). Rarely is the RER target met 
before the animal begins oral intake, demonstrating that the jejunostomy tube 
does not impair appetite, which is important because interest in food is a clinical 
indicator of recovery. For animals in which RER is not met, a benefit beyond 
supplying substrate for protein and energy needs may be gained from effects on 
the gut mucosal barrier and immune function (Hermsen, Sano and Kudsk, 
2009), s timulation of intestinal blood flow (de Aguilar‐Nascimento, 2005), and 
prevention of gut atrophy (Hartl and Alpers, 2011).
For those animals that do not eat enough or at all, jejunostomy feeding may 
be continued for as long as the animal is hospitalized. No maximum duration 
for leaving jejunostomy tubes in place has been reported. In the authors’ expe­
rience, the median duration has been 2 to 3 days, with usages as long as 12 
to 13 days. Jejunostomy tubes are not left in animals upon hospital dismissal 

===== PDF PAGE 76 =====
62   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
because it is the rare pet owner who can maintain constant rate infusion. Bolus 
infusion into the jejunum is discouraged to avoid intestinal distention that may 
cause abdominal discomfort and to avoid lack of absorption and resultant 
diarrhea.
Passage of feces is absent in many animals undergoing jejunal feeding; 
whereas, in other animals, feces are not liquid but soft and variably formed. Soft 
feces may reflect the lack of fiber in the diets. To the authors’ knowledge, fecal 
scores in normal healthy dogs given liquid diets have not been reported.
Complications of jejunostomy tubes
Complications of jejunostomy tubes include local cellulitis, inadvertent c omplete 
or partial removal of the tube, tube occlusion, stomal infection, and peritonitis 
(Swann, Sweet and Mitchell, 1997; Crowe and Devey, 1997; Yagil‐Kelmer, 
Wagner‐Mann and Mann, 2006). Self‐limiting local cellulitis is the most c ommon 
complication. Premature tube removal is typically inconsequential with the 
interlocking box jejunopexy technique, other than the loss of a feeding route. 
Incompletely removed tubes rarely require intervention other than monitoring 
for the retained portion in the intestine to be eliminated in the feces. Tube occlu­
sion is usually the result of not flushing the tube when liquid diet administration 
is interrupted. Instilling carbonated beverage into the tube may solve this com­
plication in most situations. Peritonitis is rare with the technique described here 
and often cannot be specifically attributed to the jejunostomy.
removal of jejunostomy tubes
When removing a jejunostomy tube, inject the tube with approximately 5 mL of 
water or saline to ensure that residual food is flushed into the intestinal lumen 
and not dragged through the subcutaneous tissues of the abdominal wall. Cut 
the friction sutures and gently extract the tube. Although jejunostomy tube 
removal is well tolerated by dogs and cats, infiltration with local anesthetic 
around the exit stoma skin and body wall will lessen tube removal discomfort. 
Periodically cleanse the stoma as needed to remove secretions. Secretions from 
the stoma are usually mild and typically resolve in 3 to 5 days.
Summary
Jejunostomy tubes are placed during celiotomy with a pre‐emptive approach to 
ensure a reliable method of feeding should postoperative vomiting ensue. The 
interlocking box jejunopexy technique permits early jejunostomy tube removal 
from patients with early adequate caloric intake and allays concerns about 
abdominal sepsis in animals that prematurely remove their tubes. Serious com­
plications with jejunostomy tube placement technique described here are rare 
and others are self‐limiting or easily managed.

===== PDF PAGE 77 =====
Jejunostomy feeding tubes in dogs and cats   63
references
Apalakis, A. (1976) An experimental evaluation of the types of material used for bile duct 
drainage tubes. British Journal of Surgery, 63, 440–445.
Beal, M.W. and Brown, A.J. (2011) Clinical experience using a novel fluoroscopic technique for 
wire‐guided nasojenual tube placement in the dog: 26 cases (2006–2010). Journal of Veterinary 
Emergency and Critical Care, 21,151–157.
Crowe, D.T. and Devey, J.J. (1997) Clinical experience with jejunostomy feeding tubes in 47 
small animal patients. Journal of Veterinary Emergency Critical Care, 7, 7–19.
Daye, R.M., Huber, M.L. and Henderson, R.A. (1999) Interlocking box jejunostomy: a new tech­
nique for enteral feeding. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 35, 129–134.
Key poIntS
•	 When	vomiting	is	a	persistent	clinical	sign,	the	most	effective	feeding	tube	may	be	one	
that	delivers	nutrients	distal	to	the	stomach.
•	 If	the	animal	requires	a	celiotomy	and	nutritional	support,	then	a	surgical	jejunostomy	
tube	placement	should	be	considered.
•	 Jejunostomy	tube	placement	can	be	performed	quickly	and	effectively	accomplished,	
adding	less	than	10	minutes	to	the	surgery	time.
•	 Using	a	pre‐emptive	approach	of	jejunostomy	tube	placement	may	result	in	tubes	placed	
in	some	animals	that	do	not	necessarily	need	the	tube,	but	using	the	interlocking	box	
jejunopexy	technique,	the	tube	can	be	removed	as	soon	after	surgery	as	desired.
•	 The	small	diameter	of	jejunostomy	tubes	dictates	the	use	of	liquid	diets.
•	 Serious	complications	associated	with	the	jejunostomy	tube	placement	technique	
described	in	this	chapter	are	rare	and	others	are	self‐limiting	or	easily	managed.
notes
1 SOVEREIGN Feeding Tube and Urethral Catheter, Covidien Animal Health & Dental Division, 
Mansfield, MA.
2 Argyle Indwell Polyurethane Feeding Tube, Covidien Animal Health & Dental Division, 
Mansfield, MA.
3 Argyle Polyvinyl Chloride Feeding Tube with Sentinel Line, Covidien Animal Health & 
Dental Division, Mansfield, MA.
4 Nasal Oxygen/Feeding Tube‐Silicone, Smiths Medical, Waukesha, WI.
5 Canine/Feline CliniCare, 2009 formulation: 340 mOsm/kg, 1 kcal/mL, 8.2 g/100 kcal crude 
protein, 5.2 g/100 kcal crude fat, 0.1 g/100 kcal crude fiber, 56 mg/100 kcal eicosapentaenoic 
acid, 36 mg/100 kcal docosapentaenoic acid, Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, IL.
6 Formula V EnteralCare™ HPL: 312 mOsm/kg, 1.2 kcal/mL, 8.5 g/100 kcal crude protein,  
4.8 g/100 kcal crude fat, 0.2 g/100 kcal crude fiber, 1.3 mg/100 kcal docosapentaenoic acid 
(typical analysis, dated April 26, 2007), provided from PetAg, Inc., Hampshire, Il, September 
10, 2010, after request by author, RCB.
7 Formula V EnteralCare™ MPL: 258 mOsm/kg, 1.2 kcal/mL, 7.5 g/100 kcal crude protein,  
6.6 g/100 kcal crude fat, 0.2 g/100 kcal crude fiber, http://www.petag.com/wp‐content/
uploads/2011/03/Item%2099430%20‐%20EnteralCareMLP%20PDS.pdf (accessed June 25, 
2011).
8 Kangaroo 224 Feeding Pump, Sherwood Medical, St. Louis, MO.
9 Kangaroo Pump Set, Sherwood Medical, St. Louis, MO.

===== PDF PAGE 78 =====
64   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
de Aguilar‐Nascimento, J.E. (2005) The role of macronutrients in gastrointestinal blood flow. 
Current Opinion Clinical Nutrition Metabolic Care, 8, 552–556.
Hartl, W.H. and Alpers, D.H. (2011) The trophic effects of substrate, insulin, and the route of 
administration on protein synthesis and the preservation of small bowel mucosal mass in 
large mammals. Clinical Nutrition, 30, 20–27.
Hegazi, R., Raina, A., Graham, T. et al. (2011) Early jejunal feeding initiation and clinical 
o utcomes in patients with severe acute pancreatitis. Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition, 
35, 91–96.
Hermsen, J.L., Sano, Y. and Kudsk, K.A. (2009) Food fight! Parenteral nutrition, enteral stimu­
lation and gut‐derived mucosal immunity. Langenbecks Archives of Surgery, 394, 17–30.
Mann F.A., Constantinescu G.M. and Yoon H. (2011) Fundamentals of Small Animal Surgery, 
Wiley‐Blackwell, Ames, Iowa.
Song, E.K., Mann, F.A. and Wagner‐Mann, C.C. (2008) Comparison of different tube materials 
and use of Chinese finger trap or four friction suture technique for securing gastrostomy, 
jejunostomy, and thoracostomy tubes in dogs. Veterinary Surgery, 37, 212–221.
Swann, H.M., Sweet, D.C. and Michel, K. (1997) Complications associated with use of jejunos­
tomy tubes in dogs and cats: 40 cases (1989–1994). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical 
Association, 210, 1764–1767.
Weimann, A., Bastian, L., Bischoff, W.E. et al. (1998) Influence of arginine, omega‐3 fatty acids 
and nucleotide‐supplemented enteral support on systemic inflammatory response syndrome 
and multiple organ failure in patients after severe trauma. Nutrition, 14, 165–172.
Wohl, J.S. (2006) Nasojejunal feeding tube placement using fluoroscopic guidance: technique 
and clinical experience in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Emergency Critical Care, 16(S1), S27–S33.
Yagil‐Kelmer, E., Wagner‐Mann, C. and Mann, F.A. (2006) Postoperative complications associ­
ated with jejunostomy tube placement using the interlocking box technique compared with 
other jejunopexy methods in dogs and cats: 76 cases (1999–2003). Journal of Veterinary 
Emergency Critical Care, 16(S1), S14–S20.

===== PDF PAGE 79 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
65
Introduction
The importance of nutritional support in hospitalized small animal patients is 
widely accepted (Remillard et al., 2001; Chan, 2004; Michel and Higgens, 2006; 
Chan and Freeman, 2006; Holahan et al., 2010). In people, significant debate 
still exists as to whether enteral nutritional support (EN) is superior to paren-
teral nutritional support (PN) (Heyland et al., 2003; Gramlich et al., 2004; Peter, 
Moran and Phillips‐Hughes, 2005; Altintas et al., 2011). Proponents of EN cite 
advantages including significantly shorter lengths‐of‐stay (Peter et al., 2005) and 
significantly fewer infectious complications (Heyland et al., 2003; Gramlich 
et al., 2004; Peter et al., 2005), especially catheter‐related bloodstream infec-
tions, and shorter duration of ventilatory support (Altintas et al., 2011) when 
compared to people fed parenterally. EN may also promote gastrointestinal 
mucosal health by reducing mucosal atrophy, intestinal permeability and gut 
bacterial translocation. In addition, EN may be significantly less expensive than 
PN support (Gramlich et al., 2004). However, the proposed advantages of EN are 
not uniformly accepted in people and some potential advantages of PN include 
a decrease in the time to achieving feeding goals and ease of administration 
(Altintas et al., 2011). Specific benefits imparted by EN (over PN) on hospitalized 
small animal patients are unknown. However, because of the evidence to sup-
port their use in human medicine, EN methods are widely utilized in veterinary 
medicine (Waddell and Michel, 1998; Heuter, 2004; Hewitt et al., 2004; Han, 
2004; Salinardi et al., 2006; Wohl, 2006; Jergens et al., 2007; Campbell et al., 
2010; Holahan et al., 2010). Establishing esophageal or gastric feeding tube 
access for EN is quick and easy to perform (see Chapters 4–6), but sometimes, 
these methods are either contraindicated or feeding is poorly tolerated, as evi-
denced by nausea and vomiting (Abood and Buffington, 1992; Holahan et al., 
2010). Postpyloric feedings mitigate this problem by bypassing the esophagus 
and stomach allowing the provision of EN. Surgical jejunostomy techniques are 
well established (see Chapter 7), however, the methods are invasive and compli-
cations occur in approximately 17.5–40% of clinical patients (Crowe and Devey 
Minimally invasive placement 
of postpyloric feeding tubes
Matthew W. Beal 
Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Director of Interventional Radiology Services, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Michigan State University, USA
Chapter 8

===== PDF PAGE 80 =====
66   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
1997; Swann, Sweet and Michel, 1997; Hewitt et al., 2004; Yagil‐Kelmer et al., 
2006). These complications include, but are not limited to, septic peritonitis, 
ostomy site infection or inflammation, tube dislodgement, or tube occlusion. 
Minimally invasive techniques for achieving jejunal access utilizing the nasoje-
junal (NJ), gastrojejunal (GJ), and esophagojejunal (EJ) routes with either fluor-
oscopic or endoscopic assistance offer an alternative to surgical  jejunostomy / 
gastrojejunostomy (Jennings et al., 2001; Heuter, 2004, Wohl, 2006; Jergens 
et al., 2007; Papa et al., 2009; Beal, Jutkowitz and Brown, 2007; Beal et al., 
2009; Beal and Brown, 2011; Campbell and Daley, 2011).
Indications and patient selection
The small animal patients that will benefit from minimally invasive postpy-
loric feeding tubes are those with contraindications to or intolerance of esoph-
ageal or gastric feeding. This includes animals with protracted vomiting or 
regurgitation, those at a high risk of aspiration due to their underlying dis-
ease, those with altered levels of consciousness and those with gastric motility 
disorders. Clinical studies describing NJ and GJ techniques most often included 
patients with pancreatitis as well as those with protracted vomiting due to 
peritonitis, parvoviral enteritis, acute renal failure and cholangiohepatitis/
cholecystitis, and those with altered levels of consciousness due to post‐arrest 
status, prolonged seizures, the need for ventilatory support and intracranial 
neoplasia (Jennings et al., 2001;Wohl, 2006; Beal and Brown, 2011; Campbell 
and Daley, 2011).
General anesthesia is recommended for the placement of GJ, NJ, and EJ 
tubes although there is one study in which NJ tubes were placed with seda-
tion and utilization of local anesthesia techniques (Wohl, 2006). NJ tube 
placement can be very stimulating even in the face of (intranasal) local anes-
thetic infusion due to pain associated with passage of different devices 
through the nose and the gag reflex that may be associated with pharyngeal 
stimulation. The patient population undergoing NJ placement often has a 
history of vomiting or regurgitation and a resulting risk of aspiration pneu-
monia. When used in conjunction with intranasal infusion of local anes-
thetic agents, general anesthesia will allow endotracheal intubation and 
protection of the airway while eliminating pain and pharyngeal stimulation. 
GJ and EJ techniques will require general anesthesia in large part because 
they are more invasive than NJ techniques. Assessment of primary and 
 secondary hemostasis (platelet count, prothrombin time (PT), activated 
 partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)) is recommended prior to NJ, GJ, or EJ 
tube placement due to the risk of epistaxis, cervical hemorrhage, peritoneal 
or  gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Animals with evidence of spontaneous 
b leeding coupled with a hemostatic abnormality, or those with thrombocyto-
penia (<35 000/μL) or significant prolongations in PT or aPTT should have 
their hemostatic abnormalities resolved prior to elective NJ, GJ, or EJ tube 
placement.

===== PDF PAGE 81 =====
Minimally invasive placement of postpyloric feeding tubes   67
Nasojejunal tube placement
Technique description
Nasojejunal tube placement has been described using various fluoroscopic and 
endoscopic techniques (Jennings et al., 2001; Wohl, 2006; Papa et al., 2009; 
Beal et al., 2007; Beal et al., 2009; Beal and Brown, 2011; Campbell and Daley, 
2011). Regardless of technique, utilization of local or regional anesthesia of the 
nose/face, in addition to general anesthesia, will facilitate patient tolerance of 
the placement procedure.
The original fluoroscopic NJ technique (FNJ) described by Wohl (2006) 
u tilizes fluoroscopic imaging and a weighted feeding tube
1, 2 coupled with 
p ositional variation to facilitate passage of the tube across the pylorus, through 
the duodenum and into the jejunum. The patient is initially positioned in 
 sternal recumbency while the tube is advanced from the nares into the esoph-
agus. The patient is then placed in right lateral recumbency as the tube is 
advanced into the stomach. Then, the patient is returned to sternal recum-
bency or placed in left lateral recumbency as the tube is advanced into the 
body of the stomach. Positioning of the tube can be confirmed by returning the 
patient to sternal recumbency. The patient is then placed in left lateral recum-
bency and air can be infused via the tube to help illustrate the pyloric antrum 
(if not already air filled) and identify the pylorus itself. The tube is then pushed 
through the pylorus, down the descending duodenum, up the ascending duo-
denum and into the jejunum. The overall success of transpyloric passage of the 
tube using this technique was approximately 74% (Wohl, 2006). Amongst 
dogs in which transpyloric passage was achieved, success at achieving jejunal 
access was 74% (overall ability to achieve jejunal access was approximately 
56%) (Wohl, 2006).
A technique for fluoroscopic, wire‐guided NJ (FWNJ) has been previously 
described by the author in a series of 26 dogs with critical illness (Beal and 
Brown, 2011). This procedure is best performed with the patient positioned in 
left lateral recumbency.
1 Once the patient is in a favorable plane of anesthesia and local anesthetic has 
been infused into the nares, a well‐lubricated 8 Fr red rubber feeding tube
3 
with the tip removed to create an end‐hole is passed ventrally and medially 
through the ventral nasal meatus and into the proximal esophagus. 
Intermittent fluoroscopy confirms tube location.
2 Through this catheter, a moistened 260 cm, 0.035 in (0.89 mm) straight‐tip, 
standard stiffness, hydrophilic guide wire (HGW) 4 is advanced down the 
esophagus and into the stomach (Figure 8.1).
3 The red rubber feeding tube is removed and a 4 Fr or 5 Fr 100 cm Berenstein 
(angled) catheter 5 is advanced over the HGW and into the stomach. The 
left lateral positioning facilitates the accumulation of air in the pylorus and 
i llustrates its location (Figure 8.2). If the pylorus is not easily visualized, 
5–20 mL of room air is infused into the stomach via the Berenstein 
catheter.
4 The Berenstein catheter is used to direct the HGW towards and eventually 
across the pylorus (Figure 8.3). The HGW should always lead the Berenstein 

===== PDF PAGE 82 =====
68   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Figure 8.1 A 0.035 in (0.89 mm) 
s traight‐tip, standard stiffness, hydrophilic 
guide wire (HGW)4 is advanced down the 
esophagus and into the stomach.
Figure 8.2 A 4–5 Fr 100 cm Berenstein 
(angled) catheter5 is advanced over the 
HGW and into the stomach. The left 
lateral positioning facilitates the 
accumulation of air in the pylorus (P).
Figure 8.3 The Berenstein catheter is used 
to direct the HGW towards and 
eventually across the pylorus (P).

===== PDF PAGE 83 =====
Minimally invasive placement of postpyloric feeding tubes   69
catheter to prevent trauma to the wall of the gastrointestinal tract. The 
Berenstein is advanced over the HGW and into the duodenum and the HGW 
is then advanced well into the jejunum. Due to the number of “turns” in the 
path to the jejunum (esophagus to pylorus, pylorus into descending duode -
num, descending to ascending duodenum), advancement of the HGW can 
sometimes be challenging. Switching to a 0.035 in (0.89 mm) 260 cm straight‐
tip, stiff, hydrophilic guide wire6 will sometimes improve the “pushability” of 
the wire and advancement of the Berenstein catheter over it (and often the 
feeding tube as well).
5 Once the HGW is advanced into the jejunum, the Berenstein catheter is 
removed over the HGW and a well lubricated, end‐hole‐modified (bolus 
tip removed, tip thermally smoothed, and side holes created), 8 Fr 140 cm 
(55 in) feeding tube 7 is advanced over the HGW and into the jejunum 
(Figure 8.4).
6 The HGW is then removed.
Using this technique, ability to achieve transpyloric passage was 92% and 
ability to achieve jejunal access was 78% (Beal and Brown, 2011). In the remain-
ing dogs, the tube terminated at the caudal flexure of the duodenum or in the 
ascending duodenum. In this series, the ability to achieve jejunal access in the 
second half of the study period was 100%. This improvement was attributed to 
improved technical capability of the operator. Median procedural time was 
35±20 minutes (Beal and Brown, 2011).
Endoscopic techniques for NJ tube placement (EndoNJ) have also been 
described (Papa et al., 2009; Campbell and Daley, 2011). In 2009, Papa et al. 
described a technique in three normal dogs in which dogs were positioned in left 
lateral recumbency and a flexible endoscope (9 mm diameter, 130 cm long, 
2.8 mm diameter working channel) was inserted orally and advanced into the 
duodenum. Next, a 450 cm 0.035 in (0.89 mm) guide wire 8 is advanced down 
the working channel and into the jejunum and an 8 Fr, 250 cm long PVC9 feed-
ing tube is advanced over the guide wire, also down the working channel of the 
endoscope and into the jejunum. The endoscope is removed over the feeding 
Figure 8.4 Once the HGW is advanced 
into the jejunum, the Berenstein catheter 
is removed over the HGW and a well 
lubricated, end‐hole‐modified (bolus tip 
removed, tip thermally smoothed, and 
side holes created), 8 Fr 137.5 cm (54 in) 
feeding tube7 is advanced over the HGW 
and into the jejunum.

===== PDF PAGE 84 =====
70   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
tube and guide wire. To achieve nasal passage of the tube, a lubricated catheter3 
was passed down the nose and exteriorized via the mouth, attached to the feed-
ing tube, and withdrawn, pulling the feeding tube out of the nose. The median 
procedural time in the study demonstrating this technique was 30 min (range 
15 45 min). This technique was associated with achieving jejunal access in all 
dogs (Papa et al., 2009).
A second EndoNJ technique utilized in 5 clinical cases (dogs) was described 
by Campbell and Daley (2011). In this technique, the patient is positioned in 
left lateral recumbency and an 8–9 Fr feeding tube is advanced into the stom-
ach via the nose. A fiberoptic endoscope (9.3 mm diameter, 2.3 mm working 
channel, 103 cm length) is then advanced via the mouth into the stomach. 
Under endoscopic visualization, the feeding tube is advanced into the pyloric 
antrum. Next, a 170 cm, 2.4 mm diameter grasping forceps
10, 11 is advanced via 
the working channel to grasp the feeding tube approximately 1cm from its 
distal tip. The endoscope, forceps, and feeding tube are then positioned just 
over the pylorus. The grasping forceps and feeding tube are then advanced 
into the pylorus. The grasping forceps are released and withdrawn and the 
scope is backed up 3–5 cm. The shaft of the feeding tube is then re‐grasped 
and advanced into the pylorus. This process was repeated until the desired 
length of feeding tube was advanced beyond the pylorus to achieve jejunal 
access. In the case series describing this method, median procedural duration 
was 35 min (range 30–45 min) and jejunal access was achieved in all dogs 
(Campbell and Daley, 2011). The authors found this EndoNJ technique 
 technically challenging due to difficulty grasping the tube with the grasping 
forceps.
Regardless of placement technique, securing the NJ tube is of critical impor-
tance to prevent external migration or premature removal of the tube by the 
patient. Folding the tube under the alar fold and securing it at this location utiliz-
ing 2‐0 or 3‐0 nylon
12 in a finger trap pattern and at additional locations along 
the side of the face is generally effective. Tube security is enhanced when an 
Elizabethan collar is also utilized.
Removal of the NJ tube or conversion to a nasogastric (NG) or nasoesopha-
geal (NE) tube can be accomplished when the patient no longer demonstrates 
intolerance of, or contraindications to, gastric feeding. Conversion to a NG or NE 
can be accomplished with the instillation of 0.2–0.3 mg/kg of lidocaine
13 intra-
nasally q 5 min for 3 doses, removal of the finger trap that secured the tube 
adjacent to the nose and backing the tube out until it is positioned within the 
stomach or esophagus as desired. The tube is then resutured adjacent to the alar 
fold as previously described.
Monitoring
When utilizing the FNJ and FWNJ techniques, the exact location of the tube 
is always known. EndoNJ techniques will require post‐procedural radiogra-
phy to confirm tube placement. The author routinely infuses 2–3 mL of a 
sterile, iodine‐based contrast agent
14 into the NJ to confirm intraluminal 
placement during final imaging. Additional monitoring of tube location is 
probably unnecessary unless the patient exteriorizes a portion of the tube 

===== PDF PAGE 85 =====
Minimally invasive placement of postpyloric feeding tubes   71
from the nose (suggesting migration) or demonstrates signs suggestive of 
intolerance of feeding, such as vomiting of the enteral diet (suggesting orad 
migration), abdominal pain or other clinical signs that could be referable to 
the procedure.
Complications
Procedural complications associated with NJ tube placement are generally 
minor. Reported procedural complications include mild epistaxis and inability to 
achieve transpyloric or jejunal access (Wohl, 2006; Beal and Brown, 2011). 
There has been the suggestion that the use of IV metoclopramide
15 to increase 
antral contractions may facilitate passage of NJ tubes (Wohl, 2006).
In the hours to days after the placement procedure, orad migration of the 
tube is the most common complication (Wohl, 2006; Beal and Brown, 2011). 
Based on the available literature, it appears that inability to position the tube 
within the jejunum (duodenal positioning) is one of the greatest risk factors for 
orad migration (Wohl, 2006; Beal and Brown, 2011). In the study by Wohl 
(2006), insertion of the tube past the duodenojejunal flexure was associated with 
a lower incidence of oral migration than that seen in tubes that rested duodenally 
in which 86% migrated orally. Sneezing and vomiting may be risk factors for oral 
migration and should be pharmacologically managed for this reason and for 
patient comfort. Instillation of 0.2–0.3 mg/kg of lidocaine
13 intranasally and resu-
turing the finger trap suture in a slightly different location may help alleviate 
sneezing. Vomiting and diarrhoea may occur after NJ tube placement, however, 
many patients have one or both of these signs prior to placement of the NJ. In 
one study, the incidence of vomiting and diarrhea was the same post‐procedure 
as it was before the procedure (Beal and Brown, 2011). Additional minor com-
plications in the post‐procedural period include mild nasal discharge and facial 
irritation as well as kinking of the tube as it makes the turn from the nares under 
the alar fold (Wohl, 2006; Beal and Brown, 2011; Campbell and Daley, 2011).
Gastrojejunal tube placement
Minimally invasive placement of GJ tubes offers additional options for postpy-
loric feeding for animals that are intolerant of, or have contraindications to 
esophageal or gastric feeding. Advantages of many GJ systems include the 
ability to feed enterally while providing gastric decompression, the ability to 
easily transition from postpyloric feeding to gastric feeding (of a non‐liquid 
diet), and the ability to achieve more aboral placement within the jejunum 
compared to nasojejunal techniques in dogs (author experience). Disadvantages 
of GJ tubes in comparison to NJ tubes include the necessity for the tube to 
remain in place until a healthy ostomy develops, risk of septic peritonitis due 
to tube dislodgement, a high incidence of minor ostomy complications and a 
degree of increased technical complexity (Jennings et al., 2001; Jergens et al., 
2007; Beal et al., 2009). In addition to a surgical technique (Cavanaugh et al., 
2008), many minimally invasive techniques have been described for GJ tube 
placement including a percutaneous endoscopic gastrojejunal tube (PEGJ) 

===== PDF PAGE 86 =====
72   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
(Jennings et al., 2001; Heuter, 2004; Jergens et al., 2007) and a percutaneous 
radiologic gastrojejunal tube placement (PRGJ) (Beal et al., 2009).
Technique description
Numerous PEGJ techniques have been described (Jennings et al., 2001; Heuter, 
2004; Jergens et al., 2007), however, the technique described by Jergens et al. 
(2007) is the most objectively evaluated technique in normal dogs and cats. 
Commercially available PEGJ kits
16 are recommended because they allow pre-
cise interdigitation between the gastric segment of the tube and the jejunal seg-
ment, thus minimizing leakage and other complications. An endoscope suitable 
for upper gastrointestinal endoscopy is required for this method.
1 The technique described by Jergens et al. (2007) begins with routine place-
ment of a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube (see Chapter 6).
2 Next, a snare is passed through the PEG tube and opened within the 
stomach.
3 The endoscope is advanced from the mouth and into the stomach, through 
the snare (in right lateral recumbency), across the pylorus (in left lateral 
recumbency) and into the duodenum or jejunum.
4 A 0.035 in (0.89 mm) 270 cm HGW
17 is advanced through the working 
channel of the scope and well into the jejunum.
5 The endoscope is then withdrawn over the HGW leaving the HGW 
within the lumen of the snare.
6 Some additional length of HGW is placed into the stomach and the 
snare is then closed around the HGW and withdrawn back through the PEG 
(a “U”‐shaped wire is withdrawn with one arm extending into the jejunum 
and the other orad).
7 The orad segment of the HGW is identified and pulled down from the 
mouth and exteriorized. At this point in the procedure, there is a HGW that 
originates externally, passes through the PEG, into the stomach, across the 
pylorus and into the jejunum.
8 Finally, the jejunal portion of the PEGJ tube is advanced over the HGW 
and into the jejunum. In the study by Jergens et al. (2007), a 24 Fr gastros-
tomy tube was utilized in concert with a 12 Fr jejunal segment of varying 
lengths depending on the size of the patient (65 or 95 cm). Utilizing this tech-
nique in dogs and cats, the ability to achieve jejunal access was 100%. Median 
procedural time was 45 min (range 39–57 min) in dogs and 25 min (range 
22–31 min) in cats (Jergens, 2007).
The author recently described a technique for PRGJ in normal dogs (Beal et al., 
2009).
1 Briefly, dogs are positioned in right lateral recumbency and the stomach is 
insufflated with air from an orogastric or nasogastric tube.
2 Fluoroscopy is utilized to identify a location caudal to the left, 13th rib for 
placement of 3 gastrointestinal suture anchors (GSA)
18 into the stomach in a 
triangular pattern, creating a gastropexy allowing apposition of the stomach 
to the left body wall during the GJ placement.
3 An 18 Ga puncture needle
19 is advanced through the center of the trian -
gle created by the GSA and into the stomach allowing for passage of a  

===== PDF PAGE 87 =====
Minimally invasive placement of postpyloric feeding tubes   73
0.035 in, (0.889 mm) 150 cm, standard stiffness, hydrophilic guide wire with 
a straight, flexible tip.20
4 A 5 Fr angled guiding catheter 18 is then passed over the HGW and used 
to direct the HGW across the pylorus and duodenum and into the jejunum. 
This portion of the procedure is performed in sternal or left‐sternal recum -
bency. The latter positioning allows air to fill and outline the pylorus, h owever, 
manipulation of the devices entering the insertion site is challenging.
5 Serial, over‐the‐wire dilation 18 of the body wall facilities placement of 
an 18 Fr peel‐away introducer 18 through which an 18 Fr/8 Fr 58 cm dual‐
lumen GJ tube 21 is advanced over the HGW and into the stomach and 
jejunum.
6 The intragastric balloon retention mechanism is then inflated and used in con-
cert with the external bolster to help prevent migration (Figures 8.5 and 8.6).
Figure 8.6 Ventrodorsal radiograph 
illustrating the extension of the jejunal 
segment of a GJ tube past the caudal 
duodenal flexure (arrow) with the tip of 
the tube (T) terminating in the jejunum. 
(Weisse 2015. Reproduced with 
permission of Wiley & Sons.).
Figure 8.5 Lateral radiograph illustrating 
suture anchors (SA), intragastric balloon 
retention mechanism (B) and extension 
of the jejunal segment of the GJ tube past 
the caudal duodenal flexure (arrow) with 
the tip of the tube (T) terminating in the 
jejunum. (Weisse 2015. Reproduced with 
permission of Wiley & Sons.).

===== PDF PAGE 88 =====
74   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
In a pilot study that allowed development of this technique, jejunal access 
was accomplished in all dogs. Median time to traversing the pylorus with the 
HGW was 23.5 min (range 14–93 min). Median total procedural time was 53 min 
(range 42–126 min). Challenges encountered with the PRGJ technique included 
identifying and successfully traversing the pylorus as well as serial dilation of the 
gastrostomy site (Beal et al., 2009).
Depending on the GJ system utilized, the jejunal segment of the feeding tube 
may be able to be removed when the patient is eating or no longer has 
c ontraindications to or intolerance of gastric feeding. The gastric portion of GJ 
tubes placed using minimally invasive techniques should remain in place for 
approximately 2 weeks to allow the ostomy time to mature. In severely debili-
tated animals, due to poor healing, the tube may need to remain in place for a 
significantly longer period of time. Septic peritonitis has developed after tube 
removal in dogs and cats up to 4 weeks after placement (Armstrong and Hardie, 
1990; Salinardi et al., 2006).
Monitoring
When utilizing the PRGJ techniques, the exact location of the tube is always 
known because the procedure is performed with fluoroscopic guidance. PEGJ 
techniques will require post‐procedural radiography to confirm tube place-
ment. The author routinely infuses 2–3mL of a sterile, iodine‐based contrast 
agent
14 into the jejunal and gastric ports of GJ tubes to confirm intraluminal 
placement during final imaging. Additional monitoring of tube location is prob-
ably u nnecessary unless the patient dislodges the jejunal segment from the 
gastric tube (based on the type of GJ system utilized) or demonstrates signs 
suggestive of intolerance of feeding, such as vomiting of the enteral diet (sug-
gesting orad migration), abdominal pain or other clinical signs that could be 
referable to the procedure. GJ tubes should be maintained according to the 
standards described in Chapter 6. Patients with GJ tubes should be monitored 
closely for evidence of ostomy infection  (redness, swelling, discharge, fever) or 
septic peritonitis (acute abdomen, fever, shock, anorexia, vomiting) as described 
in Chapter 6.
Complications
Procedural complications are uncommon in both the PEGJ and PRGJ tech-
niques and, much like NJ techniques, migration of the tube and removal of the 
tube by the patient are the most common post‐procedural complications in dogs 
(Jergens et al., 2007, Beal et al., 2009). In the study by Jergens et al. (2007), 
orad migration was a problem when the jejunal segment of the tube was duo-
denal in position because it was too short (65 cm). This problem was mitigated 
when a 95 cm jejunal segment was used. In this study, two dogs also removed 
their tubes prematurely (Jergens et al., 2007). Additional minor complications 
reported in this study in dogs included ostomy infection, and diarrhea. In cats, 
soft stool, transient fever, and pain at the ostomy site were noted. In the study 
by Beal et al. (2009), mild redness and discharge were noted at the ostomy site 

===== PDF PAGE 89 =====
Minimally invasive placement of postpyloric feeding tubes   75
in all dogs. Although not seen in the aforementioned studies, failure of the 
ostomy site with development of septic peritonitis is a recognized complication 
of gastrostomy tube placement (Salinardi et al., 2006). The utilization of GSA 
may help relieve tension on the tube and thus help maintain the ostomy, thus 
making it less likely to fail. Additional investigation into the utilization of these 
devices in the future is warranted.
esophagojejunal tube placement
Perhaps the procedure that provides the optimal blend of the advantages of both 
NJ and GJ procedures while mitigating the complications of both is the esophago-
jejunal (EJ) tube. This is minimally irritating to the patient (in contrast to the NJ 
tube) and is unlikely to trigger the sneezing that together predispose to prema-
ture dislodgement or removal of an NJ tube. In addition, in contrast to the GJ 
tube, if an EJ tube becomes dislodged prematurely, the ostomy will usually close 
without a major risk of life‐threatening infection. Lastly, in comparison to the NJ 
tube in large dogs in which the length of the feeding tube sometimes precludes 
insertion well into the jejunum, the EJ tube places the insertion site approxi-
mately 10–20 cm closer to the jejunum.
Technique description
The technique for fluoroscopic EJ placement is similar to that for fluoroscopic NJ 
placement.
1 An esophagostomy (E) tube is placed routinely (See Chapter 5) and a 0.035 in 
(0.89 mm) 260 cm standard stiffness, straight tip, hydrophilic guide wire
4 is 
introduced through the esophagostomy tube and advanced into the s tomach. 
Esophagostomy is best performed on the left side, but can be performed on 
the right if there are contraindications to placement on the left (such as prox-
imity to a pre‐existing central venous catheter).
2 The esophagostomy tube is removed over the HGW and a 10 Fr peel‐away 
introducer
22 placed over it.
3 The patient is rotated to left lateral recumbency allowing air to fill the 
pyloric antrum. Draping should be utilized to attempt to maintain cleanliness 
at the insertion site.
4 The 5 Fr 100 cm Berenstein
5 catheter is introduced over the HGW via the 
peel‐away sheath introducer and is used to direct the HGW across the 
pylorus.
5 The remainder of the procedure proceeds as it would for the FWNJ tube.
6 Once the EJ tube is in place, the peel‐away sheath is exteriorized and peeled‐
away and the tube is secured in place using 3‐0 nylon
l in a purse‐string / finger 
trap pattern.
7 A sterile dressing is placed at the insertion site.
Removal of the EJ tube or conversion to an E tube can be accomplished 
when the patient no longer demonstrates intolerance of or contraindications to 
gastric feeding. Conversion to an E tube can be accomplished by removal of the 

===== PDF PAGE 90 =====
76   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
finger trap that secured the tube at the insertion site and backing the tube out 
until it is positioned within the stomach or distal esophagus as desired. If a 
larger diameter E tube is desired, then a 0.035 in (0.889 mm), 260 cm, stiff 
guide wire
6 can be introduced down the EJ tube and the EJ tube can be removed. 
A peel‐away introducer large enough to accommodate the size of the E‐tube 
can then be introduced over the PTFE guide wire into the esophagus. The E 
tube is fed over the wire, through the peel‐away sheath and the peel‐away 
sheath is withdrawn and peeled away. The HGW is then removed. The E tube is 
then secured.
Monitoring
The author routinely infuses 2–3 mL of a sterile, iodine‐based contrast agent 14 
into the EJ to confirm intraluminal placement during final imaging. Additional 
monitoring of tube location is probably unnecessary unless the patient exterior-
izes a portion of the tube from the ostomy site (suggesting migration) or demon-
strates signs suggestive of intolerance of feeding, such as vomiting of the enteral 
diet (suggesting orad migration), abdominal pain or other clinical signs that 
could be referable to the procedure. The ostomy site should be evaluated and 
maintained as described in Chapter 5.
Complications
Procedural complications associated with EJ tube placement are usually refera-
ble to those associated with the esophagostomy phase of the procedure. Please 
see Chapter 5 for additional discussion. Occasional challenges are encountered 
when attempting to traverse the pylorus. The author has not experienced 
s ignificant orad migration associated with EJ tube placement when the terminal 
portion of the tube was positioned within the jejunum.
postpyloric tube feeding diets
A liquid diet is the only formulation that will easily flow through the 8 Fr jejunal 
feeding tubes described above. Feeding is most often accomplished via a con-
stant rate infusion because the small bowel is not a “reservoir” organ like the 
stomach. Veterinary polymeric diets
23 are routinely utilized in veterinary medi-
cine in animals with postpyloric feeding tubes. Elemental diets may not be nec-
essary if gastrointestinal function is relatively normal. For additional discussion 
of tube feeding diets, please see Chapter 9.
Summary
Postpyloric (NJ, GJ, EJ) feeding tubes can be placed utilizing minimally‐
invasive techniques and allow the provision of enteral nutritional support in 
small a nimal patients with intolerance of or contraindications to gastric 
feeding.

===== PDF PAGE 91 =====
Minimally invasive placement of postpyloric feeding tubes   77
r eferences
Abood, S.K. and Buffington, C.A. (1992) Enteral feeding of dogs and cats: 51 cases (1989–1991). 
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 201, 619–622.
Altintas, N.D., Aydin, K., Turkoglu, M.A. et al. (2011) Effect of enteral versus parenteral nutri-
tion on outcome of medical patients requiring mechanical ventilation. Nutrition in Clinical 
Practice, 26, 322–329.
Key po IN t S
•	 Veterinary	patients	with	critical	illness	may	be	intolerant	of,	or	have	contraindications	to	
esophageal	or	gastric	feeding.
•	 Minimally	invasive	postpyloric	feeding	techniques	provide	enteral	nutritional	support	
while	mitigating	much	of	the	invasiveness	associated	with	surgical	jejunostomy.
•	 Nasojejunal	tube	placement	techniques	utilizing	endoscopic	or	fluoroscopic	guidance	are	
well	established	and	relatively	easy	to	perform.
•	 Gastrojejunal	tube	placement	techniques	utilizing	endoscopic	or	fluoroscopic	guidance	
have	been	described	and	provide	access	for	a	combination	of	postpyloric	feeding	and	
gastric	decompression.
•	 Esophagojejunal	tube	placement	utilizing	fluoroscopic	guidance	may	take	advantage	of	
the	simplicity	and	minimal	risk	of	the	nasojejunal	tube	and	the	tolerance	of	the	
gastrojejunal	tube.
Notes
 1 Dobbhoff, 8 French 55 in. (139.7cm); Sherwood Davis & Geck. St. Louis, MO.
 2 Entriflex, 8 French, 42 in. (107cm); Kendall (Tyco Healthcare Group). Mansfield, MA.
 3 Feeding Tube and Urethral Catheter (8 Fr); Tyco Healthcare Group LP. Mansfield, MA.
 4  Weasel Wire Guide wire 260  cm  0.035 in (0.889 mm), straight regular taper tip; Infiniti 
Medical LLC. Menlo Park, CA.
 5 Performa 5 French, 100 cm Berenstein 1; Merit Medical Systems Inc. South Jordan, UT.
 6  Merit H2O Hydrophilic Stiff Guidewire 260 cm  0.035 in (0.889 mm), straight regular taper 
tip; Merit Medical Systems Inc. South Jordan, UT.
 7 Nasogastric Feeding Tube 8 French  55 in (140cm); Mila International Inc. Erlanger, KY.
 8 Bavarian Wire ‘soft’; Medi‐Globe GmbH. Achenmuhle, Germany.
 9  LE, 702; Borsodchem Viniplast Ltd. Budapest, Hungary.
10 2.4 mm rat tooth grasping forcep; ESS. Brewster, NY.
11 2.4 mm forked jaw grasping forcep; ESS. Brewster, NY.
12 3‐0 Ethilon; Ethicon LLC. San Lorenzo, PR.
13 Lidocaine Injectable 2%; Sparhawk Laboratories Inc. Lenexa, KS.
14 Omnipaque 300; GE Healthcare Inc. Princeton, NJ.
15 Metoclopramide Inj.; Hospira Inc. Lake Forest, IL.
16 Gastro‐Jejunal feeding tube; Wilson‐Cook Medical Inc. Winston‐Salem, NC.
17 Radifocus Glidewire; Boston Scientific Corp. Watertown, MA.
18 MIC‐KEY‐J‐TJ Introducer Kit; Kimberly‐Clark Worldwide Inc. Roswell, GA.
19 Merit Advance Angiographic Needles; Merit Medical Systems Inc. South Jordan, UT.
20  Weasel Wire 150 cm  0.035 in (0.889 mm), straight regular taper tip; Infiniti Medical LLC. 
Menlo Park, CA.
21 MIC Gastro Enteric Feeding Tube; Kimberly‐Clark Healthcare. Roswell, GA.
22 Peel‐Away Sheath Introducer Set; Cook Medical Inc. Bloomington, IN.
23 Clinicare Canine / Feline Liquid Diet; Abbott Laboratories. Abbott Park, IL.

===== PDF PAGE 92 =====
78   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Armstrong, P.J. and Hardie, E.M. (1990) Percutaneous gastrostomy; a retrospective study of 54 
clinical cases in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 4, 202–206.
Beal, M.W., Jutkowitz, L.A. and Brown, A.J. (2007) Development of a novel method for 
 fluoroscopically‐guided nasojejunal feeding tube placement in dogs (abstr). Journal of 
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 17, S1.
Beal, M.W., Mehler, S.J., Staiger, B.A. et al. (2009) Technique for percutaneous radiologic 
 gastrojejunostomy in the dog (abstr). Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 23, 713.
Beal, M.W. and Brown, M.A. (2011) Clinical experience utilizing a novel fluoroscopic tech-
nique for wire‐guided nasojejunal tube placement in the dog: 26 cases (2006–2010). Journal 
of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 21, 151–157.
Campbell, J.A., Jutkowitz, L.A., Santoro, K.A. et al. (2010) Continuous versus intermittent 
delivery of nutrition via nasoenteric feeding tubes in hospitalized canine and feline patients: 
91 patients (2002–2007). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 20, 232–236.
Campbell, S.A. and Daley, C.A. (2011) Endoscopically assisted nasojejunal feeding tube place-
ment: technique and results in five dogs. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 47, 
e50–e55.
Cavanaugh, R.P., Kovak, J.R., Fischetti, A.J. et al. (2008) Evaluation of surgically placed gastro-
jejunostomy feeding tubes in critically ill dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical 
Association, 232, 380–388.
Chan, D.L. and Freeman, L.M. (2006) Nutrition in critical illness. Veterinary Clinics of North 
America Small Animal Practice, 36, 1225–1241.
Chan, D.L. (2004) Nutritional requirements of the critically ill patient. Clinical Techniques in 
Small Animal Practice, 19, 1–5.
Crowe, D.T. and Devey, J.J. (1997) Clinical experience with jejunostomy feeding tubes in 47 
small animal patients. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 7, 7–19.
Gramlich, L., Kichian, K., Pinilla, J. et al. (2004) Does enteral nutrition compared to parenteral 
nutrition result in better outcomes in critically ill adult patients? A systematic review of the 
literature. Nutrition, 20, 843–848.
Han, E. (2004) Esophageal and gastric feeding tubes in icu patients. Clinical Techniques in Small 
Animal Practice, 19, 22–31.
Heuter, K. (2004) Placement of jejunal feeding tubes for post‐gastric feeding. Clinical Techniques 
in Small Animal Practice, 19, 32–42.
Hewitt, S.A., Brisson, B.A., Sinclair, M.D. et al. (2004) Evaluation of laparoscopic‐assisted 
placement of jejunostomy feeding tubes in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical 
Association, 225, 65–71.
Heyland, D.K., Dhaliwal, R., Drover, J.W. et al. (2003) Canadian clinical practice guidelines for 
nutrition support in mechanically ventilated, critically ill adult patients. Journal of Parenteral 
and Enteral Nutrition, 27, 355–373.
Holahan, M., Abood, S., Hauptman, J. et al. (2010) Intermittent and continuous enteral nutri-
tion in critically ill dogs: a prospective randomized trial. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 
24, 520–526.
Jennings, M., Center, S.A., Barr, S.C. et al. (2001) Successful treatment of feline pancreatitis 
using an endoscopically placed gastrojejunostomy tube. Journal of the American Animal Hospital 
Association, 37, 145–152.
Jergens, A.E., Morrison, J.A., Miles, K.G. et al. (2007) Percutaneous endoscopic gastrojejunos-
tomy tube placement in healthy dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 21, 
18–24.
Michel, K.E. and Higgins, C. (2006) Investigation of the percentage of prescribed enteral nutri-
tion actually delivered to hospitalized companion animals. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and 
Critical Care, 16, S2–S6.
Papa, K., Psader, R., Sterczer, A. et al. (2009) Endoscopically guided nasojejunal tube placement 
in dogs for short‐term postduodenal feeding. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 
19, 554–563.
Peter, J.V., Moran, J.L. and Phillips‐Hughes, J. (2005) A metaanalysis of treatment outcomes of 
early enteral versus early parenteral nutrition in hospitalized patients. Critical Care Medicine, 
33, 213–220.

===== PDF PAGE 93 =====
Minimally invasive placement of postpyloric feeding tubes   79
Remillard, R.L., Darden, D.E., Michel, K.E. et al. (2001) An investigation of the relationship 
between caloric intake and outcome in hospitalized dogs. Veterinary Therapeutics: Research in 
Applied Veterinary Medicine, 2, 301–310.
Salinardi, B.J., Harkin, K.R., Bulmer, B.J. et al. (2006) Comparison of complications of percu-
taneous endoscopic versus surgically placed gastrostomy tubes in 42 dogs and 52 cats. Journal 
of the American Animal Hospital Association, 42, 51–56.
Swann, H.M., Sweet, D.C. and Michel, K.E. (1997) Complications associated with use of jeju-
nostomy tubes in dogs and cats: 40 cases (1989–1994). Journal of the American Veterinary 
Medical Association, 210, 1764–1767.
Waddell, L.S. and Michel, K.E. (1998) Critical care nutrition: routes of feeding. Clinical Techniques 
in Small Animal Practice,13, 197–203.
Weisse, C. and Berent, A. (2015) Veterinary Image‐Guided Interventions, Wiley‐Blackwell.
Wohl, J.S. (2006) Nasojejunal feeding tube placement using fluoroscopic guidance: technique 
and clinical experience in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 16, S27–S33.
Yagil‐Kelmer, E., Wagner‐Mann, C. and Mann, F.A. (2006) Postoperative complications associ-
ated with jejunostomy tube placement using the interlocking box technique compared with 
other jejunopexy methods in dogs and cats:76 cases (1999–2003). Journal of Veterinary 
Emergency and Critical Care, 16, S14–S20.

===== PDF PAGE 94 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
80
Introduction
Diet selection for tube feeding is made based on careful consideration of the 
nutritional assessment of the patient (Freeman et al., 2011). Diets for tube 
feeding of hospitalized veterinary patients should be energy and nutrient dense 
(1–2 kcal/mL) and highly digestible, allowing lower feeding volumes to be used. 
Feeding smaller volumes of high‐energy dense diet may help prevent gastric 
distention, and may alleviate gastrointestinal (GI) discomfort and stress on the 
respiratory system (i.e., pressure on the diaphragm). Diets for tube feeding 
should be easy to administer with syringe or enteral infusion pumps and should 
be specifically formulated for dogs and cats. There are multiple commercial prod-
ucts for tube feeding of dogs and cats with different nutrient profiles, energy 
densities, moisture contents and viscosities. Factors to consider when selecting 
an enteral diet are listed in Table 9.1.
Diets for tube feeding
Commercial enteral diets designed for tube feeding of small animal patients 
include ‘recovery‐type diets’ (usually semi‐liquid canned diets) and veterinary 
liquid diets. Semi‐liquid diets can also be prepared by blenderizing canned foods 
with water or with liquid diet using a kitchen blender (Figure 9.1). A number of 
commercial human liquid diets are also available from pharmacies and grocery 
stores. These diets are typically less expensive but they are nutritionally inade-
quate and may contain inappropriate ingredients for dogs and cats, such as cocoa 
powder, a source of toxic methylxanthines (Kovalkovicova et al., 2009). While 
canine patients tolerate short‐term feeding of human liquid diets without 
adverse effects, their use is inappropriate for cats because they are too low in 
protein and lack adequate taurine and arginine.
Tube feeding in small animals: diet 
selection and preparation
Iveta Becvarova
Academic Affairs, Hill’s Pet Nutrition Manufacturing, Czech Republic
Chapter 9

===== PDF PAGE 95 =====
Tube feeding in small animals: diet selection and preparation   81
Commercial veterinary ‘recovery diets’1–3 consist of more typical pet food 
ingredients (e.g., meats and organ meats, animal fats, vegetable oils, cereal 
grains, fiber sources, vitamin‐mineral supplements) with textures designed to 
allow easy administration through syringe and feeding tubes. In general, ‘recov-
ery diets’ are highly digestible, low‐fiber, high‐protein, high‐fat and low‐  
digestible  carbohydrate formulas with variable mineral and electrolyte contents. 
These diets require  digestion with pancreatic and intestinal enzymes, and are 
indicated for patients with normal GI function. ‘Recovery diets’ are formulated 
to meet nutrient  requirements of adult dogs and cats when fed in adequate 
volumes. When feeding an immature patient, the clinician should review the 
nutritional adequacy  statement on the food label to determine whether the diet 
is suitable for growth. ‘Recovery diets’ do not usually require dilution and can 
generally be used with feeding tubes ≥ 10 French in diameter. Some selected 
products can be used for smaller tube sizes (e.g., 8 French) (see Table  9.2). 
These foods can be administered via ‘luer‐slip’ syringes with catheter adapters 
(Figure 9.2) or via catheter tip syringes (Figure 9.3). However, in order to pre -
vent inadvertent feeding into intravenous catheters,  special enteral safety 
devices4 (See Chapter 5) which do not use luer‐type connections can be used to 
prevent accidental misconnections.
Table 9.1 Factors to consider when choosing an enteral diet.
Is the gastrointestinal tract functioning and safe for use?
What is the caloric density and protein content of the diet or liquid formula?
What is the type of protein, fat, carbohydrate and fiber in the diet/liquid formula and is the patient 
able to digest and absorb nutrients in this form?
Is the diet/liquid formula complete and balanced for dog or cat? Is it meeting the patient’s nutrient 
requirements? Is the liquid formula for cats supplemented with taurine?
Is the sodium, potassium, phosphorus and magnesium content of the diet/liquid formula 
appropriate, especially for patients with cardiopulmonary, renal, or hepatic failure?
What is the viscosity (thickness) of the food relative to the tube size and method of feeding?
Figure 9.1 Canned diets can 
be blenderized in a kitchen 
blender enabling them to be 
used for tube feeding.

===== PDF PAGE 96 =====
Table 9.2 Diet options for tube feeding.
Animal species Water added  
to make a  
gruel with a  
blender (mL)
Volume  
of the  
can (mL)
8 Fr tube 10 Fr tube >10 Fr tube Energy  
density
(kcal/mL)
Severe stress / trauma (high‐protein, high‐fat, low‐carbohydrate; fortified with glutamine, EPA, DHA, arginine)
‘Recovery diet’
Royal Canin Recovery RS™ 
1 Canine / Feline – 160 Yes Yes Yes 1.1
Hill’s a/d® 2 Canine / Feline – 160 No Yes Yes 1.1
IAMS™ Maximum‐Calorie™ 3 Canine / Feline – 160 No No Yes 2.1
Liquid diet
CliniCare® 5 Canine/Feline  
Liquid Diet
Canine / Feline – 237 Yes Yes Yes 1.0
Renal failure (low‐protein, high‐fat, low‐phosphorus, low‐sodium)
Blenderized gruel
Royal Canin Renal LP
®  
Modified Canine11 (385g can)
Canine 100 360 Yes Yes Yes 1.4
Royal Canin Renal LP®  
Modified Morsels in Gravy  
Feline12 (70g can)
Feline 20 65 Yes Yes Yes 1.0
Liquid diet
CliniCare
® RF Feline  
Liquid Diet6
Feline – 237 Yes Yes Yes 1.0
Hepatoencephalopathy (restricted‐low‐protein, high‐fat, restricted‐low‐sodium)
Blenderized gruel
Hill’s l/d
® Canine13 (370g can) Canine 150 370 Yes Yes Yes 1.0
Hill’s l/d® Feline14 (156g can) Feline 20 160 No Yes Yes 1.0
40 160 No Yes Yes 0.9

===== PDF PAGE 97 =====
Animal species Water added  
to make a  
gruel with a  
blender (mL)
Volume  
of the  
can (mL)
8 Fr tube 10 Fr tube >10 Fr tube Energy  
density
(kcal/mL)
Royal Canin Renal LP
®  
Modified Canine11 (385g can)
Canine 100 360 Yes Yes Yes 1.4
Royal Canin Renal LP®  
Modified Morsels in Gravy  
Feline
12 (70g can)
Feline 20 65 Yes Yes Yes 1.0
Liquid diet
CliniCare
® RF Feline  
Liquid Diet6
Feline – 237 Yes Yes Yes 1.0
Cardiopulmonary disease (high‐fat, low‐carbohydrate, restricted‐sodium [<100 mg/100 kcal])
IAMS Maximum‐Calorie™ 3 Canine / Feline – 160 No No Yes 2.1
CliniCare® Canine/Feline  
Liquid Diet5
Canine / Feline – 237 Yes Yes Yes 1.0
CliniCare® RF Feline  
Liquid Diet6
Feline – 237 Yes Yes Yes 1.0
Fat intolerance (moderate‐protein, low‐fat, low‐fibre, highly‐digestible)
Blenderized gruel
Royal Canin Gastrointestinal™  
Low Fat LF™
15 (386 g can)
Canine 150 360 Yes Yes Yes 0.7
IAMS™ Low‐Residue™  
Feline
16 (170 g can)
Feline 50 160 No Yes Yes 0.9
Table 9.2 (Continued)

===== PDF PAGE 98 =====
84   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Commercial veterinary liquid diets are polymeric products that contain intact 
milk proteins (e.g., casein, sodium caseinate, whey protein), animal fats, vegetable 
oils, digestible carbohydrates (e.g., maltodextrins), soluble fibres, vitamins and 
minerals. Some products have added taurine, L‐arginine, fish oil and L‐carnitine. 
Liquid diets are appropriate for all feeding tube sizes and can be administered via 
special enteral infusion pumps (Figure 9.4).
Enteral diet composition
Osmolality
The nutrient composition of the enteral diet is the major determinant of total 
osmolality. Liquid formulas that contain intact proteins and glucose polymers 
(i.e., polymeric diets) have a lower osmolality than formulas with free amino 
acids, peptides, mono‐ and di‐saccharides (i.e., monomeric diets). Canine and 
feline polymeric diets have osmolality approximating that of plasma (~235 – 
310 mOsm/kg water) 5,6 while human monomeric formulas are hypertonic 
Figure 9.2 Luer slip syringe 
with catheter adapter for food 
administration via feeding tube.
Figure 9.3 Administration of blenderized 
canned food by catheter syringe via 
esophagostomy feeding tube with flared 
end.

===== PDF PAGE 99 =====
Tube feeding in small animals: diet selection and preparation   85
(650 mOsm/kg water).7,8 Previously, it was assumed that hypertonic diets drew 
water into the GI lumen inducing an osmotic diarrhea. However,  studies in 
people have identified that the GI tract possesses several mechanisms to main -
tain osmotic regulation within the lumen when hypertonic  formulas are fed, 
regardless of the site of administration (e.g., stomach vs. small intestine) 
(Keohane et al., 1984; Zarling et al., 1986). Similarly to human patients, the 
author’s experience is that hypertonic solutions (i.e., monomeric diets) do not 
cause diarrhea in patients with functional GI tract and their dilution to 
 isotonicity is not required when fed as a constant rate infusion into the small 
intestine. Formula dilution can be instituted when there is a need for increased 
water intake or for patients with impaired GI function.
Water content
Daily maintenance fluid needs of hospitalized patients are generally estimated as 
60 mL/kg body weight. Special attention to dietary water intake should be paid in 
patients with alterations in fluid balance (i.e., cardiopulmonary and renal disease). 
Liquid diets, ‘recovery diets’ and diet blends with ≥1 kcal/mL contain approxi-
mately 80% moisture (i.e., 800 mL of ‘free’ water in each litre of diet) which does 
not meet maintenance fluid requirement when fed in an amount equivalent to 
the estimated resting energy requirement (RER). Diet formulations that provide 
more than 1 kcal/mL contain less water, while formulas with less than 1 kcal/mL 
provide more water. Additional water to meet patient’s fluid needs is typically 
provided as tube flushes (Figure 9.5) and with dissolved medications. Therefore, it 
is important to monitor patient’s hydration status and subtract enterally adminis-
tered fluids (e.g.,‘free’ water in the diet, water for flushing, water administered 
with medications) from intravenously administered fluids. Additional water can 
be administered through the feeding tube between main meals as needed. The 
Figure 9.4 Liquid diet administration via 
enteral pump.

===== PDF PAGE 100 =====
86   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
moisture content of commercial canine and feline diets is listed on the guaranteed 
or on the typical analysis of the product label.
Protein content
The percentage of total calories provided from protein in liquid formulas and 
‘recovery diets’ varies from 22 to 41%, depending on the condition for which the 
product was designed. Standard canine and feline formulas contain highly‐  
digestible biologically intact proteins, such as sodium and calcium caseinate, 
whey protein, dried egg whites, liver or whole meats. Human monomeric diets 
contain protein fragments, peptides and amino acids that are derived from 
hydrolysis of casein, whey, lactalbumin or soy, which improves digestibility but 
contributes to higher osmolality of the solution. Provision of intact proteins 
requires a functional intestinal tract for digestion and absorption. The brush 
 border of the small intestine is capable of absorbing single amino acids as well as 
di‐ and tri‐peptides, therefore, diets containing protein hydrolysates rich in small 
peptides might be of benefit for patients with impaired GI function.
Critically ill patients require sufficient intake of essential amino acids for 
maintenance, healing, tissue repair, immune cell function, albumin synthesis 
and correction of protein losses. Feline diets should always be sufficient in tau -
rine. Glutamine may become conditionally essential during critical illness 
(Weitzel and Wischmeyer, 2010). Glutamine is the primary carrier of nitrogen 
from the skeletal muscle, provides energy to immune cells and enterocytes and 
is precursor for the antioxidant glutathione (Weitzel and Wischmeyer, 2010). 
Arginine has immune enhancing and vasoactive properties, and excessive sup -
plementation could be harmful in sepsis due to its vasodilative action (Gough 
et al., 2011). Essential branched‐chain amino acids (BCAAs), leucine, isoleucine 
and valine, are mobilized from the skeletal muscle during injury and are 
 important dietary protein components for muscle anabolism during recovery 
Figure 9.5 Administration of water via 
esophagostomy feeding tube.

===== PDF PAGE 101 =====
Tube feeding in small animals: diet selection and preparation   87
(Kadowaki and Kanazawa, 2003). A number of ‘recovery diets’ are fortified with 
BCAAs in an amount of 8.9–13.3 g/1000 kcal metabolizable energy (ME). Their 
efficacy for alleviating hepatic encephalopathy in humans, dogs and cats is con-
troversial (Charlton, 2006; Meyer et al., 1999). Presently, the utility of including 
BCAAs in veterinary critical care diets is unknown.
Diets with high protein content are contraindicated in patients with acute 
and chronic renal failure, azotemia and hepatic encephalopathy. Special diets for 
protein intolerant patients are listed in Table 9.2.
Fats and oils content
Fats and oils are a concentrated source of energy and supply essential fatty 
acids. Liquid diets and ‘recovery diets’ for dogs and cats are high in fat with 
approximately 45–57% and 55–68% calories from fat, respectively. Dietary 
lipids are isotonic (~260 mOsm/kg) and are not water soluble. In liquid diets, 
lipids are emulsified to be incorporated into the aqueous phase of the solution. 
The sources of lipid in liquid and ‘recovery’ diets are vegetable oils and animal 
fats. These include soybean oil, chicken fat and various fish oils. Soybean oil is 
an excellent source of essential polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), linoleic 
(n‐6 PUFA) and alpha‐linolenic (n‐3 PUFA) acid. Chicken fat is a source of 
monounsaturated, saturated and polyunsaturated fat with 47%, 31% and 22% 
of total fat, respectively.
9 The n‐6:n‐3 PUFA ratio of the chicken fat is 20:1, the 
major PUFA is linoleic acid and main n‐3 PUFA is alpha‐linolenic acid.9 Fish oils 
(e.g., menhaden oil, sardine oil), are concentrated sources of n‐3 PUFA, such as 
eicosapentaenoic (EPA) and docosahexaenoic (DHA) fatty acid with n‐6:n‐3 
PUFA ratio of 0.1:1.
9
Linoleic acid serves as a precursor of arachidonic acid in dogs, while cats 
require preformed arachidonic acid from animal sources in their diet (Rivers, 
Sinclair and Craqford, 1975). Arachidonic acid is associated with increased 
inflammation and immunosupression in critically ill patients through production 
of inflammatory eicosanoids (Ricciotti and Fitzgerald, 2011; Sardesai, 1992). 
While the need for essential linoleic acid is well recognized, critically ill patients 
may benefit from a decreased ratio of n‐6:n‐3 in their diet to alleviate the inflam-
matory process and modify hemodynamic functions, although results of human 
clinical studies are contradictory (Martin and Stapleton, 2010). The clinical use of 
fish oil in critically ill patients appears to be safe but more studies are needed to 
determine the optimal dose. Alpha‐linolenic acid from animal fat (e.g., chicken 
fat) or vegetable oils (e.g., flaxseed oil, soybean oil, canola oil) serves as a precur-
sor for EPA and DHA in many species; however, this conversion is deficient in 
dogs and minimal in cats (Bauer, Dunbar and Bigley, 1998; Pawlosky, Barnes and 
Salem, 1994). Addition of fish oil derived EPA and DHA product to the diet can 
efficiently lower the total n‐6:n‐3 ratio.
Typical dietary fat sources require intact digestive and absorptive capacity, as 
well as normal function of the intestinal lymphatic system. Selected human liquid 
diets contain medium‐chain triglycerides
10 (MCT, 6‐12 carbon‐chain‐ length) 
from the coconut oil that by‐passes lymphatics to a great extent and are directly 
delivered to the liver through the portal system where they serve as a direct source 
of energy through beta‐oxidation (Ramirez, Amate and Gil, 2001). Medium‐chain 

===== PDF PAGE 102 =====
88   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
triglycerides are not a source of essential fatty acids but they provide extra calories 
to patients with fat malabsorptive disorders.
Feeding diets with a high fat content (i.e., canine and feline liquid diets, 
‘recovery diets’) are considered contraindicated in patients with fat malabsorp-
tive diseases, pancreatitis, hyperlipidemia, lymphangiectasia or chylothorax. 
These patients require preparation of special low‐fat formulas (Table  9.2). 
Human liquid diets ultra‐low in fat (3–6% of the total calories) can be used as 
short‐term diet alternatives.
7,8
Digestible carbohydrates
The percentage of total calories from digestible (hydrolysable) carbohydrates in the 
liquid enteral diets for dogs and cats is typically restricted to 21 to25%.
5,6 Lowering 
the calories from carbohydrates is beneficial for patients with insulin resistance, 
hyperglycemia and respiratory distress as a result of decreased CO
2 production from 
carbohydrate metabolism. Diets with low carbohydrate content are also useful in 
prevention of ‘Refeeding Syndrome’ (See Chapter 16) in patients with a history of 
long‐term suboptimal caloric intakes. Carbohydrate sources used in liquid diets are 
maltodextrins (D‐glucose units connected in chains of variable length) and glucose. 
Formulas that contain sucrose (disaccharide derived from glucose and fructose) 
should be avoided in feline patients since cats have low intestinal sucrase activity 
(Kienzle, 1993) and possibly lack fructokinase activity (Kienzle, 1994). Formulas 
that contain lactose (milk sugar; disaccharide derived from glucose and galactose), 
such as milk replacers, should be avoided in adult dogs and cats due to the lack of 
intestinal lactase activity in adulthood (Hore and Messer, 1968). Formulas high in 
digestible carbohydrates or with smaller carbohydrate molecules tend to have higher 
osmolality when compared to formulas with high‐fat and high‐protein content.
Digestible carbohydrate sources in ‘recovery diets’ are present in low amount 
(1.8–12% ME), and come from cereal grains, such as cornflour or rice.
Prebiotic fibers and probiotics
Interest is increasing in inclusion of prebiotic fibers and probiotic bacteria in 
enteral diets for veterinary patients. Probiotics are products with a single strain 
or a combination of multiple strains of bioactive lactic acid bacteria. Prebiotic 
fibers (e.g., fructooligosaccharides, mannanoligosaccharides, inulin, vegetable 
gums) resist hydrolysis in the small intestine, promote intestinal fermentation, 
support healthy colonic microflora, increase short‐chain fatty acid synthesis, 
 foster absorption of water and sodium in the large bowel and improve the 
 immunological status of intestinal mucosa and gut barrier function (Manzanares 
and Hardy, 2008). Probiotics work synergistically with prebiotics by breaking 
them down by the action of bacterial enzymes. Some human studies show that 
addition of guar gum decreases the duration and severity of diarrhea (Rushdi, 
Pichard and Khater, 2004; Spapen et al., 2001), while other studies report that 
the use of fibers in enteral formulas (i.e., fructooligosaccharides, inulin) to treat 
GI symptoms in acutely ill patients is controversial (Bosscher, Van Loo and 
Franck, 2006; Whelan, 2007). In general, canine and feline liquid and ‘recovery 
diets’ have very low total dietary fiber (TDF) content. The crude fiber concentra-
tion on the diet label represents the insoluble fraction of the TDF and is generally 

===== PDF PAGE 103 =====
Tube feeding in small animals: diet selection and preparation   89
very low at 3–6.9 g/1000 kcal and 1.2 g/1000 kcal in ‘recovery diets’ and liquid 
diets, respectively. Whenever desirable, non‐thickening soluble fibers (i.e., 
wheat  dextrin) can be gradually added into liquid diets or ‘recovery diets’ in an 
attempt to manage diarrhea. The optimal doses of probiotics for dogs and cats are 
uncertain but it is safe to follow product dosing recommendations. Canine and 
feline probiotic supplements can be blenderized with the canned food for the 
tube feeding but these products do not readily dissolve in liquid diets.
Minerals and vitamins
Canine and feline enteral diets are designed to meet or exceed vitamin and min-
eral requirements of adult or growing patients, assuming that sufficient amount 
of the diet is consumed. Special consideration for diet of choice is needed in 
patients with renal failure that require diets with low phosphorus, restricted 
sodium and chloride, and high B‐complex vitamin concentration, or in patients 
with cardiac disease, systemic or portal hypertension that require restricted 
intake of sodium and chloride (Table 9.2). Conversely, patients with a history of 
anorexia, exudation/transudation, high rates of intravenous fluid administra-
tion, vomiting and diarrhea can be depleted of minerals and vitamins and require 
a diet fortified with electrolytes and water‐soluble vitamins. Evidence is increas-
ing for inclusion of antioxidant supplements in diets for hospitalized patients 
because critical illness is associated with deficits in circulating antioxidants in 
people (Berger and Chiolero, 2007). The antioxidant defence system includes 
enzymes (i.e., superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase), trace elements 
(e.g., selenium, zinc), vitamins (i.e., vitamin C, E, beta‐carotene), sulfhydryl 
group donors (i.e., glutathione), and glutamine. ‘Recovery diets’ and liquid 
diets are fortified with variable concentrations of antioxidant nutrients, such as 
vitamin E, vitamin A, vitamin C, taurine, zinc, selenium and folic acid. The clini-
cal utility of including antioxidants in diets designed for dogs and cats is cur -
rently unknown.
Specialized diets for tube feeding
Patients with renal failure, liver disease with hepatic encephalopathy, cardiopul-
monary disease or fat intolerance require special consideration. While there is a 
commercially available liquid diet for cats with renal failure available,
6 there are 
no other specialized formulas for tube feeding on the market. These patients will 
require enteral diets that are prepared by blenderizing special canned foods in a 
kitchen blender (See Figure 9.1).
Key poInts
•	 Choosing a diet for tube feeding is performed after careful consideration of the 
nutritional assessment of the patient.
•	 The suitability of a diet for tube feeding in a dog or cat is determined based on:
 ◦ the functional status of the patient’s gastrointestinal tract.
 ◦ the size and location of the feeding tube.

===== PDF PAGE 104 =====
90   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
notes
1 Royal Canin Veterinary Diet® Recovery RS™, Royal Canin USA, Inc., St. Charles, MO.
2 Hill’s a/d Prescription Diet, Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc., Topeka, KS.
3 IAMS™ Veterinary Formulas, Maximum‐Calorie™, P&G Pet Care, Dayton, OH.
4 BD Enteral syringe, UniVia. BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ.
5 CliniCare® Canine/Feline Liquid Diet, Abbott Animal Health, Abbott Park, IL.
6 CliniCare® RF Feline Liquid Diet, Abbott Animal Health, Abbott Park, IL.
7 Vivonex® TEN, Nestlé Nutrition, Highland Park, MI.
8 Vivonex® Plus, Nestlé Nutrition, Highland Park, MI.
9 Portagen® Powder, Mead Johnson Pediatric Nutrition, Evansville, IN.
10 http://nutritiondata.self.com (accessed December, 2012).
11 Royal Canin Veterinary Diet® Renal LP® Modified Canine, Royal Canin USA, Inc., St. Charles, 
MO.
12 Royal Canin Veterinary Diet ® Renal LP ® Modified Morsels in Gravy Feline, Royal Canin 
USA, Inc., St. Charles, MO.
13 Hill’s Prescription Diet® l/d® Canine, Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc., Topeka, KS.
14 Hill’s Prescription Diet® l/d® Feline, Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc., Topeka, KS.
15 Royal Canin Veterinary Diet® Gastrointestinal™ Low Fat LF™.
16 IAMS™ Veterinary Formulas, Intestinal Low‐Residue™/Feline, P&G Pet Care, Dayton, OH.
references
Bauer, J. E., Dunbar, B. L. and Bigley, K. E. (1998) Dietary flaxseed in dogs results in differential 
transport and metabolism of (n‐3) polyunsaturated fatty acids. Journal of Nutrition, 128, 
2641S–2644S.
Berger, M. M. and Chiolero, R. L. (2007) Antioxidant supplementation in sepsis and systemic 
inflammatory response syndrome. Critical Care Medicine, 35 (suppl), S584–590.
Bosscher, D., Van Loo, J. and Franck, A. (2006) Inulin and oligofructose as prebiotics in the 
prevention of intestinal infections and diseases. Nutrition Research Review, 19, 216–226.
Charlton, M. (2006) Branched‐chain amino acid enriched supplements as therapy for liver 
disease. Journal of Nutrition, 136, 295S–298S.
Freeman, L., Becvarova, I., Cave, N. et al. (2011) WSAVA Nutritional Assessment Guidelines. 
Journal of Small Animal Practice, 52, 385–396.
Gough, M. S., Morgan, M. A., Mack, C. M. et al. (2011) The ratio of arginine to dimethylarginines 
is reduced and predicts outcomes in patients with severe sepsis. Critical Care Medicine, 39(6), 
1351–1358.
 ◦ the physical characteristics of the diet, such as osmolality and viscosity.
 ◦ the energy and nutrient composition of the diet
 ◦ the digestive and absorptive capability of the patient
 ◦ other patient parameters such as hydration status, electrolyte and acid base 
abnormalities, and organ function
•	 Diets for tube feeding of hospitalized veterinary patients should be energy and nutrient 
dense and highly digestible.
•	 Diets for tube feeding should be easy to administer with a syringe or enteral infusion 
pumps and should be specifically formulated for dogs and cats.
•	 While there is a commercially available liquid diet for cats with renal failure available, 
there are no other specialized formulas for tube feeding on the market.

===== PDF PAGE 105 =====
Tube feeding in small animals: diet selection and preparation   91
Hore, P. and Messer, M. (1968) Studies on disaccharidase activities of the small intestine of the 
domestic cat and other carnivorous mammals. Comparative Biochemical Physiology 24, 
717–725.
Kadowaki, M. and Kanazawa, T. (2003) Amino acids as regulators of proteolysis. Journal of 
Nutrition 133, 2052S–2056S.
Keohane, P. P., Attrill, H., Love, M. et al. (1984) Relation between osmolality of diet and gastro-
intestinal side effects in enteral nutrition. British Medical Journal (Clinical Research Education) 
288, 678–680.
Kienzle, E. (1993) Carbohydrate‐Metabolism of the Cat .4. Activity of Maltase, Isomaltase, 
Sucrase and Lactase in the Gastrointestinal‐Tract in Relation to Age and Diet. Journal of 
Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition‐Zeitschrift Fur Tierphysiologie Tierernahrung Und 
Futtermittelkunde 70, 89–96.
Kienzle, E. (1994) Blood sugar levels and renal sugar excretion after the intake of high carbo-
hydrate diets in cats. Journal Nutrition 124, 2563S–2567S.
Kovalkovicova, N., Sutiakova, I., Pistl, J. et al. (2009) Some food toxic for pets. Interdisciplinary 
Toxicology 2, 169–176.
Manzanares, W. and Hardy, G. (2008) The role of prebiotics and synbiotics in critically ill 
patients. Current Opinion Clinical Nutrition Metabolic Care 11, 782–789.
Martin, J. M. and Stapleton, R. D. (2010) Omega‐3 fatty acids in critical illness. Nutritional 
Reviews 68, 531–541.
Meyer, H. P., Chamuleau, R. A., Legemate, D. A. et al. (1999) Effects of a branched‐chain amino 
acid‐enriched diet on chronic hepatic encephalopathy in dogs. Metabolic Brain Diseases 14, 
103–115.
Pawlosky, R., Barnes, A. and Salem, N., Jr. (1994) Essential fatty acid metabolism in the feline: 
relationship between liver and brain production of long‐chain polyunsaturated fatty acids. 
Journal Lipid Research 35, 2032–2040.
Ramirez, M., Amate, L. and Gil, A. (2001) Absorption and distribution of dietary fatty acids 
from different sources. Early Human Development 65 Suppl, S95–S101.
Ricciotti, E. and Fitzgerald, G. A. (2011) Prostaglandins and inflammation. Arteriosclerosis 
Thrombosis Vascular Biology 31, 986–1000.
Rivers, J. P., Sinclair, A. J. and Craqford, M. A. (1975) Inability of the cat to desaturate essential 
fatty acids. Nature 258, 171–173.
Rushdi, T. A., Pichard, C. and Khater, Y. H. (2004) Control of diarrhea by fiber‐enriched diet in 
ICU patients on enteral nutrition: a prospective randomized controlled trial. Clinical Nutrition 
23, 1344–1352.
Sardesai, V. M. (1992) The essential fatty acids. Nutrition Clinical Practice 7, 179–186.
Spapen, H., Diltoer, M., Van Malderen, C. et al. (2001) Soluble fiber reduces the incidence of 
diarrhea in septic patients receiving total enteral nutrition: a prospective, double‐blind, ran-
domized, and controlled trial. Clinical Nutrition 20, 301–305.
Weitzel, L. R. and Wischmeyer, P. E. (2010) Glutamine in critical illness: the time has come, the 
time is now. Critical Care Clinics 26, 515‐525, ix–x.
Whelan, K. (2007) Enteral‐tube‐feeding diarrhoea: manipulating the colonic microbiota with 
probiotics and prebiotics. Proceedings Nutrition Society 66, 299–306.
Zarling, E. J., Parmar, J. R., Mobarhan, S. et al. (1986) Effect of enteral formula infusion rate, 
osmolality, and chemical composition upon clinical tolerance and carbohydrate absorption in 
normal subjects. Journal Parenteral Enteral Nutrition 10, 588–590.

===== PDF PAGE 106 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
92
Introduction
Obtaining appropriate intravenous access is vital for the successful implementation 
of parenteral nutrition (PN). Parenteral nutrition in both animals and people is 
associated with increased catheter complication rates, including thrombotic 
events, catheter‐related infections and sepsis (Chan et al., 2002; Lippert, Fulton 
and Parr, 1993; Ryan et al., 1974). Although septic and infectious complications 
are most concerning, mechanical complications are more common than infection 
in animals receiving PN (Reuter et al., 1998) and these can be frustrating as these 
complications will frequently result in the loss of the catheter.
Parenteral nutrition can be administered via a number of routes in dogs and 
cats including central venous catheters (most commonly placed in the jugular 
vein), peripheral venous catheters (e.g., cephalic, saphenous vein) and also 
peripherally inserted central catheters accessing for example the caudal vena 
cava via the femoral vein. Generally speaking central venous access is used more 
commonly in dogs and cats for the administration of PN. The insertion and use of 
central venous catheters is associated with complications, even when not being 
used for PN (Adamantos, Brodbelt and Moores, 2010). As such, it is important 
that catheters are placed aseptically and monitored for complications carefully 
during their use. Furthermore, it is recommended that catheters placed for this 
purpose are retained for the sole use of the administration of the PN solution and 
that disconnection is avoided to reduce the risk of introducing infection.
Guidelines for PN in people recommend that high osmolarity solutions 
(i.e., >  1200 mOsm/L) should be administered through central venous catheters 
as these solutions are irritating to the endothelium and believed to increase the 
risk of thrombophlebitis. This is somewhat controversial as a number of studies 
demonstrate conflicting results. A study in people administered PN centrally 
found no increased risk of thrombophlebitis when PN solutions with an osmo-
larity of 1700 mOsm/L were compared with solutions with 1200 mOsm/L (Kane 
et al., 1996). In dogs, the use of a PN solution administered peripherally with an 
osmolarity of 840 mOsm/L reported similar rates of thrombophlebitis as those 
seen in people, possibly suggesting that osmolarity alone may not be the only 
Intravenous access for parenteral 
nutrition in small animals
Sophie Adamantos
Langford Veterinary Services, University of Bristol, UK
Chapter 10

===== PDF PAGE 107 =====
Intravenous access for parenteral nutrition in small animals   93
factor influencing thrombophlebitis (Chandler and Payne‐James, 2006). A more 
recent study evaluating the use of a high osmolarity solution (1350 mOsm/L) in 
dogs administered peripherally reported a high rate of mechanical complications, 
which included thrombophlebitis (Gajanayake and Chan, 2013). The adminis-
tration of high osmolarity PN solutions peripherally has also been associated 
with an increased rate of thrombosis in people (Turcotte, Dubé and Beauchamp, 
2006). Given these results, it would be prudent to recommend that PN solu-
tions should have osmolarities < 850 mOsm/L when administered peripherally. 
(Singer et al., 2009).
Indications for catheter placement
All patients requiring PN administration should have a dedicated catheter placed 
for this sole purpose. As previously mentioned, patients that require high osmolar-
ity PN solutions should have a central venous catheter placed. Patients receiving 
lower osmolarity solutions can receive the solution through a peripheral catheter 
(Singer et al., 2009). In patients requiring high osmolarity solutions where central 
venous catheterization is contraindicated (e.g., due to coagulopathy), peripherally 
inserted central catheters may be considered although there is an increased risk of 
loss of the catheter due to mechanical complications (e.g., thrombosis). Where PN 
is likely to be used for > 7 days central venous access is recommended. Once the 
catheter is no longer required it should be removed as soon as possible.
General guidelines for placement of catheters 
for parenteral nutrition
As there is an increased risk of thrombosis and infection associated with the use 
of catheters for PN it is vitally important that catheters are placed aseptically. In 
people, ensuring appropriate placement technique is associated with a reduction 
in infection rates associated with central catheterization; this involves using a 
strict aseptic technique, empowering nurses to prevent violations in protocol and 
utilizing an evidence‐based approach for catheter placement (Berenholtz et al., 
2004). It is likely that using a similar approach to prevent breaches of asepsis in 
veterinary patients will be associated with a similar risk reduction in infection 
rate although this has not been evaluated. As patients receiving PN are typically 
critically ill and therefore are already at risk of other associated morbidities, 
including nosocomial infection, it is probably prudent to utilize a similar approach 
in veterinary patients and clinicians should take every precaution to prevent 
introduction of infection at the time of catheter placement.
When placing catheters the patient should be adequately restrained to pre-
vent movement that may lead to irritation of the vessel at the time of placement 
or increase the risk of introducing infection. If the patient is unlikely to allow 
placement with gentle restraint the use of sedation or anesthesia should be con-
sidered if the patient’s cardiovascular status allows. The site of catheter place-
ment should be prepared surgically using a chlorhexidine solution.

===== PDF PAGE 108 =====
94   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Catheter material choice is also important. Polyurethane and silicone 
 catheters are less thrombogenic than other materials and are recommended. 
Many central catheters are made from these materials; however, over the needle 
catheters typically used for peripheral access are frequently made from other 
materials and so should be checked prior to use.
There is limited evidence in veterinary patients that the use of antimicrobial 
or silver impregnated catheters is associated with a reduced risk of infection 
although this has been shown in people. Risk benefit and cost considerations 
should be considered when choosing whether to use antimicrobial or silver 
impregnated catheters. Recommendations in people include that antimicrobial 
or silver impregnated catheters are used only in high‐risk patients (O’Grady 
et al., 2002). Similarly there is limited evidence to recommend the use of anti -
septic ointment as a means to prevent catheter‐related infections, and the use of 
this has been associated with fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(O’Grady et al., 2002).
placement of catheters for parenteral nutrition
Placement of peripheral catheters is well described elsewhere and will not be 
further discussed here. Central venous access is recommended for high osmolality 
solutions and the modified Seldinger technique is recommended for placement in 
people as it is associated with a lower complication rate compared with other 
techniques for central venous access (Jauch et al., 2009). This evidence is lacking 
in veterinary patients, however, it is recommended that the tip of the catheter lie 
in the vena cava and therefore a long catheter is required. The modified‐Seldinger 
technique allows any length catheter to be placed over a wire and therefore is 
a useful technique for catheter placement for PN use. Multiple lumen central 
catheters that can be used for PN administration are commercially available as kits 
and greatly facilitate the procedure (Figure 10.1)
Placement of central catheters by any method is not recommended in animals 
with coagulopathies. Furthermore, placement of central venous catheters for 
administration of PN is not recommended in bacteremic patients or those that are 
clinically hypercoagulable due to the higher risk of thrombosis and infection in 
animals receiving PN.
Figure 10.1 Multi‐lumen catheter kits 
greatly facilitate placement. These 
catheters are placed using a modified‐
Seldinger technique.

===== PDF PAGE 109 =====
Intravenous access for parenteral nutrition in small animals   95
Placement of a central catheter by the modified‐ Seldinger technique:
1 The patient should be restrained and placed in lateral recumbency by one or 
two assistants. This can be facilitated by using light sedation.
2 A large area over the jugular vein should be clipped and prepared with an 
antimicrobial scrub and surgical alcohol (Figure 10.2).
3 Sterile gloves should be worn.
4 A sterile drape should be placed over the site.
5 A small skin incision should be made using a no. 11 blade to facilitate 
venopuncture.
6 The vein is occluded under the drape by an assistant to facilitate visualization.
7 A large through‐the‐needle catheter is inserted into the vein (Figure 10.3).
8 The stylet is removed and a long wire is inserted through the catheter into 
the vein (Figure 10.4). The wire should be fed far enough to ensure that 
accidental displacement does not occur during the subsequent steps. Enough 
wire should remain outside the animal to allow a catheter to be placed over 
it and the wire grasped out of one of the catheter ports before the catheter 
passes through the skin (approximately 20–30 cm, depending on the length 
of the catheter).
9 The catheter is removed leaving the wire in place (Figure 10.5).
10 A dilator is passed over the wire into the vein (Figure 10.6). The wire should 
be held still and the dilator advanced over it. A twisting motion assists  passage 
through the skin into the vein
11 The dilator is removed, leaving the wire in place
12 The catheter is passed over the wire into the vein; again, a twisting motion 
can facilitate catheter passage (Figure 10.7).
Figure 10.2 To ensure aseptic technique 
for catheter placement, a large area over 
the jugular vein should be clipped and 
prepared with an antimicrobial scrub and 
surgical alcohol.
Figure 10.3 A large through‐the needle 
catheter is inserted into a distended vein. 
Making a small skin incision with a no. 
11 blade facilitates this step.

===== PDF PAGE 110 =====
96   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Figure 10.4 The stylet is removed and a 
long wire is inserted through the catheter.
Figure 10.5 The catheter is removed 
leaving the wire in place.
Figure 10.6 A dilator is passed over the 
wire into the vein. The wire should be 
held still and the dilator advanced over it. 
A twisting motion assists passage through 
the skin into the vein.
Figure 10.7 The catheter is passed over 
the wire into the vein; again, a twisting 
motion can facilitate catheter passage.

===== PDF PAGE 111 =====
Intravenous access for parenteral nutrition in small animals   97
13 The wire is removed leaving the catheter in place (Figure 10.8).
14 The catheter ports are capped promptly to prevent air embolization.
15 The ports should be aspirated to obtain blood and any air from the catheter 
before flushing with heparin saline.
16 The catheter is secured in place with 3‐0 metric suture material.
17 A light bandage wrap is applied to prevent contamination of the area and 
prevent accidental dislodgement.
Complications and monitoring of catheters  
used for pN
The two main complications identified in patients receiving PN are thrombosis 
and phlebitis. This risk is higher in patients receiving PN compared with those 
receiving other solutions and therefore catheters should be monitored very 
closely and if there is any concern with the catheter it should be removed. There 
is no limit as to the duration of time a catheter can be used for PN as long as no 
complications are observed.
Catheters should be maintained and monitored as is done for any catheter. 
They should be covered with a sterile permeable dressing, such as gauze, and 
bandaged in place securely to prevent patient interference and contamination. 
The catheter should be examined at least once daily for signs of redness, tender-
ness, swelling or discharge (Figure 10.9). It is recommended that lines for admin-
istration of PN solutions are changed every 48 hours. Systemic signs that may be 
attributable to catheter‐related sepsis (e.g., pyrexia and left‐shifted neutrophilia) 
with no other explanation should prompt evaluation including bacterial blood 
culture and removal and culture of the catheter tip. Systemic intravenous broad‐
spectrum antimicrobials should be initiated once samples have been collected.
Catheters should be maintained for exclusive use of PN and disconnection 
should be avoided, hence flushing of the catheter is not required. Catheters 
should also not be used for blood sampling. As many of these patients are criti -
cally ill use of multi‐lumen catheters is useful although there is a higher risk of 
infection with multi‐lumen versus single lumen catheters in people (McCarthy 
et al., 1987). If these are used for administration of PN the other lumen may be 
used for administration of other solutions, however, strict asepsis should be used 
when handling the catheter to prevent contamination and infection and one 
Figure 10.8 The wire is removed leaving 
the catheter in place.

===== PDF PAGE 112 =====
98   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
port should be dedicated for administration of PN. In order to minimize the risks 
of using multi‐lumen catheters use of the other port for blood sampling, admin-
istration of blood products or central venous blood pressure monitoring is not 
recommended as there may be an increased risk of bacterial contamination 
(Johnson and Rypins, 1990).
Thrombosis will result in the loss of use of the catheter and will require removal 
of the catheter. This should be done at the earliest opportunity. Some authors 
have recommended the use of heparin in the PN solutions or by administering it 
as a continuous rate infusion (Dollery et al., 1994); however, there is limited evi-
dence that this reduces the risk of thrombosis (Shah and Shah, 2001).
Summary
Intravenous catheterization is essential for administration of PN. Catheters 
should be placed and monitored extremely carefully to minimize the risks of 
infection and thrombosis. Catheters should be maintained for exclusive use of 
PN and disconnections prevented to reduce the risk of contamination and poten-
tial infection. Central catheterization using catheters of low thrombogenicity is 
extremely useful in these patients and clinicians should consider placement 
using the modified‐Seldinger technique to ensure accurate placement within the 
vena cava.
Figure 10.9 Catheters used for parenteral 
nutrition administration should be 
examined at least once daily for signs of 
redness, tenderness, swelling or 
discharge. The amount of discharge 
shown in this picture should prompt 
catheter removal.
Key po IN t S
•	 Animals	receiving	PN	have	a	risk	of	thrombosis	and	catheter‐related	infections.
•	 Catheters	should	be	minimally	thrombogenic	(e.g.,	silicone	or	polyurethane).
•	 Central	venous	catheterization	should	be	utilized	for	administration	of	high	osmolarity	
PN	solutions	(>	850	mOsm/L)	and	only	lower	osmolarity	solutions	should	be	administered	
peripherally.
•	 Catheters	should	be	maintained	for	sole	use	of	PN	and	disconnections	should	be	
avoided.
•	 Catheters	should	be	monitored	carefully	for	complications	of	thrombosis	and	infection	
and	they	should	be	immediately	removed	if	there	is	any	concern	of	these	complications.

===== PDF PAGE 113 =====
Intravenous access for parenteral nutrition in small animals   99
references
Adamantos, S., Brodbelt, D. and Moores, A.L. (2010) Prospective evaluation of complications 
associated with jugular venous catheter use in a veterinary hospital. Journal of Small Animal 
Practice, 51, 254–257.
Berenholtz, S.M., Pronovost, P.J., Lipsett, P.A. et al. (2004) Eliminating catheter‐related blood-
stream infections in the intensive care unit. Critical Care Medicine, 32, 2014–2020.
Chan, D.L., Freeman, L.M., Labato, M.A. et al. (2002) Retrospective Evaluation of Partial 
Parenteral Nutrition in Dogs and Cats Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 16, 440–445.
Chandler, M.L. and Payne‐James, J.J. (2006) Prospective evaluation of a peripherally adminis-
tered three‐in‐one parenteral nutrition product in dogs. Journal of Small Animal Practice, 47, 
518–523.
Dollery, C.M., Sullivan, I.D., Bauraind, O. et al. (1994) Thrombosis and embolism in long‐term 
central venous access for parenteral nutrition. Lancet, 344, 1043–1045.
Gajanayake, I. and Chan, D.L. (2013) Clinical experience using a lipid‐free, ready‐made paren-
teral nutrition solution in 70 dogs. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 23(3), 
305–313.
Jauch, K.W., Schregl, W., Stanga, Z. et al. (2009) Working group for developing the guidelines 
for parenteral nutrition of The German Association for Nutritional Medicine. Access tech-
nique and its problems in parenteral nutrition‐ Guidelines on Parenteral Nutrition. German 
Medical Science, 7, Doc 19.
Johnson, B.H. and Rypins, E.B. (1990) Single lumen vs double lumen catheters for total paren-
teral nutrition. A randomized, prospective trial. Archives of Surgery, 125, 990–992.
Kane, K.F., Cologiovanni, L., McKiernan, J. et al. (1996) High osmolality feedings do not 
increase the incidence of thrombophlebitis during peripherally i.v. nutrition. Journal Parenteral 
and Enteral Nutrition, 20, 194–197.
Lippert A.C., Fulton R.B. Jr. and Parr A.M. (1993) A Retrospective Study of the Use of Total 
Parenteral Nutrition in Dogs and Cats, Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7, 52–64.
McCarthy, M.C., Shives, J.K., Robison, R.J. et al. (1987) Prospective evaluation of single and 
triple lumen catheters in total parenteral nutrition. Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition, 
11, 259–262.
O’Grady, N.P., Alexander, M., Dellinger, E.P. et al. (2002) Control and Prevention Guidelines for 
the prevention of intravascular catheter‐related infections. Pediatrics, 110, e51.
Reuter, J.D., Marks, S.L., Rogers, Q.R. et al. (1998) Use of Parenteral Nutrition in Dogs: 209 
Cases (1988–1995). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 8, 201–213.
Ryan, J.A., Jr, Abel, R.M., Abbott, W.M. et al. (1974) Catheter Complications in Total Parenteral 
Nutrition – A Prospective Study of 200 Consecutive Patients. New England Journal of Medicine, 
290, 757–761.
Shah, P. and Shah, V. (2010) Continuous heparin infusion to prevent thrombosis and catheter 
occlusion in neonates with peripherally placed percutaneous central venous catheters in 
neonates. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews: CD002772.
Singer, P., Berger, M.M., Van de Berge, G. et al. (2009) ESPEN Guidelines on Parenteral 
Nutrition: Intensive Care. Clinical Nutrition, 28, 387–400.
Turcotte, S., Dubé, S. and Beauchamp, G. (2006) Peripherally inserted central venous catheters 
are not superior to central venous catheters in the acute care of surgical patients on the ward. 
World Journal of Surgery, 30, 1605–1619.

===== PDF PAGE 114 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
100
Introduction
The provision of nutrition to animals via the parenteral route is an important 
therapeutic modality for hospitalized animals that cannot tolerate enteral nutri-
tion (EN). Although parenteral nutrition (PN) can be an effective means of pro-
viding animals with calories, protein and other nutrients, there are a number of 
possible complications associated with its use that requires careful patient selec-
tion, appropriate formulation, safe and effective administration practices, and 
close patient monitoring. In most cases hospitalized patients that do not con-
sume adequate quantities of food voluntarily should be supported with EN as it 
is the safest, most convenient, most physiologically sound and least expensive 
method of nutritional support (see Chapter 3). While EN support is the preferred 
method of  nutritional support in hospitalized patients, PN is the established 
method of providing nutritional support to patients whose gastrointestinal tracts 
cannot tolerate enteral feedings (Barton, 1994; Braunschweig et al., 2001; Biffl 
et al., 2002).
While the use of PN support has certainly increased in recent years, there is a 
perception that this technique is technically difficult, associated with many compli-
cations and limited to university hospitals and major referral centers. In reality, PN 
support can be adopted in many practices and complications can be significantly 
reduced with proper and meticulous care. The goals of this chapter are to outline 
the proper identification of patients most likely to benefit from PN, to review the 
process of formulating, implementing, and monitoring parenteral nutritional 
 support, and discuss how PN can be incorporated into many practices.
Indications for PN support
Studies in people have shown that the use of PN in some patient populations 
actually increases the risk of complications and worsens outcome (Braunschweig 
et al., 2001; Gramlich et al., 2004; Simpson and Doig, 2005). Moreover, some 
Parenteral nutrition in 
small animals
Daniel L. Chan1 and Lisa M. Freeman2
1 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
2 Department of Clinical Sciences, Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, MA, USA
ChaPter 11

===== PDF PAGE 115 =====
Parenteral nutrition in small animals   101
studies have demonstrated worse morbidity (e.g., increased risk of infectious 
complications, greater dependence on mechanical ventilation) in intensive care 
unit (ICU) patients when PN was initiated within the first 48 hours of ICU admis-
sion compared with delayed initiation of PN until day 8 of ICU admission. 
(Casaer and et al., 2011). The increase in complications may be related to early 
initiation of PN in well‐nourished ICU patients and, therefore, careful patient 
selection may be particularly important when considering implementing PN 
(Lee et al., 2014). However, there are conflicting reports on the subject regarding 
the impact of PN on ICU outcome. A recent large prospective controlled study 
found that early PN in critically ill patients with relative contraindications to 
early EN was not associated with any negative impact on survival and in fact 
identified decreased dependence on mechanical ventilation and better preserva-
tion of lean muscle mass (Doig et al., 2013). Furthermore, a new study com-
pared initiation of EN or PN within 36 hours of ICU admission and found 
significant reductions in rates of hypoglycemia and vomiting in the PN group 
and no differences in the rates of infectious complications, 30‐ or 90‐day mortal-
ity or rates of 14 other secondary endpoints (Harvey et al., 2014). In light of 
these conflicting findings, perhaps the sensible first step in considering patients 
for nutritional support is to perform a nutritional assessment (see Chapter 1). 
Following the nutritional assessment of the patient, the most appropriate route 
of nutritional support should be selected. The indications for PN support 
include situations in which malnourished animals cannot voluntarily or safely 
consume food (i.e., animals unable to protect their airways) or those that cannot 
tolerate EN despite attempts to improve tolerance to EN. Persistent hyporexia or 
anorexia is not sufficient justification for PN and should be considered an 
 inappropriate use of PN. In patients that require nutritional support but have 
contraindications for placement of feeding tubes (e.g., coagulopathic, presence 
of cardiovascular or cardiopulmonary instability), short term (e.g., < 3 days) 
administration of PN may be considered.
Parenteral nutrition
The terminology used to describe the use of PN in veterinary patients has evolved 
and so it is worth reviewing the current terminology. Total parenteral nutrition 
(TPN) was previously defined as the provision of all of the patient’s protein, calo-
rie and micronutrient requirements intravenously, whereas partial parenteral 
nutrition (PPN) was defined as the provision of only a part of this requirement 
(typically 40–70% of the energy requirement) (Chan and Freeman, 2012). More 
recently, there has been a shift away from describing PN in terms of ‘meeting 
energy and nutrient requirements’ as they remain largely unknown in animals 
and so recent recommendations emphasize categorizing PN by the mode of deliv-
ery such that PN delivered into a central vein is described as ‘central PN’ and PN 
delivered into a peripheral vein is described as ‘peripheral PN. (Queau et al., 2011; 
Perea, 2012). For the purposes of this chapter, ‘PPN’ will refer to peripheral PN.
To enable safe administration of PN solutions using peripheral veins the 
osmolarity of the solutions is decreased because osmolarity is believed to be one 

===== PDF PAGE 116 =====
102   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
of the main contributing factors for the development of thrombophlebitis.  
A recent study in paediatric human patients found that PN solutions with osmo-
larity > 1000 mOsm/L was associated with greater risk of phlebitis and infiltra-
tion of PN as compared with solutions < 1000 mOsm/L when administered via a 
peripheral vein (Dugan, Le and Jew, 2014). Although similar studies in animals 
have not been reported, a recent veterinary study evaluated the administration 
of a PN product with an osmolarity of 1350 mOsm/L to dogs and the authors did 
not report high rates of phlebitis or infiltration of PN (Gajanayake, Wylie and 
Chan, 2013). Interestingly, the majority of dogs (66% of 70 dogs) received this 
high‐osmolarity solution peripherally, with a single occurrence of thrombophle-
bitis and only two incidents of infiltration noted in this study. Nevertheless, 
some authors recommend that PN solutions administered peripherally should 
have osmolarities < 950 mOsm/L. In order to achieve these lower osmolarities 
(e.g., < 1000 mOsm/L), the concentrations of amino acids and dextrose are 
reduced and this also decreases the caloric density of these solutions. As such, 
because PPN only provides a portion of the patient’s RER, it should be used for 
short‐term nutritional support in non‐debilitated patients with average nutri-
tional requirements.
The administration of PN always requires a dedicated catheter that is newly 
placed using an aseptic technique (see Chapter 10). Once placed, this catheter 
should not be used for anything other than PN administration. The use of long 
catheters composed of silicone or polyurethane is recommended for use with PN 
to reduce the risk of thrombophlebitis. Multi‐lumen catheters are often recom-
mended for PN because they can remain in place for longer periods of time (as 
compared with normal jugular catheters) and provide other ports for blood sam-
pling and administration of additional fluids and IV medications.
Components of parenteral nutrition
Amino acids
Most PN solutions are composed of amino acids, a carbohydrate source (dextrose 
or glycerol) and lipids. Amino acid solutions vary from 3–10% concentrations. 
The most commonly cited concentration of amino acids used in veterinary 
patients is 8.5%, with an energy density of 0.34 kcal/ml and osmolarity of 
approximately 880 mOsm/L. Amino acid solutions are typically available with 
and without added electrolytes. The amino acid profile of these solutions is 
intended to meet the essential amino acid requirements in people. Currently, 
there are no amino acid solutions made specifically for dogs or cats and, there-
fore, these solutions do not meet all amino acid requirements in these species. 
However, when used for short‐term nutritional support, their use is unlikely to 
result in clinically relevant deficiencies. The minimal protein requirement of 
healthy dogs supported via parenteral nutrition has been estimated to be 
3 g/100 kcal (Mauldin et al., 2001). While the protein requirement of ill  veterinary 
patients has not been extensively investigated, in order to support hospitalized 
animals with PN the standard recommendations for protein provision are 4–6 
g/100 kcal (15–25% of total energy requirements) for dogs and 6–8 g/100 kcal 

===== PDF PAGE 117 =====
Parenteral nutrition in small animals   103
(25–35%) for cats (Michel and Eirmann, 2014; Chan and Freeman, 2012; Chan, 
2012). The presumed increase in protein requirements in ill animals relates to 
inadequate food intake that accompanies many diseases, increased protein losses 
and altered metabolic and inflammatory pathways (Michel, King and Ostro, 
1997; Chan, 2004).
Given the risk of protein malnutrition in hospitalized animals, the goal of PN 
support should be to provide sufficient amino acids to minimize muscle protein 
breakdown and maintain lean body mass. Whereas healthy animals that are 
deprived of food can adapt to conserve muscle mass and use stored fat for energy 
(simple starvation), critically ill animals that are malnourished may have accel-
erated muscle catabolism (stressed starvation) for generation of amino acids 
used for gluconeogenesis and synthesis of acute phase proteins. (Biolo et  al., 
1997; Chan, 2004). However, not all animals require increased protein during 
nutritional support; animals with protein intolerance (e.g., patients with hepatic 
encephalopathy, severe kidney failure) should be supported with reduced levels 
of protein (e.g., 3 g protein/100 kcal)
Carbohydrates
For provision of carbohydrate calories, dextrose solutions ranging from 5 to 
50% are typically used for PN solutions. In CPN, 50% dextrose is the most com-
monly used concentration of dextrose, with an osmolarity of 2523 mOsm/L and 
providing 1.7 kcal/ml. For PPN the typical dextrose solution used is 5% dex-
trose, which corresponds to 0.17 kcal/ml and an osmolarity of 250 mOsm/L. The 
proportion of calories provided with carbohydrates depends on the patient’s 
individual circumstances (e.g., protein, carbohydrate, lipid intolerance) but is 
typically half of the non‐protein calories. The ratio of calories provided by car -
bohydrate and lipid can be adjusted as dictated by the patient’s needs. As dex-
trose infusion rates exceeding 4 mg/kg/min have been associated with the 
development of hyperglycemia in non‐diabetic human patients, the authors 
recommend limiting the amount of dextrose provided in PN to this amount 
(Rosmarin, Wardlaw and Mirtallo, 1996) When formulating PN for diabetic 
patients, a greater proportion of calories should be provided from amino acids 
and lipids. In some patients, insulin therapy may be necessary to control the 
degree of hyperglycemia.
Lipids
Lipid emulsions are used in PN to provide energy and essential fatty acids. 
The most commonly used lipid emulsion is a 20% solution, providing 2 kcal/
ml with an osmolarity of 260 mOsm/L. Commercial lipid emulsions in the 
United States are usually based on soybean or safflower oil. They also include 
egg yolk phospholipids, glycerin and water. As the principal type of lipid used 
for PN is composed primarily of n‐6 fatty acids, there are concerns on its 
affect on the inflammatory response. In vivo studies in people have shown an 
exaggerated inflammatory response to endotoxin following a long‐chain 
 triglyceride infusion (Krogh‐Madsen et  al., 2008). There have also been 
 concerns raised with regards to possible effects of n‐6 fatty acids on immune 
function, oxidative stress and negative hemodynamic effects, as well as an 

===== PDF PAGE 118 =====
104   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
increased risk for hyperlipidemia, lipid embolization and microbial contamination 
(Grimes and Abel, 1979; Wiernik, Jarstrand and Julander, 1983; Mirtallo 
et al., 2004; Kang and Yang, 2008; Calder et al., 2010; Kuwahara et al., 2010). 
In order to reduce these effects, different lipid emulsions containing n‐3 fatty 
acids, n‐9 fatty acids, medium‐chain triglycerides or structured lipids have 
been developed but are not currently available in the United States (Wanten 
and Calder, 2007; Sala‐Vila, Barbosa and Calder, 2007). Until these different 
types of lipids are evaluated in dogs and cats and demonstrated to have 
clinical benefits, the authors recommend limiting the typical n‐6‐based lipid 
emulsion dosage in dogs and cats to 2 g/kg/day (30–40% of total calories 
provided) to decrease the risk of lipemia and possible immunosuppression. 
Animals with pre‐existing lipemia may also require lower doses of lipid or PN 
formulations without lipids. A recent study evaluated the use of a lipid‐free 
PN formulation in dogs, and so this may be an option for some animals 
(Gajanayake and others 2013.
Electrolytes and trace minerals
Parenteral nutrition can be formulated with or without electrolytes depend-
ing on patient needs. The most commonly adjusted electrolyte in PN solution 
is potassium and most formulations contain 20 to 30 mmol/L (20 to 30 mEq/L) 
potassium. Potassium chloride and potassium phosphate can be used to 
adjust potassium content. In patients requiring additional phosphorus (e.g., 
patient with hypophosphatemia), the authors recommend supplementing 
phosphate as a separate infusion as requirements may change frequently 
and there may be an increased risk of mineral precipitation with addition  
of  minerals to PN solutions. Adjusting electrolytes separately allows greater 
flexibility.
Trace minerals are sometimes added to PN solutions but the majority of 
 veterinary patients receive PN without the addition of trace minerals. In patients 
that require prolonged PN support (e.g., > 10 days) or are severely malnour -
ished, the addition of zinc, copper, manganese and chromium may be consid-
ered. The authors have used a commercial trace element preparation
1 containing 
(per 5 mL) 4 mg zinc, 1 mg copper, 0.8 mg manganese and 10 µg chromium at a 
dosage of 0.2 to 0.3 ml/100 kcal of solution.
Vitamins
As many hospitalized animals requiring PN may already have a degree of mal-
nutrition, supplementation of PN with B vitamins may be of benefit. As some  
B vitamins are light sensitive (e.g., riboflavin) it may be best to add B vitamins 
immediately before administration and dose it so that the dose is administered 
within the first 6 hours of infusion. Commercial vitamin B formulations
2 con-
taining thiamine, niacin, pyridoxine, panthothenic acid, riboflavin and cyanoco-
balamin may be sufficient in most cases. The dosages that have been recommended 
for these B vitamins in PN formulation (per 1000 kcal of PN solution) include: 
0.29 mg thiamine, 0.63 mg riboflavin, 3.3 mg niacin, 2.9 mg pantothenic acid, 
0.29 mg pyridoxine and 6 µg cyanocobalamin (Perea, 2012).

===== PDF PAGE 119 =====
Parenteral nutrition in small animals   105
Formulation of parenteral nutrition solutions
Using parenteral nutrient admixtures that include amino acids, dextrose and 
lipids in a single bag is preferred over single nutrient solutions. The authors use 
the calculations in Box 11.1 to formulate PN. The first step is to determine the 
animal’s calorie requirements. As discussed in Chapter  2, a sensible starting 
point in estimating energy requirements of most hospitalized animals is to calcu-
late the resting energy requirement (RER). The authors do not apply illness 
energy factors in determining the target calories to be administered due to con-
cerns over overfeeding and its associated complications. It is worth noting that 
Box 11.1 Worksheet for calculating parenteral nutrition using commonly available components.
1 Resting energy requirement (RER)
70 × (current body weight in kg)0.75 = kcal/day or for animals 3–25 kg, can also use:
[30 × (current body weight in kg)] + 70 = kcal/day
RER = _____kcal/day. This caloric target can be adjusted down (e.g., 70% RER) if 
necessary.
2 Protein requirements
Canine (g/100 kcal) Feline (g/100 kcal)
Standard 4–5 6
Decreased requirements (hepatic/renal 
failure)
2–3 4–5
Increased requirements (protein‐losing 
conditions)
5–6 6–8
(RER ÷ 100) × _____g/100 kcal = _____g protein required/day (protein required)
3 Volumes of nutrient solutions required each day
a. 8.5% amino acid solution = 0.085 g protein/mL
_____g protein required/day ÷ 0.085 g/mL = _____mL of amino acids/day
b. Nonprotein calories:
The calories supplied by protein (4 kcal/g) are subtracted from the RER to get total 
nonprotein calories needed:
_____g protein required/day × 4 kcal/g = _____kcal provided by protein
RER − kcal provided by protein = _____nonprotein kcal needed/day
c. Nonprotein calories are usually provided as a 50:50 mixture of lipid and dextrose. 
However, if the patient has a preexisting condition (e.g., diabetes, hypertriglyceri-
demia), this ratio may need to be adjusted:
*20% lipid solution = 2 kcal/mL
To supply 50% of nonprotein kcal:
_____lipid kcal required ÷ 2 kcal/mL = _____mL of lipid
*50% dextrose solution = 1.7 kcal/mL
To supply 50% of nonprotein kcal:
_____dextrose kcal required ÷ 1.7 kcal/mL = _____mL dextrose
4 Total daily requirements
_____mL 8.5% amino acid solution
_____mL 20% lipid solution
_____mL 50% dextrose solution
_____mL total volume of PN solution

===== PDF PAGE 120 =====
106   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
the method of calculating the distribution of energy from carbohydrate, amino 
acids and lipids used in this chapter includes the contribution of energy provided 
by the amino acid solution. Some authors meet the target energy requirement 
with only the carbohydrate and lipid component, arguing that this results in a 
“protein sparring effect,” whereby the amino acids are solely used for protein 
synthesis when all the energy needs are met by the other components. However, 
this strategy risks overfeeding so the authors and the calculations used in the 
worksheet do account for the calories provided by the amino acids (i.e., protein 
calories). As a final check, the estimated osmolarity of the final solution can be 
determined by the following formula: final osmolarity = [(mL of amino acids  
osmolarity of solution) + (mL of dextrose  osmolarity of solution) + (mL of 
 dextrose x osmolarity of solution) + (mL of additional fluids  osmolarity of 
 solution)]/ total volume of parenteral admixture.
Compounding
To compound the PN admixtures aseptic conditions are required. Ideally, only 
individuals with the expertise and facilities who can ensure accurate and sterile 
preparation should compound PN solutions. This usually entails the use of auto-
mated compounders (Figure  11.1) within sterile environments (Figure  11.2). 
However, these compounders are not widely available, are expensive and  usually 
Figure 11.1 An automated parenteral 
nutrition compounder can facilitate 
accurate and safe compounding of 
admixtures.
Figure 11.2 In situations where manual 
parenteral nutrition compounding is 
required, sterile environments such as a 
positive air‐pressure hood is required.

===== PDF PAGE 121 =====
Parenteral nutrition in small animals   107
are not cost‐effective unless PN is used frequently. For this reason, it may be 
preferable for veterinary practices that infrequently use PN to obtain solutions 
from hospitals or home‐care companies that can compound PN to the required 
specifications for the patient. If this is not feasible, a less ideal option is to manu-
ally compound solutions using a “3‐in‐1” bag system. These bags have three 
attached leads that can be connected using an aseptic technique to bags of dex-
trose, amino acids and lipids, respectively. The components then are added to 
the recipient bag in a closed system by gravity. To make this system more accu-
rate, the recipient bag should be weighed to ensure that an accurate amount of 
each solution is added, especially in very small animals. Many hospitals that do 
not use PN frequently do not find this method to be time‐ or cost‐effective. The 
sequence for mixing the PN admixture should be to mix the amino acid solution 
with the dextrose solution, followed by any crystalloid fluid if required and 
finally, the lipid emulsion. If any other additive is required e.g., potassium, trace 
mineral, this is done last. The reason for this sequence is that lipids may destabi-
lize if mixed with the amino acid solution.
alternatives to compounding parenteral 
nutrition admixtures
In practices that do not have compounding capabilities or access to facilties that 
can provide PN, there are a number of combination products commercially 
available that could be used in practice. Some products have multi‐chambered 
sealed bags that keep the components (e.g., amino acids, dextrose, lipids) sepa-
rate until the seals are broken by squeezing the bag and mixing the contents. 
(Figure 11.3a–c). There are also products that have premixed amino acids and a 
carbohydrate source. The advantages of these commercial combination products 
are their availability and the fact that they require no special compounding. 
There are several different formulations of the dextrose/amino acid solutions. 
Box  11.2 provides calculations for the use of a commonly used product 
(ProcalAmine)
3 available in the United States. There are two retrospective stud-
ies reporting the use of these combination products and findings are not dissimi-
lar to studies reporting the use of partial PN (Gajanayake et al., 2013; Olan and 
Prittie, 2015). The major disadvantage of these products is that they do not allow 
the proportions of different components to be adjusted to suit the needs of the 
patient. The use of these ready‐made products is a compromise that enables 
some form of nutritional support for patients requiring PN in practices that can-
not provide individualized PN formulation.
administering parenteral nutrition
The procedure described for formulation of PN in this chapter yields an admix-
ture that is intended to last 24 hours when administered as a constant‐rate 
infusion. Current recommendations are that bags of PN admixtures should not 
be at room temperature for more than 24 hours. The bag should be  administered 

===== PDF PAGE 122 =====
108   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
 during the 24‐hour period via a fluid infusion pump (Figure 11.4). During this 
time, the lines should not be disconnected from the bag or the patient (i.e., it 
should remain a closed system). At the end of each 24‐hour period, the infu -
sion should be complete, and the empty bag, along with the lines, can be 
changed using an aseptic technique and a new bag and lines substituted 
(Figure 11.5). Some studies have reported the use of PN administered for only 
part of the day (i.e., 10–12 hour infusions), which is termed “cyclic PN” (Zentek 
et al., 2003; Chandler and Payne‐Jones, 2006). Although this may be appeal -
ing for practices without 24 hour care, this increases the risk of cathether con -
tamination and is not recommended by the authors. All PN should be 
administered through a 1.2‐µm in‐line filter. The filter can help to prevent lipid 
globules or precipitates (particularly calcium phosphate) from being intro -
duced to the patient.
Parenteral nutrition should be instituted gradually over 48 to 72 hours. Most 
animals tolerate receiving 50% of total requirements on the first day and 100% 
Figure 11.3 a) Commercially available 3‐in‐1 parenteral nutrition products are available 
which allow fixed‐formulation admixtures to be used in facilities unable to compound 
parenteral nutrition. Components (dextrose, amino acids, lipids) are held in separate 
compartments until solution is prepared for administration. b) For mixing the various 
components, the bag is rolled from the top and the pressure opens the internal seals, first 
between the dextrose and amino acids and then the lipid compartment. c) After all the 
internal seals are opened, the bag is gently inverted to ensure complete mixing. The bag is 
now ready for set up and administration.
(a)
 (b)
(c)

===== PDF PAGE 123 =====
Parenteral nutrition in small animals   109
on the second day. Animals that have been without food for long periods may 
require slower introduction (i.e., 33% on the first day, 66% on the second day, 
and 100% on the third day). It is important to adjust the animal’s other intrave-
nous fluids when initiating PN support to avoid fluid volume overload.
Figure 11.4 It is recommended that 
parenteral nutrition admixtures should be 
administered continuously over 24 hours 
with automated fluid infusion pumps and 
that the system remain closed until 
infusion is complete.
1 Calculate resting energy requirement (RER):
RER = 70 × (current body weight in kg)0.75
or for animals weighing between 2 and 30 kg:
RER = (30 × current body weight in kg) + 70
RER = _____kcal/day
2 Calculate protein requirement:
Canine (g/100 kcal) Feline (g/100 kcal)
*Standard 4 6
*Reduced (hepatic/renal disease) 2–3 3–4
*Increased (excessive protein losses) 6 7–8
(RER÷100)  _____ g/100 kcal protein requirement = _____ g protein required/day
3 Calculate rate of administration for ProcalAmine®:
ProcalAmine® is a 3 % amino acid solution thus it has 0.03 g protein /mL
Rate of administration required = _____ g of protein/day ÷ 0.03 g prot /mL ÷ 24 h
= ______ mL/h of ProcalAmine®
Make sure this rate of infusion is acceptable for this patient.
4 Calculate proportion of RER provided at this rate:
ProcalAmine® has 0.25 kcal/mL of energy
Energy provided = 0.25 kcal/mL  ______ mL/h  24 h = ______ kcal/d
Proportion of energy met = _____ PPN energy ÷ ______ RER x 100 = ________ %
5 Calculate rate of glucose infusion at calculated PPN rate:
ProcalAmine® has 3% glycerol (dextrose equivalent) i.e. 30 mg/ml
Glucose infusion rate = _______ ml/hr PPN ÷ 60 mins  30 mg/ml ÷ kg body weight.
= ________ mg/kg/min glucose.
Glucose infusion rate should not exceed 4 mg/kg/min as it may cause hyperglyce -
mia. May need to decrease infusion rate and recalculate.
Box 11.2 Worksheet for calculating parenteral nutrition using ProcalAmine®

===== PDF PAGE 124 =====
110   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Monitoring
The other critical aspect in reducing the risk of complications is vigilant monitor-
ing. Checking the catheter site daily can identify malpositioning of the catheter 
and phlebitis or cellulitis early, before serious problems develop. Body weight 
should be monitored daily in animals receiving PN. Fluid shifts can also explain 
rapid changes in weight during hospitalization, emphasizing the need for contin-
ued nutritional assessment. Use of the RER as the patient’s caloric requirement 
is merely a starting point. The number of calories provided may need to be 
increased to prevent weight loss or to keep up with the patient’s changing needs. 
To avoid complications with PN, the patient should be monitored carefully and 
frequently. General attitude, body weight, temperature, blood glucose concen -
tration, total plasma protein (also checking the serum for presence of gross 
lipemia or hemolysis) and serum electrolyte concentrations should be assessed 
daily, or more frequently if indicated. Pulse and respiratory rates should be 
recorded several times a day. Metabolic complications can occur frequently in 
animals receiving PN and monitoring is crucial to detect and address them early, 
if necessary. The clinical situation should dictate the frequency and spectrum of 
monitoring required because some patients will need more intensive monitor -
ing. The development of metabolic abnormalities usually does not require dis -
continuation of PN but may require reformulation (e.g., a reduction in the lipid 
content for animals that develop hypertriglyceridemia). Other parameters to 
monitor include gastrointestinal signs and appetite so that enteral nutrition or 
oral intake can be initiated as soon as possible. Finally, the overall nutritional 
plan should be reassessed on a regular basis so that it can be adjusted to meet the 
animal’s changing needs.
Complications
Metabolic complications
A number of possible complications can be associated with PN and these gen -
erally are grouped into one of three categories. Metabolic complications are 
the most common, with hyperglycemia typically seen most frequently (Lippert, 
Figure 11.5 Set up of parenteral nutrition 
requires strict adherence to an aseptic 
technique which includes use of 
disposable protective clothing, sterile 
gloves and new infusion sets.

===== PDF PAGE 125 =====
Parenteral nutrition in small animals   111
Fulton and Parr, 1993; Reuter et al., 1998: Chan et al., 2002; Pyle et al., 2004; 
Crabb et  al., 2006; Queau et  al., 2011). Despite being the most commonly 
encountered complication, hyperglycemia was only associated with a poorer 
survival in cats in the Pyle study (2004). In that study, cats that developed 
hyperglycemia after the first 24 hours of PN had a fivefold increase in mortality 
risk. It is worth noting that many of the cats in that study were fed in excess of 
RER. Although the development of hyperglycemia following PN administration 
may not necessarily worsen outcome, it may still be prudent to avoid this com-
plication. Using conservative energy targets (i.e., initial target of RER), slowly 
increasing PN infusion rates during first day, close monitoring of patients 
receiving PN are recommended for minimizing the risks for development of 
hyperglycemia.
Hyperlipidemia is also a commonly reported metabolic complication in dogs 
and cats receiving PN (Lippert et  al., 1993; Chan et  al., 2002; Crabb et  al., 
2006), although in two studies some animals experienced a resolution of 
hyperlipidemia following initiation of PN (Reuter et al., 1998; Pyle et al., 2004). 
The rates of hyperlipidemia appear to be decreasing from almost 70% in the 
Lippert study reported in 1993, to <20% in more recent studies (Reuter et al., 
1998; Chan et al., 2002; Pyle et al., 2004, Crabb et al., 2006). A decrease in 
overall energy targets and decrease in the proportion of energy provided via 
lipids in more recent studies are likely reasons for improvement for this 
complication.
Electrolyte disturbances can develop either after instituting nutritional sup-
port or may worsen in animals with preexisting abnormalities. Hyponatremia, 
hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia and hypochloremia have been 
reported in various studies although these complications were not associated 
with non‐survival, (Lippert et al., 1993; Reuter et al., 1998; Chan et al., 2002; 
Pyle et al., 2004; Crabb et al., 2006; Queau et al., 2011). In contrast, a recent 
report, Gajanayaje et al., (2013) reported that hyperkalemia occurred in approx-
imately 24% of dogs receiving a commercially available amino acid and dextrose 
solution and that this complication was associated with a decrease in survival.
Refeeding syndrome (see Chapter 16) is rarely reported in companion ani-
mals but can be difficult to manage when it occurs (Armitage‐Chan, O’Toole 
and Chan, 2006; Brenner, KuKanich and Smee, 2011). Refeeding syndrome 
refers to a potentially fatal complication secondary to reintroduction of feeding 
in severely malnourished patients (Solomon and Kirby, 1990; Crook, Hally and 
Pantelli, 2001). It includes the development of hypophosphatemia with or 
without hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, thiamine deficiency, and fluid shifts 
(Solomon and Kirby, 1990; Crook et al., 2001). It can develop when nutritional 
support, either parenteral or enteral, is initiated in a severely malnourished 
animal (particularly those that have not eaten for a prolonged period). The glu-
cose provided stimulates insulin secretion that drives extracellular ions (e.g., 
phosphorus, potassium, magnesium) intracellularly and stimulates protein syn-
thesis. The result may be clinically significant hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia, 
and hypomagnesemia. The shift to carbohydrate metabolism increases demands 
for important cofactors such as thiamine, which may already be depleted in 
malnourished patients, and neurological manifestations of thiamine deficiency 

===== PDF PAGE 126 =====
112   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
may occur (Solomon and Kirby, 1990; Crook et al., 2001; Armitage‐Chan et al., 
2006; Brenner et al., 2011). Congestive heart failure also can occur secondary 
to fluid shifts. It is important, particularly in animals with prolonged anorexia, 
to initiate parenteral nutrition slowly, to supplement vitamins (particularly 
 thiamine), and to monitor serum electrolytes for the first 3 to 4 days after 
initiation.
Other metabolic complications that have been reported in association with 
PN in animals include hyperbilirubinemia and azotemia. Hyperbilirubenemia is 
a more significant complication in infants as cholestasis and fatty infiltration of 
the liver are of particular concern. It is unknown if the development of hyper -
bilirubinemia in animals following PN administration is due to similar liver 
pathology. The rates of azotemia reported in dogs receiving PN range from 1 to 
17% (Lippert et al., 1993; Reuter et al., 1998; Chan et al., 2002; Queau et al., 
2011). The development of azotemia associated with PN administration may be 
due to increased turnover of amino acids due to influx of amino acids in the PN 
admixture, progression of endogenous muscle catabolism or onset of acute kid-
ney injury. In the study by Queau et al. (2011), azotemia was the only metabolic 
complication associated with mortality.
Mechanical complications
The most commonly reported mechanical complications reported in associa-
tion with PN include catheter dislodgement, catheter disconnection, catheter 
occlusion, chewed lines, occluded lines and thrombophlebitis. Mechanical 
complications appear to be more common in dogs compared with cats, with 
chewed lines and catheter disconnection occuring more frequently. (Lippert 
et al., 1993; Reuter et al. 1998; Chan et al., 2002). In the study by Gajanayake 
et al. (2013) there was a particularly high rate of catheter dislodgement (40%) 
and this was mostly encountered in peripherally inserted catheters. As most 
other studies of PN in animals had predominantly used central catheters, it is 
difficult to draw conclusions whether the high rate of complication was 
related to PN administration, the formulation of PN (dextrose/amino acid 
combination) or no different if compared to peripheral catheters where PN 
was not used.
Septic complications
Although potentially the most devastating, septic complications appear to be 
uncommon in animals receiving PN. In all studies to date, septic complication 
has been described in < 7% of animals receiving PN (Lippert et al., 1993; Reuter 
et al., 1998; Chan et al., 2002; Pyle et al., 2004; Crabb et al., 2006; Queau et al., 
2011; Gajanayake et al., 2013). Catheter‐related infections are the main concern 
in this patient population and many patients respond with removal of the intra-
venous catheter. Although contamination of PN admixture is said to pose a par-
ticular risk, especially if the admixture contains lipids, to date, there are no 
reports of a positive bacterial culture of PN admixture in any of the studies in 
animals. The low rates of septic complications may be due to insistance on strict 
aseptic techniques during catheter placement, PN compounding and handling of 
PN bags and infusing sets.

===== PDF PAGE 127 =====
Parenteral nutrition in small animals   113
Preventative measures
The most important factor in reducing the risk of complications is institution of 
preventative measures and protocols. Careful attention to catheter placement 
and catheter and line care will reduce the risk of problems. Placement of cathe-
ters by experienced personnel has been shown to reduce mechanical and septic 
complications (O’Grady et al., 2002). Elizabethan collars should be used for any 
animal that shows a propensity to chew lines. Protocols for catheter placement, 
handling catheters and line with an aseptic technique and maintaining dedi-
cated catheters also are beneficial in minimizing the incidence of sepsis. If there 
is a suspicion of the development of a septic complication, the catheter must be 
investigated or removed. Submission of the catheter tip or of any discharge from 
around the catheter site, a sample of the PN admixture, or a blood culture for 
bacteriological cultures should be considered in all patients that develop pyrexia 
or an unexplained left‐shifted neutrophilia following institution of PN, espe-
cially if this is not believed to be directly related to underlying disease.
transitioning to enteral nutrition
Animals receiving PN should be transitioned to enteral feeding as soon as it is 
feasible. Unless there are specific contraindications to enteral feeding (e.g., 
intractable vomiting or regurgitation) animals receiving PN should be offered 
food and water on a daily basis. Some authors have recommended reducing the 
rate of PN infusion when tempting animals to eat voluntarily as there is some 
thought that PN administration in itself can suppress appetite via peptide YY and 
neuropeptide Y receptor‐mediated events (Lee et al., 1997; Perea, 2012). The 
effectiveness of this technique has not been further evaluated but can be trialed 
and PN administration can be restored to the previous infusion rate if the animal 
continues to be intolerant of enteral feeding. The use of antiemetic and proki-
netic therapy may be of further benefit in such patients.
Summary
The provision of nutritional support in patients intolerant of enteral nutrition 
can be challenging due to technical, logistical and management issues. As 
many hospitalized animals may already have a degree of malnutrition present 
or are at high risk of becoming malnourished, being able to implement PN sup-
port is an important technique in such cases. Proper identification of patients 
that will benefit from PN as well as the ability to formulate and compound PN 
safely are critical for successful management of these cases. As the patient pop-
ulation that requires PN support is usually afflicted with serious conditions, 
avoiding and minimizing complications is also important. Despite some of the 
technical challenges associated with the compounding and administration of 
PN in animals, this form of nutritional support can be successfully adopted in 
many practice settings and play an important role in the recovery of critically 
ill animals.

===== PDF PAGE 128 =====
114   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Notes
1 4 Trace Elements, Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, Ill.
2 B vitamin complex, Veterinary Laboratories, Lenexa, KS.
3 ProcalAmine. B. Braun Medical Inc, Irvine, CA.
references
Armitage‐Chan, E.A., O’Toole, T. and Chan, D.L. (2006) Management of prolonged food depri-
vation, hypothermia and refeeding syndrome in a cat. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and 
Critical Care, 16, S34–S41.
Barton, R.G. Nutrition support in critical illness. (1994) Nutrition Clinical Practice, 9, 127–139.
Biffl, W.L., Moore, E.E., Haenel, J.B. et al. (2002) Nutritional support of the trauma patient. 
Nutrition, 18, 960–965.
Biolo G, Toigo G, Ciocchi B et al. (1997) Metabolic response to injury and sepsis: Changes in 
protein metabolism. Nutrition, 13, 52S–57S.
Braunschweig, C.L., Lecy, P., Sheean, P.M. et al. (2001) Enteral compared with parenteral nutri-
tion: a meta‐analysis. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 74, 534–542.
Brenner, K., KuKanich, K.S. and Smee, N.M. (2011) Refeeding syndrome in a cat with hepatic 
lipidosis. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery, 13, 614–617.
Casaer, M.P., Mesotten, D., Hermans, G. et al. (2011) Early versus late parenteral nutrition in 
critically ill adults. New England Journal of Medicine, 365, 506–517.
Calder P.C., Jensen G.L., Koletzko B.V. et al. (2010) Lipid emulsions in parenteral nutrition of inten-
sive care patients: current thinking and future directions. Intensive Care Medicine, 36, 735–749.
Chan, D.L. (2004) Nutritional requirements of the critically ill patient. Clinical Techniques in 
Small Animal Practice, 19(1), 1–5.
Chan, D.L. (2012) Nutrition in critical care. in Kirk’s Current Veterinary Therapy, 15th edn (eds 
J.D. Bonagura and D.C. Twedt) Elsevier Saunders, St Louis, pp. 38–43.
Chan D.L. and Freeman L.M. (2012) Parenteral nutrition. in Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid–Base Disorders 
in Small Animal Practice. 4th edn (ed. S.P. DiBartola) Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, pp. 605–622.
Chan, D.L., Freeman, L.M., Labato, M.A. et al. (2002) Retrospective evaluation of partial par -
enteral nutrition in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 16, 440–445.
Key PoINtS
•	 Parenteral nutrition may be an important mode of nutritional support for hospitalized 
patients intolerant of enteral nutrition.
•	 Before initiation of PN support, nutritional assessment should be carried out to assess the 
need for PN, identify complicating factors and devise a plan for commencing PN.
•	 Formulation of PN requires calculation of energy and protein needs and facilities for safe 
compounding techniques.
•	 The safe provision of PN requires special attention to the placement and maintenance of 
intravenous catheters, the aseptic technique in compounding and handling of PN and 
vigilant patient monitoring.
•	 Potential complications associated with PN include metabolic, mechanical and septic 
complications.
•	 With appropriate protocols and safeguards in place, the use of PN can be successfully 
incorporated in the care of critically ill patients in many practice settings.
•	 Transitioning to enteral nutrition should occur as soon as it is feasible.

===== PDF PAGE 129 =====
Parenteral nutrition in small animals   115
Crabb, S.E., Chan, D.L., Freeman, L.M. et al. (2006) Retrospective evaluation of total parenteral 
nutrition in cats: 40 cases (1991‐2003). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 16, 
S21–S26.
Crook, M.A., Hally, V. and Pantelli, J.V. (2001) The importance of the refeeding syndrome. 
Nutrition, 17, 632–637.
Chandler, M. L. and Payne‐Jones, J. (2006) Prospective evaluation of a peripherally adminis-
tered three‐in‐one parenteral nutrition product in dogs. Journal of Small Animal Practice, 47, 
518–523.
Doig, G.S., Simpson, F., Sweetman, E.A. et al. (2013) Early parenteral nutrition in critically ill 
patients with short‐term relative contraindications to early enteral nutrition in a randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 309, 2130–2138.
Dugan, S., Le, J. and Jew, R.K. (2014) Maximum tolerated osmolarity for peripheral adminis-
tration of parenteral nutrition in pediatric patients. Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition, 
38, 847–851.
Gajanayake, I., Wylie, C.E. and Chan, D.L. (2013) Clinical experience using a lipid‐free, ready‐
made parenteral nutrition solution in dogs: 70 cases (2006–2012). Journal of Veterinary 
Emergency and Critical Care, 23, 305–313.
Gramlich, L., Kichian, K., Pinilla, J. el al. (2004) Does enteral nutrition compared to parental 
nutrition result in better outcomes in critically ill adult patients? A systematic review of the 
literature. Nutrition, 20, 843–848.
Grimes, J.B. and Abel, R.M. (1979) Acute hemodynamic effects of intravenous fat emulsion in 
dogs. Journal of Parenteral Enteral Nutrition, 3, 40–44.
Harvey, S.E., Parrott, F., Harrison, D.A., et al. (2014) Trial of the route of early nutritional sup-
port in critically ill adults. The New England Journal of Medicine, 371(18), 1673–1684.
Kang, J.H. and Yang, M.P. (2008) Effect of a short‐term infusion with soybean oil‐based lipid 
emulsion on phagocytic responses of canine peripheral blood polymorphonuclear neutro-
philic leukocytes. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 22, 1166–1173.
Krogh‐Madsen, R., Plomgaard, P., Akerstrom, T. et  al. (2008) Effect of short‐term intralipid 
infusion on the immune response during low‐dose endotoxaemia in humans. American 
Journal of Physiology Endocrinology and Metabolism, 94, E371–E379.
Kuwahara, T., Kaneda, S., Shimono, K. et al. (2010) Growth of microorganisms in total paren-
teral nutrition solutions without lipid. International Journal of Medical Science, 7, 43–47.
Lee, H., Chung, K.S., Parl, M.S. et al. (2014) Relationship of delayed parenteral nutrition pro-
tocol with the clinical outcomes in a medical intensive care unit. Clinical Nutrition Research, 3, 
33–38.
Lee, M.C., Mannon, P.J., Grand, J.P. et al. (1997) Total parenteral nutrition alters NPY / PYY 
receptor levels in the rat brain. Physiology and Behavior, 62, 1219–1223.
Lippert, A.C., Fulton, R.B. and Parr, A.M. (1993) A retrospective study of the use of total par -
enteral nutrition in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7, 52–64.
Mauldin, G.E., Reynolds, A.J., Mauldin, N. et al. (2001) Nitrogen balance in clinically normal 
dogs receiving parenteral nutrition solutions. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 62, 
912–920.
Michel, K.E. and Eirmann, L. (2014) Parenteral nutrition. in Small Animal Critical Care Medicine, 
2nd edn, (eds D.C. Silverstein and K. Hopper), Elsevier Saunders, St Louis, pp. 687–690.
Michel, K.E., King, L.G. and Ostro, E. (1997) Measurement of urinary urea nitrogen content as 
an estimate of the amount of total urinary nitrogen loss in dogs in intensive care units. 
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 210, 356–359.
Mirtallo, J., Canada, T., Johnson, D. et al. (2004) Task force for the revision of safe practices for 
parenteral nutrition. Safe practices for parenteral nutrition. Journal of Parenteral and Enteral 
Nutrition, 28, S39–S70.
O’Grady, N.P., Alexander, M., Dellinger, E.P. et al. (2002) Guidelines for the prevention of 
intravascular catheter‐related infections. Infection Control Hospital Epidemiology, 23, 
759–769.
Olan, N.V. and Prittie, J. (2015) Retrospective evaluation of ProcalAmine administration in a 
population of hospitalized ICU dogs: 36 cases (2010–2013). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and 
Critical Care, (in press)

===== PDF PAGE 130 =====
116   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Perea, S. C. (2012) Parenteral nutrition. in Applied Veterinary Clinical Nutrition, 1st edn (eds  
A.J. Fascetti and S.J. Delaney) Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 353–373.
Pyle, S.C., Marks, S.L., Kass, P.H. et al. (2004) Evaluation of complication and prognostic factors 
associated with administration of parenteral nutrition in cats: 75 cases (1994–2001). Journal 
of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 225, 242–250.
Queau, Y., Larsen, J.A., Kass, P.H., et al. (2011) Factors associated with adverse outcomes dur-
ing parenteral nutrition administration in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 
25, 446–452.
Reuter, J.D., Marks, S.L., Rogers, Q. R. et al. (1998) Use of total parenteral nutrition in dogs: 
209 cases (1988–1995). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 8, 201–213.
Rosmarin D.K., Wardlaw G.M. and Mirtallo J. (1996) Hyperglycemia associated with high, con-
tinuous infusion rates of total parenteral nutrition dextrose. Nutrition Clinical Practice, 11, 
151–156.
Sala‐Vila, A., Barbosa V.M. and Calder P.C. (2007) Olive oil in parenteral nutrition. Current 
Opinion in Clinical Nutrition and Metabolic Care, 10, 165–174.
Simpson, F. and Doig, G.S. (2005) Parenteral vs. enteral nutrition in the critically ill patient A 
meta‐anlysis of trials using the intention to treat principle. Intensive Care Medicine, 31, 12–23.
Solomon, S.M. and Kirby, D. F. (1990) The refeeding syndrome: a review. Journal of Parenteral 
and Enteral Nutrition, 14, 90–97.
Wanten G.J.A. and Calder P.C. (2007) Immune modulation by parenteral lipid emulsion. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 85, 1171–1184.
Wiernik, A., Jarstrand, C. and Julander, I. (1983) The effect of Intralipid on mononuclear and 
polymorphonuclear phagocytes. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 37, 256–261.
Zentek, J., Stephan, I., Kramer, S. et al. (2003) Response of dogs to short‐term infusions of 
carbohydrate‐ or lipid‐based parenteral nutrition. Journal of Veterinary Medicine, A Physiology 
Pathology Clinical Medicine, 50, 313–21.

===== PDF PAGE 131 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
117
Introduction
Malnutrition can be defined as a state of suboptimal nutritional status due to 
inadequate, unbalanced, or excessive consumption of nutrients that leads to 
physical and mental compromise of the host. Given that malnutrition may 
increase morbidity and mortality in critically ill patients, it is imperative that 
clinicians understand its consequences and know when and how to initiate 
nutritional interventions that may mitigate the deleterious effects of malnutri­
tion. This chapter will focus on undernutrition resulting from anorexia and 
cachexia, describe the specific pathophysiology of malnutrition and discuss the 
nutritional interventions and supplements that have the potential to ameliorate 
these disorders.
Hyporexia, although not classically defined, refers to a reduction in appetite, 
rather than a total loss of appetite, that can occur for numerous reasons (Delaney, 
2006; Forman, 2010). This is also differentiated from the starvation patient 
(i.e., anorectic) and from the cachectic patient as the cachectic patient may be 
hyporexic or display normal eating behaviour. More importantly, the anorectic 
patient will lose fat when deprived of sufficient calories before catabolizing lean 
body mass (Chan, 2004). The cachectic patient will have equal loss of adipose 
and muscle tissues and this may precede a noticeable decrease in food intake. 
Thus, there may be progressive weight loss in the face of apparent adequate 
caloric intake. While anorexia may be a component of cachexia, the body com­
position changes observed suggest that anorexia alone is not responsible for 
cachexia (Costa, 1977; DeWys, 1972). This should not diminish the importance 
of anorexia without the presence of cachexia, as it has been reported in people 
that the presence of an appetite and the ability to eat are the most important 
factors in the physical and psychological aspects of a patient’s quality of life 
(Padilla, 1986). The same likely holds true in companion animals.
Pathophysiology and clinical 
approach to malnutrition 
in dogs and cats
Jason W. Gagne1 and Joseph J. Wakshlag2
1 Nestle Purina Incorporated, St Louis, MO, USA
2 Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine, Ithaca, NY, USA
Chapter 12

===== PDF PAGE 132 =====
118   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
pathophysiology of starvation and cachexia
In a healthy mammal with adequate caloric intake, exogenous dietary nutrients 
will be used to meet the metabolic needs of tissues, followed by replenishment 
of glycogen reserves in the liver and muscle. Any excess amount of m acronutrients 
will be stored in adipose, muscle and liver tissue as triglycerides (Saker and 
Remillard, 2010). In the fasting or starved animal, any exogenous glucose con­
sumed will be utilized within about 4 to 5 hours. Glycogen reserves will then be 
sought as glucose declines below approximately 120 mg/dL (6.6 mmol/L). At 
this point hepatic glycogenolysis will commence to preserve blood glucose for an 
additional 12 to 24 hours (Welborn and Moldawer, 1997). Insulin will also be 
downregulated (to further augment glucose preservation) and, consequently, 
decrease the conversion of thyroxine (T4) to triiodothyronine (T3) initiating a 
hypometabolic state. Furthermore, while glycogen stores are quickly depleted, 
stimulation of muscle catabolism begins to occur by glucose counterregulatory 
hormones, such as glucagon and endogenous glucocorticoids, and is even f urther 
exacerbated in strict carnivores such as the cat. Release of muscle alanine and 
glutamine undergoes gluconeogenesis in the liver and kidney, respectively 
(Welborn and Moldawer, 1997). In addition to stimulating muscle catabolism, 
glucagon stimulates fat catabolism. By day 3 of starvation, fatty acids are 
m obilized from adipose stores and undergo beta oxidation in the liver to produce 
ketone bodies. With the exception of the renal medulla and red blood cells, all 
tissues can utilize ketones as an energy source. The body can now spare the 
muscle of catabolic effects and optimize glucose usage.
In accordance with the starvation model, there is a decrease in glucose usage 
and a shift towards ketones utilization. However, the diseased state leads to the 
release of inflammatory mediators and sympathetic nervous system stimulation 
that may induce a hypermetabolic state typified by an increased energy expendi­
ture and proteolysis creating a potential state of cachexia. This hypermetabolic 
state has been studied in multiple models including sepsis, trauma, critical i llness, 
burn victims and cancer (Inui, 2011; Tisdale, 2000). The degree of alterations 
and duration of the hypometabolic and transition to hypermetabolic phases 
(commonly referred to as the ‘ebb and flow’ model) depends upon the specific 
illness. Though there is much debate regarding total energy expenditure in 
d isease states (particularly in cancer), hypermetabolism may be the direct cause 
of weight loss in cachectic patients (Nelson, Walsh and Sheehan, 1994). Some of 
the factors stimulating this hypermetabolic state include tumour necrosis factor 
(TNF‐α), Interleukin‐1 (IL‐β), Interleukin‐6 (IL‐6), Interferon‐γ (INF‐γ) and, if 
associated with cancer, additional tumour‐derived factors, known as proteolysis 
inducing factor (PIF) and lipid mobilizing factor (LMF), may be involved (Argiles 
and Lopez‐Soriano, 1999; Inui, 2011; Llovera et al., 1998).
Alterations in carbohydrate metabolism include hyperglycemia and insulin 
resistance. This results from the induction of the sympathetic nervous system 
inducing release of glucose counterregulatory hormones, including cortisol, 
glucagon, growth hormone and other adrenal corticosteroids and catechola­
mines. It has been hypothesized that cancer patients release lactate from their 
tumour(s) which is then converted to glucose in the liver (via the Cori cycle). 

===== PDF PAGE 133 =====
Pathophysiology and clinical approach to malnutrition in dogs and cats   119
This additional interconversion of substrate is an energy wasting process. This 
metabolic shift has not been firmly recognized in any specific canine or feline 
neoplastic diseases (Barber, Ross and Fearon, 1999; Tisdale, 2000). In addition, 
lipid metabolism is disrupted by increased levels of TNF‐α and IL‐1β inhibiting 
expression of several lipogenic genes, including lipoprotein lipase (LPL). LPL is 
an enzyme that is responsible for triglyceride clearance from plasma, thereby 
inducing mild alterations in lipoprotein composition and mild hypertriglyceri­
demia in some cases. Additionally, unlike starvation where proteins are spared 
by utilization of ketones, cachectic patients continue to utilize amino acids, 
resulting in a negative nitrogen balance and depletion of lean body mass. In 
most cases of disease‐related anorexia there are neuroendocrine alterations that 
are inducing the anorexia or hyporexia. In response, the hypothalamus will 
release orexigenic signals to stimulate feeding and suppress energy expenditure. 
Administration of TNF‐α, IL‐1β, IL‐6, and INF‐γ (in combination or solely) is 
capable of reducing food intake, possibly by stimulating expression or release of 
leptin, thereby inhibiting the normal feedback mechanisms, even in the face of 
decreased food intake and body weight (Inui, 2011). These cytokines also have 
direct effects in diminishing neuropeptide Y (potent orexigenic hormone) release 
from the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, diminishing appetite. Injection 
of IL‐1β into the cerebral ventricles of rats in an amount similar to pathophysi­
ologic concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid of rats with tumours induced 
anorexia (Sonti, Ilyin and Plata‐Salaman, 1996a; Gayle, Ilyin and Plata‐Salaman, 
1997; Sonti, Ilyin and Plata‐Salaman, 1996). The exact roles these neuropep­
tides are playing in companion animal anorexia are not well defined, but are 
likely influencing orexigenic behaviours. The above‐mentioned macronutrient 
and neurohormonal alterations are depicted in Figure 12.1.
Clinical manifestation and amelioration 
of malnutrition
Clinicians are often faced with a hyporexia or anorexia associated weight loss or 
a patient that is losing weight in the face of a normal appetite. In either scenario, 
the patient may be malnourished. The reason may or may not be obvious. A full 
nutritional assessment (see Chapter 1) of the patient should be carried out. This 
should entail a review of the medical history to rule out environmental stressors, 
unpalatable food, anosmia, side effects to medications, a complete dietary his­
tory needs to be performed that includes the brand and amount of food being 
offered as well as how much is consumed, including treats and table foods 
(Buffington, Holloway and Abood, 2004). Next, the total daily caloric intake 
should be calculated. A thorough physical examination should be performed to 
further rule out respiratory, cardiovascular, neurologic, orthopaedic or oral/
pharyngeal etiologies and appropriate diagnostic tests carried out to rule out 
disease processes. Quite possibly, no inciting cause for the hyporexia will be 
determined from the history and physical examination, as is the case in many 
geriatric patients with mild cognitive dysfunction.

===== PDF PAGE 134 =====
120   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Identification of the malnourished patient (Figure 12.2a,b) is complex since 
there are no established criteria in companion animals. Indicators that the clini­
cian may identify include unintentional weight loss of greater than 10% in less 
than 3 months, poor hair‐coat quality, muscle wasting, inadequate wound heal­
ing, hypoalbuminemia, lymphopenia and coagulopathy. These abnormalities are 
not specific to malnutrition and often occur late in the disease process (Chan and 
Freeman, 2006). Hypoalbuminemia may be observed and is considered a nega­
tive prognostic indicator. This albumin deficit is thought to represent hepatic 
protein reprioritization towards acute phase proteins and inflammatory media­
tors rather than albumin synthesis (Saker and Remillard, 2010). While a trend in 
weight change is sometimes informative, if observed on a consistent basis, the 
clinician should keep in mind that hydration status (e.g., history of vomiting, 
diarrhea, third spacing) can significantly alter weight. Additionally, when assess­
ing body weight the same scale should be used every time to eliminate variation 
in recorded body weights. While determining body condition scores (BCS) is a 
practical method of quantifying a patient’s body composition and a way to 
 convey an image to a colleague (Delaney, Fascetti and Elliot, 2006), BCS meth­
ods were designed to assess body fat content and not lean muscle mass. 
Highlighting this point, a study of 100 oncology canine patients diagnosed with 
27 different forms of neoplasia, found approximately 3 times as many dogs with 
evidence of moderate or severe muscle wasting despite a normal or overweight 
Ill/diseased state
Hypothalamus
Appetite
Glucose
Neoplastic cell
PIF, LMF
Cori cycle
Lactate
?
Energy expenditure
Cachexia
Hyporexia / Anorexia
Anorexigenic
signalling
Orexigenic
signalling
In/f_lammation
(IL-1, IL-6. TNF/uni03B1, INF/uni03B3)
Protein metabolism
Protein catabolism
Lipid metabolism
Carbohydrate metabolism
Hyperglycemia
LPL =L ipogenesis
Hypertriglyceridemia
Insulin resistance
Lean body mass
Figure 12.1 Neurohormonal influences of anorexia and cachexia. A number of hormonal and 
cytokine signals are thought to induce the changes related to anorexia and cachexia, including 
alterations in lean and fat mass distribution during various disease processes associated with 
chronic inflammation.

===== PDF PAGE 135 =====
Pathophysiology and clinical approach to malnutrition in dogs and cats   121
body condition when compared to dogs classified as underweight (Michel, 
Sorenmo and Shofer, 2004). Similarly, a study of 57 feline patients diagnosed 
with 9 different forms of neoplasia (32 of which were lymphoma) examining 
weight loss and muscle wasting demonstrated a significantly lower median sur­
vival time in those with a BCS <5 when using a scale of 1–9. This study con ­
cluded that not only weight loss, but loss of lean body mass may be more 
prevalent in cats than in dogs with cancer (Baez et al., 2007). Therefore BCS 
alone may not detect cachexia since loss of lean muscle mass is the hallmark sign.
Feeding the malnourished patient
Following the establishment of a diagnosis, primary treatment should be aimed 
at the underlying disease causing the anorexia or hyporexia, and a nutritional 
plan should be tailored to the disease condition(s). However, even in the absence 
of a definitive diagnosis, implementing a nutritional plan using assisted or 
u nassisted enteral support should ensue.
Upon determining that nutritional intervention is required, the route of 
delivery needs to be assessed. The enteral route is the preferred choice for 
a nimals because it is considered more physiologically sound than parenteral 
f eeding. Mucosal integrity will be maintained and this may reduce the risk of 
translocation of intestinal bacteria and subsequent sepsis with enteral support 
(a) (b)
Figure 12.2 a), b) This dog is exhibiting advanced signs of malnutrition with overt lean 
muscle loss. However, not all patients with malnutrition will have overt changes in body 
condition as these may only manifest later in the disease process. Source: Lucy Goodwin. 
Reproduced with permission of Lucy Goodwin.

===== PDF PAGE 136 =====
122   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
(Michel, 1998). Voluntary oral intake is the preferred route of enteral nutrition; 
however, animals must be able to consume at least 85% of their calculated 
 resting energy requirement (RER) for this method to be effective (Donaghue, 
1989). Alternatively, other methods of enteral feeding include nasoesophageal, 
esophagostomy, nasogastric, gastrotomy and jejunostomy feeding tubes. 
Appropriate choice, placement procedures, maintenance and advantages/  
disadvantages of these devices are described in earlier chapters.
Although energy expenditure has been demonstrated to be increased in 
some conditions, e.g., septicemia, burns, the typical critically ill or post‐operative 
patient does not appear to have increased energy requirements above baseline 
needs (Brunetto et al., 2010). Illness factors ranging from 1.1 to 2.0 times RER 
that have been used in the past are considered unnecessary and may actually 
lead to further complications (Chan, 2004). Therefore using the following allo ­
metric equation for RER of the malnourished dog or cat is appropriate:
RER = 70 x (current body weight in kg)0.75. A patient is typically fed 1
3
1
2 of 
RER over day 1, 2
3
3
4
 of RER over day 2, and 3
4
–full RER on day 3, given that 
no complications are encountered. In addition to monitoring tolerance to feed ­
ings, blood work should be used to monitor electrolyte changes that may occur 
following feeding, for example, as seen with refeeding syndrome. This syndrome 
is characterized in Chapter 16.
In the malnourished state, replenishment of protein to spare further skeletal 
muscle proteins and to attempt to correct the negative nitrogen balance is key. A 
starting point of 4 g of protein per 100 kcal enterally can be used for most canine 
patients when their ability to handle nitrogenous waste products is not in ques­
tion and there are no known extraordinary protein losses. In cats 6 g or more of 
protein per 100 kcal enterally is a more reasonable estimate. Fat has more 
metabolizable energy on a per gram basis. The choice of food should be 5 to 
7.5 g fat/100 kcal or approximately 20% fat or higher on a dry matter basis, 
which increases caloric intake and should enhanced palatability (Wakshlag and 
Kallfelz, 2006). This increased fat will cause a decrease in carbohydrate which 
may be appropriate given insulin resistance may be a factor. Appropriate foods 
for feeding cachectic dogs and cats are listed in Tables 12.1 and 12.2.
Multiple substances have been added to critical care formulas and foods for 
treatment of malnourished patients in the hope of accelerating recovery. While 
most of these nutrients have not been extensively studied in small animals, 
some recommended dosages are listed in Table 12.3. The following is a brief 
overview of some common supplements employed in the management of 
m alnourished patients, however, there is little evidence of their efficacy in 
c ompanion animals. A more detailed discussion of some of these nutritional 
s upplements can be found in Chapter 18.
Arginine
Arginine is an essential amino acid that is an intermediary in the urea cycle and 
when a deficiency occurs, hyperammonemia develops. Given the proteolysis that 
occurs in malnutrition, the urea cycle is accelerated and therefore s upplementation 
may be warranted. Arginine‐enriched diets have been associated with enhanced 
immune function and wound healing in rodents and people (Michel, 1998). In a 

===== PDF PAGE 137 =====
Pathophysiology and clinical approach to malnutrition in dogs and cats   123
study of 48 critically ill dogs higher concentrations of arginine (amongst other 
amino acids) were shown to be higher in survivors (n  = 28) compared to non­
survivors (n = 20) (Chan, Rozanski and Freeman, 2009). However, in one study, 
beagles with induced septic shock received arginine supplementation parenter ­
ally at doses lower than that supplied in standard dog food, resulting in lower 
blood pressure, evidence of organ injury and decreased survival (Kalil et al., 
2006). Therefore arginine supplementation at this time is questionable.
Glutamine
Glutamine is considered a conditionally essential amino acid during times of 
stress and is involved in protein synthesis, acts as an energy source for entero­
cytes and lymphocytes, and is an essential precursor for nucleotide biosynthesis. 
A glutamine‐enriched enteral diet was shown to have positive effects on protein 
Table 12.1 High calorie globally easily accessible feline diets.
PRODUCT Calories  
(kcal/ml or g)
Protein  
(g/100 kcal)
Fat  
(g/100 kcal)
Veterinary Therapeutic Diets
Hill’s a/d (5.5 oz) 1.2 9.2 6.3
Eukanuba Max Cal (6 oz) 2.0 7.2 6.4
Royal Canin Recovery RS (6 oz) 1.0 10.0 7.0
Purina DM (dry) 1.3 (4.1) 11.1 (12.9) 6.8 (4.0)
Hill’s m/d (dry) 1.0 (4.0) 13.1 (12.3) 4.8 (5.2)
Feline High Calorie Kitten Diets
Purina Proplan Kitten Formula (dry) 1.16 (4.4) 12.1 (10.1) 6.7 (4.2)
Eukanuba Kitten formula (dry only) (4.7) (8.5) (5.3)
Hill’s Science Diet Kitten (dry) 1.3 (4.5) 10.4 (8.3) 5.1 (5.9)
Royal Canin Feline DD Growth (dry) 1.1 (4.2) 10.8 (8.1) 5.4 (4.8)
Table 12.2 
High calorie globally easily accessible canine diets.
Calories  
(kcal/ml or g)
Protein  
(g/100 kcal)
Fat  
(g/100 kcal)
Veterinary Therapeutic Diets
Hill’s a/d (5.5 oz) 1.2 9.2 6.3
Eukanuba Max Cal (6 oz) 2.0 7.2 6.4
Royal Canin Recovery RS (6 oz) 1.0 10.0 7.0
Purina JM (dry) 1.1 (3.8) 9.6 (7.9) 4.9 (3.3)
Hill’s n/d 1.6 7.0 6.1
Hill’s j/d (dry) 1.3 (3.7) 4.7 (5.4) 4.6 (3.9)
Canine Performance Diets
Impact (2 oz scoop; 56 gr.) 2.6 9.6 6.0
Proplan Chicken and rice Entrée 
or (Performance‐dry)
1.2 (4.4) 8.4 (7.1) 7.3 (4.8)

===== PDF PAGE 138 =====
124   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
metabolism, intestinal and pancreatic repair and regeneration, nutrient 
a bsorption, gut barrier function, systemic and intestinal immune function, and 
animal survival (Ziegler, 1997). Glutamine is unstable in solution and may be 
cost prohibitive in the long run. Most high protein enteral support supplies ade­
quate glutamine therefore the benefits of its addition are also questionable.
Branched‐chain amino acids
The branched‐chain amino acids (BCAA), leucine, isoleucine and valine, are 
used with the goal of improving nitrogen balance and may spare muscle protein 
in malnourished patients. BCAA may counteract anorexia/cachexia by compet­
ing for tryptophan (precursor of serotonin) across the blood brain barrier, thus 
blocking increased hypothalamic activity of serotonin. Oral and parenteral 
administration of BCAA decreased the severity of anorexia and improved pro­
tein accretion and albumin synthesis in human cancer patients (Cangiano et al., 
1996). Leucine administered solely has had a positive effect on protein synthesis 
in skeletal muscle in comparison to increases in other amino acids, shifting the 
balance towards anabolism rather than catabolism (Anthony et al., 2000; 
Nakashima et al., 2005). Currently there is no evidence of any benefits in canine 
and feline patients on high protein diets.
Fish oils
Fatty acids in the form of marine fish oils are a rich source of omega‐3 fatty acids, 
particularly eicosopentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosohexaenoic acid (DHA). 
Omega‐3 fatty acids are thought to (i) displace arachidonic acid from cell mem­
branes, (ii) produce the inert 3‐series prostaglandins and 5‐series leukotrienes 
( differential production of prostaglandin E
2 (PGE2) and leukotriene B4) and 
(iii) downregulate IL‐1β, IL‐6, TNF‐α, synthesis in inflammatory cells. Some dog 
foods have been supplemented to achieve a 10:1–5:1 ratio of omega‐6 to omega‐3 
fatty acids. A study examining cardiac cachexia suggested that a dditional fish oil to 
Table 12.3 Recommended dosages for nutritional supplements for use in 
malnourished dogs and cats.
Supplement Recommended dosage
Arginine 2% of dietary protein on a dry matter basisa
Glutamine 500 mg/100 kcal of enteral dietb
Branched‐chain amino acids 100–150 mg/kgc
Fish oils (EPA/DHA) 1–0.5:1 (omega 6: omega 3) in dogsc
2:1 (omega 6:omega 3) in catsc
Vitamin E 5 IU per gram of omega 3 supplementd
a Olgivie et al., 2000.
b Saker and Remillard, 2010,
c Wakshlag and Kallfelz, 2006,
d Foods approved by AAFCO should provide sufficient quantities of Vitamin E to 
account for this recommendation. Consideration should be given to home‐ 
prepared diets.

===== PDF PAGE 139 =====
Pathophysiology and clinical approach to malnutrition in dogs and cats   125
p rovide 27 mg/kg EPA and 18 mg/kg DHA in the daily diet showed decreased 
inflammatory cytokine production and improved body mass indices (Freeman 
et al., 1998). Another canine study using a 0.3:1 ratio showed increased survival 
times and disease free intervals in dogs with lymphoma with no discernible side 
effects (Ogilvie et al., 2000), while other studies have demonstrated when ratios 
lower than 1:1 have been used, they result in increased clotting times and decreased 
vitamin E concentrations within cellular membranes in other species (Davidson 
and Haggan, 1990; Bright et al., 1994, Saker et al., 1998, Hendricks et al., 2002).
Vitamins
B‐vitamins are coenzymes that are required for the Kreb’s Cycle. Therefore, they are 
required for glucose, protein, and fat metabolism. Most pet foods contain adequate 
amounts of B‐vitamins, however, if the patient is not eating, B‐vitamins should be 
supplemented. Fat soluble vitamins are stored in the liver and fat stores. However, if 
a patient has not been eating for an extended amount of time (weeks) and has 
excessive loss of fat stores, parenteral supplementation should be considered.
Summary
Management of anorexia and cachexia requires a multimodal approach, which may 
include pharmacologic agents (see Chapter 13) and is best started early in the dis­
ease process. The enteral route of nutritional supplementation is preferable to par­
enteral nutrition in the majority of cases. Improvement may not be possible, at 
which point the clinician must attempt to stabilize cachexia and prevent further 
decline. Many patients present with very substantial weight losses and these may be 
very difficult to reverse. There is no one single or combined treatment regime that 
is known to be successful, but the above mentioned approaches are used to coun­
teract the hypermetabolism and lean body wasting associated with malnutrition.
Key poIntS
•	 Given that malnutrition may increase morbidity and mortality in critically ill patients, it is 
imperative that clinicians understand its consequences and know when and how to 
initiate nutritional interventions that may mitigate the deleterious effects of malnutrition.
•	 In diseased states characterized by the release of inflammatory mediators and 
sympathetic nervous system stimulation there may be an induced state of 
hypermetabolism typified by an in increased energy expenditure and proteolysis creating 
a potential state of cachexia.
•	 Anorectic patients will lose fat when deprived of sufficient calories before catabolizing lean 
body mass whereas cachectic patients will have equal loss of adipose and muscle tissues.
•	 The identification of the malnourished patient is complex since there are no established 
criteria in companion animals. Common indicators that the clinician may use to identify 
these patients include unintentional weight loss of greater than 10% in less than 
3 months, poor hair‐coat quality, muscle wasting, inadequate wound healing and 
hypoalbuminemia.

===== PDF PAGE 140 =====
126   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
references
Anthony, J.C., Anthony, T.G., Kimball, S.R. et al. (2000) Orally administered leucine stimulates 
protein synthesis in skeletal muscle of post absorptive rats in association with increased eIF4F 
formation. Journal of Nutrition, 130(2), 139–145.
Argiles, J.M. & Lopez‐Soriano F.J. (1999) The role of cytokines in cancer cachexia. Medicinal 
Research Reviews, 19, 223–248.
Barber, M.D., Ross, J.A. and Fearon, K.C. (1999) Cancer Cachexia. Surgical Oncology, 8, 133–141.
Baez, J.L., Michel, K.E., Soremon, K. et al. (2007) A prospective investigation of the prevalence 
and prognostic significance of weight loss and changes in body condition in feline cancer 
patients. (Abstr) Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery, 9, 526.
Bright, J.M., Sullivan, P.S., Melton, S.L. et al. (1994) The effects of n‐3 fatty acid supplementa­
tion on bleeding time, plasma fatty acid composition, and in vitro platelet aggregation in cats. 
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 8(4), 247–252.
Brunetto, M.A., Gomes, M.O.S., Andre, M.R. et al. (2010) Effects of nutritional support on hos­
pital outcome in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 20(2), 224–231.
Buffington, T., Holloway C. and Abood A. (2004) Nutritional assessment. in Manual of Veterinary 
Dietetics (eds T. Buffington, C. Holloway and S. Abood) W.B. Saunders, St. Louis. pp.1–7.
Cangiano, C., Laviano, A., Meguid, M.N. et al. (1996) Effects of administration of oral branched‐
chain amino acids on anorexia and caloric intake in cancer patients. Journal of the National 
Cancer Institute, 88(8), 550–552.
Chan, Daniel (2004) Nutritional requirements of the critically ill patient. Clinical Techniques in 
Small Animal Practice, 19, 1–5.
Chan, D. and Freeman, L. (2006) Nutrition in critical illness, The Veterinary Clinics of North 
America Small Animal Practice, 36, 1225–1241.
Chan, D.L., Rozanski, E.A. and Freeman, L.M. (2009) Relationship among plasma amino acids, 
C‐reactive protein, illness severity, and outcome in critically ill dogs. Journal of Veterinary 
Internal Medicine, 23(3), 559–563.
Costa G. (1977) Cachexia, the metabolic component of neoplastic diseases. Cancer Research, 37, 
2327–2335.
Davidson, B.C. & Haggan, J. (1990) Dietary polyenoic fatty acids change the response of cat 
blood platelets to inductions of aggregation by ADP. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes, and Essential 
Fatty Acids, 39(1), 31–37.
Delaney, S.J. (2006) Management of anorexia in dogs and cats. The Veterinary Clinics of North 
America Small Animal Practice, 36, 1243–1249.
Delaney, S.J., Fascetti, A.J. and Elliot, D.A. (2006) Nutritional status of dogs with cancer: die­
tetic evaluation and recommendations. in Encyclopedia of Canine Clinical Nutrition, Aniwa SAS, 
Aimargues, France. pp. 426–450.
DeWys W.D. (1972) Anorexia as a general effect of cancer. Cancer, 45, 2013–2019.
Donaghue, S. (1989) Nutritional support of hospitalized patients. The Veterinary Clinics of North 
America Small Animal Practice, 19, 475–493.
Forman, M. (2010) Anorexia. in Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edn (eds S.J. Ettinger 
and E.C. Feldman) Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis. pp. 172–173.
•	 Following identification of malnourished patients, primary treatment should be aimed at 
the underlying disease causing the anorexia or hyporexia, and a nutritional plan should be 
tailored to the disease condition. However, even in the absence of a definitive diagnosis, 
implementing a nutritional plan using assisted or unassisted enteral support should ensue.
•	 In the malnourished state, replenishment of protein to spare further skeletal muscle 
proteins and to attempt to correct the negative nitrogen balance is key.
•	 Management of anorexia and cachexia requires a multimodal approach, which may 
include pharmacologic agents and is best initiated early in the disease process.

===== PDF PAGE 141 =====
Pathophysiology and clinical approach to malnutrition in dogs and cats   127
Freeman, L.M., Rush, E., Kehayias, J.J., et al. (1998) Nutritional alterations and the effect of fish oil 
supplementation in dogs with heart failure. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 12(6), 440–448.
Gayle, D., Ilyin S.E. and Plata‐Salaman C.R. (1997) Central nervous system IL‐1β  system 
and Neuropeptide Y mRNA during IL‐1β  induced anorexia in rats. Brain Research Bulletin, 
44, 311–317.
Hendricks, W.H., Wu, Y.B., Shields, R.G. et al. (2002) Vitamin E requirement of adult cats 
increases slightly with high dietary intake of polyunsaturated fatty acids. The Journal of 
Nutrition, 132, 1613S–1615S.
Inui, Akio (2011) Cancer anorexia‐cachexia syndrome: Current issues in research and manage­
ment. CA A Cancer Journal for Clinicians, 52, 72–91.
Kalil, A.C., Sevransky J.E., Myers, D.E. et al. (2006) Preclinical trial of L‐arginine monotherapy 
alone or with N‐acetylcysteine in septic shock. Critical Care Medicine, 34(11), 2719–2728.
Llovera, M., Garcia‐Martinez, C., Lopez‐Soriano, J. et al. (1998) Role of TNF receptor1 in pro­
tein turnover during cancer cachexia using gene knockout mice. Molecular Cell Endocrinology, 
142, 183–189.
Michel, K.E. (1998) Interventional nutrition for the critical care patient: Optimal diets. Clinical 
Techniques in Small Animal Practice, 13, 204–210.
Michel, K.E., Sorenmo, K. and Shofer, F.S. (2004) Evaluation of body condition and weight loss 
in dogs presented to a veterinary oncology service. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 18, 
692–695.
Nakashima, K., Ishida, A., Yamazaki, M. et al. (2005) Leucine suppresses myofibrillar proteoly­
sis by down‐regulating ubiquitin‐ proteasome pathway in chick skeletal muscles. Biochemical 
and Biophysical Research Communications, 336(2), 660–666.
Nelson, K.A., Walsh, D. and Shehann F.A. The cancer anorexia‐cachexia syndrome. Journal of 
Clinical Oncology, 12, 213–225.
Ogilvie, G.K., Fettman, M.J., Mallinckrodt, C.H. et al. (2000) Effect of fish oil, arginine, and 
doxorubicin chemotherapy on remission and survival time for dogs with lymphoma: a 
 double‐blind, randomized placebo‐controlled study. Cancer, 88(8), 1916–1928.
Padilla, G.V. (1986) Psychological aspects of nutrition and cancer. Surgical Clinics of North America, 
66, 1121–1135.
Saker, K.E., Eddy, A.L., Thatcher, C.D. et al. (1998) Manipulation of ietary (n‐6) and (n‐3) fatty 
acids alters platelet function in cats. The Journal of Nutrition, 128(12), 26455–26475.
Saker, K. and Remillard, R. (2010) Critical care nutrition and enteral‐assisted feeding. in Small 
Animal Clinical Nutrition, 5th edn (eds M.S. Hand, C.D. Thatcher, R.L. Remillard, et al.) Mark 
Morris Institute, Topeka. pp. 439–476.
Sonti, G., Ilyin S.E. and Plata‐Salaman C.R. (1996a) Neuropeptide Y blocks and reverses 
interleukin‐1β‐induced anorexia in rats. Peptides, 17, 517–520.
Sonti, G., Ilyin S.E. and Plata‐Salaman C.R. (1996b) Anorexia induced by cytokine interactions 
at pathophysiological concentrations. American Journal of Physiology, 270, 1349–1402.
Tisdale, M.J. (2000) Metabolic abnormalities in cachexia and anorexia. Nutrition, 16, 1013–1014.
Tisdale, M.J. (2001) Cancer anorexia and cachexia. Nutrition, 17, 438–442.
Wakshlag, J. and Kallfelz, F. (2006) Nutritional status of dogs with cancer: dietetic evaluation 
and recommendations. in Encyclopedia of Canine Clinical Nutrition, Aniwa SAS, Aimargues, 
France. pp. 408–425.
Welborn, M.B. and Moldawer, L.L. (1997) Glucose metabolism. in Clinical Nutrition Enteral and 
Tube Feeding, 3rd edn (eds J.L. Rombeau and R.H. Rolandelli) W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia. 
pp. 61–80.
Ziegler, T.R. and Young, L.S. (1997) Therapeutic effects of specific nutrients. in Clinical Nutrition 
Enteral and Tube Feeding, 3rd edn (eds J.L. Rombeau and R.H. Rolandelli) W.B. Saunders, 
Philadelphia, pp. 112–137.

===== PDF PAGE 142 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
128
Introduction
Appetite is the manifestation of hunger and is a normal adaptive response to 
periods of decreased energy intake, while anorexia is a maladaptive response 
that results in the absence of food intake despite inadequate energy consump-
tion. Left untreated, prolonged anorexia can result in generalized wasting, 
delayed wound healing, impaired immune function, altered drug metabolism, 
and is known to increase morbidity and mortality in human patients (Donohoe, 
Ryan and Reynolds, 2011). The behavioral expression of appetite is complex and 
can be modified by altered sense of taste and smell, dysphagia, pain and learned 
food aversions, as well as alteration in hormone and cytokine levels within the 
body. A change in any one of these parameters can result in the outward appear-
ance of anorexia.
Loss of appetite can occur with a variety of medical conditions in dogs and 
cats including kidney disease, cardiovascular disease, pancreatitis, neoplasia, 
gastrointestinal diseases and dental disease. Since appetite is also viewed as a 
“quality of life” indicator by pet owners, pharmacological appetite stimulants 
may be more effective at managing the caregiver’s perception of health rather 
than stopping or reversing anorexia.
Meeting nutritional needs of patients with anorexia can be challenging. In 
patients that are not already exhibiting signs of malnutrition (e.g., severe lean 
muscle loss) nutritional management should involve addressing the primary 
underlying disorder, coaxing the animal to eat by modifying the diet to increase 
palatability, addressing pain and nausea (Figure 13.1). If these measures are not 
effective, consideration should be given to using pharmacological agents to stim-
ulate appetite. Although there are various agents that have been used to 
s timulate appetite in animals, it is worth noting that there is a paucity of data 
evaluating the effectiveness of appetite stimulants in clinical patients. It is also 
important to understand the pathophysiology of anorexia and how pharmaco-
logical agents may interact with various signals in the body to potentially increase 
food intake.
Appetite stimulants 
in dogs and cats
Lisa P. Weeth
Weeth Nutrition Services, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
Chapter 13

===== PDF PAGE 143 =====
Appetite stimulants in dogs and cats   129
pathophysiology of anorexia
Whether a potential food item is appealing to an individual will depend on a 
number of external stimuli, such as past experiences (e.g., learned food a versions 
or preferences), environmental triggers (e.g., location of food, other animals or 
people nearby), and food characteristics (e.g., aroma, texture and temperature). 
Animals that experience mouth pain, pain related to chewing or swallowing, or 
that experience maldigestion associated with food consumption (whether related 
to a primary disease or a side effect of treatment) may refuse to eat to avoid real 
or anticipated pain or discomfort (Figure 13.2).
An animal’s desire to eat is also in part controlled by the balance of hormones, 
such as insulin, glucagon and leptin (a polypeptide produced by adipocytes), and 
cytokines such as interleukin‐6 (IL‐6), tumour necrosis factor a (TNF α), and 
prostaglandin E2α (PGE2α). Systemic increases in IL‐6, TNFα, and PGE2α concen-
trations can occur with chronic medical conditions and can suppress appetite 
despite the individual being in a negative energy balance (Perboni and Inui, 
2006; Braun and Marks, 2010). Even in the absence of chronic conditions, the 
‘anorexia of aging’ has been described in older people and laboratory animals 
(Morley, 2001) and involves age related declines in the sense of taste and olfac-
tion; decreased renal clearance of hormones, such as cholecystokinin (CCK), as 
well as IL-6, TNF α, and PGE 2α, which can suppress appetite; and poor dietary 
intake of certain essential nutrients, such as zinc, that can alter taste perception.
Figure 13.1 The cat depicted is exhibiting 
pronounced hypersalivation, which is 
common sign of nausea and may explain 
reluctance to eat.
Figure 13.2 Example of an at‐risk patient 
that may benefit from short‐term use of 
appetite stimulants. A 13‐year‐old obese 
female spayed domestic shorthaired cat 
with history of weight loss associated 
with recent diet change and dental 
extractions due to multiple tooth root 
abscesses. Photo courtesy of L.P. Weeth.

===== PDF PAGE 144 =====
130   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Nutrition modification strategies
Diet characteristics
Individual cats and dogs may have preferences for or aversions to certain 
t extures (e.g., dry vs. canned vs. home‐prepared foods) and aromas (e.g., 
strongly aromatic vs. minimally aromatic) that can impact that animal’s will-
ingness to eat voluntarily. Prior to initiating pharmacological intervention the 
initial step to stimulating voluntary food intake should be aimed at modifying 
the food itself to increase palatability, if possible. This approach may be coun-
terproductive with certain conditions (e.g., feline hepatic lipidosis) and should 
not be attempted for more than one or two days before more direct nutritional 
support is initiated.
Long‐chain omega‐3 fatty acids
While currently used for chronic inflammatory conditions such as osteoarthritis, 
neoplasia and cardiovascular disease, the use of fish oil as a means of improving 
appetite and lean body mass in cachexic and inappetant dogs and cats has not 
been extensively evaluated. However, in one study, the use of omega‐3 fatty 
acids was associated with reduction in IL‐1 concentrations and improved 
cachexia scores in a group of 28 dogs with heart failure (Freeman et al., 1998). 
When taken by people with cancer‐associated cachexia in conjunction with 
appetite stimulants, supplementation with fish oil was shown to decrease circu-
lating IL‐6 concentrations, improve lean body mass and increase food intake 
more than when either fish oils or appetite stimulants were given alone 
(Mantovani et al., 2010). Given the current lack of data regarding the concur -
rent use of omega‐3 fatty acids and appetite stimulants in animals, further 
research in this area is warranted.
Pharmacological agents
Various agents have been used as appetite stimulants in dogs and cats (Tables 13.1 
and 13.2). In many instances, the effect on appetite is a side‐effect rather than 
its main effect. Nevertheless, understanding the purported mechanism of how 
these agents affect appetite may allow the clinician to choose the most appropri-
ate agent or to forgo their use and implement more effective means of nutri-
tional support such as feeding tubes.
Prednisone/prednisolone
These agents are not used as an appetite stimulant per se, but perhaps more for 
their palliative effects. Glucocorticoids are typically used to decrease inflamma-
tion associated with primary underlying diseases. However, glucocorticoids also 
have a series of side‐effects and an increase in appetite is well appreciated as a 
common consequence. Other systemic side effects of this medication include 
increased muscle catabolism and gastrointestinal ulceration. Given these seque-
lae, glucocorticoids are not a good first choice for appetite stimulation in dogs 
and cats.

===== PDF PAGE 145 =====
Appetite stimulants in dogs and cats   131
Cyproheptadine
Cyproheptadine is a serotonin receptor antagonist as well as an H 1‐receptor 
antagonist. Published clinical studies as to the use and efficacy of cyproheptadine 
as an appetite stimulant in veterinary medicine are lacking, though clinically a 
short‐term increase in food intake can be seen in anorexic cats after oral admin-
istration. This is not an effective appetite stimulant in dogs due to a more rapid 
metabolism and clearance of this medication in this species. Undesired effects 
include aggression, vocalization and altered behaviour. These signs tend to 
resolve with either dose reduction or discontinuation of use.
Benzodiazepine derivatives
Diazepam or midazolam given intravenously or diazepam and oxazepam given 
orally have been used as appetite stimulants in dogs and cats, but limitations in 
patient selection (i.e., cannot be given to debilitated or critically ill animals due 
to sedative and hypotensive affects) (Figure 13.3), lack of efficacy in dogs, and 
risk of hepatic failure in cats with repeated administration (Center et al., 1996) 
limit the use of benzodiazepine derivatives as appetite stimulants.
Table 13.1 Appetite stimulants for use in cats. Adapted from Plumb, 2011.
Drug Dosage Considerations
Cyproheptadine 2–4 mg/cat PO daily to twice 
daily
Can cause excess sedation, behavioural 
changes and aggression.
Diazepam 0.05–0.15 mg/kg IV or 
1 mg/cat/day PO
Associated with hepatic failure with 
repeated usage; can cause excessive 
sedation.
0.05–0.4 mg/kg IV, IM or PO
Oxazapam 2 mg/cat PO twice daily Use with caution, similar to diazepam.
Mirtazapine 3–4 mg/cat PO every 3 days Hepatic metabolism via glucuronidation, 
delayed metabolism relative to dogs. Can 
cause sedation. May be weak anti‐emetic.
Table 13.2 
Appetite stimulants for use in dogs. Mirtazapine information adapted from Plumb, 
2011; megestrol acetate information adapted from Kuehn, 2008.
Drug Dosage Considerations
Mirtazapine 0.6 mg/kg PO q 24h, not to 
exceed 30 mg/day
Can cause sedation. May be 
weak anti‐emetic.
Megestrol 
acetate
<20 kg: 2.5 mg PO q24h x 5 days; 
then 2.5 mg PO q48h
Dosages extrapolated from 
human usage.
>20 kg: 5 mg PO q24h x 5 days; 
then 5 mg PO q48h

===== PDF PAGE 146 =====
132   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Megestrol acetate
Megestrol acetate is a synthetic progestin that has been used to suppress estrus 
and treat pseudo‐pregnancy in female dogs as well as benign prostatic hypertro-
phy in male dogs. In human medicine, megestrol acetate has been used to 
improve appetite, promote weight gain and improve quality of life indicators in 
people undergoing cancer treatments (Loprinzi et al., 1990; Loprinzi et al., 
1993). Though it is important to note that the weight gain shown in these stud-
ies was related to increased water retention or increased body fat mass, or both, 
and not improvement in lean body mass. Megestrol acetate may help minimize 
signs of anorexia and reported nausea and improve quality of life parameters in 
people (Berenstein and Ortiz, 2009) though there are no published studies to 
data demonstrating efficacy for the use of megestrol acetate to treat anorexia in 
dogs. Clinically, modest increases in food intake can be seen in anorexic dogs 
with repeated oral administration of megestrol acetate. Megestrol acetate should 
not be used in cats due to adrenocortical suppression and hepatic toxicity associ-
ated with oral administration of this medication (Plumb, 2011).
Mirtazapine
Mirtazapine is a tricyclic antidepressant used to treat clinical depression in peo -
ple but has gained popularity in both human and veterinary medicine in recent 
years as an appetite stimulant. Mirtazapine acts as a serotonin receptor antago -
nist, H1‐receptor antagonist and enhances norepinephrine release in people. Its 
effects on appetite are thought to be mediated both through serotonin receptor 
inhibition as well as norepinephrine’s effect on promoting food intake. It has 
also been used as an anti‐nausea medication and appetite stimulant in people 
with cancer‐associated cachexia (Riechelmann et al., 2010) as well as sarcopenia 
of aging (Fox et al., 2009) and use in veterinary medicine is largely extrapolated 
from human studies. Recent pharmacokinetics studies in healthy dogs (Giorgi 
and Yun, 2012) and cats with renal disease (Quimby, Gustafson and Lunn, 2011) 
show mirtazapine to be absorbed, metabolized and excreted in these species sim-
ilarly to people. Hepatic metabolism is primarily via glucuronidation and long‐
term safety studies of mirtazapine administration in cats are lacking. A recent 
abstract detailing a prospective observational study attempted to quantify food 
intake subsequent to administration of mirtazapine to hospitalized dogs and cats 
Figure 13.3 The dog depicted is debilitated 
and has a dull mentation and the use of 
appetite stimulants, which have sedation 
or hypotension as possible side‐effects, 
are not recommended.

===== PDF PAGE 147 =====
Appetite stimulants in dogs and cats   133
(Casmian‐Sorrosal and Warman, 2010). The study suggested that mirtazapine 
stimulated food intake in 86% of dogs and 83% of cats. However, as this study 
has not been published in the peer reviewed literature, definitive conclusions 
about the efficacy of mirtazapine cannot be drawn. However, it does appear that 
mirtazapine can increase short‐term food intake in dogs and cats similar to other 
appetite stimulants.
Monitoring and complications
The goal of therapy in anorectic patients is to improve total energy intake and 
ultimately resolve anorexia, to improve lean body mass and to improve quality 
of life. The use of appetite stimulants as either the primary or sole means of 
improving food intake is not recommended. Consideration for the use of appe-
tite stimulants after the primary disease process has been addressed and the 
animal is recovering and beginning to exhibit interest in eating may be useful. 
Body weight and lean body mass should be evaluated daily, either in the clinic 
or at home by the pet owner. Additionally, daily food consumption logs should 
be recorded and reviewed daily to ensure adequate energy intake and response 
to medical intervention. Animals that are persistently anorexic or hyporexic 
(i.e., energy intake below daily energy requirements) for more than three days 
are candidates for either modification of overall medical treatment or considera-
tion for more directed nutritional support via an indwelling feeding tube. 
Patients treated on an out‐patient basis should also be evaluated by the veteri-
narian at least weekly to monitor for efficacy of treatment as well as specific 
adverse effects of medications (see Tables 13.1 and 13.2).
Summary
It is important to remember that anorexia is a symptom of disease and not a 
disease itself and, as such, the primary medical treatment should be aimed at 
addressing the causes of food refusal. For animals with reduced but not absent 
food intakes, those where the duration of anorexia is expected to be less than 
one week, or for those whose owners are reluctant to place an indwelling feed-
ing tube, short‐term use (i.e., less than one week) of appetite stimulants can be 
considered. In animals that experience persistent anorexia for more than three 
days despite medical management of the underlying disease state or those 
requiring longer‐term nutritional support (i.e., expected anorexia for more than 
one week), placement of an indwelling feeding tube should be considered (see 
Chapter 3).
Clinical trials of the use of appetite stimulants in people have shown mixed 
results, with improvement in quality of life indicators but no change in median 
survival time or improvement in lean body mass. Appetite stimulants for dogs 
and cats may improve the owner’s perception of food intake though there is a 
lack of evidence that they will reverse anorexia. In veterinarian medicine where 
the perceived quality of life may determine whether a pet owner continues 

===== PDF PAGE 148 =====
134   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
treatment or not, managing the caregiver’s perception of the animal’s overall 
“wellness” may be just as valuable as addressing the patient’s medical and 
n utritional needs.
references
Berenstein, G. and Ortiz, Z. (2005) Megestrol acetate for the treatment of anorexia‐cachexia 
syndrome. Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews, Issue 2, No.: CD004310.
Braun, T.P. and Marks, D.L. (2010) Pathophysiology and treatment of inflammatory anorexia in 
chronic disease. Journal of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle, 1, 135–145.
Casmian‐Sorrosal, D. and Warman, S. (2010) The use of mirtazapine as an appetite stimulant in 
dogs and cats: a prospective observational study (Abstract). Proceedings of 53rd British Small 
Animal Veterinary Association Annual Congress. April 8 to 11, Birmingham, UK, p. 420.
Center, S.A., Elston, T.H., Rowland, P.H. et al. (1996) Fulminant hepatic failure associated with 
oral administration of diazepam in 11 cats. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 
209, 618–625.
Donohoe, C.L., Ryan, A.M. and Reynolds, J.V. (2011) Cancer cachexia: mechanisms and clini-
cal implications. Gastroenterology Research and Practice, 60, 14–34.
Fox, C.B., Treadway, A.K., Blaszczyk, A.T. et al. (2009) Megestrol acetate and mirtazapine for 
the treatment of unplanned weight loss in the elderly. Pharmacotherapy, 29, 383–397.
Freeman, L.M., Rush, J.E., Kehayias, J.J. et al. (1998) Nutritional alterations and the effect of 
fish oil supplementation in dogs with heart failure. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 12, 
440–448.
Giorgi, M. and Yun, H. (2012) Pharmacokinetics of mirtazapine and its main metabolites in 
beagle dogs: a pilot study. The Veterinary Journal, 192, 239–241.
Kuehn, N. (2008) North American Companion Animal Formulary, 8th edn, North American 
Compendiums.
Loprinzi, C.L., Ellison, N.M., Schaid, D.J. et al. (1990) Controlled trial of megestrol acetate for 
the treatment of cancer anorexia and cachexia. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 82, 
1127–1132.
Loprinzi, C.L., Schaid, D.J., Dose, A.M. et al. (1993) Body composition changes in patients who 
gain weight while receiving megestrol acetate. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 11, 152–154.
Morley, J.E. (2001) Anorexia, sarcopenia, and aging. Nutrition, 17, 660–663.
Mantovani, G., Maccio, A., Madeddu, C. et al. (2010) Randomized phase III clinical trial of five 
different arms of treatment in 332 patients with cancer cachexia. The Oncologist, 15, 200–211.
Key poINtS
•	 Appetite stimulants can be considered for short‐term administration once the primary 
disease process has been addressed.
•	 It is important to recognize that symptomatic treatment of anorexia does not correct the 
underlying reason for food refusal.
•	 Side effects, such as hypotension, encountered with some appetite stimulants limit use 
in critically ill or debilitated patients.
•	 The use of appetite stimulants may address pet owners’ perception of “quality of life”.
•	 Animals being treated with appetite stimulants should be closely monitored and 
continued lack of adequate food intake should be addressed by altering either the 
medical or nutritional plan.

===== PDF PAGE 149 =====
Appetite stimulants in dogs and cats   135
Perboni, S. and Inui, A. (2006) Anorexia in cancer: role of feeding regulatory peptides. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society London Biological Sciences, 361, 1281–1289.
Plumb, D.C. (2011) Plumb’s Veterinary Drug Handbook. 7th edn, Wiley‐Blackwell Publishing.
Quimby, J.M., Gustafson, D.L. and Lunn, K.F. (2011) The pharmacokinetics of mirtazapine in 
cats with chronic kidney disease and in age‐matched control cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal 
Medicine, 25, 985–989.
Riechelmann, R.P. Burman, D. Tannock, I.F. et al. (2010) Phase II trial of mirtazapine for c ancer‐
related cachexia and anorexia. American Journal of Hospice and Palliative Care, 27, 106–110.

===== PDF PAGE 150 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
136
Introduction
An adverse food reaction (AFR) refers to an abnormal response to ingested 
food components. Reactions involving immune‐mediated mechanisms are 
defined as a food allergy (FA) whereas in all other cases they are defined as 
food intolerances (Gaschen and Merchant, 2011). Food intolerance can be 
further categorized into metabolic, pharmacologic, toxic and idiosyncratic 
reactions (see Table 14.1).
The prevalence in dogs and cats of AFR is unknown, in part due to the 
d ifficulty in diagnosing and the variety in clinical signs. The most frequent 
c linical signs associated with AFR are dermatological (i.e., cutaneous adverse 
food reactions (CAFRs) and gastrointestinal (Verlinden et al., 2006; Gaschen 
and Merchant, 2011). The most common dermatological sign is non‐seasonal 
pruritus, which can be generalized or localized (Bryan and Frank, 2010; 
Hensel, 2010). Common skin lesions include erythema, papules, excoriations, 
pododermatitis and otitis externa in dogs (Watson, 1998; Hensel, 2010) (see 
Figure 14.1) and military dermatitis, eosinophilic plaques, self‐induced sym-
metrical a lopecia, and head and neck excoriations in cats (Hobi et al., 2011). 
Gastrointestinal signs include vomiting, diarrhea and abdominal pain (Guilford 
et al., 2001; Verlinden et al., 2006). The coexistence of skin and gastrointesti-
nal signs, usually reported as 10–15% of the cases (Guilford et al., 1998: 
Chesney, 2002), is considered very suggestive of AFR, at least in cats (Guilford 
et al., 2001). There is no age, sex, or breed predilection described, although 
clinical signs often arise before 1 year in dogs, and Siamese cats have been sug-
gested to be at higher risk (Verlinden et al., 2006).
Adverse food reactions 
in small animals
Cecilia Villaverde and Marta Hervera
 Servei de Dietètica i Nutrició, Fundació Hospital Clínic Veterinari, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Bellaterra, Spain
Chapter 14

===== PDF PAGE 151 =====
Adverse food reactions in small animals   137
pathophysiology
The term AFR includes multiple pathophysiological mechanisms that result in 
similar clinical signs for both FA and food intolerance. The pathophysiology of 
FA in dogs and cats is poorly understood, although it is assumed that there is an 
alteration in the normal processing of food antigens and the development of oral 
tolerance, as reviewed by Verlinden et al. (2006) and Gaschen and Merchant 
(2011). Although there are little data, both IgE‐ and non‐IgE‐mediated mecha-
nisms are believed to exist in companion animals. Dietary antigens are c ommonly 
glycoproteins that require a minimum size to trigger a reaction. This size has 
been defined in human medicine as 10–70 kD, but there are no data available for 
dogs or cats to make a similar assertion (Cave, 2006). As for food intolerance, the 
pathophysiology mechanism varies depending on the particular reaction. In 
these cases, other non‐protein ingredients can be responsible for the clinical 
signs (such as food additives).
It has been suggested that an intestinal inflammatory environment is 
capable of playing a role in the genesis of FA (Philpott et al., 1998). Thus, it 
could be hypothesized that patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) 
might be predisposed to the development of FA. Several authors believe that 
a subset of patients with IBD respond to diet changes and it could be consid -
ered a form of AFR (Cave, 2006; Fogle and Bissett, 2007). There are some 
Table 14.1 Classification of adverse food reactions (adapted from Verlinden et al., 2006 and 
Gaschen and Merchant, 2011).
Adverse Food reactions
Food Allergy Food Intolerance
Ig E‐mediated 
(immediate and 
intermediate 
hypersensitivity)
Non‐IgE mediated 
(delayed 
hypersensitivity)
Idiosyncratic 
(idiopathic)
Metabolic  
(e.g. lactase 
deficiency)
Pharmacological 
(e.g. theobromine, 
caffeine)
Toxic (e.g. 
bacterial and 
fungal toxins)
Figure 14.1 Pododermatitis in a West 
Highland White Terrier diagnosed with 
food allergy.

===== PDF PAGE 152 =====
138   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
specific syndromes, such as gluten‐sensitive enteropathy of Irish Setters and 
protein losing enteropathy–protein losing nephropathy of the Soft Coated 
Wheaten Terrier that are also considered AFRs (Verlinden et al., 2006).
Nutritional management strategies
The management of AFR consists in avoiding the ingredients to which the 
patient shows a negative response. The offending ingredients have to be identi-
fied first, and this is accomplished through an elimination‐challenge process 
(reviewed by Verlinden et al., 2006; Bryan and Frank, 2010) after other diseases 
have been ruled out, such as flea allergy dermatitis, parasitic dermatitis, pyo-
derma and parasitic diarrhea (see Figure 14.2). The elimination part consists in 
exclusively feeding a diet with ingredients that the patient has never been 
exposed to. Other antigen sources should be eliminated (e.g., treats, flavored 
medication, f lavoured toothpaste, unmonitored sources of food). The duration 
of this trial should be 8–12 weeks for CAFR and 2–4 weeks for enteropathies. 
The elimination trial can give false results if the ingredients used were not really 
novel to the patient, so at least two different elimination diets should be tested 
before ruling out AFR.
Elimination diet for
8–12 weeks (3–4
weeks if
gastrointestinal signs)
Clinical signs do not
improve
Diet not novel for
patient
Recommended
second elimination
diet trial with another
diet
AFR ruled out
Clinical signs
improve
Challenge: Introduce 
ingredients
individually (1–3  
weeks) or previous
diet
Clinical signs recur:
AFR ruled in
Choose commercial
diet or balance
homemade diet for 
long term
management 
Clinical signs do not
recur: AFR ruled out
Clinical signs
partially improve
Consider concurrence
of other conditions
such as atopy,
infections, etc.
Figure 14.2 Diagnostic algorithm for adverse reaction to foods.

===== PDF PAGE 153 =====
Adverse food reactions in small animals   139
Animals that improve clinically to the elimination phase should then be 
c hallenged with individual ingredients suspected of eliciting the adverse reaction 
for 1–3 weeks. It is also possible to challenge with the previous diet, but then the 
individual offender might never be identified. If the clinical signs recur the 
patient is then diagnosed with AFR. A high percentage of dogs (35%) may react 
to more than one ingredient (Paterson, 1995). Patients whose clinical signs do 
not recur with the challenge cannot be diagnosed with AFR. In one study it was 
reported that 20% of cats with chronic diarrhea responded to elimination but 
not to the challenge (Guilford et al., 2001). The authors hypothesized that the 
offending ingredient might not have been correctly identified, the challenge 
phase might have been too short, the disease might have spontaneously resolved 
or other aspects of the elimination diet might be responsible for the improve-
ment, such as digestibility or fat content.
Other diagnostic procedures have been proposed, due to the complexity of 
the elimination‐challenge test. Specific IgE measurement in serum has very poor 
sensitivity (Jeffers, Shanley and Meyer, 1991) and other techniques such as gas-
troscopic and colonoscopic food testing have not been sufficiently evaluated 
(Mandigers and German, 2010).
Elimination Diets
Diet characteristics
The source and form of protein in food is the key nutritional factor in patients 
with suspected AFR. The ingredients most frequently implied as culprits are beef, 
dairy, wheat, egg, chicken, lamb and soy in dogs; and beef, dairy, fish and poultry 
in cats (Verlinden et al., 2006). These ingredients are routinely avoided in elimi-
nation diets. However, it is believed that these ingredients are often implicated 
due to their high frequency of use in pet foods in the past years, so the animals are 
repeatedly exposed to them, and not due to some inherent “allergenicity” (Cave, 
2006). Cross reactivity between antigens of related species may exist (Garcia and 
Lizaso, 2011) but it has not been demonstrated in v eterinary medicine as yet.
Digestibility can be considered theoretically an important characteristic to 
minimize the time and presence of undigested large peptides in the gut lumen, 
which could trigger an abnormal reaction.
There are two types of elimination diets: diets that use uncommon i ngredients 
(to maximize the likelihood of the patient being unexposed to them) and diets 
that use hydrolyzed proteins.
Diets with uncommon ingredients
Finding a diet with ingredients the patient has never eaten previously can be dif-
ficult, especially with the growing number of pet foods that include exotic pro-
tein sources (e.g., bison, salmon or venison) in their formulation. There are two 
dietary options we can choose from: commercial or homemade. Both approaches 
have pros and cons which should be considered before choosing (see Table 14.2).
Homemade foods usually include a combination of a single protein source 
and a single carbohydrate source. The ingredients should be novel to the patient 
(carbohydrate sources contain some protein as well), which will restrict choices 
to ingredients that may be expensive and hard to find. Many authors propose 

===== PDF PAGE 154 =====
140   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
that homemade diets are superior as elimination diets because they do not 
include food additives (which are suggested as a possible cause of AFR) and they 
are processed at lower temperatures (Jeffers et al., 1991, Harvey, 1993). The 
high temperatures of pet food processing have been proposed to form new anti-
gens that might trigger AFR (Cave and Marks, 2004). However, most of the 
homemade foods recommended for initial management of dogs and cats with 
suspected AFR were nutritionally inadequate (Roudebush and Cowell, 1992). 
Such diets should not be fed for longer than the elimination trial and never to 
growing animals. If a long term diet is required a nutritionally adequate and 
complete recipe must be formulated by a veterinary nutritionist. Other problems 
of homemade foods include cost and time.
There are several complete and balanced commercial therapeutic foods with 
uncommon ingredients in the market that use a single protein source and a 
s ingle carbohydrate source, since not one commercial diet will work for all 
Table 14.2 Pros and cons of diets used in the diagnosis and treatment of adverse food reactions.
Homemade diets
Pros
 • Do not contain food additives
 • Low risk of new antigen formation during processing
 • Allows the owners’ involvement in patient management
 • Highly digestible
Cons
 • Expensive
 • Time consuming
 • Ingredients may be difficult to source for the owners
 • Requires considerable commitment by the owner
 • They are usually nutritionally unbalanced unless formulated by a veterinary nutritionist
Commercial diets with uncommon ingredients
Pros
 • Generally they are the cheapest option
 • Complete and balanced, can be fed long‐term
 • Some products are adequate for growth
 • Easily available to the owner
Cons
 • Contain pet food additives
 • There is a risk of new antigen formation during processing
 • Can contain traces of other ingredients (if not manufactured in a dedicated line)
Hydrolyzed protein source diets
Pros
 • Useful in animals with a complex diet history that have been exposed to multiple ingredients
 • Complete and balanced, can be fed long‐term
 • Some products are adequate for growth
Cons
 • Contain pet food additives
 • There is a risk of new antigen formation during processing
 • A number of patients sensitive to the “original” protein may still be sensitive to the hydrolyzed 
counterpart

===== PDF PAGE 155 =====
Adverse food reactions in small animals   141
Table 14.3 Lists of uncommon ingredients in canine and feline prescription products in US 
and Europe.
Uncommon ingredients list in canine prescription diets in US
Producer Product Form Protein source Carbohydrate 
source
Fat source
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PD
Dry Duck by‐
product meal/ 
potato protein
Potato Coconut oil /
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PD
Canned Duck / duck 
by‐product meal
Potato Fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PR
Dry Rabbit meal / 
potato protein
Potato Coconut oil /
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PR
Canned Rabbit meal / 
potato protein
Potato Vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PV
Dry Venison meal / 
potato protein
Potato Coconut oil /
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PV
Canned Venison / 
venison meal / 
potato protein
Potato Vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PW
Dry Whitefish meal / 
potato protein
Potato Coconut oil /
vegetable oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PW
Canned Whitefish / 
potato protein
Potato Vegetable oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PW 
moderate calorie
Dry Whitefish meal / 
potato protein
Potato Coconut oil /
vegetable oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
duck formula
Canned Duck Potato / potato 
starch
Soybean oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
venison formula
Canned Lamb Rice flour Soybean oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
salmon formula
Canned Salmon Potato / potato 
starch
Soybean oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
venison formula
Canned Venison / potato 
protein
Potato / potato 
starch
Soybean oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
potato & duck 
formula
Dry Duck / potato 
protein / duck 
by‐product meal
Potato / potato 
starch
Pork fat / 
soybean oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
potato & salmon 
formula
Dry Salmon / potato 
protein / fish 
meal
Potato / potato 
starch
Pork fat / 
soybean oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
potato & venison 
formula
Dry Venison / potato 
protein / 
venison meal
Potato / potato 
starch
Pork fat / 
soybean oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
rice & egg formula
Dry Dried egg 
product
Brewers rice Pork fat / 
soybean oil / 
fish oil
(Continued )

===== PDF PAGE 156 =====
142   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Table 14.3 (Continued)
Eukanuba Iams veterinary 
formula skin & coat 
response FP
Canned Catfish Modified 
potato starch
Herring meal / 
corn oil
Eukanuba Iams veterinary 
formula skin & coat 
response FP
Dry Catfish Potato Herring meal / 
animal fat
Eukanuba Iams veterinary 
formula skin & coat 
response KO
Dry Kangaroo Oat flour Animal fat / fish 
oil
Purina DRM dermatologic 
management
Dry Salmon meal / 
trout
Brewers rice Animal fat
Canine Hydrolyzed protein prescription diets in US
Producer Product Form Protein 
source
Carbohidrate 
source
Fat source
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
hydrolyzed adult 
HP
Dry Hydrolyzed 
soy protein
Brewers rice Chicken fat / 
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
hydrolyzed adult 
HP small breed
Dry Hydrolyzed 
soy protein
Brewers rice Chicken fat / 
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
hydrolyzed adult 
HP moderate 
calorie
Dry Hydrolyzed 
soy protein
Brewers rice Chicken fat / 
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s z/d low allergen Dry Hydrolyzed 
chicken liver 
/ hydrolyzed 
chicken
Dried potato 
product / 
potato starch
Soybean oil
Hill’s z/d ultra allergen 
free
Dry Hydrolyzed 
chicken liver 
/ hydrolyzed 
chicken
Starch Soybean oil
Hill’s z/d ultra allergen 
free
Canned Hydrolyzed 
chicken liver
Corn starch Soybean oil
Purina HA 
Hypoallergenic
Dry Hydrolyzed 
soy protein 
isolate
Starch Vegetable oil / 
canola oil / 
corn oil
Uncommon ingredients list in canine prescription diets in US
Producer Product Form Protein source Carbohydrate 
source
Fat source

===== PDF PAGE 157 =====
Adverse food reactions in small animals   143
Table 14.3 (Continued)
Uncommon ingredients feline prescription diets in US
Producer Product Form Protein source Carbohydrate 
source
Fat source
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PD
Dry Duck by‐product 
meal/ pea 
protein
Peas Coconut oil /
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PD
Canned Duck/ duck 
by‐product meal/ 
pea protein
Pea flour Fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PR
Dry Rabbit meal/ pea 
protein
Peas Coconut oil /
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PR
Canned Rabbit/ pea 
protein
Pea flour Vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PV
Dry Venison meal/ 
pea protein
Peas Coconut oil /
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
selected protein PV
Canned Venison/ venison 
by‐products / 
pea protein
Pea flour Vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
duck formula
Canned Duck / pea 
protein 
concentrate
Ground green 
pea
Soybean oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
venison formula
Canned Venison / pea 
protein 
concentrate
Ground green 
pea
Soybean oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
duck & green pea 
formula
Dry Pea protein 
concentrate / 
duck
Ground yellow 
pea / ground 
green pea
Pork fat / fish 
oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
rabbit & green pea 
formula
Dry Pea protein 
concentrate / 
rabbit
Ground yellow 
pea / ground 
green pea
Pork fat / fish 
oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
venison & green 
pea formula
Dry Pea protein 
concentrate / 
venison
Ground yellow 
pea / ground 
green pea
Pork fat / fish 
oil
Eukanuba Iams veterinary 
formula skin & 
coat response LB
Canned Lamb / lamb 
meal
Ground 
pearled barley
Corn oil
Feline Hydrolyzed protein prescription diets in US
Producer Product Form Protein source Carbohydrate 
source
Fat source
Royal 
canin
Hypoallergenic 
hydrolyzed 
adult HP
Dry Hydrolyzed soy 
protein
Brewers rice Chicken fat / 
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
(Continued )

===== PDF PAGE 158 =====
144   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Feline Hydrolyzed protein prescription diets in US
Producer Product Form Protein source Carbohydrate 
source
Fat source
Hill’s z/d low 
allergen
Dry Hydrolyzed chicken 
liver / hydrolyzed 
chicken
Brewers rice Soybean oil
Hill’s z/d ultra 
allergen free
Canned Hydrolyzed chicken 
liver
Corn starch Soybean oil
Purina HA 
Hypoallergenic
Dry Hydrolyzed soy 
protein isolate / 
hydrolyzed chicken 
liver / hydrolyzed 
chicken
Rice starch Corn oil
Uncommon ingredients canine prescription diets in Europe
Producer Product Form Protein source Carbohydrate 
source
Fat source
Royal 
Canin
Sensitivity 
control
Dry Dehydrated fish / 
hydrolyzed 
poultry liver
Tapioca Animal fats / 
fish oil / soy oil
Royal 
Canin
Sensitivity 
control chicken 
with rice
Canned Chicken Rice Fish oil / 
sunflower oil
Royal 
Canin
Sensitivity 
control duck 
with rice
Canned Duck Rice Fish oil / 
sunflower oil
Purina DRM 
dermatologic 
management
Dry Salmon meal / 
trout
Brewers rice Animal fat
Hill’s d/d duck formula Canned Duck Potato / potato 
starch
Vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d lamb 
formula
Canned Lamb Rice flour Vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d venison 
formula
Canned Salmon Potato / potato 
starch
Vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d salmon 
formula
Canned Salmon Potato / potato 
starch
Vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d venison 
formula
Canned Venison / potato 
protein
Potato / potato 
starch
Vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d duck & rice 
formula
Dry Duck meal / 
hydrolyzed 
chicken
Ground rice Animal fat / 
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d salmon & 
rice formula
Dry Dried whole egg 
/ hydrolyzed 
chicken
Ground rice Animal fat / 
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Table 14.3 
(Continued)

===== PDF PAGE 159 =====
Adverse food reactions in small animals   145
Uncommon ingredients canine prescription diets in Europe
Producer Product Form Protein source Carbohydrate 
source
Fat source
Hill’s d/d egg & rice 
formula
Dry Salmon meal / 
hydrolyzed 
chicken
Ground rice Animal fat / 
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Eukanuba Veterinary diets 
dermatosis FP
Dry Fish meal / 
catfish / 
hydrolyzed fish 
protein
Potato Animal fat
Eukanuba Veterinary diets 
dermatosis FP
Canned Catfish / kipper 
meal
Modified 
potato starch
Corn oil
Affinity Advance 
dermatosis 
limited antigen
Dry Trout / 
dehydrated 
salmon protein
Rice Animal fat /fish 
oil
Specific CDD food allergy 
management
Dry Egg Rice Animal fat /
sunflower oil
Specific CDW food 
allergy 
management
Canned Lamb Rice Soybean oil
Canine Hydrolyzed protein prescription diets in Europe
Producer Product Form Protein source Carbohydrate 
source
Fat source
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic Dry Hydrolyzed soy 
protein / 
hydrolyzed 
poultry liver
Rice Animal fat / 
soybean oil / 
fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
moderate 
energy
Dry Hydrolyzed soy 
protein / 
hydrolyzed 
poultry liver
Rice Animal fat / 
soybean oil / 
fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic 
small dog
Dry Hydrolyzed soy 
protein / 
hydrolyzed 
poultry liver
Rice Animal fat / 
soybean oil / 
fish oil
Purina HA 
hypoallergenic
Dry Hydrolyzed soy 
protein isolate
Starch Vegetable oil / 
canola oil / 
corn oil
Hill’s z/d low 
allergen
Dry Hydrolyzed 
chicken liver / 
hydrolyzed 
chicken
Dried potato 
product / 
potato starch
Vegetable oil
Table 14.3 
(Continued)
(Continued)

===== PDF PAGE 160 =====
146   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Canine Hydrolyzed protein prescription diets in Europe
Producer Product Form Protein source Carbohydrate 
source
Fat source
Hill’s z/d ultra 
allergen free
Dry Hydrolyzed 
chicken liver
Starch Vegetable oil
Hill’s z/d ultra 
allergen free
Canned Hydrolyzed 
chicken liver
Corn starch Vegetable oil
Affinity Advance Hypo 
Allergenic
Dry Hydrolyzed soy 
protein
Corn starch Coconut oil / 
corn oil
Specific CωD‐hy Allergy 
management 
plus
Dry Hydrolyzed 
salmon protein / 
rice protein
Rice Fish oil / pork 
fat / sunflower 
oil
Specific CYD‐HY Food 
allergy 
management
Dry Hydrolyzed 
salmon protein / 
rice protein
Rice Pork fat / 
sunflower oil
Uncommon ingredients feline prescription diets in Europe
Producer Product Form Protein source Carbohydrate 
source
Fat source
Royal 
Canin
Sensitivity control Dry Dehydrated duck 
meat / 
hydrolysed 
poultry proteins / 
rice gluten
Rice Animal fats / 
fish oil / 
soybean oil
Royal 
Canin
Sensitivity control 
duck & rice
Canned Duk /rice protein Rice Fish oil
Royal 
Canin
Sensitivity control 
chicken & rice
Canned Chicken Rice Fish oil
Eukanuba Veterinary diets 
dermatosis lb
Canned Lamb Barley Corn oil
Hill’s d/d skin support 
duck formula
Canned Duck / pea 
protein 
concentrate
Ground green 
pea
Soybean oil / 
fish oil
Hill’s d/d venison 
formula
Dry Pea protein 
extract / venison 
meal / 
hydrolyzed 
poultry liver
Dehydrated 
peas
Animal fat / 
vegetable oil / 
fish oil
Specific CDW food 
allergy 
management
Canned Lamb Rice Soybean oil
Table 14.3 
(Continued)

===== PDF PAGE 161 =====
Adverse food reactions in small animals   147
patients (Table 14.3). However, not all have been tested in dogs and cats with 
known AFR (Leistra, Markwell and Willemse, 2001; Leistra and Willemse, 2002; 
Guilford et al., 2001; Sauter et al., 2006). Over the counter foods with u ncommon 
ingredients should be avoided, since some of them may contain multiple protein 
sources and include traces of common pet food proteins not mentioned on the 
label, as shown in a recent study (Raditic, Remillard and Tater, 2011).
Diets with hydrolyzed proteins
The aim of hydrolyzing proteins is to sufficiently disrupt the protein structure to 
a size that does not trigger an immune response, both in patients already sensi-
tized to the intact protein and in naive individuals. Many dry therapeutic com-
mercial diets exist in the market. These diets use either uncommon carbohydrate 
sources or purified starch.
Feline Hydrolyzed protein prescription diets in Europe
Producer Product Form Protein source Carbohidrate 
source
Fat source
Royal 
Canin
Hypoallergenic Dry Hydrolyzed soy 
protein / 
hydrolyzed 
poultry liver
Rice Animal fat / 
soybean oil / 
fish oil
Purina HA 
Hypoallergenic
Dry Hydrolyzed soy 
protein isolate / 
hydrolyzed 
chicken liver / 
hydrolyzed 
chicken
Rice starch Corn oil
Hill’s z/d low 
allergen
Dry Hydrolyzed 
chicken liver / 
hydrolyzed 
chicken
Brewers rice Soybean oil
Hill’s z/d ultra 
allergen free
Canned Hydrolyzed 
chicken liver
Corn starch Soybean oil
Affinity Advance Hypo 
Allergenic
Dry Hydrolyzed soy 
protein / 
hydrolyzed 
animal protein
Corn starch Coconut oil / 
corn oil
Specific FωD‐HY allergy 
management 
plus
Dry Hydrolyzed 
salmon protein
Rice Fish oil / pork 
fat / sunflower 
oil
Specific FDD‐HY food 
allergy 
management
Dry Hydrolyzed 
salmon protein 
/ rice protein
Rice Pork fat / 
sunflower oil
Table 14.3 
(Continued)

===== PDF PAGE 162 =====
148   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
These diets are good options when the patient has been exposed to multiple 
protein sources or the diet history is incomplete. They have been reported to be 
effective in a high percentage of dogs (Loeffler et al., 2006; Biourge, Fontaine 
and Vroom, 2004; Mandigers et al., 2010a). However, it seems that a small per-
centage of animals sensitive to the intact protein can react to the hydrolysate 
(Jackson et al., 2003; Olivry and Bizikova, 2010) or other ingredients of these 
diets (starch, oils, additives, or new antigens).
Specific considerations
Hospitalized patients
Hospitalized patients diagnosed with AFR
Patients with AFR hospitalized for any reason should have detailed feeding 
instructions in their hospitalization chart. Owners of those patients should be 
asked to clearly specify the regular food currently consumed (and tolerated) by 
the patient and provide some if the hospital does not carry it.
Hospitalized patients with chronic enteropathies
Patients suffering from enteritis (including IBD) might be susceptible to tempo-
rary loss of oral tolerance, which may worsen clinical signs. This concern has led 
to the recommendation of feeding a “sacrificial protein” during recovery in these 
patients during the initial treatment phase (Cave, 2006). After a few weeks, the 
diet can be switched to a commercial diet with novel ingredients or hydrolyzed. 
Another option would be to feed a hydrolyzed protein diet and thus avoid the 
formation of new AFR during recovery and minimize clinical signs and compli-
cations (Cave, 2006).
Thus, in patients with chronic enteropathies or suspected of AFR that are 
hospitalized (e.g. to obtain biopsies) there are several options: use a highly digest-
ible, energy dense diet (“intestinal” type diet) or use a hydrolyzed diet, which is 
also highly digestible and may potentially help with recovery. If an elimination 
trial needs to be instituted at home, the food used while hospitalized should be 
avoided since the patient may have become sensitized to those ingredients.
Hydrolyzed and uncommon ingredient diets can also be used long term for 
chronic enteritis, including IBD patients, since there have been reports of 
improvement using diet, sometimes without the need for immunosuppression 
(Nelson, Stookey and Kazacos, 1998; Guilford et al., 2001; Fogle and Bissett, 
2007; Mandigers et al., 2010b). One study compared the use of a hydrolyzed diet 
with an intestinal‐type diet in the management of chronic small bowel enter -
opathy in dogs and, while both treatments resulted in clinical improvement, the 
dogs on the hydrolyzed diets remained free of signs for a longer period of time 
(Mandigers et al., 2010a).
Diet history
The diet history is key in diagnosis and treatments and should include an 
e xhaustive list of the products regularly supplied to the patients during their 
lifetime, including commercial and human foods, snacks, treats, supple-
ments, chewable medications, human foods and any other available food 

===== PDF PAGE 163 =====
Adverse food reactions in small animals   149
source. This will allow us to choose adequate elimination diets in animals 
suspected of AFR and know what to avoid in hospitalized patients already 
diagnosed with AFR.
The objective of the diet history is to make a list of ingredients the pet has 
been exposed. In the US the majority of pet foods follow AAFCO (Association 
of American Feed Control Officials) regulations and list all their ingredients 
in the label, thus, it is relatively easy to identify them. Diets are subject to 
reformulation which will induce error, but unfortunately this is out of our 
control.
In Europe, current legislation permits to list ingredients as categories (e.g. 
“cereal” and “meat”). In some cases, this makes it close to impossible to make a 
proper list of ingredients the patient has eaten and a hydrolyzed diet or a really 
exotic ingredient might be the best option.
Monitoring and complications
The most common complication is recurrence of clinical signs. Adequate man-
agement of animals with AFR requires avoiding the offending ingredient(s) for 
life using a complete and balanced diet, be it commercial or home cooked. Given 
this life‐long commitment to a single diet, compliance can be an issue, and it can 
be involuntary (animal eating a food meant for another animal, scavenging 
food, unmonitored food source and even changes in formulation of the usual 
diet) or voluntary (owners giving treats and other food items). Client education 
both during the elimination trial and after is key to success (Chesney, 2002, 
Gaschen and Merchant, 2011). Regular visits after diagnosis (every 6–12 months) 
should include a thorough diet history (to check compliance).
Some pets with diagnosed AFR might conceivably develop eventually another 
AFR to ingredients in the new diet. In these cases an alternative diet must be 
found. The other way around could also be possible: in human adults, dietary 
avoidance of the offending foods for 1 to 2 years resulted in the re establishment 
of antigen tolerance in more than 30% of patients with FA (Pastorello et al., 
1989). We do not yet have data in animals in this regard.
Concurrent allergies have been reported (Paterson, 1995; Loeffler et al., 
2004) and may influence the threshold level of clinical signs. It is important to 
keep a strict control of atopic and flea allergic dogs that also have AFR.
Summary
Adverse reactions to food result in chronic non‐specific skin and gastrointestinal 
clinical signs that adversely influence the quality of life of dogs and cats. The 
main treatment consists in avoiding the ingredients responsible for the reaction, 
and for this a complete and detailed diet history is essential. There are several 
diet options available, both commercial and homemade, that either include 
uncommon food ingredients or hydrolyzed protein sources. Care should be 
taken to avoid other sources of potentially damaging substances (e.g., treats, 
human foods, flavoured medication) and regular monitoring is important to 
ensure compliance and avoid recurrence.

===== PDF PAGE 164 =====
150   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
references
Biourge, V. C., Fontaine, J. and Vroom, M. W. (2004) Diagnosis of adverse reactions to food in 
dogs: efficacy of a soy‐isolate hydrolyzate‐based diet. Journal of Nutrition, 134, 2062S–2064S.
Bryan, J. and Frank, L. A. (2010) Food allergy in the cat: a diagnosis by elimination. Journal of 
Feline Medicine and Surgery, 12, 861–866.
Cave, N. J. (2006) Hydrolyzed protein diets for dogs and cats. Veterinary Clinics of North America: 
Small Animal Practice, 36, 1251–1268.
Cave, N. J. and Marks, S. L. (2004) Evaluation of the immunogenicity of dietary proteins in cats 
and the influence of the canning process. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 65(10), 
1427–1433.
Chesney, C. J. (2002) Food sensitivity in the dog: a quantitative study. Journal of Small Animal 
Practice, 43, 203–207.
Fogle, J. E. and Bissett, S. A. (2007) Mucosal immunity and chronic idiopathic enteropathies in 
dogs. Compendium on Continual Education for the Practicing Veterinarian, 29, 290–302.
Garcia, B. E. and Lizaso, M. T. (2011) Cross‐reactivity syndromes in food allergy. Journal of 
Investigational Allergology and Clinical Immunology, 21, 162–170.
Gaschen, F. P. and Merchant, S. R. (2011) Adverse food reactions in dogs and cats. Veterinary 
Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice, 41, 361–379.
Guilford, W. G., Jones, B. R., Markwell, P. J. et al. (2001) Food sensitivity in cats with chronic 
idiopathic gastrointestinal problems. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 15, 7–13.
Guilford, W. G., Markwell, P. J., Jones et al. (1998) Prevalence and causes of food sensitivity in 
cats with chronic pruritus, vomiting or diarrhea. Journal of Nutrition, 128, 2790S–2791S.
Harvey, R. G. (1993) Food allergy and dietary intolerance in dogs ‐ a report of 25 cases. Journal 
of Small Animal Practice, 34, 175–179.
Hensel, P. (2010) Nutrition and skin diseases in veterinary medicine. Clinics in Dermatology, 28, 
686–693.
Hobi, S., Linek, M., Marignac, G. et al. (2011) Clinical characteristics and causes of pruritus in 
cats: a multicentre study on feline hypersensitivity‐associated dermatoses. Veterinary 
Dermatology, 22, 406–413.
Jackson, H. A., Jackson, M. W., Coblentz, L. et al. (2003) Evaluation of the clinical and allergen 
specific serum immunoglobulin E responses to oral challenge with cornstarch, corn, soy and 
a soy hydrolysate diet in dogs with spontaneous food allergy. Veterinary Dermatology, 14, 
181–187.
Jeffers, J. G., Shanley, K. J. and Meyer, E. K. (1991) Diagnostic testing of dogs for food hyper -
sensitivity. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 198, 245–250.
Key poINtS
•	 In most cases, AFR manifests as dermatological problems (mainly non‐seasonal pruritus) 
and non‐specific gastrointestinal problems (such as vomiting and diarrhea).
•	 The gold standard to diagnose AFR is with an elimination–challenge food trial. 
A complete and exhaustive diet history is crucial to the success of this trial.
•	 The main nutritional treatment of animals with AFR is to avoid the offending ingredients. 
Again, a complete diet history is necessary to ensure the success of the treatment.
•	 Homemade or commercial diets can be used for diagnosis and treatment of AFR. 
A specific diet has to be chosen for the particular patient after careful consideration 
of pros and cons of each option.
•	 If homemade diets are used long‐term (longer than the food trial protocol) they must be 
formulated by a veterinary nutritionist to ensure nutritional adequacy.
•	 In hospitalized patients with diagnosed AFR feeding orders must be accurately detailed 
and followed to avoid recurrence of clinical signs while under our care.

===== PDF PAGE 165 =====
Adverse food reactions in small animals   151
Leistra, M. and Willemse, T. (2002) Double‐blind evaluation of two commercial hypoallergenic 
diets in cats with adverse food reactions. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery, 4, 185–188.
Leistra, M. H., Markwell, P. J. and Willemse, T. (2001) Evaluation of selected‐protein‐source 
diets for management of dogs with adverse reactions to foods. Journal of the American Veterinary 
Medical Association, 219, 1411–1414.
Loeffler, A., Lloyd, D. H., Bond et al. (2004) Dietary trials with a commercial chicken hydro-
lysate diet in 63 pruritic dogs. The Veterinary Record, 154, 519–522.
Loeffler, A., Soares‐Magalhaes, R., Bond, R. et al., (2006) A retrospective analysis of case series 
using home‐prepared and chicken hydrolysate diets in the diagnosis of adverse food reactions 
in 181 pruritic dogs. Veterinary Dermatology, 17, 273–279.
Mandigers, P. & German, A. J. (2010) Dietary hypersensitivity in cats and dogs. Tijdschrift voor 
Diergeneeskunde, 135, 706–710.
Mandigers P. J. J., Biourge, V., van den Ingh, T. S. G. A. M. et al. (2010a) A randomized, open‐
label, positively‐controlled field trial of a hydrolyzed protein diet in dogs with chronic small 
bowel enteropathy. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 24, 1350–1357.
Mandigers, P. J., Biourge, V. and German, A. J. (2010b) Efficacy of a commercial hydrolysate 
diet in eight cats suffering from inflammatory bowel disease or adverse reaction to food. 
Tijdschrift voor Diergeneeskunde, 135, 668–672.
Nelson, R. W., Stookey, L. J. & Kazacos, E. (1988) Nutritional management of idiopathic chronic 
colitis in the dog. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 2, 133–137.
Olivry, T. and Bizikova, P. (2010) A systematic review of the evidence of reduced allergenicity 
and clinical benefit of food hydrolysates in dogs with cutaneous adverse food reactions. 
Veterinary Dermatology, 21, 32–41.
Pastorello, E. A., Stocchi, L., Pravettoni, V. et al. (1989) Role of the elimination diet in adults 
with food allergy. The Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 84, 475–483.
Paterson, S. (1995) Food hypersensitivity in 20 dogs with skin and gastrointestinal signs. Journal 
of Small Animal Practice, 36, 529–534.
Philpott, D. J., McKay, D. M., Mak, W. et al. (1998) Signal transduction pathways involved in 
enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli‐induced alterations in T84 epithelial permeability. 
Infection and Immunity, 66, 1680–1687.
Raditic, D. M., Remillard, R. L. and Tater, K. C. (2011) ELISA testing for common food antigens 
in four dry dog foods used in dietary elimination trials. Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal 
Nutrition, 95, 90–97.
Roudebush, P. and Cowell, C. S. (1992) Results of a hypoallergenic diets survey of veterinarians 
in North America with a nutritional evaluation of homemade diet prescriptions. Veterinary 
Dermatology, 3, 23–28.
Sauter, S. N., Benyacoub, J., Allenspach, K. et al. (2006) Effects of probiotic bacteria in dogs 
with food responsive diarrhoea treated with an elimination diet. Journal of Animal Physiology 
and Animal Nutrition, 90, 269–277.
Verlinden, A., Hesta, M., Millet, S. et al. (2006) Food allergy in dogs and cats: a review. Critical 
Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 46, 259–273.
Watson, T. D. (1998) Diet and skin disease in dogs and cats. Journal of Nutrition, 128, 
2783S–2789S.

===== PDF PAGE 166 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
152
Introduction
Short bowel syndrome (SBS) refers to a constellation of clinical signs resulting from 
intestinal malabsorption that develops following extensive resection of the small 
intestines (Yanoff and Willard, 1989). Affected individuals can develop a number of 
nutritional and metabolic disturbances typified by weight loss, chronic diarrhea, 
fluid and electrolyte imbalances. Long‐term survival of patients with SBS is depend-
ent on adaptation of the remaining small intestine and response to pharmacological 
and nutritional management (Wall, 2013). In people, this  syndrome is encountered 
when there is extensive or repeated resection of small bowel for management of 
chronic inflammatory (e.g., Crohn’s disease),  ischaemic or neoplastic processes. 
Disease processes in dogs and cats that may require extensive resection include 
linear foreign bodies, intussusception, mesenteric volvulus or entrapment/ischae-
mia. While there is no defined amount of small intestine that is removed for SBS to 
develop, patients that have > 50% of small intestine resected are believed to be at 
high risk for developing SBS (Urban and Weser, 1980; Wilmore et al., 1997; Wall, 
2013). Although intestinal  resection/anastomosis is a relatively common procedure 
in dogs and cats,  resection of > 50% of the small intestine appears to be uncommon 
(Figure 15.1). Moreover, the development of SBS has mostly been reported in 
experimental reports that have used canine models of the disease and in sporadic 
case reports and case series (Wilmore et al., 1971; Joy and Patterson, 1978; Williams 
and Burrows, 1981; Pawlusiow and McCarthy, 1994; Uchiyama et al., 1996; Yanoff 
et al., 1992; Gorman et al., 2006). Dogs affected by SBS have been reported to have 
watery diarrhea, fluid and electrolyte imbalances and significant weight loss 
(Pawlusiow and McCarthy, 1994; Williams and Burrows, 1981). In the  largest 
 retrospective study in dogs and cats published thus far, no relationship between the 
percentage of resected intestines and the development of SBS has been identified 
(Gorman et al., 1996). Although data on this syndrome and response rate to 
 treatment in dogs and cats is scarce, there are some general considerations in 
respect to drug and nutritional therapy that can be used in animals at high risk for 
developing SBS and these will be discussed in this chapter.
Nutritional management of short 
bowel syndrome in dogs and cats
Daniel L. Chan
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
Chapter 15

===== PDF PAGE 167 =====
Nutritional management of short bowel syndrome in dogs and cats   153
pathophysiology
Following extensive resection of the small intestines, postprandial motility is 
altered, leading to delayed gastric emptying and increased intestinal transit 
times in other segments of small intestines (Johnson et al., 1996). Loss of 
absorptive surface compromises adequate absorption of water, electrolytes and 
other nutrients. Incomplete digestion and absorption of nutrients may result in 
osmotic diarrhea. In addition, unabsorbed bile acids and fatty acids may lead to 
secretory diarrhea in the large bowel. Clinical manifestations of SBS include 
dehydration, vomiting, diarrhea, cramping and weight loss. Diarrhea may be 
intermittent or persistent. In chronic cases, animals may become  catabolic with 
significant muscle wasting despite being polyphagic. In cases where the ileum 
is removed, there is also bile acid and vitamin B 12 (i.e.,  cobalamin) malabsorp -
tion. Findings on hematology and serum biochemistry are not specific although 
findings of hypoalbuminemia, mild, normocytic,  normochromic non‐  
regenerative anemia may be present. The  presence of  microcytic anemia may 
be suggestive of cobalamin deficiency.
Through a process of intestinal recovery and adaptation, the presence of 
luminal nutrients stimulates the remaining small intestine to undergo a period 
of hypertrophy and hyperplasia, which may continue for several weeks to 
months. Exposure to luminal contents, endogenous GI secretions, trophic 
effects of gut hormones (especially epidermal growth factor, enteroglucagon 
and gastrin), intraluminal polyamines, and neural factors all contribute to 
adaptation of the remaining bowel (Cisler and Buchman, 2005). Dilatation, 
lengthening and  thickening of the intestine are observed, along with epithelial 
cell proliferation in intestinal crypts and migration of cells into intestinal villi 
(Thompson, Quigley and Adrian, 1999; Cisler and Buchman, 2005). The colon 
also becomes an  important digestive organ in patients with SBS (Jeppensen 
and Mortensen, 1998). Sodium, water and some amino acids are absorbed 
in the colon, as well as energy from absorbed short‐chain fatty acids (Jeppensen 
Figure 15.1 Extensive resection of bowel in dogs and cats is not performed commonly but 
may be required in cases with extreme devitalization of intestines, as depicted in this picture 
of a dog with intestinal volvulus. Source: Elvin Kulendra. Reproduced with permission of 
Elvin Kulendra.

===== PDF PAGE 168 =====
154   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
and Mortensen, 1998). Thus, a source of readily available fermentable fiber 
should be included in all diets, while insoluble fiber should be kept to a 
 minimum to maximize nutrient digestibility (Roth et al., 1995). Short‐chain 
fatty acids promote mucosal  hyperplasia and thus support further bowel 
 adaptation. Intestinal adaptation is typified by enterocyte hyperplasia, increases 
in bowel diameter, villous height, crypt depth and enterocyte density. Ideally, 
these physical changes will increase the bowel’s absorptive capacity. Mucosal 
changes may start to occur within a few days and can result in a fourfold 
increase in mucosal surface area within 14 days, if intraluminal contents are 
provided (Vanderhoof et al., 1992).
Nutritional management strategies
In the initial post‐operative period following extensive bowel resection (e.g., 
> 50% of bowel removed), there should be consideration for parenteral 
 nutritional  support initially, with introduction of a small amount of enteral 
nutrition within days  following surgery (Figure 15.2). Long‐term dietary man-
agement is  complex and needs to be individualized for each patient depending 
on residual intestinal  function and nutritional status. In addition to nutrient 
intake,  management of SBS also requires appropriate oral rehydration, vitamin 
and mineral supplementation and pharmacotherapy. Several medications pro -
vide a useful adjunctive  function to  dietary intervention, including antidiar -
rheal agents (e.g., loperamide), H 2 antagonists (e.g., famotidine) and proton 
pump inhibitors (e.g., omeprazole) and  antimicrobials. Future therapy will 
likely involve direct stimulation of intestinal adaptation through the adminis -
tration of trophic factors such as glucagon‐like  protein 2 (GLP‐2) (Bechtold 
et al., 2014) and is discussed in a later section.
Figure 15.2 Patients with extensive small bowel resection, such as the cat depicted in this 
picture, may require initial nutritional management consisting of parenteral nutrition (as has 
been done in this case) with gradual introduction of enteral nutrition.

===== PDF PAGE 169 =====
Nutritional management of short bowel syndrome in dogs and cats   155
Specific recommendations based on resultant GI integrity
If only the jejunum is resected, long‐term management will require feeding 
multiple small meals throughout the day as this may help with improving 
absorption and decrease episodes of vomiting. Diets should have very high 
digestibility, as is typical in super‐premium and prescription diets. Fat content 
should be limited to a maximum of 25% of metabolized energy as excessive fat 
will exacerbate diarrhea and vomiting. Dietary fiber is important to stimulate 
intestinal adaptation, maximize colonic absorption and bind unabsorbed bile 
acids. However, excessive fiber will decrease digestibility, impair nutrient absorp-
tion, and may exacerbate diarrhea. Supplementing the diet with psyllium or 
wheat bran may be helpful. Diets with high non‐fermentable fiber (e.g., 
 cellulose), although low in fat, are not recommended.
If there is greater than 50% of small intestines removed including partial 
resection of the ilium bile salt‐induced diarrhea may develop that may not be 
controlled with increased dietary fiber. The addition of cholestyramine (100–300 
mg/kg PO q 12 h) may help bind bile salts. Supplemental taurine is advised in 
dogs and cats with long‐term cholestyramine treatment as obligate losses of tau-
rine will be increased with binding of bile salts. Vitamin B
12 supplementation 
250 μg (cats) or 500 μg (dogs) subcutaneously or intramuscularly, weekly for 
4 weeks then every 1–4 weeks as indicated, may also be advised.
If there is complete resection of the ilium fat restriction is absolutely 
required and diets may have to be formulated to contain less than 20% calories 
from fat. With massive (>70% resection of jejunum and ileum), PN may be 
initially required for several days. Enteral feeding should be initiated as soon 
as feasible as introduction of enteral feeding will help with bowel adaptation, 
however, the amount of enteral feeding tolerated may be small. The 
 introduction of enteral feeding can be very gradual within a couple of days 
postoperatively, supplying as little as 25% of resting energy requirements. This 
amount of enteral feeding may be sufficient to provide luminal benefits and 
stimulate trophic factors. These patients will also require medical management 
including cholestyramine therapy, taurine and parenteral vitamin B
12 supple-
mentation, as described above.
Special considerations
Removal of the ileocolic valve removes the physical barrier that separates the 
 profuse bacterial flora of the colon and this could lead to small intestinal 
 bacterial overgrowth. Using diets with prebiotic fructooligosaccharides (FOS) 
have been proposed to help with small intestinal bacterial overgrowth so it 
may be helpful in cases with SBS. As there are commercial diets designed with 
low fat, high  fermentable fiber content with added FOS, such diets may be 
ideal for patients with SBS.
As glutamine is a primary energy source for enterocytes, it has been extensively 
studied in the context of intestinal adaptation (Lund et al., 1990; Rhoads et al., 
1991; Tamada et al., 1993). In animal models, the use of glutamine induces intesti-
nal adaptation by increasing the length of intestinal villi and thereby increases 
absorption capacity (Lund et al., 1990; Rhoads et al., 1991; Tamada et al., 1993). 

===== PDF PAGE 170 =====
156   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Growth hormone (in the form of recombinant human growth hormone) has 
similarly been evaluated for its capacity to increase body weight, lean body 
mass in human patients with SBS (Ellegard et al., 1997; Seguy et al., 2003). A 
series of studies combining glutamine and growth hormone in patients with 
SBS have yielded mixed results and, unfortunately, the effects appear to 
require continual use, the therapy is expensive and does not affect overall 
clinical outcome (Bechtold et al., 2014).
Teduglutide, an analogue of glucagon‐like peptide 2 (GLP‐2) has been 
shown to be a promising and key agent in stimulating intestinal adaptation 
and a series of studies have demonstrated reduction of diarrhea, improvement 
in intestinal structure, reduction of PN‐dependence and some resolution in 
some patients with SBS (Jeppesen et al., 2001; Haderslev et al., 2002; Jeppesen 
et al., 2011; O’Keefe et al., 2013). However, this drug is not without serious 
side‐effects and is associated with prolific trophic effect on intestinal mucosa to 
the point of causing partial or complete intestinal obstruction in some patients 
with SBS (Jeppesen et al., 2011; O’Keefe et al., 2013). As a potent growth fac-
tor, teduglutide could also promote growth of intestinal neoplasms (Bechtold 
et al., 2014). Currently, there are no reports on the use of tediglutide in ani-
mals with SBS.
Monitoring and complications
Animals that have undergone extensive bowel resection should be assessed on a 
weekly to biweekly basis for tolerance to enteral feeding, stool quality and body 
condition. Additionally, assessing for the presence of anemia is advised as this 
may require vitamin B
12 supplementation. Prognosis for patients with SBS can 
be variable, with some cases stabilizing with appropriate medical and nutritional 
management. Response to treatment does not appear to be predictable based on 
length of intestine removed (Gorman et al., 2006).
Summary
Short bowel syndrome may be a serious sequelae to extensive bowel resection 
comprising at least > 50% of length of the bowel, although the precise 
 percentage of bowel removed that is required to trigger SBS has not been 
 demonstrated in dogs or cats. In animals that undergo extensive bowel resec-
tion, there should be consideration for providing parenteral nutrition initially 
with gradual  introduction of enteral feeding within a couple of days following 
surgery. Patients  displaying clinical signs of SBS should be managed with anti‐
diarrheal agents, antacids, parenteral vitamin injections and nutritional sup-
port. The recommended dietary strategy includes frequent and small meals, 
and use of a diet that is restricted in fat and high in fermentable fiber. There is 
insufficient evidence to recommend glutamine or growth hormone in dogs at 
risk for developing SBS, but some human patients with SBS may respond to 
such therapy. Newer pharmacological agents that have been identified to be 
potent trophic factors could be used in the future in animals with SBS but as 
yet are untried in veterinary patients.

===== PDF PAGE 171 =====
Nutritional management of short bowel syndrome in dogs and cats   157
references
Bechtold, M.L., McClave, S.A., Palmer, L.B. et al. (2014) The pharmacologic treatment of short 
bowel syndrome: New Tricks and Novel Agents. Current Gastroenterology Reports, 16:392, doi: 
10.1007/s11894‐014‐0392‐2.
Cisler, J.J. and Buchman, A.L. (2005) Intestinal adaptation in short bowel syndrome. Journal of 
Investigative Medicine, 53, 402–413.
Ellegard, L., Bosaeus, I., Nordgren, S. et al. (1997) Low‐dose recombinant human growth hor-
mone increases body weight and lean body mass in patients with short bowel syndrome. 
Annals of Surgery, 225, 88–96.
Gorman, S.C., Freeman, L.M., Mitchell, S.L. et al. (2006) Extensive small bowel resection in 
dogs and cats: 20 cases (1998–2004). Journal of the American Veterinary Medicine Association, 
228, 403–407.
Jeppensen, P.B. and Mortensen, P.B. (1998) The influence of a preserved colon on the absorp-
tion of medium chain fat in patients with small bowel resection. Gut, 43, 478–83.
Jeppesen, P.B., Hartmann, B., Thulesen, J. et al. (2001) Glucagon‐like peptide 2 improves nutri-
ent absorption and nutritional status in short‐bowel patients with no colon. Gastroenterology, 
120, 806–815.
Jeppesen, P.B., Gilroy, R., Perkiewicz, M. et al. (2011) Randomized placebo‐controlled trial of 
teduglutide in reducing parenteral nutrition and/or intravenous fluid requirements in 
patients with short bowel syndrome. Gut, 60, 902–914.
Johnson, C.P., Sarna, S.K., Zhu, Y.R. et al. (1996) Delayed gastroduodenal emptying is an 
important mechanism for control of intestinal transit in short‐gut syndrome. American Journal 
of Surgery, 171, 90–95.
Joy, C.L. and Patterson, J.M. (1978) Short bowel syndrome following surgical correction of a 
double intussusception in a dog. Canadian Veterinary Journal, 19, 254–259.
Haderslev, K.V., Jeppesen, P.B., Hartmenn, B. et al. (2002) Short‐term administration of 
glucagon‐like peptide‐2. Effects on bone mineral density and markers of bone turnover in 
short bowel syndrome patients with no colon. Scandinavian Journal of Gastroenterology, 37, 
392–398.
Lund, P.K., Ulshen M.H., Rountree, D.B. et al. (1990) Molecular biology of gastrointestinal 
peptides and growth factors: relevance to intestinal adaptation. Digestion, 46, Suppl 2, 
66–73.
Key poINtS
•	 Short	bowel	syndrome	results	from	severe	intestinal	malabsorption	that	develops	
following	extensive	resection	of	the	small	intestines.
•	 Affected	individuals	can	develop	a	number	of	nutritional	and	metabolic	disturbances	
typified	by	weight	loss,	chronic	diarrhea,	fluid	and	electrolyte	imbalances.
•	 A	definitive	percentage	of	bowel	that	needs	to	be	resected	to	trigger	short	bowel	
syndrome	in	dogs	has	not	been	established,	although	those	with	>50%	of	bowel	
resected	are	believed	to	be	at	high	risk.
•	 Survival	of	affected	patients	depends	on	the	ability	of	the	remaining	intestines	and	colon	
to	adapt	and	cope	with	digestion	and	assimilation.
•	 Main	nutritional	strategy	includes	feeding	small	and	frequent	meals	using	a	diet	
restricted	in	fat	and	high	in	fermentable	fibre.
•	 Some	affected	patients	also	require	long‐term	therapy	with	anti‐diarrheal	agents,	
antacids	and	antimicrobial	agents.
•	 Goals	for	management	include	improvement	in	fecal	quality,	decreased	fecal	output,	
improved	body	weight	and	body	condition	score.

===== PDF PAGE 172 =====
158   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
O’Keefe, S.J., Jeppesen, P.B., Gilroy, R. et al. (2013) Safety and efficacy of teduglutide after 52 
weeks of treatment in patients with short bowel intestinal failure. Clinical Gastroenterology 
Hepatology, 11, 815–823.
Pawlusiow, J.I. and McCarthy, R.J. (1994). Dietary management of short bowel syndrome in a 
dog. Veterinary Clinical Nutrition, 1, 163–170.
Rhoads, J.M., Keku, E.O., Quinn, J. et al. (1991) L‐glutamine stimulates jejunal sodium and 
chloride absorption in pig rotavirus enteritis. Gastroenterology, 100, 683–691.
Roth, J.A., Frankel, W.L., Zhang, W. et al (1995) Pectin improves colonic function in rat short 
bowel syndrome. Journal of Surgical Research, 58, 240–246.
Seguy, D., Vahedi, K., Kapel, N. et al. (2003) Low‐dose growth hormone in adult home paren-
teral nutrition‐dependent short bowel syndrome patients: a positive study. Gastroenterology, 
124, 293–302.
Tamada, H., Nezu, E.O., Quinn, J. et al. (1993) Alanyl‐glutamine‐enriched total parenteral nutri-
tion restores intestinal adaptation. Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition, 17, 236–242.
Thompson, J.S., Quigley, E.M. and Adrian, T.E. (1999) Factors affecting outcome following prox-
imal and distal intestinal resection in the dog: an examination of the relative roles of mucosal 
adaptation, motility, luminal factors, and enteric peptides. Digestive Disease Science, 44, 63–74.
Uchiyama, M., Iwafuchi, M., Matsuda, Y. et al. (1996) Intestinal motility after massive small 
bowel resection in conscious canines: comparison of acute and chronic phases. Journal of 
Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, 23, 217–223.
Urban, E. and Weser, E. (1980) Intestinal adaptation to bowel resection. Advances in Internal 
Medicine, 26, 265–291.
Vanderhoof, J.A., Lagnas, A.N., Pinch, L.W. et al. (1992) Short Bowel Syndrome. Journal of 
Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, 14, 559–570.
Wall, E.A. (2013) An overview of short bowel syndrome management: adherence, adaptation, and 
practical recommendations. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, 113, 1200–1208.
Wilmore, D.W., Byren, T.A., Persinger R.L. et al. (1997) Short bowel syndrome: new therapeu-
tic approaches. Current Problems in Surgery, 34, 389–444.
Williams D.A. and Burrows C.F, (1981) Short bowel syndrome—a case report in a dog and discus-
sion of the pathophysiology of bowel resection. Journal of Small Animal Practice, 22, 263–265.
Yanoff S.R., Willard M.D., Boothe H.W. et al. (1992) Short‐bowel syndrome in four dogs. 
Veterinary Surgery, 21, 217–222.
Yanoff S.R. and Willard, M.D. (1989) Short bowel syndrome in dogs and cats. Seminars in 
Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, 4, 226–231.

===== PDF PAGE 173 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
159
Introduction
Refeeding syndrome refers to a potentially fatal constellation of metabolic derange-
ments that occur upon refeeding a patient with an extended period of complete 
anorexia or severe malnutrition (Crook, Hally and Panteli, 2001; Kraft, Btaiche and 
Sacks, 2005). These metabolic derangements include severe hypophosphatemia, 
hypomagnesemia, hypokalemia, hyponatremia, hypocalcemia, hyperglycemia 
and vitamin deficiencies (Skipper, 2012). Clinical manifestations of these abnor-
malities include peripheral edema, hemolytic anemia, cardiac failure, neurological 
 dysfunction and respiratory failure. Many of these metabolic changes are believed 
to result from sudden release of insulin (stimulated by carbohydrate intake) in the 
presence of total body nutrient depletion. The successful management and  refeeding 
of a patient with a history of prolonged starvation, therefore, involves careful use 
of fluid therapy, frequent monitoring of electrolytes, conservative nutritional ther-
apy, and support of cardiac and respiratory function.
Pathophysiology
Refeeding syndrome is believed to result when enteral or parenteral nutrition is 
fed to starved or severely malnourished patients (Figure 16.1) leading to changes 
and redistribution of fluid and electrolytes that cannot be accommodated by the 
weakened cardiovascular system. (Skipper, 2012). These patients often have an 
intracellular depletion of electrolytes that may not be identified on evaluation of 
serum electrolytes. Upon refeeding, there is increased utilization of phosphorus 
and magnesium to drive metabolic pathways of substrates (e.g., glycolysis) and to 
act as co‐factors for adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthesis. This increased 
 intracellular need, in conjunction with cotransport of potassium into the cell with 
insulin‐driven glucose uptake, results in the further depletion of these electro-
lytes. Hypophosphatemia is the most common and consistent abnormality seen 
Refeeding syndrome in 
small animals
Daniel L. Chan
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
ChaPter 16

===== PDF PAGE 174 =====
160   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
in refeeding syndrome and also results in many of the complications seen. 
Moreover, depletion of magnesium and potassium contribute to the clinical man-
ifestation of this syndrome. The ensuing depletion in phosphate results in neuro-
muscular, cardiovascular and respiratory compromise (e.g., diaphragmatic muscle 
fatigue, respiratory failure). Arrhythmias could be induced by hypokakemia in 
combination with hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia. Upregulation of carbohy-
drate metabolism may also explain the increased demand for magnesium and 
thiamine, which then leads to neurological and neuromuscular complications 
(Crook et al., 2001; Kraft et al., 2005; Skipper, 2012). Typically, refeeding syn -
drome occurs within the first 2 to 5 days after initiation of feeding (Skipper, 2012), 
but signs can be detected within hours of refeeding or delayed up to 10 days 
(Armitage‐Chan, O’Toole and Chan, 2006; Hofer et al., 2014).
Systemic responses to prolonged starvation reported in people with severe 
weight loss secondary to anorexia nervosa include severe bradycardia, hypothermia 
and hypoventilation. These changes reflect a decrease in resting metabolic rate that 
occurs within a few days of anorexia. Decreased energy expenditure stems from 
decreased insulin activity, reduction of glucose utilization, and loss of  metabolically 
active lean body mass (Crook et al., 2001). Skeletal muscle wasting and reduction in 
respiratory muscle function leads to poor shivering ability and further compromises 
ventilatory function and body temperature regulation. Eventually, decreased myo-
cardial mass and ventricular contractility occur, leading to decreased cardiac output. 
The reported incidence of cardiovascular related complications in anorexia nervosa 
is high (up to 95%), and these include bradycardia, postural hypotension, fluid 
overload and cardiac arrhythmias, and result in a high incidence of cardiovascular‐
related mortality (Crook et al., 2001; Mehler et al., 2010).
During starvation, depletion of electrolytes, such as potassium and 
 magnesium, occurs because of decreased dietary intake. Catabolism of fat and 
muscle also contributes to further electrolyte losses. Adjustments in renal elec -
trolyte excretion maintain serum concentrations and clinical signs of  electrolyte 
depletion may not be seen initially. During refeeding, intake of carbohydrate 
stimulates insulin release, resulting in conversion from a  catabolic to an ana -
bolic state, which increases cellular demand for  phosphorus, potassium and 
water. Newly synthesized cells require potassium for maintenance of electrical 
gradients and translocate serum potassium and phosphorus intracellularly. 
Figure 16.1 Severely malnourished 
animals (weight loss > 20%) such as the 
cat depicted above that had been missing 
for 6 weeks, should be considered at high 
risk of developing refeeding syndrome 
and require special nutritional 
management strategies to ensure safe 
nutritional recovery.

===== PDF PAGE 175 =====
Refeeding syndrome in small animals   161
Stimulated processes, such as glycolysis and protein synthesis, also require 
 cellular uptake of phosphate and magnesium. The increase in cellular activity 
resulting from insulin release therefore rapidly increases the cellular require-
ment for magnesium, depleting serum magnesium concentration. As starvation 
leads to whole‐body depletion of these electrolytes, cellular translocation can 
cause severe serum depletion and life‐threatening complications. Inorganic 
phosphate is required for generation of ATP and 2,3‐diphosphoglycerate (2,3‐
DPG). Protein phosphorylation is also required for many intracellular enzy-
matic processes. Hypophosphatemia decreases ATP synthesis causing an energy 
deficit that is responsible for many of the clinical signs associated with refeeding 
syndrome. Refeeding‐associated hypophosphatemia has been reported previ-
ously in cats when it resulted in hemolytic anemia (Justin and Honenhaus, 
1995). Thiamine deficiency is an important component of refeeding syndrome 
in people and has also been reported in cats (Justin and Hohenhaus, 1995; 
Armitage‐Chan et al., 2006; Brenner, KuKanich and Smee, 2011). Signs of thia-
mine deficiency include ataxia, vestibular dysfunction and visual disturbances. 
Thiamine is a cofactor in many enzymatic  reactions involved in carbohydrate 
metabolism and clinical deficiencies may develop as refeeding of carbohydrates 
dramatically increases cellular thiamine utilization.
There is a single report of apparent refeeding syndrome in dogs that were 
starved then fed with enteral hyperalimentation resulting in hypophosphatemia, 
hemolytic anemia and neurological signs (Silvis, DiBartolomeo and Aaker, 1980). 
However, given the lack of any other information, it is unknown whether dogs 
with severe malnutrition are at increased risk for developing refeeding syndrome.
Nutritional management strategies
The risk of developing refeeding syndrome may be related to the degree of prior 
malnutrition, although it has been reported to occur in critically ill patients after a 
brief period of starvation (48 hours). (Marik and Bedigian, 1996; Ornstein et al., 
2003). Proposed guidelines for identification of patients at high risk for developing 
refeeding syndrome in people include decreased body mass index (BMI), uninten-
tional weight loss >10% in previous 3 to 6 months, complete lack of food intake, 
decreased serum concentrations of potassium, phosphorus or magnesium before 
initiation of feeding (Mehler et al., 2010). General guidelines for the prevention of 
refeeding syndrome state that nutritional support should not be initiated prior to 
correction of fluid and electrolyte imbalances. Once stabilization is achieved, 
 nutrition should be administered gradually and only increased incrementally. 
Recommendations for prevention of refeeding complications in people suggest 
that initial refeeding should not exceed 20 kcal/kg/day (Crook et al., 2001). 
Refeeding syndrome has been reported to occur in cats fed only approximately 
6 kcal/kg/day; it is therefore possible that refeeding complications in cats may be 
triggered at a lower level of caloric intake than is typically seen with people (Justin 
and Hohenhaus, 1995;Armitage‐Chan et al., 2006). A loading dose of thiamine 
administered before initiation of feeding, followed by daily injections until day 3 
of nutritional therapy is recommended (Solomon and Kirby, 1990; Stanga et al., 
2008; Boateng et al., 2010; Sriram, Manzanares and Joseph, 2012).

===== PDF PAGE 176 =====
162   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Although there is insufficient information available from dogs and cats at risk 
for developing refeeding syndrome, protocols for reducing the risk for this disorder 
are available in people. In a protocol proposed by Hofer et al., (2014), which has 
been adopted by the European Society of Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism 
(ESPEN), there should be careful patient assessment of patients at risk for develop-
ing refeeding syndrome, restoration of fluid balance without overloading the car-
diovascular system, initiation empirical supplementation of phosphate, potassium 
and magnesium (unless serum concentrations of these electrolytes are increased), 
initiation of thiamine and other B vitamins and trace minerals with the exception 
of iron (Hofer et al., 2014). The caloric intake is gradually increased from 10 kcal/
kg to 30 kcal/kg over the course of 10 days with daily monitoring of potassium, 
phosphate, magnesium and glucose (Hofer et al., 2014).
Extrapolating from recommendations in people and recommended supple-
mentation regimens in animals, a sensible approach would be to empirically 
 supplement high risk patients with phosphate at 0.01–0.03 mmol/kg/h, potassium 
at 0.05 mEq/kg/h, and magnesium at 0.01 to 0.02 mEq/kg/h for the first 24 hours 
of therapy, provided the patient does not have any of these electrolytes above the 
reference interval for the first 3 days. Thiamine should be administered prior to 
feeding at 25 mg total dose (cats) or 100 mg total dose (dogs) either subcutane-
ously or intramuscularly daily until signs resolve. When nutritional  support is 
instituted, no greater than 20% of RER should be provided on the first day and 
nutritional support should be increased gradually over 4–10 days.
Monitoring
Patients considered at risk for developing refeeding syndrome should be moni-
tored daily as successful treatment may be dependent on identifying this condi-
tion in the early stages. Body weight, urine output, serum electrolytes (i.e., 
phosphorus, potassium, magnesium, calcium) electrocardiography, haematocrit, 
presence of hemolysis, serum glucose, cardiovascular and respiratory function 
should be monitored closely. Detection of metabolic abnormalities should 
prompt adjustments of nutritional therapy along with further correction of 
serum electrolyte concentrations.
Summary
Refeeding syndrome is an uncommon but potentially fatal complication associated 
with the initiation of nutritional support in severely malnourished animals, par-
ticularly cats. Typical metabolic derangements include severe hypophosphatemia, 
hypomagnesemia, hypokalemia, hyponatremia, hypocalcemia, hyperglycemia 
and vitamin deficiencies. Clinical manifestations of these abnormalities include 
peripheral edema, hemolytic anemia, cardiac failure, neurological dysfunction 
and respiratory failure. The successful management and refeeding of a patient 
with a history of prolonged starvation involves careful use of fluid therapy, 
 nutritional replacement, and support of cardiac and respiratory function. Before 
initiation of feeding, patients should be supplemented with thiamine as well as 
phosphorus, potassium and magnesium. Energy targets should be very  conservative 

===== PDF PAGE 177 =====
Refeeding syndrome in small animals   163
(e.g., 20% of RER on the first day) and only gradually increasing over the next 
several days. With careful management of cases at risk for developing refeeding 
syndrome, nutritional support can play a key role in the recovery of these patients.
references
Armitage‐Chan, E.A., O’Toole, T. and Chan, D.L. (2006) Management of prolonged food depri-
vation, hypothermia, and refeeding syndrome in a cat. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and 
Critical Care, 16, S34–S41.
Boateng, A.A., Sriram, K., Meguid, M.M. et al. (2010) Refeeding syndrome: treatment consid-
erations based on collective analysis of literature case reports. Journal of Nutrition, 
26,156–67.
Brenner, K., KuKanich, K.S. and Smee, N.M. (2011) Refeeding syndrome in a cat with hepatic 
lipidosis. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery, 13, 614–617.
Crook, M.A., Hally, V. and Panteli, J.V. (2001) The importance of the refeeding syndrome 
Nutrition. 17, 632–637.
Hofer, M., Pozzi, A., Joray, M. et al. (2014) Safe refeeding management of anorexia nervosa 
inpatients: an evidence‐based protocol. Journal of Nutrition, 30, 524–530.
Justin, R.B. and Hohenhaus, A.E. (1995) Hypophosphatemia associated with enteral alimenta-
tion in cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 9, 228–233.
Kraft, M.D., Btaiche, I.F. and Sacks, G.S. (2005) Review of the refeeding syndrome. Nutrition in 
Clinical Practice, 20, 625–633.
Marik, P.E. and Bedigian, M.K. (1996) Refeeding hypophosphatemia in critically ill patients in 
an intensive care unit A prospective study. Archives of Surgery, 131,1043–1047.
Mehler, P.S., Winkelman, A.B., Andersen, D.M. et al. (2010) Nutritional rehabilitation: Practical 
guidelines for refeeding the anorectic patient. Journal of Nutrition and Metabolism, pii: 625782. 
doi: 10.1155/2010/625782
Ornstein, R.M., Golden, N.H., Jacobson, M.S. et al. (2003) Hypophosphatemia during nutri-
tional rehabilitation in anorexia nervosa: implications for refeeding and monitoring. Journal 
of Adolescent Health, 32, 83–88.
Skipper, A. (2012) Refeeding syndrome or refeeding hypophosphatemia: a systematic review of 
cases. Nutrition in Clinical Practice, 27, 34–40.
Key PoINtS
•	 Metabolic	derangements	associated	with	refeeding	syndrome	include	severe	
hypophosphatemia,	hypomagnesemia,	hypokalemia,	hyponatremia,	hypocalcemia,	
hyperglycemia	and	thiamine	deficiency.
•	 Clinical	manifestations	of	these	abnormalities	include	peripheral	edema,	hemolytic	
anemia,	cardiac	failure,	neurological	dysfunction	and	respiratory	failure.
•	 Many	of	these	metabolic	changes	are	believed	to	result	from	sudden	release	of	insulin	
(stimulated	by	carbohydrate	intake)	in	the	presence	of	total	body	nutrient	depletion.
•	 Proposed	recommendations	for	reducing	risk	of	refeeding	syndrome	include	empirically	
supplementing	phosphate,	potassium,	and	magnesium	for	the	first	24	hours	of	therapy,	
provided	the	patient	does	not	have	any	of	these	electrolytes	above	the	reference	interval	
for	the	first	3	days.
•	 Thiamine	should	be	administered	prior	to	feeding	at	25	mg	total	dose	(cats)	or	100	mg	
total	dose	(dogs)	either	subcutaneously	or	intramuscularly	daily	until	signs	resolve.
•	 When	nutritional	support	is	instituted,	no	greater	than	20%	of	RER	should	be	provided	on	
the	first	day	and	this	target	is	gradually	increased	to	100%	RER	over	the	next	several	days

===== PDF PAGE 178 =====
164   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Silvis, S.E., DiBartolomeo, A.G. and Aaker, H.M. (1980) Hypophosphatemia and neurological 
changes secondary to oral caloric intake: a variant of hyperalimentation syndrome. American 
Journal of Gastroenterology, 73, 215–222.
Solomon, S. and Kirby, D. (1990) The refeeding syndrome: a review. Journal of Parenteral and 
Enteral Nutrition, 14, 90–97.
Sriram, K., Manzanares, W. and Joseph, K. (2012) Thiamine in nutrition therapy. Nutrition in 
Clinical Practice, 27, 41–50.
Stanga, Z., Brunner, A., Leuenberger, M. et al. (2008) Nutrition in clinical practice – the refeed-
ing syndrome: illustrative cases and guidelines for prevention and treatment. European 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2, 687–694.

===== PDF PAGE 179 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
165
Introduction
For normal gastrointestinal(GI) function and digestion, maintenance of GI 
m otility is essential. As the GI tract is frequently affected by disease and pharma­
cological agents for treatment of various conditions, GI dysmotility disorders are 
commonly encountered complications in critically ill people (Adam and Baston, 
1997; Fruhwald, Holzer and Metzler, 2007). In animals the most commonly 
r ecognized GI dysmotility disorders include esophageal dysmotility, delayed 
 gastric emptying, functional intestinal obstruction (ileus) and colonic motility 
abnormalities (Washabau, 2003; Boillat et al., 2010).
Most GI dysmotility disorders in small animals occur secondary to an 
u nderlying disease process or following surgery and are therefore very common 
in hospitalized patients. It is important to recognize GI motility disorders early in 
these patients in order to initiate appropriate treatment, which usually consists 
of changes in nutritional therapy and may require GI motility modifying 
t herapies. In this chapter, common GI motility disorders in hospitalized patients 
and their management will be discussed.
Pathophysiology of GI dysmotility disorders
Esophageal motility disturbances are frequently encountered in hospitalized 
patients. For example, in patients requiring mechanical ventilation, the frequency, 
amplitude, and percentage of propulsive contractions of the esophagus are 
reduced (Kölbel et al., 2000). The most pressing clinical concern with o esophageal 
dysmotility disorders is the development of gastroesophageal reflux, esophagitis, 
and subsequent aspiration (Nind et al., 2005).
Delayed gastric emptying, or gastric stasis, has been associated with many 
d iseases in veterinary patients, including both primary and secondary disorders. 
Delayed gastric emptying is a functional disorder caused by defects in myenteric 
neuronal and gastric smooth‐muscle function, leading to impaired emptying of 
Feeding small animal patients with 
gastrointestinal motility disorders
Karin Allenspach1 and Daniel L. Chan2
1 Department of Clinical Science and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
2 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
ChaPter 17

===== PDF PAGE 180 =====
166   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
digesta from the stomach. The pathophysiology of delayed gastric emptying in 
critically ill human and small animal patients is not fully understood. Normally, the 
gastric antrum in the stomach acts as a pump for peristaltic waves passing through 
the rest of the GI tract. This so‐called ‘antral pump’ is stimulated by distension of 
the gastric body, which excites mechano‐ and chemo‐receptors to produce acetyl­
choline, which in turn leads to excitation of afferent nerves and, finally, to antral 
contractions. One theory suggests that delayed gastric emptying is the result of a 
primary motor dysfunction (“pump failure”), resulting in decreased antral motility 
and the presence of the fasting motility pattern during feeding (Dive et al., 1994).
Another theory for delayed gastric emptying relates to neuroendocrine 
feedback mechanisms. Normally, the release of choleocystokinin (CCK) by 
the i ntestinal epithelium after sensing luminal hydrochloric acid, amino acids 
and fatty acids provides feedback to the antrum that contractions should 
diminish, which leads to relaxation of the gastric body. Once the chyme 
arrives in the distal small intestine, glucagon‐like peptide 1 (GLP‐1) is released 
from the intestinal epithelium which again provides negative feedback on 
gastric e mptying (Hall and Washabau, 1999). This phenomenon is called ‘ileal 
brake’ (Lin et al., 1996). The rate of gastric emptying in dogs is regulated to a 
large degree by the composition of the diet, with the amount of moisture, fat, 
protein and carbohydrates all playing a role. During some disease states there 
appears to be a disproportionate activation of an inhibitory feedback pathway 
originating in the proximal small intestine or duodenum (“excessive feed­
back”) leading to inhibitioning and vagal and spinal afferent neurons and 
delayed gastric e mptying. (Chapman, Nguyen and Fraser, 2005).
In the small intestine, three types of motility patterns occur: peristaltic waves, 
which move chyme aborally over long intestinal segments, stationary contrac­
tions which segment the chyme for better absorption, and clusters of contraction 
which mix the chyme over short segments in aboral movements. Diarrhea is 
associated with the occurrence of pathologic giant aboral contractions in the 
small intestine. Colonic motor complexes occur in the colon and mix the content 
and slowly move it aborally.
Ileus is characterized by lack of borborygmi, accumulation of gas and fluid in 
the bowel with subsequent abdominal distension, patient discomfort and 
decreased advancement of GI contents (Washabau, 2003). A functional ileus 
appears to occur more commonly in critically ill patients (Madl, 2003). There is 
also some recent suggestion that ileus in the critically ill patient results from a 
loss of synchronized coordination of peristalsis (Chapman et al., 2007).
This is in contrast to previous suggestions that GI paralysis and decreased 
motor activity was the cause of ileus. Inflammatory mediators have also been 
implicated in the pathophysiology of ileus.
Clinical manifestations of GI dysmotility
The clinical signs of gastric emptying disorders are mainly vomiting, which occurs 
approximately 10–12 hours after food intake. In addition, bloating, regurgitation, 
abdominal pain and colic can be seen. Some clinical signs are relatively subtle and 

===== PDF PAGE 181 =====
Feeding small animal patients with gastrointestinal motility disorders   167
include decreased appetite, nausea, belching and pica. These signs are commonly 
seen in hospitalized patients and it is therefore helpful to keep a list of diseases in 
mind that can result in the development of secondary gastric emptying disorders 
so that appropriate action can be initiated early in the hospitalized patient.
Diagnosis of GI dysmotility disorders
Definitive identification of GI motility in small animals is challenging because 
we are lacking sufficiently sensitive and specific diagnostics modalities to fully 
characterize these disorders. A number of diagnostic modalities have been 
evaluated to investigate GI function in animals (Wyse et al., 2003) Contrast 
radiography can be used qualitatively to assess gastrointestinal motility distur ­
bances in critically ill dogs and cats. Although widely available, radiographic 
assessment has limited use for the evaluation of subtle gastrointestinal dysmo­
tility disorders in animals (Guilford, 2000; Lester et al., 1999). Ultrasonography 
may be more useful for qualitative and semi‐quantitative assessment of 
delayed gastric emptying and ileus compared with radiography, however, the 
main disadvantages relates to its inherent subjectivity.
As many hospitalized animals with GI disorders have gastric feeding tubes in 
place, the measurement of gastric residual volume (GRV), defined as the volume 
of fluid aspirated from the stomach after a given time and before each new feed­
ing, can be used to quantify and evaluate gastric tolerance of enteral feeding and 
can be used to infer the presence of delayed gastric emptying. In human adults, 
GRV exceeding 150 mL in a 4‐hour period is indicative of intolerance of enteral 
feeding (MacLeod et al., 2007). In infants, GRVs in excess of 5 mL/kg in a 4‐hour 
period were considered a marker for delayed gastric emptying in one study (Horn, 
Chaboyer and Schluter, 2004). Unfortunately, veterinary guidelines as to accept­
able GRV have not been defined but in a recent study, Holahan et al., (2010) 
reported a median GRV of 4.5 mL/kg in a group of dogs prospectively being eval­
uated for complications associated with bolus versus continuous nasogastric 
tubes. The range of GRV in that same population ranged from 0 to 213 mL/kg and 
the volume of GRV was not associated with increased incidence of vomiting or 
regurgitation. Therefore it is still unclear what level of GRV should be considered 
as acceptable or indicative of gastric emptying problems in animals.
therapeutic and nutritional management strategies
The mainstay approach for animals with GI dysmotility includes identification 
and treatment of the underlying condition, institution of early nutritional 
i nterventions, early ambulation, correction of metabolic derangements, 
m ultimodal pain management and pharmacological interventions that are 
aimed to restore normal GI motility. The use of pharmacological agents for man­
agement of GI dysmotility is a major area of investigation and the reader is 
referred elsewhere (Washbau, 2005; Chapman et al., 2007; Fraser and Bryant, 
2010). Table 17.1 lists commonly used prokinetic agents and dosages that are 

===== PDF PAGE 182 =====
168   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
recommended in small animals. The focus of this chapter will cover nutritional 
modulation of GI motility dysfunction.
Nutritional management
Although animals with GI dysmotility disorders may manifest regurgitation, 
vomiting and diarrhea, institution of early enteral nutrition can help normalize 
GI motility and therefore should be considered a key treatment strategy (Stupak, 
Abdelsayed and Soloway, 2012). Proposed mechanisms for the positive effects of 
enteral nutrition on GI function include improving gut perfusion, promoting 
secretion of bicarbonate and various gut hormones and growth factors and stim­
ulating motility (Stupak et al., 2012, Marik and Zaloga, 2001).
The actual composition of the food can impact GI motility and is worthy of 
consideration in selecting diets for affected patients. Formulations that are 
highly digestible (>95% digestibility), have high moisture content, with a low 
to medium content of fat (15% dry matter in cats and 6–15% of dry matter in 
dogs) may be desirable. However, specific formulations for use in animals with 
GI dysfunction have not been evaluated. Whereas protein content in the diet 
increases gastric emptying and intestinal transit time, dietary fat slows gastric 
emptying in dogs and humans but not in cats (Lin et al., 1996; Zhao, Wang 
and Lin, 2000). Furthermore, fat content lowers the tone of the lower esoph­
ageal sphincter and may therefore lead to gastro‐esophageal reflux and vom­
iting. Interestingly, in a recent study evaluating bolus feeding versus 
intermittent feeding in dogs with nasoenteric tubes, investigators used a liquid 
diet with moderate to high fat contents and this was not associated with 
increased  complication rates. Although fat is in general more digestible for 
small animals than protein or c arbohydrates, the digestion and absorption of 
fat is a complex process involving various enzymes and bicarbonate secreted 
from the  pancreas and the intestinal epithelial cells. Malassimilation of fat is 
Table 17.1 Prokinetic agents used in small animals for management of gastrointestinal 
dysmotility disorders.
Agent Dosage Mode of action
cisapride Dogs: 0.2–1.0 mg/kg PO q8h
Cats: 2.5–5 mg/cat, PO q8h
Serotonergic agonist (5HT4)
Serotonergic antagonist (5HT1, 3)
domperidone 0.05–0.1 mg/kg PO q12h Dopaminergic (D2) antagonist
erythromycin 0.5–1.0 mg/kg, IV, PO q8h 
– q12h
Motilin agonist
Serotonergic antagonist (5HT
3)
metoclopramide Constant rate infusion: 
1–2 mg/kg/day IV
0.2–0.5 mg/kg PO, IV, SQ q8h
Dopaminergic (D
2) antagonist
Serotonergic agonist (5HT4)
nizatidine 2.5–5.0 mg/kg PO q24h H2‐ histaminergic antagonist
ranitidine 1.0–2.0 mg/kg PO q8h ‐ q12h H2‐ histaminergic antagonist

===== PDF PAGE 183 =====
Feeding small animal patients with gastrointestinal motility disorders   169
therefore a common concern in hospitalized animals, and could lead to bacterial 
fermentation of the fat in the distal small intestine and colon. This reinforces 
the recommendation made above that diets for these patients should contain 
reduced amounts of fat.
Soluble fibers in the diet form gels in solution and delay gastric emptying and 
slow the intestinal transit time (Papasouliotis et al., 1993), so these should be 
avoided in patients with GI motility disorders. Insoluble fibers on the other hand 
do not form gels in solution and have no effect on gastric emptying. They can 
increase the intestinal transit time, are good bulking agents and have no effect 
on nutrient absorption. These fibres can promote colonic health, however, they 
can also decrease digestibility of the diet. Fructo‐oligosaccharides (FOS) are 
fibres that have been shown to decrease intestinal inflammation in human 
patients and may therefore also have an anti‐inflammatory effect in small ani­
mals with GI inflammation (Rose et al., 2010).
Liquid formulations may be delivered via continuous or intermittent bolus 
feedings. Critically ill animals with GI dysmotility have been suggested to toler ­
ate continuous infusion feedings better than intermittent bolus feeding. A recent 
veterinary study defined ‘feeding intolerance’ as vomiting or regurgitation twice 
within a 24‐hour period (Holahan et al., 2010). Although continuous feeding 
may be helpful in animals in which high feeding volumes may not be tolerated, 
a recent study demonstrated that GRVs and clinical outcome did not differ 
between the two feeding methods (Holahan et al., 2010). Furthermore, Holahan 
et al. (2010) suggested that terminating of enteral feeding when GRVs are high 
may be unwarranted in dogs as they found no relationship between GRVs and 
incidence of complications.
In addition, it should be kept in mind that many patients with GI diseases or 
GI motility disorders in the ICU have cobalamin malabsorption, leading to severe 
whole‐body cobalamin deficiency. This cobalamin deficiency can by itself lead to 
clinical GI disease. Therefore it is never contraindicated to s upplement any 
h ospitalized patient with chronic GI disease with cobalamin parenterally, even 
if there are no serum concentrations available for that particular patient. This is 
especially true for cats, where it has been shown that GI diseases will not be 
t reatable unless cobalamin supplementation is initiated (Ruaux et al., 2005). 
The recommended dosages for cobalamin supplementation can be found in 
Table 17.2.
Table 17.2 Recommended dosages of cobalamin supplementation subcutaneously once weekly 
for at least 6 weeks in dogs with chronic enteropathies.
Body 
weight 
(kg)
<5 5–10 10–20 20–30 30–40 40–50
Dosage of 
cobalamin 
(μg)
250 400 600 800 1000 1200

===== PDF PAGE 184 =====
170   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Summary
GI motility disorders are common in the small animal critical care setting and 
can occur secondary to GI as well as many systemic diseases. Manifestations of 
GI motility dysfunction include regurgitation, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal 
pain, nausea and anorexia. In addition to pharmacological therapy, nutritional 
management of these animals may help restore normal GI motility and alleviate 
clinical signs. Although not formally evaluated, the use of highly digestible, high 
moisture, low‐fat diets fed in frequent small feedings throughout the day may 
help improve tolerance to enteral feeding in these patients.
references
Adam, S. and Baston, S. (1997) A study of problems associated with the delivery of enteral feed 
in critically ill patients in five ICUs in the UK. Intensive Care Medicine, 3, 261–266.
Boillat, C.S., Gaschen, F.P., Gaschen, L. et al. (2010) Variability associated with repeated meas­
urements of gastrointestinal tract motility in dogs obtained by use of a wireless motility cap­
sule system and scintigraphy. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 71, 903–907.
Chapman, M., Fraser, R., Vozzo, R. et al. (2005) Antro‐pyloro‐duodenal motor responses to 
gastric and duodenal nutrient in critically ill patients. Gut, 54, 1384–1390.
Chapman M.J., Nguyen N.Q. and Fraser R.J. (2007) Gastrointestinal motility and prokinetics in 
the critically ill. Current Opinion in Critical Care, 13, 187–194.
Dive, A., Miesse, C., Jamart, J. et al. (1994) Duodenal motor response to continuous enteral 
feeding is impaired in mechanically ventilated critically ill patients. Clinical Nutrition, 13, 
302–306.
Fraser, R.J. and Bryant, L. (2010) Current and future therapeutic prokinetic therapy to improve 
enteral feed intolerance in the ICU patient. Nutrition Clinical Practice, 25, 26–31.
Fruhwald, S., Holzer, P. and Metzler, H. (2007) Intestinal motility disturbances in intensive care 
patients pathogenesis and clinical impact. Intensive Care Medicine, 33, 36–44.
Guilford, G. (2000) Gastric emptying of BIPS in normal dogs with simultaneous solid‐phase 
gastric emptying of a test meal measured by nuclear scintigraphy. Veterinary Radiology and 
Ultrasound, 41, 381–383.
Hall, J. A. and Washabau, R. J. (1999) Diagnosis and treatment of gastric motility disorders. 
Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal Practice, 29, 377–395.
Key PoINtS
•	 In animals the most commonly recognized GI dysmotility disorders include esophageal 
dysmotility, delayed gastric emptying, and functional intestinal obstruction (ileus).
•	 Most GI dysmotility disorders in small animals occur secondary to an underlying disease 
process or following surgery.
•	 Management of GI dysmotility disorders include addressing the underlying cause, use of 
prokinetic therapy, analgesia and nutritional management.
•	 Early enteral nutrition may be useful in mitigating dysmotility disorders and should be 
encouraged.
•	 The optimal composition of diets suitable for animals with GI dysmotility disorders is 
unknown, but diets with high moisture content, high digestibility with reduced or 
moderate fat content are commonly recommended.

===== PDF PAGE 185 =====
Feeding small animal patients with gastrointestinal motility disorders   171
Holahan, M., Abood, S., Hautman, J. et al. (2010) Intermittent and continues enteral nutrition 
in critically ill dogs: A prospective randomized trial. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 24, 
520–536.
Horn, D.,Chaboyer, W. and Schluter, P. (2004) Gastric residual volumes in critically ill p aediatric 
patients: a comparison of feeding regimens. Australian Critical Care, 17, 98–103.
Kölbel, C.B., Rippel, K., Klar, H. et al. (2000) Esophageal motility disorders in critically ill 
patients: a 24‐hour manometric study. Intensive Care Medicine, 26, 1421–1427.
Lester, N. V., Roberts, G. D., Newell, S. M. et al. (1999) Assessment of barium impregnated poly­
ethylene spheres (BIPS) as a measure of solid‐phase gastric emptying in normal dogs–
c omparison to scintigraphy. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound, 40, 465–471.
Lin, H. C., Zhao, X. T., Wang, L. et al., (1996) Fat‐induced ileal brake in the dog depends on 
peptide YY. Gastroenterology, 110, 1491–1495.
MacLeod, J.B.A., Lefton, J., Houghton, D. et al. (2007) Prospective randomized control trial of 
intermittent versus continuous gastric feeds for critically ill trauma patients. Journal of Trauma, 
63, 57–61.
Madl C.D.W. (2003) Systemic consequences of ileus. Best Practice and Research: Clinical 
Gastroenterology, 17(3), 445–456.
Marik, P.E. and Zaloga, G.P. (2001) Early enteral nutrition in acutely ill patients: A systematic 
review. Critical Care Medicine, 29, 2264–2270.
Nind, G., Chen, W‐H., Protheroe, R. et al. (2005) Mechanisms of gastroesophageal reflux in 
critically ill mechanically ventilated patients. Gastroenterology, 128, 600–606.
Papasouliotis, K., Muir, P., Gruffydd‐Jones, T. J. et al. (1993) The effect of short‐term dietary 
fibre administration on oro‐caecal transit time in dogs. Diabetologia, 36, 207–211.
Rose, D. J., Venema, K., Keshavarzian, A. et al. (2010) Starch‐entrapped microspheres show a 
beneficial fermentation profile and decrease in potentially harmful bacteria during in vitro 
fermentation in faecal microbiota obtained from patients with inflammatory bowel disease. 
British Journal of Nutrition, 103, 1514–1524.
Ruaux, C. G., Steiner, J. M. and Williams, D. A. (2005) Early biochemical and clinical responses 
to cobalamin supplementation in cats with signs of gastrointestinal disease and severe hypoc­
obalaminemia. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 19, 155–160.
Stupak, D.P., Abdelsayed, G.G. and Soloway, G.N. (2012) Motility disorders of the upper gastro­
intestinal tract in the intensive care unit: pathophysiology and contemporary management. 
Journal of Clinical Gastroenterology, 46, 449–456.
Washabau, R. J. (2003) Gastrointestinal motility disorders and gastrointestinal prokinetic 
t herapy. Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal Practice, 33, 1007–1028.
Wyse C.A., McLellan J., Dickie A.M. et al. (2003) A review of methods for assessment of the 
rate of gastric emptying in the dog and cat: 1998–2002. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 
17, 609–621.
Zhao, X. T., Wang, L. and Lin, H. C. (2000) Slowing of intestinal transit by fat depends on 
n aloxone‐blockable efferent, opioid pathway. America Journal of Physiology. Gastrointestinal 
and Liver Physiology, 278, G866–G870.

===== PDF PAGE 186 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
172
Introduction
In critically ill and hospitalized animals, the role of nutritional support in the 
overall management of patients is well established. However, nutrition is most 
often simply regarded as a supportive measure. Recently, further understanding 
of the underlying mechanisms of various disease processes and the recognition 
that certain nutrients possess pharmacological properties have led to  investigations 
on how nutritional therapies themselves could modify the behavior of various 
conditions and improve patient outcomes and this has been dubbed ‘therapeutic 
nutrition’(Wischmeyer and Heyland, 2010). Nutrients, such as certain vitamins, 
amino acids, and polyunsaturated fatty acids, can modulate inflammation and 
the immune response (Cahill et  al., 2010; Hegazi and Wischmeyer, 2011). A 
major focus of nutrition in critically ill human patients now involves the 
 development of strategies that target or modulate metabolic pathways, inflam-
mation and the immune system. (Hegazi and Wischmeyer, 2011) Exploiting 
pharmacological effects of certain nutrients to modulate disease processes and 
patient outcomes has been the subject of various clinical trials in people,  however, 
a similar focus on clinical veterinary patients has not yet taken place. The use of 
nutritional strategies in ameliorating animal diseases has been shown to be 
 beneficial in the areas of chronic kidney disease (e.g., protein and phosphorus 
 restriction) (Bauer et  al., 1999; Brown et  al., 1998) and cardiac disease 
(e.g., omega‐3 fatty acids) (Freeman et al., 1998; Smith et al., 2007). In people, 
there is mounting evidence that certain nutrients, such as glutamine, omega‐3 
fatty acids and antioxidants, can positively impact both morbidity and mortality 
in critically ill populations. It is hoped that a greater understanding of how these 
nutrients impart such beneficial effects may lead to developments of novel strate-
gies for modulating various diseases in small animals. To this end, a review of 
how  nutritional strategies could be used to modulate disease, especially in criti-
cally ill  animals, is the focus of this chapter and is discussed in greater detail.
Immune modulating nutrients 
in small animals
Daniel L. Chan
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
Chapter 18

===== PDF PAGE 187 =====
Immune modulating nutrients in small animals   173
Nutritional management strategies
Omega‐3 fatty acids
As inflammation plays a crucial role in many diseases, modulation of the inflam-
matory response has become an important target of therapy. Inflammation yields 
several lipid mediators that are involved in a complex regulatory array of the 
inflammatory process. Lipid mediators are synthesized by three main pathways, 
namely the cyclooxygenase, 5‐lipoxygenase and cytochrome P450 pathways and 
they each use polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) such as arachidonic acid (AA), 
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and γ ‐linolenic acid (GLA) as substrates (Mayer, 
Schaefer andSeeger, 2006). Potent proinflammatory eicosanoids, leukotrienes, 
and thromboxanes of the 2 and 4 series are produced from AA metabolism. 
Classically, modulation of inflammation was thought to result from greater substi-
tution of omega‐6 fatty acids i.e., AA with EPA and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) 
in cell membranes, such that when these PUFAs were cleaved by phospholipases 
and oxidized by several enzymes it led to less inflammatory eicosanoids of the 3 
and 5 series (Mayer et al., 2006).
However, it is now clear that the biological anti‐inflammatory activities of 
omega‐3 fatty acids are far beyond the simple regulation of eicosanoid production. 
Namely, these PUFAs can affect immune cell responses through the regulation of 
gene expression, subsequent downstream events by acting as ligands for nuclear 
receptors and through control of some key transcription factors (Singer et  al., 
2008). EPA can also inhibit the activity of the proinflammatory transcription 
nuclear factor B (NF‐ κB) at several levels, which regulates the expression of many 
proinflammatory mediators (e.g., cytokines, chemokines) and other effectors of 
the innate immune response system (Singer et  al., 2008). In addition, recent 
research has revealed that free EPA and DHA also inhibit the activation of Toll‐like 
receptor 4 by endotoxin and thereby further inhibit the inflammatory response 
(Lee and Hwang, 2006). Finally, recent discoveries have identified that EPA and 
DHA are also substrates of two novel classes of mediators called resolvins and pro-
tectins, which are involved in the inhibition and resolution of the inflammatory 
process, which now appears to be a well orchestrated, complex, active process 
involving these mediators (Singer et al., 2008; Willoughby et al., 2000). Therefore, 
in the context of disease modulation, omega‐3 fatty acids help reduce the produc-
tion of inflammatory mediators and are incorporated in the synthesis of anti‐
inflammatory and “pro‐resolution” factors, which serve to attenuate the 
inflammatory response and the innate immune response.
In regards to the clinical use of omega‐3 fatty acids in critically ill populations, the 
evidence is exclusively from human medicine. Enteral supplementation of EPA/
DHA with concurrent antioxidants has been described in ventilated patients with 
acute lung injury (Pontes‐Arruda et al., 2008) and, more recently, it has been shown 
to improve outcome in patients with early sepsis.(Pontes‐Arruda et  al., 2011) 
However, the data are not entirely conclusive, especially when omega‐3 fatty acids 
are administered intravenously via parenteral nutrition. In a recent meta‐analysis of 
studies evaluating supplemental omega‐3 fatty acids in parenteral nutrition, no 
 statistically significant benefits were identified in regards to mortality, infection or 
ICU stay and only weak evidence that such supplementation shortens overall 

===== PDF PAGE 188 =====
174   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
 hospitalization. (Palmer et al., 2013) However, the analysis should be considered 
preliminary as there were fewer than 10 trials included in the analysis and 6 of these 
trials contained fewer than 50 patients and therefore the conclusions regarding the 
utility of parenteral omega‐3 fatty acids should be reserved until more data are 
 available (Palmer et  al., 2013). It is worth noting that the analysis did possibly 
uncover that timing of supplementation (i.e., early versus late in the disease process) 
may have a large impact on the results. Many of the trials included in the analysis 
recruited patients in septic shock and therefore the ability to demonstrate treatment 
benefit would be extremely difficult (Palmer et al., 2013). The recent results of the 
INTERSEPT Study (Pontes‐Arruda et  al., 2011) using enteral EPA/DHA would 
 support this hypothesis as they recruited patients with early sepsis without organ 
dysfunction and were able to demonstrate various improvements in outcome. 
Currently, no data are available on the use of omega‐3 fatty acids in critically ill 
 veterinary populations. Given the number of potential benefits in modulation of 
inflammation and patient outcome, further research in this area is warranted.
Antioxidants
Similar to inflammation, oxidative stress is also recognized to be a prominent 
and common feature of many disease processes, including neoplasia, cardiac 
disease, trauma, burns, severe pancreatitis, sepsis, and critical illness. During 
various pathophysiological states, particularly those typified by an inflammatory 
response, cells of the immune system, such as neutrophils, macrophages and 
eosinophils, contribute substantially to the production of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS). With the depletion of normal anti-
oxidant defences, the host is more vulnerable to free radical species and prone to 
cellular and subcellular damage (e.g., DNA, mitochondrial damage) (Manzanares 
et al., 2012). The degree of antioxidant depletion appears to reflect the severity 
of illness in human patient populations(Alonso de Vega, Serrano and Carbonell, 
2002). Oxidative stress is believed not only to be a promoter of inflammation but 
also a key factor leading to multiple organ failure (Manzanares et al., 2012).
Replenishment of antioxidant defences attempts to lessen the intensity of the 
injury caused by ROS and RNS. Antioxidants can be classified in three different 
systems: (i) Antioxidant proteins such as albumin, haptoglobin and ceruloplasmin, 
(ii) enzymatic antioxidants such as superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase, 
and catalase and (iii) non‐enzymatic or small molecule antioxidants, such as 
 ascorbate (vitamin C), alpha‐tocopherol (vitamin E), glutathione, selenium, lyco-
pene and beta‐carotene. N‐acetylcysteine is a powerful progenitor of glutathione 
and has been associated with some positive results in several patient populations. 
Treatment with n‐acetylcysteine not only scavenges ROS but also enables  continual 
production of glutathione and even blocks transcription of inflammatory cytokines 
(Manzanares et al., 2012).
In regards to clinical evidence in critically ill people, a number of meta‐analyses 
have indicated that the administration of antioxidant micronutrients (as mono-
therapy or combination therapy or antioxidant cocktails) is associated with a mor-
tality risk reduction, reduced mechanical ventilator dependence but only a trend 
for reduced infectious complications (Manzanares et al., 2012; Heyland et al., 2005; 
Visse, Labadarios and Blaauw, 2011). It is interesting to note that the effect on 

===== PDF PAGE 189 =====
Immune modulating nutrients in small animals   175
 mortality reduction was most apparent in populations with the expected 
 highest mortality rates but a difference could not be detected when the mortality 
rate between the critically ill population and control population was less than 10% 
(Manzanares et al., 2012). However, not all of the data regarding the use of antioxi-
dants in the critically ill are positive. In a recent Cochrane review (Szakmany, 
Hauser and Radermacher, 2012) of the use of N‐acetylcysteine for sepsis and 
 systemic inflammatory responses syndrome (SIRS) in adult human patients, the 
authors concluded that their analysis casts “doubt on the safety and utility of 
 intravenous N‐acetylcysteine as an adjuvant therapy in SIRS and sepsis. At best, 
N‐acetylcysteine is ineffective in reducing mortality and complications in this 
patient population” (Szakmany et al., 2012). The analysis also highlighted concern 
that administration of N‐acetylcysteine after 24 hours of onset of symptoms could 
lead to cardiovascular depression (Szakmany et  al., 2012). Typically, Cochrane 
reviews are very conservative in their analytical methods and seldom support novel 
interventions in critically ill populations. It is clear that further research is required 
to identify the most appropriate approach in modulating oxidative stress in the 
critically ill patients.
Despite the clear importance of oxidative stress in various diseases in veteri-
nary species, investigations evaluating the effect of antioxidants on disease pro-
cesses are limited. Positive results have been demonstrated in experimental 
models of oxidative stress including in conditions such as congestive heart 
failure(Amado et al., 2005), acute pancreatitis (Marks et al., 1998) gastric dilatation‐
volvulus (Badylak, Lanz and Jeffries, 1990), renal transplantation (Lee, Son 
and Kim, 2006), gentamicin‐induced nephrotoxicity (Varzi et  al., 2007), and 
acetaminophen toxicity (Webb et al., 2003; Hill et al., 2005). Supplementation 
of vitamin E alone did not prevent oxidative injury (i.e., development of Heinz 
body anemia) in cats fed onion powder or propylene glycol but the same group 
of investigators later showed that supplementation of vitamin E with cysteine in 
cats decreased the production of methemoglobinemia following acetaminophen 
challenge (Hill et al., 2005).
In naturally‐occurring disease such as chronic valvular disease (Freeman 
et al., 1998) and renal insufficiency (Plevraki et al., 2006) there have also been 
some positive results that support the need for further evaluation. Unfortunately, 
the use of antioxidants in the setting of critically ill veterinary patients has not 
been published.
Immune modulating amino acids
Amino acids fulfill a vast array of functions in the body. They primarily serve as 
building blocks for protein synthesis and participate in various chemical reactions. 
Certain amino acids have immune‐modulating properties and they help maintain 
the functional integrity of immune cells and aid in wound healing and tissue repair. 
They may also serve as an energy source for certain cells; perhaps the most perti-
nent example being glutamine which is the preferred fuel source for enterocytes 
and cells of the immune system. During disease states, the body undergoes marked 
alterations in substrate metabolism that could lead to a deficiency in these amino 
acids. In the response to stress there may be a dramatic increase in demand by 
the host for particular amino acids such as arginine and glutamine. In health these 

===== PDF PAGE 190 =====
176   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
amino acids are adequately synthesized by the host. However, during periods 
 following severe trauma, infection or inflammation, the demand for these amino 
acids cannot be met by the host, and they become “conditionally essential” and 
must be obtained from the diet. Given the importance of these amino acids, the 
sudden depletion in these important substrates led to the hypothesis that dietary 
supplementation of these amino acids during disease would improve outcome. In 
addition, in times of injury and tissue repair and rapid cellular proliferation, 
 nucleotide availability may become depleted and rate‐limiting for the synthesis of 
nucleotide‐derived compounds (Hegazi and Wischmeyer, 2011).
Arginine
Arginine is a conditionally essential amino acid that is required for polyamine syn-
thesis (for cell growth and proliferation), proline synthesis (for wound healing) and 
is a precursor for nitric oxide (signalling molecule for immune cells). Following 
extensive injury or surgery, immature cells of myeloid origin produce arginase‐1, 
an enzyme that breaks down arginine. The ensuing arginine deficiency is associated 
with suppression of T‐lymphocyte function (Popovic, Zeh and Ochoa, 2011). When 
steps are taken to replenish arginine along with omega‐3 fatty acids, T cell number 
and function improves. There are also data that demonstrate a significant treatment 
benefit following supplementation after major surgery. Clinical benefits included 
fewer infectious complication rates and decreased overall length of stay when com-
pared with standard nutritional support. (Hegazi and Wischmeyer, 2011)
The one population where arginine therapy is likely to be contraindicated is 
patients with severe sepsis (Hegazi and Wischmeyer, 2011). Likely causes of 
this detrimental effect relate to promotion of excessive nitric oxide synthesis, 
worsening of cardiovascular tone and decreasing organ perfusion (Hegazi and 
Wischmeyer, 2011).
Glutamine
Glutamine, another conditionally‐essential amino acid, is the most abundant free 
amino acid in circulation, however, stores are rapidly depleted during critical illness 
in people. A deficiency in glutamine has been documented to impair several impor-
tant defence mechanisms of the host. Supplementation of glutamine during critical 
illness is well accepted to confer beneficial effects on patient outcomes. The  evidence 
had been so strong that nutritional guidelines for critically ill people recommended 
supplemental glutamine to any patient receiving parenteral nutrition. (Wernerman, 
2011; McClave et al., 2009; Kreymann et al., 2006) The proposed mechanisms by 
which glutamine improves outcomes involve: (i) Tissue protection (e.g., heat shock 
protein expression, maintenance of gut barrier integrity and function, and decreased 
apoptosis), (ii) anti‐inflammatory and immune‐modulation (e.g., decreased 
cytokine production, inhibition of NF‐kB), (iii) preservation of metabolic function 
(e.g., improved insulin sensitivity, ATP synthesis) (iv) Antioxidant effects (i.e., 
enhance glutathione generation) and (v) Attenuation of inducible nitric oxide 
 synthase activity (Wischmeyer and Heyland, 2010).
The evidence supporting the use of glutamine in critically ill human patients 
had been overwhelmingly positive, until the publication of the largest randomized 
placebo‐controlled, double‐blinded clinical trial evaluating high dose glutamine 

===== PDF PAGE 191 =====
Immune modulating nutrients in small animals   177
and antioxidants in severely ill patients (Heyland et  al., 2013). In this seminal 
study, over 1200 critically ill patients, with at least two failing organ systems and 
requiring mechanical ventilation were randomly allocated to glutamine versus 
placebo treatment and antioxidants versus placebo treatment. Unexpectedly, there 
was a trend for increased mortality associated with glutamine use (Heyland et al., 
2013). There was no effect of glutamine on rates of organ failure or infectious 
complications and antioxidants had no discernible effects (Heyland et al., 2013). 
The exact reasons for the observed trend in increased mortality were not identi-
fied, but it is worth noting that the dose of glutamine used in this study was much 
higher than any previous study to date and also that this study population included 
patients in shock being treated with nutritional support prior to achieving hemo-
dynamic stability. Most recommendations for nutrition support (both enteral and 
parenteral) in the critically ill patient stipulate that cardiovascular stability must be 
achieved before commencing nutritional support (McClave et al., 2009).
Despite ample evidence guiding treatment recommendations in people, 
there are no equivalent recommendations in the veterinary literature 
 pertaining to  glutamine use. This is likely due to the lack of supporting data 
and limited  availability of parenteral glutamine. To date, there are only a few 
published  veterinary trials that have evaluated the use of glutamine (enteral 
or parenteral) in dogs and cats. In a trial of cats treated with methotrexate, 
enteral glutamine offered no intestinal protection in terms of reducing 
 intestinal permeability or improving the severity of clinical signs(Marks et al., 
1999). Another trial evaluating the effects of enteral glutamine on plasma 
glutamine concentrations and prostaglandin E
2 concentrations in radiation‐
induced mucositis showed no  measurable benefit (Lana et al., 2003). Possible 
reasons for the apparent failures in both of these trials could be attributed to 
inadequate doses used or because the form used, enteral, was not effective in 
these conditions. In contrast, a recent experimental canine model of post‐
operative ileus by Ohno et al., (2009)  evaluated the effects of glutamine on 
restoration of interdigestive migrating  contraction in the intestines and they 
were able to demonstrate a statistically significant reduction in the time to 
restore contractions in the glutamine treated group. The authors  hypothesized 
that the benefit was derived from glutamine’s ability to maintain glutathione 
concentration and thereby counteract the  deleterious effects from surgical 
injury, inflammation and oxidative stress. They concluded that administration 
of glutamine following gastrectomy could shorten the duration of ileus (a 
major problem post‐operatively in critically ill people) and may protect against 
surgical stress in general. Given these positive results, further studies should 
evaluate the possible beneficial effects of glutamine  supplementation in 
 treating ileus and other gastrointestinal motility disorders in dogs with  natural 
occurring disease.
Most recently, Kang, Kim and Yang (2011) demonstrated that the immune 
suppression induced by high‐dose methylprednisolone sodium succinate ther -
apy can be ameliorated by parenteral administration of L‐alanyl‐L‐glutamine. 
The study was designed to address a common concern associated with high dose 
glucocorticoid therapy, namely, immune‐suppression. The model employed did 
demonstrate that such high doses of glucocorticoid can suppress oxidative burst 

===== PDF PAGE 192 =====
178   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
activity and phagocytic capacity of neutrophils. Although the study used an 
experimental model, it does suggest that parenteral glutamine does have immu-
nomodulatory effects in dogs, and that in the future more clinically applicable 
uses should be explored. Unfortunately, parenteral glutamine is not routinely 
available in North America and the majority of studies evaluation parenteral 
glutamine are performed in Europe and Asia.
Nucleotides
These low molecular weight intracellular compounds (i.e., pyrimidine and 
purine) are the basic building blocks for the synthesis of DNA, RNA, ATP and 
key coenzymes involved in essential metabolic reactions. Similarly to amino 
acids, nucleotides can be synthesized de novo or can be salvaged and recycled 
from other molecules. The reason nucleotides are included in this discussion of 
therapeutic nutrition is that during disease states and injury, the rapid cell 
 proliferation required for tissue  healing leads to nucleotide depletion (Hegazi 
and Wischmeyer, 2011). Dietary  supplementation can compensate for such 
 depletions and support cell proliferation and differentiation. As the cell types 
most affected by shortfall in nucleotides are cells of the immune systems and 
of the gastrointestinal tract, nucleotide supplementation is often included in 
‘immune‐enhancing diets’. The evidence for the beneficial effects of dietary 
nucleotides is mostly from pre‐ clinical trials and rodent models, therefore 
 further research is still warranted (Hess and Greenberg, 2012). From the 
 pathophysiological point of view, supplementation of dietary nucleotides may 
be particularly important in animals with prolonged anorexia as supplementa-
tion in rodent models enhance intestinal repair, restore brush‐border enzyme 
 activity and improve gut barrier function (Hess and Greenberg, 2012). 
Additional benefits of dietary nucleotides include positive effects on gut flora, 
gastrointestinal microcirculation, immune function and inflammation (Hess 
and Greenberg, 2012) Given the plethora of potential  beneficial effects with-
out clear detrimental effects, it is not surprising that  nucleotides have been 
included in some immune‐enhancing diet cocktails despite the lack of defini-
tive results. Although results of trials using these immune‐enhancing cocktails 
are  encouraging and mostly positive, it is unknown if these effects are syner -
gistic or whether they result from the summation of the  individual compo-
nents. To date, no veterinary studies have evaluated the potential utility of 
supplementing nucleotides to critically ill patients.
Probiotics
Probiotics are live microorganisms that, when ingested in sufficient amounts, 
have a positive effect on the health of the host. Some of the benefits purport-
edly related to probiotics include reduced production of toxic bacterial metab-
olites, increased production of certain vitamins, enhanced resistance to 
bacterial colonization and reinforcing host natural defences. Probiotics are 
also believed to shorten the  duration of infections or decrease host suscepti-
bility to pathogens. (Morrow, Gogineni and Malesker, 2012) The proposed 
mechanisms underlying the positive effects include restoration of gastrointes-
tinal barrier function, modification of the gut flora by inducing host cell 

===== PDF PAGE 193 =====
Immune modulating nutrients in small animals   179
 antimicrobial peptides (i.e., defensins, cathelicidins) or releasing probiotic 
antimicrobial factors (e.g., bacteriocins, microsins),  competing for epithelial 
adherence and immunomodulation (Morrow et  al., 2012). Probiotics are 
therefore believed to have a role in balancing gut microflora and increasing 
host resistance to pathogenic bacteria. It is worth bearing in mind that the 
effects of probiotics are not only dose‐dependent but also both strain and 
 species‐specific (Petrof et al., 2012). In people, probiotics used include various 
species of Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium and Streptococcus (Morrow et al., 2012). 
Microorganisms approved for use in animal feeds include strains belonging to 
the Bacillus, Enterococcus and Lactobacillus bacterial groups.
The mechanism by which probiotics enhance gut barrier function may 
involve how certain bacteria, for example, Lactobacillus, stimulate mucin 
 production and thereby inhibit pathogenic bacteria from invading and 
 attaching to the gut epithelium (Morrow et al., 2012). One of the concerns 
with the use of probiotics is that there is a risk that certain microorganisms, 
such as  enterococci, may harbor transmissible antimicrobial resistance determi-
nants (i.e., plasmids), thus contributing to the problem of antimicrobial resist-
ance. The use of  probiotics in the critically ill is controversial and guidelines 
recommend further safety trials before further use in critically ill patients 
(Petrof et al., 2012).
In human critical care, probiotics have been used to combat antimicrobial‐
associated diarrhea, Clostridium difficile infections, and ventilator‐associated 
pneumonia (Morrow et  al., 2012) The probiotic yeast Saccharomyces boulardii 
apparently produces a protease which degrades C difficile toxins and may also 
stimulate IgA secretions against C difficile toxins (Petrof et al., 2012). The only 
meta‐analysis evaluating probiotics to prevent ventilator‐associated pneumonia 
demonstrated a significant reduction in the incidence of ventilator‐associated 
pneumonia and length of ICU stay (Siempos, Ntaidou and Falagas, 2010). Thus 
far, trials evaluating probiotics in critically ill patients have only demonstrated a 
trend towards reduced ICU mortality (Petrof et al., 2012).
Probiotics have the theoretical risk of transferring the antibiotic resistance 
gene, translocating from intestine to other areas or developing adverse reactions 
via interactions with the host’s microflora. While bacteremia has not been docu-
mented with probiotic use in critically ill people, there are single case reports 
detailing infections with probiotic strains in patients that are immune‐ suppressed 
(Boyle, Robbins‐Browne and Tang, 2006).
In veterinary medicine, there are no trials evaluating the use of probiotics in 
a critically ill patient population. However, there have been trials in dogs with 
gastrointestinal signs. A prospective placebo‐controlled probiotic trial using a 
canine‐specific probiotic cocktail containing three different Lactobacillus spp 
strains in addition to a novel protein diet was able to demonstrate a dramatic 
improvement in clinical signs after dietary change but no additional benefit 
attributed to the addition of a probiotic (Sauter et al., 2006). Other studies have 
documented some positive effects, such as improvements in immunological 
markers or desirable changes in microbiota, however, these trials have mostly 
been performed on healthy dogs. It is uncertain whether these benefits would 
improve clinical signs in dogs with critical illness.

===== PDF PAGE 194 =====
180   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Summary
Despite the many pitfalls discussed, nutritional modulation of diseases appears 
to be a potentially useful strategy for companion animals. However, until trials 
can elucidate which specific nutrients and what dosages confer beneficial effects 
to particular patient populations, a certain degree of caution is advised. Of par -
ticular concern is the distinct possibility that significant species differences may 
reduce the usefulness of some of these approaches in veterinary patients. Before 
general recommendations for the use of immunomodulating nutrients in veteri-
nary patients can be made, many questions must be answered. Central issues of 
safety, purity and efficacy must be addressed. However, as our understanding of 
the interactions between nutrients and disease processes grows, we may yet 
identify specific nutrients that could modulate serious diseases. Based on the 
progress being made in the area of clinical nutrition, it is quite evident that there 
should be a greater appreciation for the role nutrients play in ameliorating dis-
eases, and how treatment strategies for certain conditions in companion animals 
may one day depend heavily on nutritional therapies.
references
Alonso de Vega, J.M., Serrano, E. and Carbonell, L.F. (2002) Oxidative stress in critically ill 
patients with systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Critical Care Medicine, 30, 
1782–1786.
Amado, L.C., Saliaris, A.P., Raju, S.V. et al. (2005) Xanthine oxidase inhibition ameliorates car-
diovascular dysfunction in dogs with pacing induced heart failure, Journal of Molecular Cell 
Cardiology, 39, 531–536.
Badylak, S.F., Lanz, G.C. and Jeffries, M. (1990) Prevention of reperfusion injury in surgical 
induced gastric dilatation volvulus in dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 51, 
294–299.
Bauer, J.E., Markwell, P.J , Rauly, J.M. et al. (1999) Effects of dietary fat and polyunsaturated 
fatty acids in dogs with naturally developing chronic renal failure. Journal of the American 
Veterinary Medical Association, 215, 1588–1591.
Boyle, R.J., Robbins‐Browne, R.M. and Tang, M.L.K. (2006). Probiotic use in clinical practice: 
what are the risks? American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 83, 1256–1264.
Key poINtS
•	 Recently,	it	has	been	recognized	that	certain	nutrients	possess	pharmacological	
properties	that	could	modify	the	behavior	of	various	conditions.
•	 Using	nutrients	to	modulate	disease	has	been	dubbed	‘therapeutic	nutrition’.
•	 Nutrients	such	as	certain	vitamins,	amino	acids,	polyunsaturated	fatty	acids	can	
modulate	inflammation	and	the	immune	response.
•	 It	is	hoped	that	a	greater	understanding	of	how	these	nutrients	impart	such	beneficial	
effects	may	lead	to	developments	of	novel	strategies	for	modulating	various	diseases	in	
small	animals.

===== PDF PAGE 195 =====
Immune modulating nutrients in small animals   181
Brown, S.A., Brown, C.A., Crowel, W.A. et al. (1998) Beneficial effects of chronic administration 
of dietary omega‐3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in dogs with renal insufficiency. Journal of 
Laboratory Clinical Medicine, 131, 447–455.
Cahill, N.E., Dhaliwal, R., Day, A.G. et al. (2010) Nutrition therapy in the critical care setting: 
what is “best achievable” practice? An international multicenter observational study. Critical 
Care Medicine, 38, 395–401.
Freeman, L.M., Rush, J.E., Khayias, J.J. et al. (1998) Nutritional alterations and effect of fish oil 
supplementation in dogs with heart failure. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 12, 
440–448.
Hegazi, R.A. and Wischmeyer, P.E. (2011) Clinical review: optimizing enteral nutrition for criti-
cally ill patients –a simple data‐driven formula. Critical Care, 15, 234–245.
Hess, J.R. and Greenberg, N.A. (2012) The role of nucleotides in the immune and gastrointesti-
nal systems: potential clinical applications. Nutrition Clinical Practice, 27, 281–294.
Heyland, D.K., Dhaliwal, R., Suchner, U. et  al. (2005) Antioxidants nutrients: a systematic 
review of trace elements and vitamins in the critically ill patient. Intensive Care Medicine, 31, 
327–337.
Heyland, D., Muscedere, J., Wischmeyer, P.E. et al. (2013) A randomized trial of glutamine and 
antioxidants in critically ill patients. New England Journal of Medicine, 368, 1489–1497.
Hill, A.S., Rogers, Q.R., O’Neill, S.L. et al. (2005) Effects of dietary antioxidant supplementation 
before and after oral acetaminophen challenge in cats. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 
66, 196–204.
Kang, J.H., Kim, S.S. and Yang, M.P. (2011) Effect of parenteral L‐alanyl‐L‐glutamine adminis-
tration on phagocytic responses of polymorphonuclear neutrophilic leukocytes in dogs 
undergoing high‐dose methylprednisolone sodium succinate treatment. American Journal of 
Veterinary Research, 73, 1410–1417.
Kreymann, K.G., Berger, M.M., Deutz, N.E. et al. (2006) ESPEN guidelines on enteral nutrition: 
intensive care. Clinical Nutrition, 25, 210–223.
Lana, S.E., Hansen, R.A., Kloer, L. et al. (2003) The effects of oral glutamine supplementation 
on plasma glutamine concentrations and PGE2 concentrations in dogs experiencing radiation‐
induced mucositis. Journal of Applied Research in Veterinary Medicine, 1, 259–265.
Lee, J.I., Son, H.Y. and Kim, M.C. (2006) Attenuation of ischemia‐reperfusion injury by ascor-
bic acid in the canine renal transplantation. Journal of Veterinary Science, 7, 375–379.
Lee, J.Y. and Hwang, D.H. (2006) The modulation of inflammatory gene expression by lipids: 
mediation through Toll‐like receptors. Molecular Cell, 21, 176–185.
Manzanares ,W., Dhaliwal, R., Jiang, X. et al. (2012) Antioxidant micronutrients in the critically 
ill: a systemic review and meta‐analysis. Critical Care, 16, R66.
Marks, J.M., Dunkin, B.J., Shillingstad, B.L. et al. (1998) Preteratment with allopurinol dimin-
ishes pancreatography‐induced pancreatitis in a canine model, Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, 48, 
180–183.
Marks, S.L., Cook, A.K., Reader, R. et al. (1999) Effects of glutamine supplementation of an 
amino acid‐based purified diet on intestinal mucosal integrity in cats with methotrexate‐
induced enteritis. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 60, 755–763.
Mayer, K., Schaefer, M.B. and Seeger, W, (2006) Fish oil in the critically ill: from experimental 
to clinical data. Current Opinion on Clinical Nutrition Metabolic Care, 9, 140–148.
McClave, S.A., Martindale, R.G., Vanek, V.W. et al. (2009) Guidelines for the provision and 
assessment of nutritional support therapy in adult critically ill patient: Society of Critical Care 
Medicine (SCCM) and the American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (ASPEN). 
Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition, 33, 277–316.
Morrow, L.E., Gogineni, V. and Malesker, M,A, (2012) Probiotics in the intensive care unit. 
Nutrition Clinical Practice, 27, 235–241.
Ohno, T., Mochiki, E., Ando, H. et al. (2009) Glutamine decreases the duration of postoperative 
ileus after abdominal surgery: an experimental study of conscious dogs, Digestive Disease 
Science, 54, 1208–1213.
Palmer, A.J., Ho, C.K.M., Ajinola, O. et al. (2013) The role of omega‐3 fatty acid supplemented 
parenteral nutrition in critical illness in adults: a systemic review and meta‐analysis, Critical 
Care Medicine, 41, 307–316.

===== PDF PAGE 196 =====
182   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Petrof, E.O., Dhaliwal, R., Manazanares, W. et al. (2012) Probiotics in the critically ill: a systematic 
review of the randomized trial evidence. Critical Care Medicine, 40, 3290–3302.
Plevraki, K,, Koutinas, A.F., Kaldrymidou, H. et al. (2006) Effects of allopurinol treatment on 
the progression of chronic nephritis in canine leishmaniosis (Leishmania infantum), Journal 
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 20, 228–233.
Pontes‐Arruda, A., Demichele, S., Seth, A. et al. (2008) The use of an inflammation‐modulating 
diet in patients with acute lung injury or acute respirator distress syndrome: a meta‐analysis 
of outcome data. Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition, 32, 596–605.
Pontes‐Arruda, A., Martins, L.F., de Lima, S.M. et al. (2011) Enteral nutrition with eicosapen-
taenoic acid, gamma‐linolenic acid and antioxidants in the early treatment of sepsis: results 
from a multicenter, prospective, randomized, double‐blinded, controlled study: the 
INTERSEPT Study, Critical Care, 15, R144.
Popovic, P.J., Zeh, H.J. and Ochoa, J.B. (2011) Arginine and immunity. Journal of Nutrition, 136, 
1681S–1686S.
Sauter, S.N., Benyacoub, J., Allenspach, K. et al. (2006) Effects of probiotic bacteria in dogs with 
food responsive diarrhoea treated with an elimination diet. Journal of Animal Physiology and 
Animal Nutrition, 90, 269–277.
Siempos, I., Ntaidou, T.K. and Falagas, M.E. (2010) Impact of the administration of probiotics 
on the incidence of ventilator‐associated pneumonia: a metaanalysis of randomized, con-
trolled trials. Critical Care Medicine, 38, 954–962.
Singer, P., Shapiro, H., Theilla, M. et al. (2008) Anti‐inflammatory properties of omega‐3 fatty 
acids in critical illness: novel mechanisms and an integrative perspective. Intensive Care 
Medicine, 34, 1580–1592.
Smith, C.E., Freeman, L.M., Rush, J.E. et al. (2007) Omega‐3 fatty acids in Boxer dogs with 
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 21, 
265–273.
Szakmany, T., Hauser, B., and Radermacher, P. (2012) N‐acetylcysteine for sepsis and systemic 
inflammatory response in adults, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 9, CD006616.
Varzi, H.N., Esmailzadeh, S., Morovvati, H. et al. (2007) Effect of silymarin and vitamin E on 
gentamycin‐induced nephrotoxicity in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 
30, 477–481.
Visse, J., Labadarios, D. and Blaauw, R. (2011) Micronutrient supplementation for critically ill 
adults: a systemic review and meta‐analysis. Nutrition, 27, 745–758.
Webb, C.B., Twedt, D.C., Fettman, M.J. et al. (2003) S‐adenosylmethionine (SAMe) in a feline 
acetaminophen model of oxidative injury. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery, 5, 69–75.
Wernerman, J. (2011) Glutamine supplementation. Annals of Intensive Care, 1, 25–31.
Willoughby, D.A., Moore, A.R., Colville‐Nash, P.R. et al/ (2000) Resolution of inflammation. 
International Journal of Immunopharmacology, 22, 1131–1135.
Wischmeyer, P.E. and Heyland, D.K. (2010) The future of critical care nutrition therapy. Critical 
Care Clinics, 26, 433–441.

===== PDF PAGE 197 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
183
Introduction
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND) (also known as hepatocutaneous 
s yndrome, metabolic epidermal necrosis, canine diabetic dermatosis, necrolytic 
migratory erythema and glucagonoma syndrome) is a rare skin disease of 
dogs, which accounted for 0.3% (10/3387) of cases of various non‐neoplastic 
 dermatoses recorded by the pathology service of Cornell University. (Miller 
et al., 1990). It comprises a characteristic symmetrical cutaneous pathology most 
commonly associated with a particular hepatopathy (Byrne, 1999; Outerbridge, 
2013, pp. 143–145). The first case was described by Ehrlein, Loeffler and 
Trautwein (1968). This was followed by a series of four cases reported by Walton, 
Center and Scott (1986). The various names for this disease reflect the  incomplete 
understanding of its etiopathogenesis.
In people, an analogous syndrome with equivalent dermatohistopathologi-
cal features was first reported by Becker, Kahn and Rothman (1942), and is 
most commonly seen as a paraneoplastic syndrome involving a glucagon‐
secreting tumour, mainly originating from the pancreas (Stacpoole, 1981). 
There have been rare reports correlating typical skin lesions to extra‐pancreatic 
glucagonomas (right kidney, Gleeson et al., 1971; proximal duodenum, Roggli, 
Judge and McGavran, 1979), to cirrhosis (Doyle, Schroeter and Rogers, 1979; 
Blackford, Wright and Roberts, 1991; Delaporte, Catteau and Piette, 1997), or 
small bowel villous atrophy and malabsorptive syndrome (Goodenberger, 
Lawley and Strober, 1979). By contrast, most canine cases have hepatic rather 
than p ancreatic pathology; in one review of canine SND cases only 5 out of 
75 dogs had p ancreatic neoplasia (Scott, Miller and Griffin, 2001).
SND has rarely been reported in cats (Patel, Whitbread and McNeil, 1996; Day, 
1997; Byrne, 1999; Godfrey and Rest, 2000; Mauldin, Morris and Goldschmidt 
Nutritional management of 
superficial necrolytic 
dermatitis in dogs
Andrea V. Volk and Ross Bond
Department of Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
Chapter 19

===== PDF PAGE 198 =====
184   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
2002; Kimmel, Christiansen and Byrne, 2003; Asakawa, Cullen and Linder, 2013). 
The clinical presentation is quite variable and there is no information available on 
treatment. There is one report of SND in a red fox in conjunction with hepatic lipi-
dosis (van Poucke and Rest, 2005) and conflicting reports about a similar cutaneous 
manifestation in captive black rhinoceros (Munson et al., 1998; Dorsey et al., 2010).
Clinical presentation
SND is typically a disease of older dogs, with the mean age at presentation being 
approximately 10 years (Miller, 1992; Gross, Song and Havel, 1993; Outerbridge, 
2013). Further reports suggest an increased prevalence in small breeds and male 
animals (Byrne, 1999; Outerbridge, Marks and Rogers, 2002). The most striking 
feature at initial presentation is severe hyperkeratosis with fissuring of the 
 footpads (Figure 19.1), causing lameness or reluctance to walk. Similar hyper -
keratosis and fissuring can also affect the nasal planum, muzzle and lips. Other 
cutaneous lesions include progressive crusts with coalescing erosions and ulcers, 
interdigital erythema, and circular, well‐demarcated areas with peripheral 
 erythema, vesiculation, central alopecia and hyperpigmentation (Outerbridge, 
2013). Lesions often affect the facial mucocutaneous junctions (perilabial, 
 periocular), pinnal margins, ventral abdomen, flanks, distal extremities, bony 
prominences, external genitalia and the ventral aspect of the tail. Stomatitis is 
common in human cases but very rare in dogs (Gross et al., 1993). Pruritus 
likely reflects secondary infections with bacteria or fungi.
Systemic signs, such as lethargy, decreased appetite, weight loss, polydipsia / 
polyuria, muscle wastage, peripheral lymphadenopathy, may precede the  cutaneous 
(a) (b)
Figure 19.1 Images depicting a footpad of a dog with superficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND) 
before and after treatment. a) Characteristic severe hyperkeratosis and deep fissuring in a 
footpad of a dog with SND. b) The same footpad as in a) after 3rd intravenous amino acid/
essential fatty acids infusion, showing a marked reduction in hyperkeratosis with new skin 
visible on pad margins.

===== PDF PAGE 199 =====
Nutritional management of superficial necrolytic dermatitis in dogs   185
signs or become apparent shortly after presentation (Miller, 1992,; Bond et al., 
1995; Torres, Johnson and McKeever, 1997b; Cerundolo, McEvoy and McNeil, 
1999; Allenspach et al., 2000; Koutinas et al., 2001; Outerbridge et al., 2002; 
Bexfield and Watson, 2009; Mizuno, Hiraoka and Yoshioka, 2009; Papadogianniakis, 
Frangia and Matralis, 2009; Brenseke, Belz and Saunders, 2011).
Diagnosis
Diagnosis in dogs is commonly based on history, clinical presentation and der -
matohistopathology (Miller, 1992; Gross et al., 1993; Byrne, 1999; Outerbridge, 
2013), accompanied by evaluation of routine blood parameters, and imaging 
of liver and pancreas (Gross et al., 1993; Bond et al., 1995; Cerundolo et al., 
1999; Koutinas et al., 2001; Mizuno et al., 2009; Papadogiannakis et al., 2009; 
Brenseke et al., 2011). Identifying the nature of the underlying pathology 
(hepatic versus pancreatic pathology) may lead to a different therapeutic 
approach (Table 19.1).
pathophysiology
Although the etiopathogenesis is incompletely understood, a common finding in 
all cases of canine SND is marked hypoaminoacidemia (Outerbridge, 2013). 
Gross et al., (1993) speculated that reduced plasma amino acid concentrations 
result in protein depletion in the epidermis with subsequent necrolysis, since 
amino acids are necessary for maintenance of epidermal stability (Dorsey et al., 
2010), growth and keratohyalin granule formation (Byrne, 1999), reflecting 
some features seen on histopathology in SND lesions.
In glucagonoma‐related SND increased plasma glucagon concentrations lead 
to increased hepatic gluconeogenesis and ureagenesis, which subsequently 
deplete circulating amino acids (Cellio and Dennis, 2005). Further marked 
inflammation seen in the epidermis of SND cases could also be glucagon related, 
as incubation of human keratinocytes in vitro with glucagon caused increased 
concentrations of arachidonic acid (Peterson et al., 1984).
By contrast, dogs with hepatic‐related SND have normal plasma glucagon con-
centrations, at least on current available assays, although it has been suggested 
that pancreatic and enteric‐derived glucagon may influence the liver via the portal 
route without detection in peripheral blood samples (Gross et al., 1993).
A remarkable difference in canine hepatic‐related SND compared to glucagonoma‐
related ones is the liver appearance. In glucagonoma‐related SND the liver is 
unremarkable (apart from possible discrete metastases of the primary tumour). 
However, a specific hepatopathy is found in the majority of SND cases in the 
absence of a glucagonoma, characterized by vacuolar degeneration of hepatocytes 
and parenchymal collapse. This hepatopathy is, like the glucagonoma cases, 
 associated with hypoaminoacidemia, and diabetes mellitus in 25% of the cases 
(Outerbridge et al., 2002). Neither the characteristic cutaneous features of SND nor 
these biochemical changes are seen in primary hepatopathies of dogs, but are more 

===== PDF PAGE 200 =====
186   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
commonly seen with endocrine, metabolic or nutritional diseases (Miller, 1992; 
Gross et al., 1993; Outerbridge et al., 2002, Turek 2003). Above all, dogs with acute 
and chronic hepatopathies show increased plasma amino acid concentrations 
(Outerbridge et al., 2002). Thus, the etiopathogenesis in hepatic‐related SND 
remains poorly understood.
Some SND cases have been shown to be associated with hepatotoxicity, rang-
ing from mycotoxins (Little, Mc Neil and Robb, 1991) or anticonvulsant drugs 
(Bloom, Rosser and Dunstan, 1992; March, Hillier and Weisbrode, 2004), to (as 
in people) severe gastrointestinal disease (Florant et al., 2000). The skin lesions 
of ‘toxin’‐related cases resolved completely upon withdrawal of the offending 
agent (Little et al., 1991; Bloom et al., 1992; March et al., 2004).
Table 19.1 Diagnostic approach in dogs possibly affected by superficial necrolytic dermatitis.
Diagnostic procedure Typical findings
Tests for skin infections and infestations  
(e.g., scrapings, hair plucks, cytology,  
bacterial or fungal cultures)
Unremarkable with possible identification  
of secondary infections
Dermatohistopathology Parakeratotic hyperkeratosis (‘red’), striking  
pallor of keratinocytes creating a pale middle  
layer caused by intra‐and intercellular edema  
(‘white’) and irregular epidermal hyperplasia  
(‘blue’) with a mild superficial perivascular  
dermatitis with mononuclear cells (‘French  
flag’; Gross et al., 2005).
Hematology
Serum biochemistry
Typically unremarkable (early stages) or mild,  
often non‐regenerative anemia
Typically unremarkable (early stages) or  
increased activity of alkaline phosphatase  
(ALP) and aminoalanine transferase (ALT),  
hyperglycemia, hypoalbuminemia,  
hypocalcemia (Gross et al., 1993; Bond et al.,  
1995; Cerundolo et al., 1999; Koutinas et al.,  
2001).
Abdominal ultrasonography
In SND cases with an unremarkable  
ultrasound further imaging modalities  
like CT might be considered.
(a) ‘Honeycomb’ / ‘Swiss‐cheese’ like liver  
(Jacobson et al., 1995; Nyland et al., 1996;  
Scott et al., 2001; Outerbridge et al., 2002;  
ultrasound being a highly sensitive tool)  
followed by liver biopsy (ultrasound‐guided or  
surgical) revealing vacuolar degeneration of  
hepatocytes grouped in nodules surrounded  
by collapsed parenchyma (Gross et al., 1993;  
Allenspach et al., 2000, Outerbridge et al.,  
2002; Brenseke et al., 2011)
b) Unremarkable or pancreatic mass or its 
metastases (rare) (Miller, 1992, Bond et al., 
1995).

===== PDF PAGE 201 =====
Nutritional management of superficial necrolytic dermatitis in dogs   187
Some authors have speculated that decreased skin or blood concentrations of 
essential fatty acids (Blackford et al., 1991; Outerbridge et al., 2002), zinc (Gross 
et al., 1993), and vitamin B (van Beek et al., 2004) may contribute to the cutaneous 
lesions, but supplementation with these nutrients has inconsistent effects. A single 
case report in the human literature describes the successful use of intravenous 
amino acids and intralipids (source of essential fatty acids) in the treatment of necro-
lytic migratory erythema in the glucagonoma syndrome (Alexander et al., 2002).
Very recently, Bach and Glasser (2013) reported one dog with SND, showing 
enhanced improvement through reduced length of treatment intervals due to 
the additional use of essential fatty acids with the amino acid infusions.
Nutritional management
In cases of SND associated with hepatopathy, consideration should be given to 
possible reversible causes of hepatopathy (e.g., mycotoxins, anticonvulsant 
drugs), although commonly the specific hepatopathy cannot be reversed. 
Correction of hypoaminoacidemia is an important goal in the palliative care 
of these dogs. Dietary modifications or intravenous amino acid infusions 
may be utilized. Outerbridge et al. (2002) reported that some dogs respond 
 preferentially to intravenously rather than orally administered amino acids. 
A possible explanation might include impaired enteral absorption of amino 
acids or increased hepatic metabolism before amino acids are available for the 
skin (Alexander et al., 2002). Different commercially available parenteral 
solutions of amino acids have been used in the literature via different  protocols 
(Table 19.2).
These treatments appear to be well tolerated although the risk of thrombo-
phlebitis dictates the use of a central venous catheter. It remains to be determined 
whether the commercially available infusions contain the optimal amounts of the 
relevant amino acids for individual animals (Outerbridge et al., 2002; Cave, 2007).
A high quality protein diet is an important adjunctive treatment in all cases 
of SND (Norton et al., 1979; Stacpoole, 1981; Shepherd et al., 1991). In cases 
where intravenous administration is not feasible, the diet can be supplemented 
with whey powder as a source of protein and amino acids. Convalescent diets 
can be useful palatable sources of such protein (Jacobson, Kirberger and Nesbit, 
1995; Byrne, 1999; Koutinas and others 2001), while eggs are an alternative 
(Gross and others 1993, Jacobson et al., 1995, Byrne 1999, Koutinas et al., 
2001; Scott et al., 2001; Bexfield and Watson, 2009). Oral supplementation of 
essential fatty acids appears to be of limited value (Bond et al., 1995; Jacobson 
et al., 1995; Outerbridge et al., 2002; Mizuno et al., 2009). Although, its intra-
venous administration via a central catheter together with the amino acid solu-
tion might be of benefit (Bach and Glasser, 2013; Dan Chan personal 
communication). The potential benefit of essential fatty acid or zinc supple-
mentation is also unclear in the human patient, though in a particular ‘pseudo‐
glucagonoma syndrome’ in patients with alcoholism, zinc supplementation 
(Delaporte et al., 1997) may resolve the skin lesions on its own, or in combina-
tion with essential fatty acids (Blackford et al., 1991).

===== PDF PAGE 202 =====
188   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
adjunct medical therapy
Glucocorticoid therapy will initially reduce skin inflammation and pruritus, but 
it can increase the risk of overt diabetes mellitus (Miller, 1992; Torres et al., 
1997b) and is therefore not recommended. S‐adenosylmethionine (Mizuno 
et al., 2009; Bexfield and Watson, 2009), ursodeoxycholic acid and glutathione 
(Mizuno et al., 2009), commonly used in hepatopathies (Flatland, 2009), have 
been used with minimal success in SND cases.
Systemic or topical antimicrobials can be used to reduce occurrence or treat 
existing secondary infections (bacteria and or Malassezia yeasts), depending on 
Table 19.2 Examples of commercially available amino acids solutions for injection, their 
composition and proposed administration protocols for dogs with superficial necrolytic 
dermatitis.
Ispol 12% (Daigo Eiyo 
Co. Tokyo, Japan)
Aminosyn 10%  
(Hispora, Inc., Lake  
Forest, IL, USA)
Aminoven 25 
(Fresenius Kabi Ltd.,  
Runcorn, UK)
25 mL/kg twice  
weekly over 6–8 h for  
3 weeks; effect  
evaluated thereafter  
(Mizuno et al., 2009)
3 mL/kg/h over 24h;  
effect evaluated 6  
days following the  
infusion (Oberkirchner  
et al., 2010)
3–4 mL/kg/h  
(combined with  
10 mL/kg Intralipid  
20%, over 24–48 h, 
effect evaluated 6 
days following the  
infusion (authors in  
communication with  
Dan Chan)
Amino acids in mg/100 mL in mg/100 mL in mg/100 mL
L‐isoleucin 845 760 520
L‐leucin 1175 1200 890
Lysine HCl 1032 677 1110
L‐methionine 540 180 380
L‐phenylalanine 1280 427 550
L‐threonine 596 512 860
L‐tryptophan 218 180 160
L‐valine 865 673 550
L‐arginine HCl 1200 1227 2000
L‐histidine HCl 600 312 730
L‐aspartic acid 600 527 –
L‐glutamic acid 180 820 –
L‐alanine 480 698 2500
L‐cystine 24 – –
Glycine 1825 385 1850
L‐proline 240 812 1700
L‐serine 240 495 960
L‐tyrosine 60 44 40
Taurine – 70 200

===== PDF PAGE 203 =====
Nutritional management of superficial necrolytic dermatitis in dogs   189
the nature of the organism present on cytology or microbial culture results. 
Topical treatment regimens may include chlorhexidine, miconazole / chlorhexidine 
combinations, and silver sulfadiazine.
Topical moisturizers may soften the hyperkeratotic skin of the footpads, nasal 
planum and lips and reduce frequency of fissuring and subsequent pain and 
secondary infection. The authors’ group favors a product containing soybean‐, 
palm‐ and cajuput oils and allantoine.
1
Special considerations
In human medicine, SND associated with glucagonoma can be treated with sur-
gical tumour de‐bulking or resection and this has an important role in improving 
debilitating skin lesions, even if complete excision cannot be achieved (Stacpoole, 
1981). In one canine case, pancreatic tumour removal led to resolution of skin 
lesions within 45 days, with no relapse over a further 6 weeks (Torres, Caywood 
and O’Brien, 1997a). Pre‐existing metastases and post‐surgical pancreatitis limit 
the potential for successful surgery (Koutinas et al., 2001).
Subcutaneous injections of octreotide, a long‐acting somatostatin analogue 
that antagonizes the effects of glucagon, have been used with limited success in 
people with glucagonoma (Long et al., 1979; Shepherd et al., 1991). Recently, 
one dog with metastatic pancreatic glucagonoma showed a marked improve-
ment after ten days of octreotide treatment (2 μg/kg twice daily as subcutaneous 
injections; Oberkirchner et al., 2010). Previously, a dog was also successfully 
treated with somatostatin (6 μg/kg subcutaneously every 8 h), but had been 
euthanized due to costs and renal dysfunction (Scott et al., 2001). Mizuno et al. 
(2009) observed only minimal improvement in one case where a somatostatin 
analogue (2 μg /kg Sandostatin (Novartis)) was used twice daily as subcutaneous 
injections for 2 weeks. Decreased appetite is a potential side effect in both dogs 
and people, which might be ameliorated by dose adjustment (1 μg/ kg 4 times 
daily, Oberkirchner et al., 2010), or use of appetite stimulants and anti‐emetics 
(Lamberts, van der Lely and de Herder, 1996).
SND in dogs carries a poor prognosis, with a mean survival time of 6.4 
months reported in a series of 36 dogs, with 18% surviving longer than 12 
months (Outerbridge et al., 2002). Many dogs can be partially controlled for 
short periods with nutritional management although ultimately the lameness 
associated with footpad hyperkeratosis often leads to euthanasia before  systemic 
signs significantly impact the quality of life. Surgical removal of pancreatic gluca-
gonoma may be beneficial in rare early cases without metastases. Owners and 
attending veterinarians should constantly review the welfare of these dogs dur-
ing treatment.
Summary
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis is a rare skin disease of dogs that has a charac-
teristic symmetrical cutaneous pathology most commonly associated with a 
hepatopathy. Severe hyperkeratosis with fissuring of the footpads and similar 

===== PDF PAGE 204 =====
190   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
lesions in nasal planum, muzzle and lips are characteristic dermal findings. 
Concurrent liver pathology is commonly encountered but this syndrome can 
occur in the absence of primary liver pathology, e.g., glucagonoma. Severe 
hypoaminoacidemia is a hallmark finding and nutritional management entails 
use of intravenous amino acid infusions and increased dietary protein intake. 
Although nutritional management can improve clinical signs temporarily, this 
disorder carries a poor prognosis.
Note
1 Dermoscent BioPalm Aventix, Laboratoire de Der mo‐Cosmétiquie Animale, Technopôle Castres‐Mazamet‐
Castres‐France.
references
Allenspach, K., Arnold, P., Glaus, T. et al., (2000) Glucagon‐producing neuroendocrine tumour 
associated with hypoaminoacidaemia and skin lesions. Journal of Small Animal Practice, 41, 
402–6.
Alexander, E.K., Robinson, M., Staniec, M. et al. (2002) Peripheral amino acid and fatty acid 
infusion for the treatment of necrolytic migratory erythema in the glucagonoma syndrome. 
Clinical Endocrinology, 57, 827–31.
Asakawa, M.G., Cullen, J.M. and Linder, K.E. (2013) Necrolytic metabolic erythema associated 
with a glucagon‐producing primary hepatic neuroendocrine carcinoma in a cat. Veterinary 
Dermatology, 24, 466–469.
Bach, J.F. and Glasser, S.A. (2013) A case of necrolytic migratory erythema managed for 24 months 
with intravenous amino acids and lipid infusions. Canadian Veterinary Journal, 54, 873–875.
Becker, S.W., Kahn, D. and Rothman, S. (1942) Cutaneous manifestations of internal malig-
nant tumors. A.M.A. Archives of Dermatology and Syphilology, 45, 1069–80.
Bexfield, N. and Watson, P. (2009) Treatment of canine liver disease 2. Managing clinical signs 
and specific liver disease, Practice, 31, 172–180.
Blackford, S., Wright, S. and Roberts, D.L. (1991) Necrolytic migratory erythema without 
 glucagonoma: the role of dietary essential fatty acids. British Journal of Dermatology, 125, 460–462.
Bloom, P., Rosser, E.J. and Dunstan, R. (1992) Anti‐convulsant hepatitis‐induced necrolytic 
migratory erythema (Abstract). Proceedings of the Second World Congress of Veterinary 
Dermatology. May 13 to 16, Montreal, Canada. p. 56.
Bond, R., McNeil, P.E., Evans, H. et al., (1995) Metabolic epidermal necrosis in two dogs with 
different underlying diseases. Veterinary Record, 136, 466–477.
Key poINtS
•	 SND is a rare but often debilitating disease in dogs.
•	 This disorder has an incompletely understood etiopathogenesis but it is most commonly 
associated with a hepatopathy and rarely with glucagonoma.
•	 Skin histopathology and abdominal ultrasound are the most useful tests in dogs with 
compatible clinical signs as the lesions are very characteristic and typical of the disease.
•	 Although there are limited data available, intravenous amino acid supplementation, 
possibly with essential fatty acids and adjunct supplemental dietary intake provides 
temporary benefit to these patients.
•	 SND ultimately has a poor prognosis in the majority of cases.

===== PDF PAGE 205 =====
Nutritional management of superficial necrolytic dermatitis in dogs   191
Brenseke, B.M., Belz, K.M. and Saunders, G.K. (2011) Pathology in practice. Journal of the 
American Veterinary Medical Association, 238 (4), 445–447.
Byrne, K.P. (1999) Metabolic epidermal necrosis–hepatocutaneous syndrome. Veterinary Clinics 
of North America Small Animal Practice, 29, 1337–1355.
Cave, T.A., Evans, H., Hargreaves, J. and Blunden, A.S. (2007) Metabolic epidermal nectosis in 
a dog associated with pancreatic adenocarcinoma, hyperglucagonaemia, hyperinsulinaemia 
and hypoaminoacidaemia. Journal of Small Animal Practice, 48, 522–526.
Cellio, L.M. and Dennis, J. (2005) Canine superficial necrolytic dermatitis. Compendium on 
Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian, 27, 820–825.
Cerundolo, R., McEvoy, F. and McNeil, P.E. (1999) Ultrasonographic detection of a pancreatic 
glucagon‐secreting multihormonal islet cell tumour in a dachshund with metabolic  epidermal 
necrosis. Veterinary Record, 145, 662–666.
Day, M.J. (1997) Review of thymic pathology in 30 cats and 36 dogs. Journal of Small Animal 
Practice, 38, 393–403.
Delaporte, E., Catteau, B. and Piette, E. (1997) Necrolytic migratory erythema‐like eruption in 
zink deficiency associated with alcoholic liver disease. British Journal of Dermatology, 137, 
1027–1028.
Dorsey, C.L., Dennis, P., Fascetti, A.J. et al. (2010) Hypoaminoacidemia is not associated with 
ulcerative lesions in Black Rhinoceroses, Diceros Bicornis. Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine, 
41 (1), 22–27.
Doyle, J.A., Schroeter, A.L. and Rogers, R.S. (1979) Hyperglucagonemia and necrolytic migra-
tory erythema in cirrhosis – possible pseudoglucagonoma syndrome. British Journal of 
Dermatolology, 100, 581–587.
Ehrlein, H.J., Loeffler K., and Trautwein, G. (1968) Ekzem und Lebererkrankung beim Hund 
(hepatodermales Syndrom) [eczema and liver disease in the dog (hepatodermal syndrome)]. 
Kleintierpraxis, 13, 123–128.
Flatland B. (2009) Hepatic support therapy. in Kirk’s Current Veterinary Therapy XIV, (sds J.D. 
Bonagura and D.C. Twedt) W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 554–557.
Florant, E., Guillot, J., DeGorce‐Rubialis, F. et al. (2000) Four cases of canine metabolic epider-
mal necrosis (Abstract). Free Communications of the Fourth World Congress of Veterinary 
Dermatology. Aug 30 to Sept 02, San Francisco, USA, p. 18.
Gleeson, M.H., Bloom, S.R., Polak, J.M. et al. (1970) An endocrine tumor in kidney affecting 
small bowel structure, motility, and function. Gut, 11, 1060.
Godfrey, D.R. and Rest, J.R. (2000) Suspected necrolytic migratory erythema associated with 
chronic hepatopathy in a cat. Journal of Small Animal Practice, 41, 324–328.
Goodenberger, D.M., Lawley and T.J., Strober, W. (1979) Necrolytic migratory erythema with-
out glucagonoma. Archive of Dermatology, 115, 1429–1432.
Gross, T.L., Ihrke P.J., Walder E.J. et al. (2005) Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn, 
Blackwell Publishing, pp. 86–91.
Gross, T.L., Song, M.D. and Havel, P.J. (1993) Superficial necrolytic dermatitis (Necrolytic 
Migratory Erythema) in dogs. Veterinary Pathology, 30, 75–81.
Kimmel, S.E., Christiansen W., and Byrne, K.P. (2003) Clinicopathological, ultrasonographic, 
and histopathological findings of superficial necrolytic dermatitis with hepatopathy in a cat. 
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 39, 23–27.
Jacobson, L.S., Kirberger, R.M. and Nesbit, J.W. (1995) Hepatic ultrasonography and pathologi-
cal findings in dogs with hepatocutaneous syndrome: new concepts. Journal of Veterinary 
Internal Medicine, 6, 399–404.
Koutinas, C.K., Koutinas, A.F., Saridomichelakis, M.N. et al. (2001) Metabolic epider -
mal  necrosis (hepatocutaneous syndrome) in the dog: A clinical and pathological 
review of 6 spontaneous cases. European Journal of Companion Animal Practice, 12 (2), 
163–171.
Lamberts, S.W., van der Lely, A.J. and de Herder, W.W. (1996) Octreotide. New England Journal 
of Medicine, 334, 246–254.
Little, C.J.L., McNeil, P.E. and Robb, J. (1991) Hepatopathy and dermatitis in a dog associated 
with the ingestion of mycotoxins. Journal of Small Animal Practice, 32, 23–26.
Long, R.G., Adrian, T.E., Brown, M.R. et al. (1979) Suppression of pancreatic endocrine tumour 
secretion by long‐acting somatostatin analogue. Lancet, 2, 764.

===== PDF PAGE 206 =====
192   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
March, P.A., Hillier, A. and Weisbrode, S.E. (2004) Superficial necrolytic dermatitis in 11 dogs 
with a history of phenobarbital administration (1995–2002). Journal of Veterinary Internal 
Medicine, 18, 65–74.
Mauldin, E.A., Morris, D.O. and Goldschmidt, M.H. (2002) Retrospective study: the presence of 
Malassezia in feline skin biopsies. A clinicopathological study. Veterinary Dermatology, 13, 7–14.
Miller, W.H. (1992) Necrolytic migratory erythema in dogs: A cutaneous marker for gastrointes-
tinal disease. in Current Veterinary Therapy XI, (eds R.W. Kirk and J.D. Bonagura) W.B. Saunders, 
Philadelphia, pp. 561–562.
Miller, W.H., Scott, D.W., Buerger, R.G. et al., (1990) Necrolytic migratory erythema in dogs: A 
hepatocutaneous syndrome. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 26,573–581.
Mizuno, T., Hiraoka, H. and Yoshioka, C. (2009) Superficial necrolytic dermatitis associated 
with extrapancreatic glucagonoma in a dog. Veterinary Dermatology, 20, 72–79.
Munson, L., Koehler, J.W., Wilkinson, J.E. et al. (1998) Vesicular and ulcerative dermatopathy 
resembling superficial necrolytic dermatitis in captive black rhinoceroses (Diceros bicornis). 
Veterinary Pathology, 35, 31–42.
Norton, J.A., Kahn, C.R., Scheibinger, R. et al. (1979) Amino acid deficiency and the skin rash 
associated with glucagonoma. Annals of Internal Medicine, 91, 213–215.
Nyland, T.G., Barthez, P.Y., Ortega, T.M. et al. (1996) Hepatic ultrasonographic and patho-
logic findings in dogs with canine superficial necrolytic dermatitis. Veterinary Radiology and 
Ultrasound, 37 (3), 200–205.
Oberkirchner, U., Linder, K.E., Zadrozny, L. et al. (2010) Successful treatment of canine necro-
lytic migratory erythema (superficial necrolytic dermatitis) due to metastatic glucagonoma 
with octreotide. Veterinary Dermatology, 21(5), 510–516.
Outerbridge, C.A., Marks, S.L. and Rogers, Q.R. (2002) Plasma amino acid concentrations in 36 dogs 
with histologically confirmed superficial necrolytic dermatitis. Veterinary Dermatology, 13, 177–186.
Outerbridge, C.A. (2013) Cutaneous manifestations of internal disease. Veterinary Clinics of North 
American Small Animal Practice, 43, 135–152.
Papadogiannakis, E., Frangia, K. and Matralis, D. (2009) Superficial necrolytic dermatitis in a 
dog associated with hyperplasia of pancreatic neuroendocrine cells. Journal of Small Animal 
Practice, 50, 318.
Patel, A., Whitbread, T.J. and McNeil, P.E. (1995) A case of metabolic epidermal necrosis in a 
cat. Veterinary Dermatology, 7, 221–226.
Peterson, L.L., Shaw, J.C., Acott, K.M. et al. (1984) Glucagonoma syndrome: in vitro evidence 
that glucagon increases epidermal arachidonic acid. Journal of the American Academy of 
Dermatology, 11, 468–73.
Roggli, V.L., Judge, D.M. and McGavran M.H. (1979) Duodenal glucagonoma: A case report. 
Human Pathology, 10 (3), 350–353.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. and Griffin, C.E. (2001) Necrolytic migratory erythema. in Muller & 
Kirk’s Small Animal Dermatology. 6th edn. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia. pp. 868–873.
Shepherd, M.E., Raimer, S.S., Tyring, S.K. et al. (1991) Treatment of necrolytic migratory erythema 
in glucagonoma syndrome. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, 25 (5), 925–928.
Stacpoole, P.W. (1981). The glucagonoma syndrome: clinical features, diagnosis and treatment. 
Endocrine Review, 2 (3), 347–361.
Torres, S.M.F., Caywood, D.D. and O’Brien, T.D. (1997a) Resolution of superficial necrolytic 
dermatitis following excision of a glucagon – secreting pancreatic neoplasm in a dog. Journal 
of the American Animal Hospital Association, 33, 313–319.
Torres, S., Johnson, K. and McKeever, P. (1997b) Superficial necrolytic dermatitis and a pancre-
atic endocrine tumor in a dog. Journal of Small Animal Practice, 38, 246–50.
Turek, M.M. (2003) Cutaneous paraneoplastic syndromes in dogs and cats: a review of the lit-
erature. Veterinary Dermatology, 14, 279–296.
Van Beek, A.P., de Haas, E.R., van Vloten, W.A. et al. (2004) The glucagonoma syndrome and necro-
lytic migratory erythema: a clinical review. European Journal of Endocrinology, 151, 531–537.
Van Poucke, S. and Rest, J.R. (2005) Superficial necroytic dermatitis associated with hepatic 
lipidosis in a red fox (Vulpes vulpes). Veterinary Record, 156, 54–55.
Walton, D.K., Center, S.A. and Scott, D.W. (1986) Ulcerative dermatosis associated with diabetes mel-
litus in the dog: a report of four cases. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association, 22, 79–88.

===== PDF PAGE 207 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
193
Introduction
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a clinical syndrome characterized by a sudden 
reduction of renal function with rapid development of azotemia and failure to 
regulate fluid, electrolyte and acid–base balance. The etiology of intrinsic AKI is 
multifactorial and can include hemodynamic, infectious, immune‐mediated, 
neoplastic or nephrotoxic damage to the vasculature, glomeruli, tubular epithe-
lium or interstitium of the kidney. AKI frequently complicates other surgical or 
medical diseases and may be identified as a bystander of a generalized systemic 
inflammatory response causing multiple‐organ dysfunction.
The clinical presentation of acute uremia depends on its cause, severity and 
concurrent diseases provoking the renal injury. The diagnosis is established from 
a comprehensive data base integrating history, physical examination, laboratory 
testing, diagnostic imaging and, in some instances, histopathology. AKI is associ-
ated with variable hyperkalemia and hypocalcemia, moderate to severe metabolic 
acidosis and hyperphosphatemia in addition to azotemia. Classically the syndrome 
of AKI has been characterized by oliguria and anuria; however, non‐oliguric 
forms of AKI also occur. With timely diagnosis and appropriately administered 
therapy, AKI can be reversible. Delays or failure to initiate specific and supportive 
therapy may result in irreversible renal damage or death. The management of the 
acute uremia encompasses reversing the underlying cause(s) and ongoing risk 
factors (e.g., drugs, inadequate hemodynamics and concurrent diseases) for the 
renal injury, correcting the uremic intoxications and the fluid, electrolyte and 
acid–base imbalances, establishing adequate urine production and providing 
nutritional support until renal function has recovered.
Nutritional management strategies
The uremic manifestations of AKI compromise the appetite and contribute to 
nausea and vomiting. In addition, recovery from AKI may require a prolonged 
convalescence during which animals are at risk of protein calorie malnutrition 
Nutritional support in acute 
kidney injury in dogs and cats
Denise A. Elliott
Waltham Centre for Pet Nutrition, Waltham on the Wolds, Leicestershire, UK
Chapter 20

===== PDF PAGE 208 =====
194   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
due to poor dietary intake. Therefore, early nutritional assessment and institution 
of nutritional support is crucial in the management of patients with AKI. 
Nutritional supplementation should be individually tailored to patient needs to 
compensate for the specific abnormalities in protein, carbohydrate and lipid 
metabolism, and the marked alterations in fluid, electrolyte and acid–base 
 balance characteristic of AKI. Nutritional management of the AKI patient is 
complex and can be significantly complicated by oliguria/anuria.
The metabolic status of the patient with AKI varies according to the variation 
of the disease (Fiaccadori, Parenti and Maggiore, 2008). However, most patients 
have some degree of protein catabolism and negative nitrogen balance (Mitch, 
May and Maroni, 1989a). Endocrine factors contributing to protein catabolism in 
uremia include insulin resistance, secondary hyperparathyroidism and increased 
circulating concentrations of catecholamines, glucagon and corticosteroids 
(Fiaccadori et al., 2008). Inflammatory mediators, including neutrophil-derived 
circulating proteases, interleukins and tumour necrosis factor, have also been 
shown to mediate hypercatabolism. Metabolic acidosis acting via a glucocorticoid‐
dependent pathway is also a major cause of muscle protein breakdown in AKI 
(Mitch et al., 1989b). Collectively, these mechanisms of catabolism and marked 
protein breakdown contribute to the uremic syndrome by exacerbating hyper -
kalemia, hyperphosphatemia, acidosis and azotemia.
Therefore, the first step in managing the patient with AKI is to ensure that 
sufficient energy is provided to prevent endogenous protein catabolism. Energy 
metabolism in AKI varies and depends on the presence of underlying or concur-
rent disease. However, it is generally considered that there is a decrease rather 
than an increase in energy expenditure (Kreymann et al., 2006). The energy 
expenditure of an individual patient may be assessed by indirect calorimetry, 
however, this technique is not widely available in veterinary hospitals (O’Toole 
et al., 2001). The amount of energy to provide for the patient can be calculated 
from the resting energy requirement (RER) 70(Wt
kg)0.75 with intake subsequently 
adjusted according to individual patient needs, based on serial clinical assess-
ment of body weight and body condition score. Excessive energy intake should 
be  avoided, particularly in animals with compromised respiratory function 
(e.g.  uremic pneumonitis) as the increased carbohydrate and fat metabolism 
generates CO
2. Carbohydrate and fat provide the non‐protein sources of energy 
in the diet. Diets designed for the management of renal failure are usually 
 formulated with a relatively high fat content because fat provides approximately 
twice the energy per gram than carbohydrate, increasing the energy density of 
the diet and thereby allowing the patient to obtain its nutritional requirements 
from a smaller volume of food.
Azotemia and uremia are due to the accumulation of protein metabolites 
(nitrogenous waste products) derived from dietary protein and degradation of 
endogenous protein. Ideally protein intake should be matched with catabolism 
to promote a positive nitrogen balance and thereby avoid protein calorie 
 malnutrition while simultaneously reducing the production of uremic toxins to 
ameliorate the clinical signs of uremia. Nitrogen balance studies to estimate 
dietary protein requirements are not applicable in the critical care setting of 
AKI. Logically, every animal with AKI should be fed at least the minimal protein 

===== PDF PAGE 209 =====
Nutritional support in acute kidney injury in dogs and cats   195
requirements (4 g/100 kcal for cats; 2 g/100 kcal for dogs) (NRC, 2006). 
However, this degree of restriction is necessary only in animals with profound 
uremia and, in most cases, the protein intake can be gradually adjusted to reach 
the recommended daily requirement (5 g/100 kcal for cats; 2.5 g/100 kcal for 
dogs) (NRC 2006) to ensure adequate protein intake while minimizing uremia. 
High quality protein sources must be used in the formulation of restricted 
 protein diets to minimize the risks of essential amino acid deficiency.
Dietary phosphorus intake should be restricted to help manage hyperphos-
phatemia. Most dietary phosphate is contained within protein, hence dietary 
protein restriction will simultaneously reduce phosphate intake. Unfortunately, 
dietary protein restriction alone is unlikely to prevent hyperphosphatemia in 
AKI, and the administration of intestinal phosphate binding agents with the 
food is typically required. The potassium status of the patient with AKI is highly 
variable and can fluctuate on a day to day basis according to the urine output 
(anuria vs oliguria vs polyuria), emphasizing the need to monitor potassium 
status and adjust intake on an individual basis. Severe metabolic acidosis is a 
common complication of AKI, but variable primary or mixed acid–base distur -
bances may develop, depending on the underlying etiology and extent of the 
vomiting, diarrhea and respiratory components. While citrate supplemented 
diets can be selected to assist the management of metabolic acidosis, medical 
treatment is often necessary. Water soluble vitamins are excreted in urine and 
hence deficiency may develop due to polyuria associated with the recovery 
phase of AKI. Long chain omega 3 fatty acids, such as eicosapentaenoic acid 
and docosahexaenoic acid, compete with arachadonic acid and alter eicosanoid 
production. To be effective, they must be incorporated into cell membranes, 
therefore, it is not clear if supplementation with omega‐3 fatty acids will be 
effective in modulating inflammation in the acute setting. Supplementation 
with exogenous antioxidants appears logical to combat oxidative stress and free 
radical damage.
Diets designed for the management of chronic kidney disease are widely 
available and typically contain appropriate nutrient modifications for patients 
with acute kidney disease. Therefore the challenges in managing the AKI 
patient are not with diet selection but rather with anorexia and food refusal 
that accompanies their critical illness, the management of which is further 
complicated by oliguria/anuria. Food intake can be encouraged by using odor -
ous foods, warming the foods prior to feeding, and stimulating eating by posi-
tive reinforcement with petting and stroking behaviour. Appetite stimulants 
can be considered (see Chapter  13) but, in most cases, adequate daily food 
intake can only be achieved by enteral or parenteral interventional nutrition.
Enteral nutrition, facilitated by the placement of nasoesophageal or 
 esophagostomy tubes, is a highly effective management devices to achieve 
 dietary administration to animals reluctant to eat appropriate amounts of food 
ad libitum (see Chapters 4 and 5). Enteral tube feeding is recommended in all 
patients who can tolerate it as enteral feeding helps to maintain the gastrointes-
tinal barrier and prevent the translocation of bacteria and systemic infections 
(Deitch, Winterton and Berg, 1987). The appropriate renal diet can be blended 
with water and the feeding solution administered intermittently or continuously 

===== PDF PAGE 210 =====
196   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
using a syringe pump. To decreased the risk of refeeding syndrome the amount 
of the nutrient solution is gradually increased over two to three days until the 
nutritional requirements are met (Justin and Hohenhaus, 1995). The stomach 
should be aspirated every 2 to 4 hours to ensure gastric emptying and intestinal 
peristalsis are established, thereby prevent vomiting and aspiration. Fluid  balance 
in the acute kidney injury patient is precarious, especially in the oliguric/anuric 
patient. Care should be taken to minimize the volume of water used to blend the 
commercial diet. In especially delicate cases, the water to blend the diet can be 
replaced with an appropriate commercial liquid; note that in this situation, a 
veterinary nutritionist should be consulted to ensure the combination of the 
two commercial products will still meet the nutrient needs of the patient. Several 
human enteral formulations for renal disease are available; however, these 
products often contain inadequate amounts of protein and essential nutrients, 
such as taurine, arginine and arachidonic acid, and hence should be used 
 cautiously in dogs and cats.
Parenteral nutrition is indicated if the nutrient requirements cannot be met 
by the enteral route and the patient can tolerate the additional fluid load (Cano 
et al., 2009). Peripheral parenteral nutrition (PPN) involves the administration 
of isotonic nutritional solutions through a peripheral vein, thereby avoiding the 
requirement of a central vein. PPN cannot provide the complete nutrient require-
ments for the patient due to the isotonic nature of the solution that is specifically 
designed to avoid thrombophlebitis (see Chapter  11). PPN is rarely used in 
patients with AKI due to the difficulties with managing fluid balance.
Central parenteral nutrition (CPN), which can provide the appropriate nutri-
ent requirements, necessitates administration into a central vein such as the vena 
cava due to the hyperosmolality of the solution. Fluid balance is still challenging 
using CPN, but clearly less so compared with the vast volumes required with 
PPN. Modified amino acid formulations for parenteral use in AKI are available, 
however, there are no studies to suggest that the modified amino acid solutions 
are any more effective than the standard amino acid solutions.
Special considerations
Fluid therapy is the cornerstone of medical management of patients with AKI. 
The goal is to normalize fluid balance, resolve any hemodynamic inadequacies 
and promote urine formation. Animals with AKI typically are dehydrated and 
hypovolemic because of anorexia, vomiting and diarrhea. The volume deficit 
should be corrected with the intravenous administration of saline or balanced 
polyionic replacement solutions within 2 to 4 hours. There is absolutely no 
indication for subcutaneous replacement of the fluid deficits. The rate of fluid 
administration may need to be tempered for patients with concurrent cardiovas-
cular disease to prevent circulatory congestion and heart failure. Blood losses 
should be replaced with compatible blood transfusions to restore intravascular 
volume, blood pressure and haematocrit. If the estimated fluid deficit fails to 
induce a diuresis of at least 1 mL/kg/hr, the hydration status of the patient 
should be reassessed to ensure that the fluid deficits are indeed replete. Further 
fluid administration with balanced electrolyte solutions should be provided to 
achieve mild (3 to 5% of body weight) volume expansion. Maintenance fluid 

===== PDF PAGE 211 =====
Nutritional support in acute kidney injury in dogs and cats   197
requirements must be provided after fluid deficits are restored and are predicated 
on assessment of ongoing fluid losses (urinary, vomitus, fecal) which are replaced 
with isonatric solutions and insensible fluid (free water 20–25 mL/kg/day) 
requirements which must be supplied orally or by parenteral administration of 
5% dextrose in water.
Failure to induce adequate diuresis with fluid therapy predicts severe kidney 
injury. A number of therapeutic agents (e.g., mannitol, furosemide, dopamine) 
have been advocated to attenuate the severity of the renal injury or induce urine 
formation in the oliguric or anuric patient. Their efficacy remains controversial 
and should not supersede appropriate and timely administration of fluid therapy. 
It should be noted that conversion of an oliguric or anuric patient to a non‐
oliguric state may not necessarily equate with improvements in renal function 
or recovery but clearly facilitates the management of fluid, electrolyte, and 
acid–base disorders, in addition to alleviating the challenges associated with the 
administration of enteral or parenteral nutrition. If a diuretic response cannot be 
established or maintained within 4 to 6 hours following restoration of fluid 
deficits and administration of mannitol, furosemide and/or dopamine therapy, it 
is highly unlikely that additional administration of fluid or drugs will be safe or 
effective, and dialysis should be considered as an alternative.
Antiemetics should be used to control protracted vomiting. Gastrointestinal 
protective agents, such as histamine receptor blockers (e.g., cimetidine, raniti-
dine, famotidine) or proton pump blockers (e.g., omeprazole) may be used to 
prevent severe esophagitis and ulcerative gastritis during periods of uremia and 
persistent vomiting. Oral rinsing with 0.1% chlorhexidine solution is beneficial 
for uremic stomatitis and oral ulcerations. Systemic hypertension may require 
antihypertensive therapy to prevent retinal detachment and cerebral bleeding.
Monitoring and complications
AKI is a dynamic condition that has significant systemic effects. Regular moni-
toring and nutritional assessment is crucial to ensure that dietary and medical 
management remains optimal for the needs of the patient (Elliott, 2008). 
Complications are typically related to fluid, electrolyte and acid–base balance, 
and inadequate food intake. The likelihood for errors can be minimized by clear 
and concise treatment plans coupled with constant re‐evaluation of the patient’s 
status (Remillard et al., 2001). The amount of food eaten should be recorded in 
the medical record. It is equally important that all episodes of vomiting and diar-
rhoea be recorded in the medical record. The body weight should be monitored 
at least once daily and the amount of food delivered adjusted accordingly to 
prevent body weight loss. Body weight changes in the acute kidney patient can 
be misleading due to the concurrent fluid balance status. Therefore, in addition 
to changes in body weight, the clinician should also utilize changes in muscle 
mass to help guide their clinical decision‐making. Fluid balance should be 
assessed regularly by changes in body weight and indices of hydration to direct 
ongoing fluid prescriptions. Oliguric or anuric animals are incapable of excreting 
an excessive fluid load, so care must be taken to avoid volume overload. Hyper-
volemia is a serious and potentially life‐threatening complication of therapy that 
is difficult or impossible to correct.

===== PDF PAGE 212 =====
198   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Summary
Management of the patient with AKI is a complex medical challenge. The nutri-
tional needs of the patient are likely to be ignored in the pursuit of diagnosis and 
management of the complex metabolic disturbances induced by acute uremia. 
Furthermore, most patients do not have a history of weight loss, nor do they 
present in poor body condition. However, it is extremely important to anticipate 
the need to feed the patient. The effects of uremia on appetite and metabolism 
are clear and devastating. Do not take a ’wait and see’ attitude. To minimize 
catabolism and promote recovery nutritional therapy should be implemented 
within hours of admission to the hospital.
references
Cano, N.J., Aparicio, M., Brunori, G. et al. (2009) ESPEN Guidelines on parenteral nutrition: 
adult renal failure. Clinical Nutrition, 28, 401–414.
Deitch, E.A., Winterton, J. and Berg, R. (1987) Effect of starvation, malnutrition, and trauma on 
the gastrointestinal tract flora and bacterial translocation. Archives of Surgery, 122, 
1019–1024.
Elliott, D. A. (2008) Nutritional assessment. in Small Animal Critical Care Medicine. (eds D. 
Silverstein and K. Hoppe). Elsevier, St Louis, pp. 856–858.
Fiaccadori, E., Parenti, E. and Maggiore, U. (2008) Nutritional support in acute kidney injury. 
Journal of Nephrology, 21, 645–656.
Justin, R.B. and Hohenhaus, A.E. (1995) Hypophosphatemia associated with enteral alimentation 
in cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 9, 228–233.
Kreymann, K.G., Berger, M.M., Deutz, N.E. et al., (2006) ESPEN Guidelines on enteral nutrition: 
Intensive care. Clinical Nutrition, 25, 210–223.
Mitch, W.E., May, R.C. and Maroni, B.J. (1989a) Review: mechanisms for abnormal protein 
metabolism in uremia. Journal of the American College of Nutrition, 8, 305–309.
Mitch, W.E., May, R.C., Maroni, B.J. et al., (1989b) Protein and amino acid metabolism in 
 uremia: influence of metabolic acidosis. Kidney International, Supplement 27, S205–S207.
National Research Council of the National Academies (2006) Nutrient Requirements of Dogs and 
Cats, National Academies Press, Washington DC.
O’Toole, E., McDonell, W.N., Wilson, B.A. et al. (2001) Evaluation of accuracy and reliability of 
indirect calorimetry for the measurement of resting energy expenditure in healthy dogs. 
American Journal of Veterinary Research, 62, 1761–1767.
Remillard, R.L., Darden, D.E., Michel, K.E. et al. (2001) An investigation of the relationship 
between caloric intake and outcome in hospitalized dogs. Veterinary Therapeutics, 2, 301–310.
Key poINtS
•	 Acute	uremia	is	associated	with	fluid,	electrolyte	and	acid–base	abnormalities.
•	 The	nutritional	needs	of	the	patient	with	acute	kidney	injury	are	often	overlooked	in	the	
pursuit	of	diagnosis	and	treatment.
•	 Malnutrition	and	lean	body	wasting	are	common	in	acute	kidney	injury	patients	and	will	
adversely	affect	outcome.
•	 Timely	and	appropriate	nutritional	therapy	should	be	a	fundamental	component	in	the	
treatment	plan	of	the	hospitalized	acute	kidney	injury	patient.

===== PDF PAGE 213 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
199
Introduction
The liver is the primary organ regulating metabolism and detoxification 
 processes. As such, when there is significant hepatic pathology present, the 
nutritional management for this patient is of critical importance. All nutritional 
approaches for the management of hospitalized canine and feline patients with 
various hepatopathies are not the same but can be generalized based on protein 
tolerance. Some hepatopathies, including early and chronic hepatic cirrhosis, 
cholangitis, triaditis and feline hepatic lipidosis do not generally require protein 
restriction, while congenital and acquired vascular shunting and end‐stage 
 cirrhosis may require significant protein restriction.
Acute liver disease: cirrhosis, hepatitis  
and cholestatic disease
The liver plays a central role in nutrient metabolism and because of this the 
requirements for specific nutrients may change following onset of liver failure. 
The liver’s role in protein metabolism includes synthesis of albumin, globulins, 
ceruplasmin, ferritin, numerous serum enzymes and coagulation factors. 
 Addi tionally the liver regulates amino acid metabolism, is involved in the detox-
ification of ammonia and is responsible for the subsequent synthesis of urea 
(Biourge, 1997; LaFlamme, 2000). Therefore, dietary protein concentrations 
should not be decreased in early liver disease, as protein restriction may cause 
catabolism of endogenous lean body mass, resulting in increased ammonia 
 production and increased risk of hepatic encephalopathy (Biourge, 1997; 
LaFlamme, 2000). In hepatic disease the liver’s regulatory role in amino acid 
homeostasis is  altered and diminished glycogen stores may also be present. 
Supplying appropriate dietary protein enables a more rapid transition to glyco-
neogenesis from amino acids and can help fill the energy gap which results from 
Nutritional support in hepatic 
failure in dogs and cats
Renee M. Streeter1 and Joseph J. Wakshlag2
1 Liverpool, NY, USA
2 Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine, Ithaca, NY, USA
ChApter 21

===== PDF PAGE 214 =====
200   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
low glycogen stores in liver disease (Silk, O’Keefe and Wicks, 1991). Consequently, 
providing a diet with modestly increased protein content from high quality pro-
tein is essential in the management of chronic hepatopathies. If a reduced 
protein‐ content diet is necessary, the diet should contain no less than 2.1g pro-
tein/kg body weight for dogs and at least 4g protein/kg body weight for cats 
(Center, 1998; LaFlamme, 2000). While many clinicians prefer to think of nutri-
ent content of foods on a dry matter or as fed basis, it is important to realize 
that calculating protein content on a gram per kg of body weight basis may be 
more appropriate when determining protein requirements for patients. 
Therefore it is preferable to calculate protein intake based on the caloric intake, 
which can be determined for most patients to maintain appropriate body condi-
tion, by using the information in product guides according to 100 kcal or 1000 
kcal intake. Table 21.1 gives an example of how to calculate protein content of 
foods on a g/kg basis once the kilocalorie consumption is known.
Calories derived from fat increase the palatability of foods, which is beneficial 
in an otherwise inappetant patient and also helps prevent endogeneous protein 
catabolism. However, the fat content of foods should be limited in patients with 
potential cholelithiasis or cholestasis. Dietary fats stimulate cholecystokinin and 
motilin release from the duodenum, signalling contraction of the gall bladder 
which can be potentially detrimental in cases of bile duct obstruction (Center, 
2009). Very high dietary cholesterol has also been found to have lithogenic prop-
erties in prairie dogs and in pigmented gall stones of dogs (Holzbach et al., 1976; 
Englert et al., 1977). Limiting fat intake in these patients may be necessary as 
lipid metabolism is compromised in hepatobiliary disease and long chain triglyc-
eride digestion may decrease by as much as 30–50%. Thus, feeding excessive fat 
could contribute to diarrhea and lead to further nutrient depletion (LaFlamme, 
2000). There have been reports in Shetland sheepdogs with gallbladder mucoceles 
which show improvement after management with a low fat diet (Aguirre et al., 
2007; Walter et al., 2008). Although these reports do not give a recommended 
dietary fat value, a diet containing no more than 10% DM fat for dogs and less 
than 15% DM fat for cats would be considered a low fat diet and appropriate for 
cases of obstructive cholestasis.
Abnormal hepatic copper concentrations are often observed as a pathologic 
feature in hepatic disease. High copper concentration may be secondary to 
cholestatic liver disease or may be the result of a primary defect in hepatic copper 
excretion. Breeds associated with primary copper‐associated hepatopathies 
include Skye terriers, West Highland white terriers, Doberman pinschers, Labrador 
Table 21.1 Calculation of protein content on a g/kg b.w. basis.
Assume a 10 kg dog’s maintenance energy requirement (MER) is approximately 629 kcal.  
A typical liver diet may contain 18% protein on an as‐fed basis.
If product guide lists 4.2 g per 1000 kcal.
Then, 42g × 0.629 Mcal = 26 g / 10 kg dog = 2.6 g per day.
If product guide lists 4.2 g/100 kcal;
Then, 4.2 g × 6.29 Mcal = 26 g / 10 kg = 2.6 g per day

===== PDF PAGE 215 =====
Nutritional support in hepatic failure in dogs and cats   201
retrievers and Bedlington terriers. Management of high hepatic copper concen-
trations will decrease hepatic mitochondrial damage and lipid peroxidation in 
hepatocytes (Sokol et al., 1989). Treatment has traditionally included decreasing 
total dietary copper content, increasing dietary zinc content, and chelation 
therapy (Hoffmann et al., 2009). Recommendations for chelation with zinc sup-
plementation have varied widely from 1.5 mg/kg of elemental zinc to 100 mg/kg 
of elemental zinc (Brewer et al., 1992; Thornburg, 2000; Plumb, 2008). However, 
only one study has proven zinc to be efficacious at decreasing copper absorption 
at a dose of 100 mg/kg of elemental zinc for 3 months and then 50 mg/kg there-
after (Brewer et al., 1992). Although supplementation of zinc is advocated to 
decrease copper absorption, the use of a low copper diet may be equally, if not 
more effective. A recent investigation of Labrador Retrievers with copper hepatop-
athy suggests that additional zinc at a dose of 10 mg/kg did not diminish the 
effects of hepatic copper accumulation beyond what was observed with a low 
copper diet alone (Hoffmann et al., 2009). However, long term management was 
not evaluated and the use of 100 mg of elemental zinc supplementation was not 
examined in conjunction with dietary copper restriction therefore, in refractory 
cases it may still be beneficial to use supplemental zinc at high doses. The form of 
zinc is also an important concept, since sources such as zinc gluconate or zinc 
acetate have very different amounts of elemental zinc per milligram. The dosage 
of zinc should always be in elemental zinc content in the tablet or capsule which 
can be somewhat variable depending on the form of zinc being used.
Another goal with nutritional treatment of liver disease in early cirrhosis or 
triaditis is protection of the hepatocyte from apoptosis and fibrosis. Nutraceuticals, 
such as polyenylphosphatidylcholine (PEP), S‐adenosylmethionine (SAMe), 
vitamin E and silymarin are often utilized for these functions. PEP is a compound 
made up of polyunsaturated phospholipids which work as antioxidants and 
collagenase stimulators to decrease hepatic fibrosis (Aleynik et al., 1997). PEP 
may also diminish oxidative mitochondrial and hepatocellular membrane injury 
by decreasing reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation thereby conserving 
hepatocyte glutathione (GSH), a potent endogenous antioxidant. Dosing in dogs 
and cats is extrapolated from human literature and is 25–50 mg/kg/day, not to 
exceed 3 g in large dogs (Center, 2004).
S‐adenosylmethionine (SAMe) is made and utilized in hepatocytes for 
methylation reactions. Benefits of SAMe treatment in hepatic disorders 
include:decreased rate of liver disease progression, increased hepatic GSH stores, 
improved tolerance of free radicals and improvement of cholestatis and reper -
fusion injury and potentially improved regeneration and protein synthesis. 
Glutathione depletion has been observed in a variety of hepatopathies, particu-
larly in cats, making the use of SAMe a standard therapeutic intervention 
(Center, 2004; Center et al., 2005). The recommended dosage in cats for cirrhosis 
(and hepatic lipidosis) is 20–55 mg/kg PO given on an empty stomach. In dogs, a 
dose of 17–20 mg/kg is used (Center, 2004; Center et al., 2005).
Vitamin E has also been used as adjunct therapy in early hepatic disorders. 
Vitamin E protects all cell membranes from lipid peroxidation and may suppress 
inflammatory cell activity and reduce free radical damage to hepatocytes 
(Cantürk et al., 1998; Center, 2004). Vitamin E also has anti‐proliferative effects 

===== PDF PAGE 216 =====
202   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
on vascular smooth muscle and suppresses hepatic collagen gene expression in 
the inflamed or injured liver (Chojkier et al., 1998; Center, 2004). Supplementation 
during hepatic disease is warranted not only due to the anti‐inflammatory 
 benefits, but also because hepatic concentrations of alpha‐tocopherol in people 
with cirrhosis have been found to be three‐fold lower than in control levels, even 
despite normal serum concentrations (Von Herbay et al., 1994). Currently a dose 
of 10 IU/kg per day of alpha‐tocopherol has been suggested for treatment of 
patients with hepatic disorders (Center, 2004).
Silymarin is a complex of flavinolignans which are derived from milk thistle 
and include silybinin (or silybin), isosilibinin, silidianin and silicristin. Silymarin’s 
mechanisms of action include providing antioxidant effects against relevant ROS 
and lipid peroxidation (Center, 2004.) Silymarin also accelerates hepatocellular 
regeneration as a result of increased gene transcription and translation and 
enhanced DNA biosynthesis. Inhibition of stellate cell activation and proliferation 
as well as signalling for type I collagen synthesis and production of metalopro-
teinase I tissue inhibitor may mitigate fibrosis. Silymarin may also induce a 
choleretic response associated with expansion of the endogenous pool of bile 
salts including the hepatoprotective bile acid urosodeoxycholic acid (Center, 
2004). Although there are no studies on dogs and cats, a dose of 40–50 mg/kg/
day of Silymarin‐controlled fibrosis in rats with bile duct obstruction, and 
ample evidence exists showing that 50–150mg/kg is safe in dogs (Center, 2004). 
However, a commercial preparation of silybin compounds (Marin
1), combined 
with phosphatidylcholine has been shown to have increased bioavailability in 
dogs (Filburn, Kettenacker and Griffin, 2007). Although this study used dosages 
of 14.6–17.3 mg/kg, the recommended dosage for Marin, which also contains 
zinc and vitamin E, is 1.3–2.8 mg/kg for dogs and 1.5–2.6 mg/kg for cats.
Ursodeoxycholic acid (Ursodiol) is a non‐toxic hydrophilic dihydroxylated 
bile acid which was first identified in the gall bladder of Chinese Black Bear. 
Benefits of Ursodiol include: displacement of toxic bile acids with this less toxic 
form of bile acid, cytoprotection of hepatocytes and biliary epithelium, antioxi-
dant effects, immunomodulatory effects, attenuation of bile acid secretion, 
enhanced biliary elimination of toxic substances and an inhibitory influence on 
fibrogenesis (Kumar and Tandon, 2001). It is used in the treatment of cirrhosis, 
cholangitis and non‐obstructive forms of cholestasis (Kumar and Tandon, 2001). 
Assuming a biliary tree occlusion has been ruled out; the dose for treatment of 
necroinflammatory hepatic disorders is 10–15mg/kg/day in one or divided into 
two treatments, administered with food (Center, 2004).
Chronic liver diseases: chronic endstage cirrhosis, 
portosystemic shunts and vascular dysplasia
The goal with treatment of end‐stage cirrhosis and shunt patients is to prevent 
hepatic encephalopathy while providing the appropriate nutrients to prevent 
wasting and capitalize on any existing hepatic function. In manipulating the diet 
for end‐stage cirrhosis patients and patients with portosystemic shunts, it has been 
found that the use of vegetable or dairy proteins in place of meat proteins signifi-
cantly decreased ammonia production (Bianchi et al., 1993). Recommen dations 

===== PDF PAGE 217 =====
Nutritional support in hepatic failure in dogs and cats   203
include decreasing the total amount of protein in the diet (2–4 g/ kg body weight 
for dogs and 4–6 g/kg body weight for cats) (Tillson and Winkler, 2002) and 
increasing the overall quality of protein in the diet by choosing highly digestible 
sources that do not include excessive nitrogen or hemoglobin, both of which have 
been associated with worsening hepatic encephalopathy (Bianchi et al., 1993, 
Douglass, Mardini and Record, 2001). The minimum protein requirement should 
be titrated up until ammonium biurate crystals are seen in the urine or signs of 
hepatic encephalopathy become evident.
Water‐soluble B vitamins are also supplemented in liver disease as vitamin 
B
12, folate, riboflavin, nicotinamide, thiamine, pantothenic acid and pyridoxine 
are stored in the liver and availability and storage patterns are altered with 
hepatic disease (Biourge, 1997). Vitamin B
12 is essential for many metabolic 
activities in the liver and administration of vitamin B 12 is recommended in 
patients with cholangitis and triaditis at a dose of 1mg SC every 7 to 28 days 
(Center, 1998). B complex vitamins at twice maintenance requirements are also 
recommended in severe cases of cirrhosis or late stage shunts (Center, 1998).
Vitamin K may be depleted in some forms of hepatic disease due to impaired 
hepatic synthesis, high turnover rate of clotting factors (i.e., consumptive coagu-
lopathy) or the concurrent use of antibiotics which may cause a decrease in 
vitamin K producing bacteria in the intestine or interfere with hepatic enzymes 
which synthesize clotting factors (Peetermans and Verbist, 1990; Lisciandro, 
Hohenhaus and Brooks, 1998; Conly and Stein, 1994). Administration of 
 0.5–1.0 mg/kg SC every 12 hours for two days has proved useful in normalizing 
clotting times in animals with liver disease (Center, 1998).
The use of lactulose and soluble fibres, such as pectin, psyllium and inulin, is 
often instituted to decrease ammonia absorption from the colon and help pre-
vent hepatic encephalopathy. Increased amounts of fermentable fiber encourage 
growth of acidophilic bacteria, such as Lactobacillus, which are less ammoniagenic 
and will reduce the pH of the colon (Crossley and Williams, 1984; Center, 1998). 
This decrease in pH causes a shift of ammonia to its ionic form (NH
4+) which is 
not absorbed from the gut and is excreted in the feces (Center 1998). In one 
study these effects have been demonstrated with ingestion of pectin (Herrmann, 
Shakoor and Weber, 1987) and a dose of 5–10 mL to about 150‐200 kcal for dogs 
has been recommended (Center, 1998). Due to similar fermentative properties 
psyllium fiber or inulin may also be used at 1–2 teaspoons (3–6 g) per 10 kg body 
weight or 0.5–1 teaspoons (1.5–3.0 g) per day, respectively, for similar effects. 
Recommended lactulose dosages are 0.5–1.0 mL/kg PO every 6–8 hours titrated 
to produce 2–3 soft stools per day (Brent and Weise, 2010). Cats should receive 
0.25–1 mL of lactulose PO titrating upwards to individualize the dose until semi‐
formed stools are produced (Scavelli, Hornbuckle and Roth, 1986).
SAMe may be used in the late stage cirrhotic and shunt patient as it plays a 
role in restoration of glutathione levels and is thus important in detoxification 
mechanisms of hepatocytes (Center et al., 2005). However, SAMe does provide 
an additional source of the amino acid methionine which can lead to hepatic 
encephalopathy and it should be used with caution in severe cases when hepatic 
encephalopathy is likely (Center, 2004). In chronic liver disease antioxidant 
therapies such as PEP, vitamin E, silamarin, SAMe and ursodiol are often used as 
described above for early hepatic disease.

===== PDF PAGE 218 =====
204   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
hepatic lipidosis and treatment in cats
Hepatic lipidosis is most commonly associated with cats. It is caused when there 
is an increase in peripheral lipolysis with decreased export of very low density 
lipoproteins (VLDL) from the liver. Current thoughts suggest that protein defi-
ciency from decreased intake impairs synthesis of apolipoproteins, limiting 
transport. Intrahepatic fat accumulates and leads to distended canaliculi and 
pronounced intrahepatic cholestasis and hepatic failure if left untreated.
Primary nutritional therapy consists of rapid replenishment with a high 
 protein (if there is no evidence of encephalopathy), moderate carbohydrate and 
moderate fat, to meet resting energy requirements. When examining substrate 
utilization, protein in the diet ameliorates this disease process making feeding a 
priority, particularly since most cats are severely jaundiced and anorexic at pres-
entation (Biourge et al., 1994). Due to inappetance and clinician’s unwillingness 
to induce food aversion, placement of a nasoesophageal tube until the cat is 
stable enough for an esophagotomy or gastrotomy tube placement is imperative. 
Enteral nutrition through tube placement may be necessary for 3–6 weeks or 
until the cat is willing to eat on its own.
The use of blenderized high protein recovery cat foods or veterinary formu-
lated liquid enteral diets is recommended. Refeeding should be initiated slowly 
over 3 days giving 
1
3
 of the RER on day one, 2
3
 of the RER on day two and full RER 
on day three. This gradual implementation will be less likely to lead to hyperam-
monemia and attenuate the potential for the possible refeeding syndrome. 
Hypophosphatemia has been observed during enteral feeding of cats with various 
hepatopathies including hepatic lipidosis which underscore the importance of 
monitoring electrolytes with this condition (Justin and Hohenhaus, 1995). If 
hyperammoniemia is suspected, as suggested by the presence of signs of encepha-
lopathy or confirmed by measuring blood ammonia, then switching to a lower 
protein diet and beginning lactulose or soluble fibre therapy is recommended.
The use of L‐carnitine is often implemented as it has been shown that it may 
improve whole body fat metabolism and help prevent hepatic lipidosis and 
ketosis even though liver and serum carnitine concentrations in hepatic lipidosis 
are not depleted (Jacobs et al., 2009; Center, 1998; Center, 2004; Blanchard et al., 
2002). The mechanisms of action using carnitine supplementation are poorly 
understood, but current thought suggests it might help peripheral tissues utilize 
ketones and fatty acids for energy or decrease hepatic ketone production 
(Blanchard et al., 2002). Supplementation of L‐carnitine is recommended at a 
dose of 250 mg/day (Center, 1998).
Since storage and utilization of water‐soluble vitamins is distorted in hepatic 
lipidosis, vitamin B supplementation is also suggested at two times maintenance 
(Biourge, 1997). If clinical signs of thiamine deficiency, such as neck ventroflex-
ion, are present, supplementation at a dose of 50–100 mg/cat each day in the 
food for one week is recommended. Testing for serum folate and vitamin B
12 is 
commonly performed and should be considered for most lipidotic patients as 
they are often low or low normal. Vitamin B
12 at 1mg every 7–28 days has been 
successfully used to replenish B12 serum concentrations in cats (Center, 1998).

===== PDF PAGE 219 =====
Nutritional support in hepatic failure in dogs and cats   205
The liver produces vitamin K dependent clotting factors which become 
depleted in chronic hepatic disease (Center, 1998). Thus, vitamin K administra-
tion to compensate for poor production of clotting factors in hepatic lipidosis 
may also be warranted. Dosages of 0.5–1.5 mg/kg IM or SC every 12 hours for 
3 doses and then once weekly for two weeks is recommended (Center, 1998).
Acute hepatotoxicosis
Hepatic insult can be caused by many toxins. Two of the more common causes of 
acute hepatitis are caused by acetaminophen toxicity and Amanita phalloides  
ingestion. Acetominophen toxicosis is often treated with N‐acetylcysteine as the 
antidote with a loading dose of 140 mg/kg as a 5% dilution given IV and then 70 
mg/kg given for 7 more doses. In severe cases a dose of 280 mg/kg with a 70 mg/
kg maintenance dose administered for 14 days. SAMEe has also been shown to 
be a useful antidote therapy for acetaminophen toxicosis with a loading dose of 
40 mg/kg and a follow‐up maintenance dose of 20 mg/kg q 24 h for 7 days P.O 
(Wallace et al., 2002). Amanita phalloides is a mushroom which when ingested 
causes fulminant hepatic necrosis. Proven effective treatment includes silybinin, 
which at a dose of 50 mg/kg decreased hepatic necro‐inflammatory lesions and 
increased survival rates in beagles (Vogel and et al., 1984). A treatment flow chart 
illustrates therapeutic options for various hepatopathies (Figure 21.1 and Tables 
21.2 and 21.3 list dosages for important nutritional therapies in dogs and cats.
Hepatic dysfunction
Encephalopathic
-End stage cirrhosis
-Shunts
Non-encephalopathic
Low Protein
<4 g/kg
Dairy:
-Cottage
 Cheese
-Yogurt
Vegetable:
-Soybean
Ascites-
hypertension
Low salt
<30 mg/100 kcal Moderate salt
<100 g/100 kcal
Soluble
/f_iber
Pectin PO
Lactulose PO 
Psyllium PO
Present Absent
Cholestasis
Chirrosis
Metal
storage
<7 ppm
in food
Moderate
protein:
> 4g /kg
Zn gluconate or
Zn sulfate PO
PEP
S-adenosyl
methionine PO Vitamin E
PO
Silamarin or
marin PO
Vitamin B
12
SC q 7–18
days
Ursodiol
PO
Obstructive Non-obstructive
choangiohepatitis
Antioxidants
Feline hepatic lipidosis
Low fat
Hemogram/chemistry
abnormal–surgical
risk Normalized
hemogram/chemistry-
decreased surgical risk
Esophagotomy or
gastrotomy tube
Nasoesophageal
tube
Refeed
1/3 RER Day 1
2/3 RER Day 2
Full RER Day 3
Potential
supplements
Vitamin K: SC or
IM for 3 doses
then once weekly
Vitamin B
12 SC
q 7–28 d
B Vitamin
complex PO
L-Carnitine PO
Acute toxicity
N-Acetyl-
cysteine: Initial
IV dose; then PO
Decreased
NH3
production
Marin or
silamarin PO
Amanita
Acetominophen
S-adenosyl-
methionine
PO
Figure 21.1 Treatment options.

===== PDF PAGE 220 =====
206   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Table 21.2 Dosages for important nutritional therapies in dogs.
Supplement/Drug Dosage Dosage Frequency Indications
Elemental zinc 100 mg/kg for 3 months 
then 50mg/kg PO
SID Copper storage
Polyenylphosphitidyl 
choline (PEP)
25–50mg/kg/day, not to 
exceed 3g PO
each day Chirrhosis/
Hepatitis
S‐adenosylmethionine 
(SAMe)
17–20mg/kg PO each day Chirrosis/Hepatitis, 
Cholestasis
Vitamin E 10 IU/kg PO each day Chirrosis/Hepatitis, 
Cholestasis
Silybin A & B in Marin 1.3–2.8 mg/kg/day PO each day Chirrosis/Hepatitis, 
Cholestasis
Ursodiol ‐ dogs 10–15mg/kg PO SID Non‐obstructive 
cholangitis
Vitamin K 0.5–1mg/kg IM or SC 3 doses BID then 
once weekly
Chirrosis/ Hepatits, 
Portosystemic 
Shunts
Pectin ‐ dogs 5–10mL to 150–200kcal PO each day Hyperammonemia
Psyllium 1–3 tsp. PO each day Hyperammonemia
Lactulose 15–30mL PO titrated to 
effect
QID Hyperammonemia
Table 21.3 
Dosages for important nutritional therapies in cats.
Supplement/Drug Dosage Dosage Frequency Indications
Polyenylphosphitidyl 
choline (PEP)
25–50mg/kg/day each day Chirrhosis/Hepatitis
S‐adenosylmethionine 
(SAMe)
20–40mg/kg PO each day Chirrosis/Hepatitis, 
Cholestasis
Vitamin E 10 IU/kg PO each day Chirrosis/Hepatitis 
Cholestasis
Silybin A & B in Marin 1.5–2.6mg/kg/day PO each day Chirrosis/Hepatitis, 
Cholestasis
Vitamin K 0.5–1.5mg/kg IM or SC 3 doses BID then 
once weekly
Chirrosis/Hepatitis, 
Hepatic Lipidosis
Pectin 5–10mL to  
150–200kcal PO
each day Hyperammonemia
Psyllium 1–3 tsp. PO each day Hyperammonemia
Lactulose 0.25–1mL PO titrated 
to effect
SID Hyperammonemia
Vitamin B12 1mg SC every 7–28 days Cholangitis, 
Hepatitis, 
Portosystemic Shunts
Vitamin B Complex 50–100mg PO each day Hepatic Lipidosis
L‐Carnitine ‐ cats 250 mg PO each day Hepatic Lipidosis

===== PDF PAGE 221 =====
Nutritional support in hepatic failure in dogs and cats   207
Summary
Nutritional management of hepatic diseases is often considered a primary 
therapeutic intervention. Manipulation of macronutrients such as protein and 
fiber plays an integral role in controlling hepatic encephalopathy, while the 
fat content of a diet plays an important role in management of obstructive 
cholangiohepatopathies. Minerals such as iron and copper can cause serious 
hepatic damage, while others such as zinc are considered therapeutic in some 
cases. Antioxidants appear to play a role in reversing membrane peroxidation 
damage and collagenase activity, effectively reducing fibrosis. Supplementation 
of hepatic‐dependent micronutrients also prevents depletion, preventing sys-
temic consequences. Regardless of what hepatopathy is present, nutritional 
intervention can be used to improve the clinical signs and potentially recovery.
Note
1 Marin: Nutramax Labratories, Inc. Edgewood, MD.
references
Aguirre, A.L., Center, S.A., Randolph, J.F. et al. (2007) Gallbladder disease in Shetland Sheepdogs: 
38 cases (1995‐2005). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 231, 79–88.
Aleynik, S.I., Leo, M.A., Ma, X. et al. (1997) Polyenylphosphatidylcholine prevents carbon 
tetrachloride‐induced lipid peroxidation while it attenuates liver fibrosis. Journal of Hepatology, 
27, 554–561.
Bianchi, G.P., Marchesini, G., Fabbri, A. et al. (1993) Vegetable versus animal protein in diet in 
cirrhotic patients with chronic encephalopathy. A randomized cross‐over comparison. Journal 
of Internal Medicine, 233, 385–392.
Key poINtS
•	 The liver plays a central role in nutrient metabolism and because of this, the 
requirements for specific nutrients may change following onset of liver failure.
•	 The nutritional approaches for the management of hospitalized canine and feline 
patients with various hepatopathies are not all the same but can be generalized based 
on protein tolerance.
•	 Some hepatopathies, including early and chronic hepatic cirrhosis, cholangitis, triaditis 
and feline hepatic lipidosis, do not generally require protein restriction while congenital 
and acquired vascular shunting and end‐stage cirrhosis may require significant protein 
restriction.
•	 Manipulation of macronutrients such as protein and fibre may play an important role in 
controlling or preventing hepatic encephalopathy.
•	 If reduced protein‐content diet is necessary, the diet should contain no less than 2.1 g 
protein/kg of body weight for dogs, and at least 4 g protein/kg of body weight for cats.
•	 Nutraceuticals, such as polyenylphosphatidyl choline, S‐Adenosyl‐methionine, vitamin E 
and silamarin, are used for hepatoprotective properties, although evidence of clinical 
benefit is limited.

===== PDF PAGE 222 =====
208   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Biourge VC. (1997) Nutrition and Liver Disease. Seminars in Veterinary Medicine and Surgery: Small 
Animal, 12, 34–44.
Biourge V.C., Massat, B., Groff, J.M. et al. (1994) Effects of protein, lipid, or carbohydrate 
 supplementation on hepatic lipid accumulation during rapid weight loss in obese cats. 
American Journal of Veterinary Research, 10, 1406–1415.
Blanchard, G., Paragon, B.M., Milliat, F. et al. (2002) Dietary L‐carnitine supplementation in 
obese cats alters carnitine metabolism and decreases ketosis during fasting and induced 
hepatic lipidosis. Journal of Nutrition, 132, 204–210.
Brent, A.C. and Weisse, C. (2010) Hepatic vascular anomalies. in Textbook of Veterinary Internal 
Medicine, 7th edn (eds S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman) W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia. 
pp. 1649–1672.
Brewer, G.J., Dick, R.D., Schall, W. et al. (1992) Use of zinc acetate to treat copper toxicosis in 
dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 201, 564–568.
Canturk, N.Z., Canturk, Z., Utkan, N.Z. et al. (1998) Cytoprotective effects of alpha tocopherol 
against liver injury induced by extrahepatic biliary obstruction. East African Medicine, 75, 
77–80.
Center, S.A. (1998) Nutritional support for dogs and cats with hepatobiliary disease. American 
Society for Nutritional Sciences, 2733S–2746S.
Center, S.A. (2004) Metabolic, antioxidant, nutraceutical, probiotic and herbal therapies relating 
to the management of hepatobiliary disorders. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal 
Practice,34, 67–172.
Center, S.A. (2009) Diseases of the gallbladder and biliary tree. Veterinary Clinics of North 
American: Small Animal Practice, 39, 543–598.
Center, S.A., Randolph, K.L., Warner, J. et al. (2005) The effects of S‐Adenosylmethionine on 
clinical pathology and redox potential in the red blood cell, liver, and bile of clinically normal 
cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 19,303–314.
Chojkier, M., Houglum, K., Lee, K.S. et al. (1998) Long‐ and short‐term D‐alpha‐tocopherol 
supplementation inhibits liver collagen alpha1(l) gene expression. American Journal of 
Physiology, 275, G1480–G1485.
Conly, J. and Stein, K. (1994) Reduction of vitamin K2 concentrations in human liver associated 
with the use of broad spectrum antimicrobials. Clinical and Investigative Medicine, 17, 531–539.
Crossley, I.R. and Williams, R. (1984) Progress in the treatment of chronic portosystemic 
encephalopathy. Gut, 25, 85–98.
Douglass, A., Mardini, H.A. and Record, C. (2001) Amino acid challenge in patients with 
 cirrhosis: a model for the assessment of treatments for hepatic encephalopathy. Journal of 
Hepatology, 34, 658–664.
Englert, E,, Harman, C.G., Freston, J.W. et al. (1977) Studies on the pathogenesis of diet‐
induced dog gallstones. Digestive Diseases, 22, 305–314.
Filburn, C.R., Kettenacker, R. and Griffin, D.W. (2007) Bioavailability of a silybin‐phosphatidyl-
choline complex in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 30, 132–188.
Herrmann, R., Shakoor, T. and Weber, F.L. (1987) Beneficial effects of pectin in chronic hepatic 
encephalopathy. Gastroenterology, 92,1795 (abs.)
Hoffman, G., Jones, P.G., Biourge, V. et al. (2009) Dietary management of hepatic copper 
accumulation in Labrador retrievers. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 23, 957–963.
Holzbach, R.T., Corbusier, C., Marsh, M. et al. (1976) The process of cholesterol cholelithiasis 
induced by diet in the prarie dog: a physiochemical characterization. Journal of Labratory 
Clinical Medicine, 87, 987–998.
Jacobs, G., Cornelius, K., Keene, B. et al. (1990) Comparison of plasma, liver, and skeletal muscle 
carnitine concentrations in cats with idiopathic hepatic lipidosis and in healthy cats. American 
Journal of Veterinary Research, 51, 1349–1351.
Justin, R.B. and Hohenhaus, A.E. (1995) Hypophosphatemia associated with enteral alimenta-
tion in cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 9, 228–233.
Kumar, D. and Tandon, R.K. (2001) Use of ursodeoxycholic acid in liver disease. Journal of 
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 16, 3–14.
LaFlamme, D.P. (2000) Nutritional management of liver disease. in Kirk’s Current Veterinary 
Therapy XIII: Small Animal Practice. (ed. J.D. Bonagura) Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 693–697.

===== PDF PAGE 223 =====
Nutritional support in hepatic failure in dogs and cats   209
Lisciandro, S.C., Hohenhaus, A. and Brooks, M. (1998) Coagulation abnormalities in 22 cats 
with naturally occurring liver disease. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 12, 71–75.
Peetermans, W. and Verbist, L. (1990) Coagulation disorders cuased by cephalosporins containing 
methylthiotetrazole side chains. Acta Clinica Belgica, 45, 327–333.
Plumb D.C. (2008) Zinc. in Plumb’s Veterinary Handbook, 6th edn (ed. D. C. Plumb) PharmaVet 
Inc, Stockholm, WI, pp. 1261–1263.
Scavelli, T.D., Hornbuckle, W.E. and Roth, L. (1986) Portosystemic shunts in cats: seven cases 
(1976‐1984). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 189, 317–325.
Silk, D.B.A., O’Keefe, S.J.D. and Wicks, C. (1991) Nutritional support in liver disease. Gut 
Supplement, S29–S33.
Sokol, R.J., Devereaux, M.W., Traber, M.G. et al. (1989) Copper toxicity and lipid peroxidation 
in isolated rate hepatocytes: effect of vitamin E. Pediatric Research, 25, 55–62.
Tillson D.M. and Winkler, J.T. (2002) Diagnosis and treatment of portosystemic shunts in the 
cat. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice, 32, 881–899.
Thornburg, L.P. (2000) A perspective on copper and liver disease in the dog. Journal of Veterinary 
Diagostic Investigation, 12, 101–110.
Vogel, G,, Tuchweber, B., Trost, W. et al. (1984) Protection by silibinin against Amanita phalloides 
intoxication in beagles. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, 72, 355–362.
Von Herbay A, de Groot H,Hegi U, et al. (1994) Low vitamin E content in plasma of patients 
with alcoholic liver disease, hemochromatosis and Wilson’s disease. Journal of Hepatology. 20, 
41–46.
Wallace, K.P., Center, S.A., Hickford, F.H. et al. (2002) S‐adenosyl‐L‐methionine (SAMe) for the 
treatment of acetaminophen toxicity in a dog. Journal of theAmerican Animal Hospital Association, 
38, 246–254.
Walter, R., Dunn, M.E., d’Anjou M.A. et al. (2008) Nonsurgical resolution of gallbladder mucocele 
in two dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 232,1688–1693.

===== PDF PAGE 224 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
210
Introduction
Sepsis is typified by an exaggerated inflammatory response by the host to a 
pathogen. The condition is driven by a storm of cytokines and this also has 
implications for energy and substrate metabolism. Given the serious sequelae of 
sepsis, preservation or reversal of deteriorating nutritional status via nutritional 
support should be considered an important aspect in the treatment of septic 
patients. However, studies specifically evaluating nutritional interventions in 
septic patients are very limited and many of the recommendations for this popu-
lation have been extrapolated from other critically ill populations. Nutritional 
support for the septic patient should be aimed at minimising the impact of 
malnutrition and enhancing the rate of recovery. To this end, designing the 
optimal nutritional approach for septic patients has proven difficult. Many of the 
challenges in designing an optimal approach centre on three areas: the mode of 
nutritional support, the timing of initiating nutritional support and the composi-
tion of the diet used. The evidence appears to suggest that feeding the patient 
enterally whenever possible should be the preferred approach. Initiation of 
enteral nutrition early (within 48 hours) appears to be preferable compared with 
delayed initiation. Although there are promising breakthroughs in enhancing 
the composition of nutritional support (e.g., inclusion of glutamine, fish oils and 
antioxidants), these strategies remain controversial and are largely untried in 
veterinary medicine.
Metabolic derangements in sepsis
Sepsis is one of the most serious disease processes encountered in animals and 
results in a complex sequence of metabolic derangements. In some cases, the 
body’s response can be exaggerated with several important effects on metabolism. 
The initial stress response may be characterized by a hypermetabolic phase 
where there is increased oxygen consumption, hyperglycemia, hyperlactatemia 
Nutritional management of the 
septic patient
Daniel L. Chan
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
Chapter 22

===== PDF PAGE 225 =====
Nutritional management of the septic patient   211
and accelerated protein catabolism (Biolo et al., 1997; Marik, 2005). These 
metabolic alterations occur as a result of inflammatory cytokines and regulatory 
and counter‐regulatory hormones and this has also been demonstrated in a 
canine model of sepsis (Shaw and Wolfe, 1984).
Accelerated loss of skeletal muscle can occur in just a few days of critical 
 illness. In people, this rapid loss of lean body mass is a predictor of mortality 
(Biolo et al., 1997; Marik, 2005). During critical illness the initial metabolic 
response is to utilize liver and muscle glycogen stores for energy. Following rapid 
exhaustion of glycogen stores, new glucose is derived from gluconeogenesis and 
results in muscle protein breakdown. Along with changes in protein metabolism 
there are also alterations in carbohydrate metabolism. These alterations include 
enhanced peripheral glucose uptake and utilization, hyperlactatemia, increased 
glucose production, depressed glycogenesis, glucose intolerance and insulin 
resistance (Biolo et al., 1997). The most important mechanism of “stress hyper-
glycemia” is likely to be excessive glucose production relative to glucose clear -
ance (Krenitsky, 2011). In sepsis, hyperglycemia is mainly caused by increased 
hepatic output of glucose, more so than impaired tissue glucose extraction. The 
implications of this hyperglycemia in critically ill patients are quite controversial. 
Hyperglycemia related to diabetes is well known to decrease neutrophil and 
macrophage function, increase risk of infection and increase overall morbidity 
and mortality. However, the effects of non‐diabetic hyperglycemia are not well 
understood. The use of insulin to control hyperglycemia in critically ill patients 
is quite controversial as the outcome is sometimes worse with insulin therapy 
(Song et al., 2014).
Although stress is typically associated with increased gluconeogenesis, there 
is evidence that septic patients may be distinguished by a biphasic response; 
lethal models of sepsis in animals demonstrate an initial phase of hyperglycemia 
during which gluconeogenesis is increased, followed by a subsequent phase 
during which glucose production is suppressed and hypoglycemia occurs (Polk 
and Schwab, 2011). Endotoxin‐induced hypoglycemia in rats is associated with 
a decrease in activity of a rate‐limiting enzyme in gluconeogenesis. There are 
also suggestions that cytokines may also play a role in hypoglycemia associated 
with sepsis. Increased peripheral utilization of glucose also plays a role in the 
pathogenesis of hypoglycemia; animal models of sepsis have demonstrated 
hypoglycemia despite increased hepatic glucose production (Polk and Schwab, 
2011). Although hypoglycemia in animals is common, this is considered to be 
rare in people.
Interestingly, fat is the preferred fuel for oxidation in patients with sepsis and 
this oxidation cannot be suppressed to the same level with glucose infusion as it 
can in healthy patients (Biolo et al., 1997; Leyba and others 2011, Cohen and 
Chin 2013). In sepsis, hypertriglyceridemia and increased fat oxidation are the 
main features of altered fat metabolism (Biolo and others 1997, Marik 2005, 
Leyba, Gonzalez and Alonso, 2011; Cohen and Chin, 2013). Some of the 
derangements are caused by failure of specific organs, while others are part of 
the host response. Again, the role of TNF‐α and altered fat metabolism are closely 
related. TNF‐α can increase lipolysis directly, or via other hormones (Biolo et al., 
1997; Marik, 2005). Catecholamines and cortisol also stimulate lipolysis. The 

===== PDF PAGE 226 =====
212   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
increased hypertriglyceridemia in sepsis is thought to occur through increased 
very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) concentrations. Another feature of sepsis is 
suppression of lipoprotein lipase activity (also mediated by endotoxin and 
TNF‐α), and this may also lead to decreased clearance of plasma VLDL. Under 
the influence of cytokines, there is a rise in hepatic triglyceride production. 
Normally, non‐esterified fatty acids (NEFAs) are only released by peripheral adi-
pose tissue to provide metabolic fuel and plasma levels of NEFAs are regulated 
by lipolysis and adipose tissue blood flow. These regulatory mechanisms seem to 
be altered in sepsis. Endotoxin increases plasma NEFA concentration via its 
effects on cytokines and hormones (Biolo et al., 1997, Marik, 2005).
Given the complexity of the many metabolic and hormonal derangements 
during sepsis, it would seem logical to try to modulate these derangements via 
providing nutritional support. Indeed, the treatment of critically ill human 
patients has recently focused on nutritional interventions, including early 
enteral nutrition and immune‐modulating nutrition (Yuan et al., 2011; Kaur, 
Gupta and Minocha, 2005; Galban and others 2000: Leyba et al., 2011). So while 
there is a growing body of evidence supporting the use of these approaches in 
people with serious diseases, including sepsis, careful consideration is required 
before similar approaches are adopted in veterinary medicine.
Differences between abdominal sepsis in  
people and dogs
One important distinction worth mentioning is that the majority of studies in 
people identifying the benefit of critical care nutrition relate to “septic” patients 
and not specifically to “septic peritonitis” patients. The reason to highlight this 
difference is that the vast majority of “sepsis” in people is not related to “septic 
peritonitis” and, as such, these patient populations are not interchangeable. In 
contrast, septic peritonitis happens to be the most common, if not the most serious, 
example of sepsis in the dog; however, this is not true in people, where pneumonia 
is far more common. Therefore, although there may be very positive results related 
to providing nutritional support to critically ill, septic human patients, there are 
actually only limited studies especially evaluating the use of nutrition in septic 
peritonitis in people. In fact, the closest disease processes in people are enterocu-
taneous fistulas and non‐traumatic perforating peritonitis. Studies evaluating the 
impact of nutritional support in these patients are relative small (Kaur et al., 2005; 
Yuan et al., 2011). Measured benefits in these studies include earlier closure times 
of the abdominal wall, fewer infectious complications, reduction of post‐operative 
ileus and improved nitrogen balance (Kaur et al., 2005; Yuan et al., 2011).
Nutritional management strategies of septic patients
The optimal nutritional approach to the septic patient is still evolving but likely 
centres on the form of nutritional support, the timing of initiation and the com-
position of the diet. Unless there is complete intolerance to enteral feeding, the 

===== PDF PAGE 227 =====
Nutritional management of the septic patient   213
preferred mode of nutritional support in septic patients is the enteral form (Table 
22.1). As for timing, initiation of EN in septic patients should start early, within 
48 hours but only after resuscitation of the patient. Splanchnic perfusion may be 
compromised in hypotensive patients and, therefore, there have been concerns 
about EN inducing intestinal ischemia; however, this risk is very low (Zaloga, 
Roberts and Marik, 2003; Leyba et al., 2011). Current recommendations are to 
initiate EN after patient resuscitation, or at least when the cardiovascular system 
is stable (e.g., when the dosage of vasoactive substances, such as dopamine and 
norepinephrine, have stabilized). In critically ill animals there should be an aim 
to initiate early enteral feeding as soon as it is feasible. Some veterinary studies 
have implemented enteral nutrition as early as within 10 hours of admission 
(Mohr et al., 2003). Although it is difficult to assess whether these measures 
actually influence outcome, one thing that has been established is that many 
patients previously assumed to require “bowel rest,” actually tolerated early 
enteral feeding. The most notable studies demonstrating this tolerance to feeding 
evaluated puppies with parvoenteritis, cats with acute pancreatitis and, most 
recently, dogs with severe and acute pancreatitis (Mohr et al., 2003; Klaus, 
Rudloff and Kirby, 2009; Mansfield et al., 2011). It is therefore reasonable to 
pursue enteral feeding in septic animals, even in cases believed to have signifi-
cant gastrointestinal dysfunction.
Results support the notion that employing early EN is achievable in many 
patients and, therefore, this should be pursued in virtually every patient. 
Although an early veterinary abstract found no advantage in instituting early 
nutritional support in canine septic peritonitis, a more recent study has demon-
strated that instituting early enteral feeding can be associated with decreased 
length of hospitalization in dogs with septic peritonitis (Hackndahl and Hill, 
2007; Liu, Brown and Silverstein, 2012). Unfortunately, this study was not 
designed to evaluate the effect of early enteral nutrition on outcome but it did 
Table 22.1 Comparison of the benefits of enteral nutrition (EN) with the consequence of 
withholding enteral nutrition in critically ill septic patients.
Physiological benefit of initiating EN Consequences of withholding EN
Stimulates splanchnic blood flow and perfusion Decreases splanchnic perfusion leading to 
ischemia, devitalization
Stimulates release of secretory IgA, inhibits 
pathogenic bacteria adherence to epithelial cells
Encourages pathogenic bacterial adherence 
and invasion leading to barrier defense 
disruption
Supports commensal bacterial flora that degrades 
bacterial toxins and inhibits colonization by 
pathogenic organisms
Encourages bacterial overgrowth of 
pathogenic bacteria
Stimulates intestinal contractility, sweeping 
bacteria downstream, controlling overall bacterial 
flora
Promotes gastrointestinal dysmotility, 
promotes bacterial overgrowth
Maintains functional and structural integrity of 
intestinal epithelium
Compromises paracellular channels between 
epithelial cells, increasing gastrointestinal 
permeability, allowing influx of bacterial toxins

===== PDF PAGE 228 =====
214   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
demonstrate that this approach is feasible and not associated with any negative 
effects. When the currently available evidence is considered, effective nutritional 
support strategies do appear to have a positive effect on septic patients and 
unless additional studies contravene these results, early enteral nutrition should 
be instituted in septic patients (Mohr et al., 2003; Campbell et al., 2010; Brunetto 
et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2012).
In animals that fail to tolerate provision of EN, there should be consideration 
given to using parenteral nutritional (PN) support. The optimal timing for initi-
ating PN is very controversial, however, even in people. Recent publications 
specifically evaluating timing of initiating PN support have suggested that early 
initiation of PN (i.e., within 48 h of admission to ICU) was associated with higher 
morbidity and mortality (Casaer et al., 2011). Other studies have found no 
 detrimental impact of initiating PN within 36 hours of admission to ICU when 
compared with EN and in fact demonstrated decreased rates of hypoglycemia 
and vomiting (Harvey et al., 2014). However, there should be considerable 
caution in extrapolating results in critically ill human patients to companion 
animals. First, the differences were rather modest (6% increase in likelihood 
of being discharged alive, P  = 0.04) and the clinical relevance of such modest 
differences needs to be considered (Casaer et al., 2011).
A perhaps more important distinction in the provision of nutritional support, 
is the optimal calorie target. There is ample evidence in both the human and 
veterinary literature demonstrating the deleterious effects of over‐feeding in 
both morbidity and perhaps mortality (O’Toole et al., 2004; Pyle et al., 2004; 
Marik, 2005; Stappleton, Jones and Heyland, 2007; Dickerson, 2011).
For these reasons, recent veterinary recommendations have centered on 
simply targeting the resting energy requirement (RER) (see Chapter 2). Although 
there are similar recommendations in human ICUs, an analysis of the caloric 
target in the recent studies, which demonstrated longer hospitalization times 
with longer ICU stays, shows that patients who did worse were essentially 
“aggressively fed” and likely overfed. Patients that received enteral feeding only 
for the first 8 days, basically received hypocaloric nutrition (previously shown to 
be beneficial) and only received PN if they failed to consume 50% of targeted 
calories after day 8 (Marik, 2005, Casaer et al., 2011). This was in contrast to the 
PN group which were fed a much greater number of calories (within 48 hours) 
and, therefore, it is reasonable to question whether complications weren’t sim-
ply a reflection of problems with overfeeding rather than related to the timing of 
PN implementation. Future studies implementing an iso‐caloric component to 
these trials are needed to confirm or refute initial findings. In animals, where a 
combination of enteral and parenteral nutrition was associated with better 
outcome, the total target was less than RER (Chan et al., 2002). It is therefore 
possible that positive outcomes can be achieved with supplemental PN, as long 
as the total caloric target is set very conservatively at RER.
The final aspect of optimal nutritional support in septic patients relates to 
nutrient composition of the diet. In respect to metabolic changes associated with 
sepsis, fats should be considered the preferred source of energy (Biolo et al., 
1997). However, gastrointestinal dysmotility disorders are common in septic 
patients (see Chapter 17) and high fat diets will delay gastric emptying which 

===== PDF PAGE 229 =====
Nutritional management of the septic patient   215
could lead to patient discomfort, supress appetite, increase vomiting and regur -
gitation and increase risk for development of aspiration pneumonia. From a 
practical point of view, enteral diets designed for convalescence in dogs and cats 
tend to be high in fat to increase caloric density and this could make feeding 
septic animals problematic. Clinicians must balance the potential benefits and 
risks associated with feeding septic patients diets with high fat content.
Protein requirements in septic patients may be particularly high due to rapid 
turnover of lean muscle catabolism combined with excessive protein losses 
(e.g., open peritoneal drainage, draining wounds) (Biolo et al., 1997) ( Figure 
22.1). Although data on protein requirements of dogs and cats with sepsis are 
scarce, the most up‐to‐date guidelines list 6 g/100 kcal (25% of total energy 
requirements) for dogs and 8 g/100 kcal (35% of total energy requirements) 
for  cats (Michel and Eirmann, 2014). Fortunately, most diets designed for 
convalescence are high in protein.
Carbohydrate content may also be important in the management of septic 
patients. Carbohydrates are a convenient and easily assimilated energy source. 
The problem that must be carefully monitored is the propensity for development 
of hyperglycemia. Although intensive insulin therapy for management of septic 
human patients has been studied, this remains a very controversial topic as there 
appear to be high complication rates without benefits on outcome (Song et al., 
2014). Thus far, there have been no studies in dogs or cats that have evaluated 
the use or merits of intensive insulin therapy and, therefore, it cannot be recom-
mended. However, avoidance of hyperglycemia may be desirable and so carbo -
hydrate content should be considered when formulating the nutritional plan.
In people, the use of immunomodulating nutrients (e.g, glutamine, omega‐3 
fatty acids, nucleotides and antioxidants) (see Chapter 18) in septic populations 
has been evaluated to a very limited extent with mixed results. In most cases, 
the septic sub‐groups have been so small that no conclusions could be formu -
lated in regards to potential beneficial or detrimental effects (Kieft et al., 2005; 
Heyland et al., 2001; Montejo et al., 2003). A meta‐analysis that included the 
results of these studies concluded that the use of immunomodulating nutrients 
was associated with decreased mortality, secondary infections and length of 
intensive care unit stay in septic patients, however, further prospective studies 
are warranted before this approach should be adopted (Marik and Zaloga, 2008). 
Figure 22.1 Dogs with septic peritonitis 
managed with open peritoneal drainage 
have particularly high protein 
requirements due to exudative losses of 
protein. Nutritional support of these 
patients will require additional protein 
provision.

===== PDF PAGE 230 =====
216   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
The most promising result to date is a small prospective study that evaluated 
omega‐3 fatty acids and antioxidants in early sepsis and found that such a diet 
was associated with reducing respiratory and cardiovascular complications 
(Pontes‐Arruda et al., 2011). Currently, the use of immunomodulatory nutri-
ents has not been studied in clinical veterinary populations and recommenda-
tions for their use cannot be made.
Summary
Nutritional support of septic patients continues to be a challenging topic in 
 veterinary critical care, mostly due to lack of specific evidence. Extrapolation 
from other populations suggests that early enteral feeding, conservative energy 
targets and sufficient protein content are the most sensible recommendation at 
this time for dogs and cats with sepsis. Further research focusing on energy and 
nutrient requirements and the role of immunomodulating nutrients in the 
management of animals with sepsis is urgently warranted.
references
Biolo, G., Toigo, G., Ciocchi, B. et al. (1997) Metabolic response to injury and sepsis: changes in 
protein metabolism. Nutrition, 13, 52S–57S.
Brunetto, M.A., Gomes, M.O., Andre, M.R. et al. (2010) Effects of nutritional support on 
hospital outcome in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Emergency Critical Care, 20, 224–231.
Campbell, J.A., Jutkowitz, L.A., Santoro, K.A.,et al. (2010) Continuous versus intermittent 
delivery of nutrition via nasoenteric feeding tubes in hospitalized canine and feline patients: 
91 patients (2002‐2007). Journal of Veterinary Emergency Critical Care, 20, 232–236.
Casaer, M.P., Mesotten, D., Hermans, G. et al. (2011) Early versus late parenteral nutrition in 
critically ill adults. New England Journal of Medicine, 365, 506–517.
Key poINtS
•	 Sepsis is a serious, often life‐threatening condition typified by an exaggerated 
inflammatory response with significant implications for energy and substrate 
metabolism.
•	 Preservation or reversal of deteriorating nutritional status via nutritional support should 
be considered an important aspect in the treatment of septic patients.
•	 The optimal nutritional approach to the septic patient is still evolving but likely centers 
on the form of nutritional support, the timing of initiation and the composition of the 
diet.
•	 Current recommendations are to initiate enteral nutrition when the patient is 
cardiovascularly stable.
•	 The ideal composition of diets for septic dogs and cats has not been identified but 
current evidence suggests that diets that are limited (although not restricted) in fat, with 
a protein content of 6 g/100 kcal for dogs and 8 g/100 kcal for cats may be beneficial.
•	 Future evaluations of diets with immunomodulatory nutrients in dogs and cats with 
sepsis may be warranted but cannot be currently recommended.

===== PDF PAGE 231 =====
Nutritional management of the septic patient   217
Chan, D.L., Freeman, L.M., Labato, M.A. et al. (2002) Retrospective evaluation of partial 
 parenteral nutrition in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 16, 440–445.
Cohen, J. and Chin, W.D.M. (2013) Nutrition and Sepsis. World Review of Nutrition Dietetics, 105, 
116–25.
Dickerson, R.N. (2011) Optimal caloric intake for critically ill patients: First, do no harm. 
Nutrition in Clinical Practice, 26, 48–54.
Galbán, C., Montejo, J.C., Mesejo, A., et al. (2000) An immune‐enhancing enteral diet reduces 
mortality rate and episodes of bacteremia in septic intensive care unit patients. Critical Care 
Medicine, 28, 643–648.
Hackndahl, N.H. and Hill, R.C. (2007) Enteral feeding in dogs with septic peritonitis (Abstract). 
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 21, 356.
Harvey, S.E., Parrott, F., Harrison, D.A., et al. (2014) Trial of the route of early nutritional 
support in critically ill adults. The New England Journal of Medicine, 371(18), 1673–1684.
Heyland, D.K., Novak, F., Drover, J.W. et al. (2001) Should immunonutrition become routine 
in critically ill patients: a systematic review of the evidence. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 286, 944–53.
Kaur, N., Gupta, M.K. and Minocha, V.R. (2005) Early enteral feeding by nasoenteric tubes in 
patients with perforation peritonitis. World Journal of Surgery, 29, 1023–1027.
Kieft, H., Roos, A.N., Van Drunen, J.D. et al. (2005) Clinical outcome of immunonutrition in a 
heterogeneous intensive care population. Intensive Care Medicine, 31, 524–532.
Klaus, J.A., Rudloff, E. and Kirby, R. (2009) Nasogastric tube feeding in cats with suspected 
acute pancreatitis: 55 cases (2001‐2006). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 19, 
327–346.
Krenitsky, J. (2011) Glucose control in the intensive care unit: a nutrition support perspective. 
Nutrition in Clinical Practice, 26, 31–43.
Leyba, C. O., Gonzalez, J.C.M. and Alonso, C.V. (2011) Guidelines for specialized nutritional 
and metabolic support in the critically‐ill patient. Update. Consensus SEMICYUC‐SENPE: 
Septic patient. Nutricion Hospitalaria, 26, S67–S71.
Liu, D.T., Brown, D.C. and Silverstein, D.C. (2012) Early nutritional support is associated with 
decreased length of hospitalization in dogs with septic peritonitis: A retrospective study of 45 
cases (2000‐2009). Journal of Veterinary Emergency Critical Care, 22, 453–459.
Mansfield, C.S., James, F.E., Steiner, J.M. et al. (2011) A pilot study to assess tolerability of early 
enteral nutrition via esophagostomy tube feeding in dogs with severe acute pancreatitis. 
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 25, 419–425.
Marik, P.E. (2005) Nutritional support in patients with sepsis. in (eds R.H. Rolandelli, R. 
Bankhead, J.I. Boullata, J.I. et al.) Clinical Nutrition: Enteral and Tube Feeding. 4th edn, Elsevier 
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 373–380.
Marik, P.E. and Zaloga, G.P. (2008) Immunonutrition in critically ill patients: a systematic 
review and analysis of the literature. Intensive Care Medicine, 34, 1980–90.
Michel, K.E. and Eirmann, L. (2014) Parenteral nutrition. in Small Animal Critical Care Medicine, 
2nd edn, (eds D.C. Silverstein and K. Hopper) Elsevier Saunders, St Louis, pp. 687–690.
Mohr, A.J., Leisewitz, A.L., Jacobson, A.S. et al. (2003) Effect of early enteral nutrition on 
intestinal permeability, intestinal protein loss, and outcome in dogs with severe parvoviral 
enteritis. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 17, 791–798.
Montejo, J.C., Zarazaga, A., Lopez‐Martinez, J. et al. (2003) Spanish society of Intensive Care 
Medicine and Coronary Units. Immunonutrition in the intensive care unit. A systematic 
review and consensus statement. Clinical Nutrition, 2, 221–233.
O’Toole, E., Miller, C.W., Wilson, B.A. et al. (2004) Comparison of the standard predictive equa-
tion for calculation of resting energy expenditure with indirect calorimetry in hospitalized 
and healthy dogs. Journal of American Veterinary Medical Association, 225, 58–64.
Pontes‐Arruda, A., Martins, L. F., de Lima, S.M. et al. (2011) Enteral nutrition with eicosapen-
taenoic acid, gamma‐linolenic acid and antioxidants in the early treatment of sepsis: results 
from a multicenter, prospective, randomized, double‐blinded, controlled study: The INTERSEPT 
study. Critical Care, 15, R144. doi: 10.1186/cc10267.
Polk, T.M. and Schwab, C.W. (2011) Metabolic and nutritional support of the enterocutaneous 
fistula patient: a three‐phased approach. World Journal of Surgery, 36, 524–533.

===== PDF PAGE 232 =====
218   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Pyle, S.C., Marks, S.L., Kass, P.H. et al. (2004) Evaluation of complication and prognostic factors 
associated with administration of parenteral nutrition in cats: 75 cases (1994‐2001). Journal 
of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 225, 242–250.
Shaw, J.H. and Wolfe, R.R. (1984) A conscious septic dog model with hemodynamic and 
metabolic responses similar to responses of humans. Surgery, 95, 553–561.
Song, F., Zhong, L.J., Han, L. et al. (2014) Intensive insulin therapy for septic patients: a meta‐
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Biomedical Research International, 698265.
Stappleton, R.D., Jones, N. and Heyland, D.K. (2007) Feeding critically ill patients: What is the 
optimal amount of energy? Critical Care Medicine, 35, S535–S540.
Yuan, Y., Ren, J., Gu, G. et al. (2011) Early enteral nutrition improves outcomes of open abdo-
men in gastrointestinal fistula patients complicated with severe sepsis. Nutrition in Clinical 
Practice, 26, 688–694.
Zaloga, G.P., Roberts, P.R. and Marik, P. (2003) Feeding the hemodynamically unstable patient: 
a critical evaluation of the evidence. Nutrition in Clinical Practice, 18, 285–293.

===== PDF PAGE 233 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
219
Introduction
Acute pancreatitis (AP) is a frequently encountered illness in both dogs and cats. 
Although most cases are mild and self‐limiting, some cases develop systemic 
complications that can result in death. Establishing a diagnosis is commonly 
complex, especially in cats, and the successful management may depend on a 
number of factors. Experimental and clinical data strongly support that nutri-
tional management plays an important therapeutic role in both veterinary and 
human patients suffering from AP (Mansfield et al., 2011; Qin et al., 2007; 
Petrov, Kukosh and Emelyanov, 2006). While the optimal nutritional manage-
ment of AP in dogs and cats remains unclear and warrants further research, 
consensus is growing that enteral nutrition (EN) should be implemented in most 
cases, and earlier than previously thought. Parenteral nutritional (PN) support, 
although no longer considered necessary, may be required in cases when EN is 
not tolerated.
Pathophysiology
The underlying pathophysiology of AP is incompletely understood, but is 
thought to involve two key events: dysfunctional lysosomal function leading 
to intracellular accumulation of vacuoles in acinar cells and to abnormal 
intra‐ acinar activation of digestive enzymes, such as trypsinogen (Gukovskaya 
and Gukovsky 2012; Gukovsky, Pandol and Gukovskaya, 2011). The result of 
these events leads to interactions between inert pancreatic zymogens and 
lysosomal proteases within the acinar cells. Trypsin is then activated and leads 
to activation of the other pancreatic zymogens to active enzymes. Activated 
pancreatic enzymes are then released in the pancreatic tissue and inflamma-
tion ensues.
Nutritional support during acute 
pancreatitis
Kristine B. Jensen1 and Daniel L. Chan2
1 Djursjukhuset Malmö, Cypressvägen Malmö, Sweden
2 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
ChaPter 23

===== PDF PAGE 234 =====
220   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Nutritional management strategies
The traditional nutritional approach to AP centered on the premise that with-
holding food would reduce pancreatic auto‐digestion by decreasing pancreatic 
stimulation and enzyme release (Simpson and Lamb, 1995; Williams, 1995). 
However, it is now clear that the trigger for pancreatitis involves intracellular 
premature activation of proteolytic enzymes rather than pancreatic stimulation. 
Avoidance of feeding as a means to decrease pancreatic stimulation may be 
unwarranted as this could not only lead to malnutrition, but also complicate the 
disease by potentially impairing gastrointestinal barrier function. (Nathens et al., 
2004; Ioannidis, Lavrentieva and Botsios, 2008; Curtis and Kudsk, 2007) It also 
has been demonstrated in experimental rodent models and in people with 
 naturally occurring disease that exocrine pancreatic secretion actually decreases 
during pancreatitis and that the decrease is more pronounced with increasing 
severity of inflammation (Niederau et al., 1990; O’Keefe et al., 2005). For these 
reasons it is becoming clear that there should be particular consideration for 
implementing nutritional support in this patient population.
Enteral nutrition during acute pancreatitis
Nutritional support during AP has been well‐documented to play a central role 
in the management of AP in people. Parenteral nutrition had been the standard 
therapy for many years based on the theory that EN stimulated pancreatic secre-
tion, potentially exacerbating the inflammatory response and delaying recovery. 
However, recent data suggest that EN in people is not only well tolerated but is 
safer and associated with fewer complications than with PN, and is even associ-
ated with improved survival in some studies (Petrov et al., 2006; Spanier, Bruno 
and Mathus‐Vliegen, 2011; Guptaa et al., 2003). In recent years EN has become 
the new gold standard of nutritional therapy in managing AP in people (Petrov 
et al., 2006; Spanier et al., 2011; Guptaa et al., 2003; McClave, 2004; Gianotti 
et al., 2009). The current consensus is also that EN should be initiated as early as 
possible (ideally within the first 48 hours of diagnosis) (Nathens et al., 2004, 
Gionotti et al., 2009).
Although studies prospectively evaluating tolerance of EN in dogs and cats 
with AP are limited, there is growing evidence supporting this approach in dogs 
and cats with AP. Experimental studies in dogs with induced AP have compared 
the effects of early intrajejunal feedings and PN and showed no effect on serum 
concentrations of amylase and lysosomal enzyme activities relative to the PN 
group (Qin and other 2007; Qin and others 2002). In addition, circulating plasma 
endotoxin activity and bacterial translocation was reduced significantly in the 
intrajejunal fed group versus the PN group (Qin et al., 2007; Qin et al., 2002). The 
intrajejunal fed group also displayed improved gut barrier when assessed histo-
pathologically by enteral villi height, thickness of mucosa and bowel wall in the 
ileum and transverse colon. Additional studies by the same group of investigators 
assessed pancreatic activation in response to a number of enteric hormones. They 
found that increased concentrations of gastrointestinal hormones did not induce 
increased release of pancreatic enzymes, which previously have been assumed to 
be the reason for induction of pancreatic autodigestion in AP (Qin et al., 2003).

===== PDF PAGE 235 =====
Nutritional support during acute pancreatitis   221
A recent small pilot study evaluating the tolerability of prepyloric EN in dogs 
with AP showed promising results with no exacerbation of pain or vomiting in 
the enteral fed group when compared to the parenterally fed group (Mansfield 
et al., 2011). The frequency of vomiting or regurgitation episodes was higher in 
the group of dogs receiving PN and it was hypothesized that EN may improve 
gut health and thereby reduce ileus and vomiting. Additionally, no evidence of 
exacerbation of abdominal pain was found in the enteral fed group. However, 
due to the study’s very small sample size (i.e., 5 dogs in each group) further stud-
ies are warranted to confirm these findings.
Nasogastric (NG) tube feeding has been assessed retrospectively in 55 cats 
with AP. Administration of bolus feeding or continuous rate infusion were com-
pared in addition to whether or not the cats had received an amino acid‐dextrose 
solution (Klaus, Rudloff and Kirby, 2009). In the study, NG feeding was well 
tolerated and there was no significant difference between groups with respect to 
the clinical variables assessed before or after feeding (including frequency of 
vomiting, incidence of diarrhea and hypersalivation). Complications were con-
sidered mild and the overall rate of complications was considered low. Based on 
the broad evidence in human studies and the preliminary results of experimental 
and clinical studies in animals, EN, when possible, should be considered as the 
mode of choice for feeding patients with AP.
Feeding tubes and routes
Given the importance of EN in the management of patients with AP and the 
poor reliability of simply offering or enticing food to animals suffering from AP, 
more effective means of nutritional support is often required. Feeding tubes can 
provide an effective means of facilitating nutritional support and several options 
are available. Selection and placement of various feeding tubes are discussed 
elsewhere (see Chapters 4–6).
Nasoesophageal feeding tubes are easily placed with a local anesthetic and do 
not require general anesthesia. They are, therefore, an appropriate choice for 
short‐term nutritional support of the severely debilitated patient, where a gen-
eral anesthetic is contra‐indicated. The major disadvantage is their small diam-
eter, which means they may clog more frequently and limits feeding to liquid 
enteral diets. Moreover, currently available liquid veterinary diets have a rela-
tively high fat content (e.g., 45% of total calorie content) to increase calorie 
density, which may not be ideal for dogs with hyperlipidemia‐associated 
 pancreatitis. Although human liquid diets with a lower fat content are available, 
they are not complete with respect to amino acid composition and therefore 
may be inappropriate for use in veterinary patients, especially cats, unless 
 supplemented with various amino acids (e.g., arginine).
Esophagostomy tubes require a short general anesthetic for placement but 
are an excellent option for cats and dogs of most sizes and have the advantage 
that a liquidized complete diet can be fed, permitting better individualized diet 
selection (e.g., lower fat content) (Figure 23.1). A recent study demonstrated 
good results when dogs with acute AP where fed a commercial low‐fat diet via 
esophagostomy tubes (Mansfield et al., 2011). In cases when surgery is required 
(e.g., pancreatic abscess), placement of gastrostomy or jejunostomy feeding tubes 

===== PDF PAGE 236 =====
222   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
ensures access for enteral feeding (See chapter 7). Two retrospective veterinary 
studies described the application of jejunostomy tubes in dogs and cats with AP 
undergoing surgical management for pancreatitis (Son et al., 2010; Thompson, 
Seshadri and Raffe, 2009). These studies evaluated complications and potential 
prognostic factors but did not describe the complications encountered in relation 
to jejunostomy tubes in detail.
Minimally invasive techniques for placement of nasojejunal tubes using 
fluoroscopy or endoscopy in dogs have been described but have not yet been 
widely adopted (Papa at al., 2009; Beal and Brown, 2011). Feeding tubes were 
successfully placed in the jejunum in 74 to 78% of cases, however, in one study 
the success rate increased over time to 100%, indicating that technical profi -
ciency improves over time. The major complication was oral tube migration 
(less than a third of cases). Acute pancreatitis was the primary diagnosis of dogs 
undergoing fluoroscopic wire‐guided placement of nasojejunal tubes in one 
study (Beal and Brown, 2011). Slow constant rate infusion of a liquid diet 
(“trickle feeding”) is recommended and jejunostomy tubes are therefore only 
suitable for hospitalized patients.
Parenteral nutrition
In patients with severe AP and intractable vomiting who do not tolerate EN, 
parenteral nutrition can be a valuable treatment modality to prevent malnutri -
tion and is covered in detail elsewhere (see Chapter 11). Although compounding 
PN solutions requires specialized expertise and is limited to referral centers, 
ready‐made amino acid/glucose solutions for PN can be used in general practice 
as interim solutions until the animal can tolerate either placement of a feeding 
tube or is voluntarily eating (Gajanayake, Wylie and Chan, 2013). The sole use 
of PN in experimental animal models of AP has been associated with a high risk 
of infection and gut atrophy, with subsequent increased risk of bacterial translo-
cation and sepsis (Alverly, Ayos and Moss, 1988). However, there are no studies 
on PN in dogs or cats that indicate a high risk for infection or sepsis and, in the 
single veterinary study that specifically evaluated PN nutritional support in dogs 
with AP, no septic complications were identified (Freeman et al., 1995). Although 
most patients fed parenterally had to have demonstrated intolerance to EN 
 initially, many may tolerate provision of trickle feeding and gradual weaning 
onto EN, which may help to maintain intestinal integrity and function. This 
Figure 23.1 A dog with acute pancreatitis 
being nutritionally managed with an 
esophagostomy feeding tube. Previous 
recommendations for ‘bowel rest’ in 
patients with pancreatitis are now 
replaced with recommendations for early 
enteral feeding.

===== PDF PAGE 237 =====
Nutritional support during acute pancreatitis   223
introduction of enteral feeding should start as soon as possible and maybe within 
24 hours of initiating PN. This approach is supported by the fact that early enteral 
feeding has been associated with earlier return of gastrointestinal motility and 
cessation of vomiting (Wernerman, 2005). The time for initiation of PN is 
 controversial in the light of recent findings that initiation of PN in critically ill 
human patients in the first 7 days of ICU hospitalization could be harmful 
(Casaer et al., 2011). The effect of time to PN initiation or combination of PN 
with EN in veterinary patients has not been studied so it is uncertain but in 
most studies detailing PN, the time to initiation is usually in the first 3 days of 
hospitalization (Chan et al., 2002; Gajanayake et al., 2013).
Selection or formulation of an appropriate nutritional solution is critical when 
using PN and it necessitates consideration of the caloric requirement of the patient 
and comorbidities present. Commercially available PN solutions for people are not 
designed to meet the needs of animals and may not provide adequate nutritional 
support (Campbell, Karriker and Fascetti, 2006). Although, a great proportion of 
energy in 3‐in‐1 PN solutions is derived from fat, there is currently no evidence to 
suggest that the lipid content in PN solutions is detrimental in the management of 
canine or feline pancreatitis. High lipid formulations appear to be well‐tolerated 
in non‐hyperlipidemic acute pancreatitis (Campbell et al., 2006). The optimal 
solution for dogs with pancreatitis and hypertriglyceridemia is not known.
Dietary considerations
When implementing enteral feeding, an appropriate diet should be selected. 
Although there is a paucity of veterinary studies evaluating the influence of diet 
type on disease course, a highly digestible diet designed for patients with gastro-
intestinal disease is generally recommended. Avoidance of a diet high in fat has 
been the general recommendation for years although, in naturally occurring 
disease, the link between a high dietary fat content and pancreatitis is not very 
clear. The presence of hypertriglyceridemia in certain dog breeds has been shown 
to act as a predisposing factor and fat‐restricted diets will therefore serve a benefit 
in management of pancreatitis in these cases (Verkest et al., 2008; Fleeman, 
2010). Although fat restriction is considered an important component of the 
management of chronic pancreatitis in dogs, the role in non‐hypertriglyceridemic 
acute pancreatitis is not well understood.
Cats have specialized dietary requirements that differ considerably from dogs 
with respect to dietary fat and protein requirements and may be more prone to 
carbohydrate‐intolerance. The high dietary protein requirement makes cats 
more susceptible to protein‐energy malnutrition and lean muscle loss during 
stressed starvation. Cats have the ability to digest and use high levels of dietary 
fat and there is no current evidence supporting restricting fat in the diet of cats 
with pancreatitis. In a retrospective study evaluating nasogastric tube feeding in 
cats with AP, feeding of a liquid enteral high lipid diet (45% of total calories fed) 
was well tolerated (Klaus et al., 2009).
Emerging role of immunonutrition
In human medicine there is increasing evidence supporting the idea that certain 
nutrients, such as glutamine, arginine and fatty acids, play a significant role in 
metabolic, inflammatory and immune processes in AP and the use of these 

===== PDF PAGE 238 =====
224   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
specific nutrients in the care of critically ill human patients, including those 
with AP, is becoming quite common, with increasing evidence of their benefits 
with little risk of complications (Cetinbas, Yelken and Gulbas, 2010; Ockenga 
et al., 2002). The role of immunonutrition is covered elsewhere (see Chapter 18) 
but because glutamine supplementation has particular applications to the 
management of AP a brief discussion is warranted.
Glutamine is the most abundant amino acid in the plasma and is essential for 
a wide variety of physiological processes. The pancreas has a high protein turno-
ver and glutamine supplementation in animals has resulted in the prevention of 
atrophy of pancreatic acinar cells, improvement in pancreatic exocrine function 
and improved outcomes following critical illness (Fan et al., 1997; Helton et al., 
1990; Zou et al., 2010; Belmonte et al., 2007). Human patients with AP treated 
with glutamine‐enriched PN solutions demonstrated significant improvement in 
C‐reactive protein (CRP) concentrations, as well as decreased dependence on 
PN, reduced infectious complications and reduced length of hospitalization 
(Ockenga et al., 2002). Glutamine‐supplemented PN is challenged by the fact 
that glutamine is relatively unstable in solution and generally has to be provided 
as di‐peptides to maintain stability (Khan et al., 1991). Glutamine is currently 
not supplemented routinely to PN formulations in veterinary medicine and no 
clinical trials evaluating its use in pancreatitis have been published. As many 
meta‐analyses of the use of immune‐enhancing diets in critically ill patients have 
shown a reduction of hospital stay and infection rate, but no adverse effect on 
mortality rate, this was deemed a safe therapeutic option (Galban et al., 2003). 
However, most recently, a large multicentred prospective placebo‐ controlled trial 
unexpectedly demonstrated a statistical trend for higher mortality risk in critically 
ill patients treated with glutamine and antioxidants. (Heyland et al.,2013). It is 
worth noting that the target population in this trial (i.e., mechanically ventilated 
patients in shock) is quite different than patients with pancreatitis. Nevertheless, 
this significant finding, especially given the high quality of this latest trial, raises 
questions over the appropriateness of this approach in all patient populations. 
The exact causal relationship for increased risk of death was not determined.
Monitoring and complications
Monitoring patients with AP receiving nutritional support will depend on the 
mode of feeding employed. Aspects common to all modes of nutritional support 
include monitoring for tolerance of feeding, metabolic, mechanical and septic 
complications. It is currently unknown if serial monitoring of canine pancreatic 
lipase immunoreactivity (cPLI) is indicated or useful to monitor resolution of 
pancreatitis. Specific monitoring of techniques can be found in specific chapters 
devoted to these techniques.
Summary
There is increasing evidence supporting the important role of early EN (within 
48 hours of diagnosis of pancreatitis) in positively impacting outcome beyond 
simply proving energy and nutrients in AP. Nutritional support is now considered 

===== PDF PAGE 239 =====
Nutritional support during acute pancreatitis   225
an integral and key aspect of the successful management of AP. Even in veterinary 
medicine the use of enteral feeding is considered to be safe, effective and well 
tolerated in severe AP. Use of feeding tubes has been shown to be effective and 
safe in dogs and cats and they should be used unless specific contra‐indications 
are identified. The exact composition of the diet has not been identified but diets 
commonly used for convalescent dogs and cats have been used successfully. 
Avoidance of high fat content does not appear to be necessary in the majority 
of  patients. Despite the growing evidence that EN can be used effectively in 
management of patients with AP, there may still be patients requiring some form 
of PN until EN can be tolerated.
references
Alverdy, J., Ayos, E, and Moss, G. (1988) Total parenteral nutrition promotes bacterial translo-
cation from the gut. Surgery, 104, 185–190.
Beal, M.W. and Brown, A.J. (2011) Clinical experience utilizing a novel fluoroscopic technique 
for wire‐guided nasojejunal tube placement in the dog: 26 cases (2006–2010). Journal of 
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 21, 151–157.
Belmonte, L., Coëffier, M, Le Pessot, F. et al. (2007) Effects of glutamine supplementation on 
gut barrier, glutathione content and acute phase response in malnourished rats during 
inflammatory shock. World Journal of Gastroenterology 13, 2833–2840.
Casaer, M.P., Mesotten, D., Hermans, G. et al. (2011) Early versus Late Parenteral Nutrition in 
Critically Ill Adults. New England Journal of Medicine, 365, 506–517.
Campbell, S.J., Karriker, M.J. and Fascetti, A.J. (2006) Central and peripheral parenteral 
nutrition. Waltham Focus, 16, 22–30.
Cetinbas, F., Yelken, B. and Gulbas, Z. (2010) Role of glutamine administration on cellular 
immunity after total parenteral nutrition enriched with glutamine in patients with systemic 
inflammatory response syndrome. Journal of Critical Care, 25, 61.e1–e6.
Chan, D.L., Freeman, L.M., Labato, M. et al. (2002) Retrospective evaluation of partial paren-
teral nutrition in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 16, 440–445.
Curtis, C.S. and Kudsk, K.A. (2007) Nutrition Support in Pancreatitis. Surgical Clinics of North 
America, 87, 1403–1415.
Fan, B., Salehi, A., Sternby, B. et al. (1997) Total parenteral nutrition influences both endocrine 
and exocrine function of rat pancreas. Pancreas, 15, 147–153.
Fleeman, L.M. (2010) Is hyperlipidemia clinically important in dogs? Veterinary Journal, 183,10.
Freeman, L., Labato, M., Rush, J. et al. (1995) Nutritional support in pancreatitis: a retrospec-
tive study. Journal of Veterinary Emergency Critical Care, 5, 32–41.
Key PoINtS
•	 Nutritional	support	is	considered	a	key	part	of	the	management	of	patients	with	acute	
pancreatitis.
•	 Feeding	should	be	attempted	in	all	patients	if	cardiovascularly	stable	and	PN	should	not	
be	considered	unless	enteral	feeding	is	not	tolerated.
•	 Placement	of	feeding	tubes	should	be	considered	the	standard	for	providing	nutritional	
support	in	patients	with	acute	pancreatitis.
•	 Parenteral	nutrition	still	has	a	place	in	the	management	of	patients	with	acute	
pancreatitis,	but	it	is	to	be	reserved	for	patients	who	fail	to	tolerate	enteral	nutrition.

===== PDF PAGE 240 =====
226   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Gajanayake, I., Wylie, C.E. and Chan, D.L. (2013) Clinical experience with a lipid‐free, ready‐made 
parenteral nutrition solution in dogs: 70 cases (2006–2012). Journal of Veterinary Emergency 
Critical Care, 23. doi: 10.1111/vec.12029.
Galbán, C., Montejo, J., Mesejo, A. et al. (2003) An immune‐enhancing enteral diet reduces 
mortality rate and episodes of bacteremia in septic intensive care unit patients. Critial Care 
Medicine, 28, 643–648.
Gianotti, L,, Meier, R,, Lobo, D.N. et al. (2009) ESPEN Guidelines on Parenteral Nutrition: 
Pancreas. Clinical Nutrition, 28, 428–435.
Gukovskaya AS, Gukovsky I. (2012) Autophagy and pancreatitis. American Journal of Physiology, 
Gastrointestinal Liver Physiology, 303, 993–1003.
Gukovsky, I,, Pandol, S.J., Gukovskaya, A.S. (2011) Organellar dysfunction in the pathogenesis 
of pancreatitis. Antioxidant Redox Signalling, 15, 2699–2710.
Guptaa, R., Patela, K,, Calderb, P.C. et al. (2003) A randomised clinical trial to assess the effect 
of total enteral and total parenteral nutritional support on metabolic, inflammatory and 
oxidative markers in patients with predicted severe acute pancreatitis (APACHE II ≥6). 
Pancreatology, 3, 406–413.
Helton, W., Jacobs, D., Bonner‐Weir, S., et al. (1990) Effects of glutamine‐enriched parenteral 
nutrition on the exocrine pancreas. Journal of Parententeral Enteral Nutrition, 14, 344–352.
Heyland, D., Muscedere, J., Wischmeyer, P.E. et al. (2013) A randomized trial of glutamine and 
antioxidants in critically ill patients. New England Journal of Medicine, 368, 1489–1497.
Ioannidis, O,, Lavrentieva, A. and Botsios, D. (2008) Nutrition support in acute pancreatitis. 
Journal of the Pancreas, 9, 375–390.
Khan, K,, Hardy, G,, McElroy, B, et al. (1991) The stability of L‐glutamine in total parenteral 
nutrition solutions. Clinical Nutrition, 10, 193–198.
Klaus, J., Rudloff, E. and Kirby, R. (2009) Nasogastric tube feeding in cats with suspected acute 
pancreatitis: 55 cases (2001‐2006). Journal of Veterinary Emergency Critical Care, 19, 337–346.
Mansfield, C.S., James, F.E., Steiner, J.M. et al. (2011) A pilot study to assess tolerability of early 
enteral nutrition via esophagostomy tube feeding in dogs with severe acute pancreatitis. 
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 25, 419–425.
McClave, S.A. (2004) Defining the new gold standard for nutritional support in acute pancrea-
titis. Nutrition Clinical Practice, 19,1–4.
Nathens, A.B., Curtis, J.R., Beale, R.L. et al. (2004) Management of the critically ill patient with 
severe acute pancreatitis. Critical Care Medicine, 32, 2524–2536.
Niederau, C., Niederau, M., Lüthen, R., et al. (1990) Pancreatic exocrine secretion in acute 
experimental pancreatitis. Gastroenterology, 99, 1120–1127.
O’Keefe, S.J.D., Lee, R.B., Li, J. et al. (2005) Trypsin secretion and turnover in patients with 
acute pancreatitis. American Journal Physiology, Gastrointestinal Liver Physiology, 289, 181–187.
Ockenga, J,, Borchert, K., Rifai, K. et al. (2002) Effect of glutamine‐enriched total parenteral 
nutrition in patients with acute pancreatitis. Clinical Nutrition, 21, 409–416.
Pápa, K., Psáder, R., Sterczer. A. et al. (2009) Endoscopically guided nasojejunal tube placement 
in dogs for short‐term postduodenal feeding. Journal of Veterinary Emergency Critical Care, 19, 
554–563.
Petrov, M., Kukosh, M. and Emelyanov, N. (2006) A Randomized controlled trial of enteral 
versus parenteral feeding in patients with predicted severe acute pancreatitis shows a sig-
nificant reduction in mortality and in infected pancreatic complications with total enteral 
nutrition. Digestive Surgery, 23, 336–345.
Qin, H.L., Su, Z.D., Gao, Q., et al. (2002) Early intrajejunal nutrition: bacterial translocation and 
gut barrier function of severe acute pancreatitis in dogs. Hepatobiliary Pancreatic Disease 
International, 1, 150–154.
Qin, H.L., Su, Z.D., Hu, L.G., et al. (2007) Effect of parenteral and early intrajejunal nutrition 
on pancreatic digestive enzyme synthesis, storage and discharge in dog models of acute 
pancreatitis. World Journal of Gastroenterology,  13, 1123–1128.
Qin, H.L., Su, Z.D., Hu, L.G. et al. (2003) Parenteral versus early intrajejunal nutrition: effect 
on pancreatitic natural course, entero‐hormones release and its efficacy on dogs with acute 
pancreatitis. World Journal of Gastroenterology, 9, 2270–2273.

===== PDF PAGE 241 =====
Nutritional support during acute pancreatitis   227
Simpson, K, and Lamb, C. (1995) Acute pancreatitis. In Practice, 17, 328–337.
Spanier, B.W.M., Bruno, M.J. and Mathus‐Vliegen, E.M.H. (2011) Enteral nutrition and acute 
pancreatitis: a review. Gastroenterology Research Practice, 9,10–12.
Son, T.T., Thompson, L., Serrano, S. et al. (2010) Surgical intervention in the management of 
severe acute pancreatitis in cats: 8 cases (2003–2007) Journal of Veterinary Emergency Critical 
Care, 20, 426–435.
Thompson, L.J., Seshadri, R. and Raffe, M.R. (2009) Characteristics and outcomes in surgical 
management of severe acute pancreatitis: 37 dogs (2001–2007). Journal of Veterinary Emergency 
Critical Care, 19, 165–173.
Verkest, K,, Fleeman, L,, Rand, J. et al. (2008) Subclinical pancreatitis is more common in over-
weight and obese dogs if peak postprandial triglyceridemia is >445 mg/dL. Journal of Veterinary 
Internal Medicine, 22, 820.
Wernerman, J. (2005) Guidelines for nutritional support in intensive care unit patients: a critical 
analysis. Current Opinion in Clinical Nutrition Metabolism Care, 8, 171–175.
Williams, D,A. (1995) Diagnosis and management of pancreatitis. Journal of Small Animal 
Practice, 35, 445–454.
Zou, X., Chen, M., Wei, W. et al. (2010) Effects of enteral immunonutrition on the maintenance 
of gut barrier function and immune function in pigs with severe acute pancreatitis. Journal of 
Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition, 34, 554–566.

===== PDF PAGE 242 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
228
Introduction
Small animal patients receiving long‐term mechanical ventilation (i.e., > 24 hours) 
require a host of supportive measures including nutritional support to ensure 
successful management and resolution of the underlying disease. Preservation 
of nutritional status has important implications for immune function, wound 
healing and muscle function to enable the patient to be weaned successfully from 
mechanical ventilation. Respiratory muscles, much like skeletal muscles, are 
negatively impacted by malnutrition. In the context of the long‐term mechani-
cally ventilated patient, malnutrition will result in muscle weakness, fatigability, 
and decreased endurance, which makes weaning patients off ventilation more 
difficult. Decrease in respiratory function results in increased respiratory muscle 
work, with increased energy demands, which further exacerbate the catabolic 
state (Ravasco and Camilo, 2003; Doley, Mallampalli and Sandberg, 2011).
Patients receiving early nutritional support (i.e., within 2 days of admission) 
have lower risks of developing nosocomial infections, require fewer days of 
mechanical ventilation and have overall better patient outcomes (Artinian, 
Krayem and Di Giovine, 2006; Strack van Schijndel et al., 2009; Reignier, 2013). 
However, provision of nutrition in this patient population is particularly chal-
lenging and measures must be taken to decrease the risk of complications. Aspects 
of nutritional support that require special consideration include the timing when 
nutrition should be initiated, the route of feeding, the composition of the diet 
and other aspects of management that may impact nutritional management. The 
biggest obstacles for provision of nutrition support in the ventilated patient 
include intolerance to enteral feeding, difficulties with airway management and 
the reality that many of these patients may be cardiovascularly unstable, and 
therefore priority is given to interventions with immediate patient benefits. 
Cardiovascular instability is regarded as a relative contraindication to enteral 
feeding and therefore many ventilated patients are not assessed as ready to 
Nutritional support in the 
mechanically ventilated small 
animal patient
Daniel L. Chan
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences and Services, The Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
Chapter 24

===== PDF PAGE 243 =====
Nutritional support in the mechanically ventilated small animal patient   229
receive nutritional support (Figure 24.1). Protocols in human medicine indicate 
that ventilated patients should receive enteral feeding on day 3 of mechanical 
ventilation, however, recent studies have emphasized initiating feeding after 24 
hours of mechanical ventilation (Parrish and McCray, 2003; Doley et al., 2011).
During critical illness, patients often develop gastrointestinal dysmotility 
problems that require a host of medical and nutritional strategies to manage 
these complications (see Chapter 17). Patients receiving mechanical ventilation 
have additional challenges that make provision of nutrition difficult. For exam-
ple, in patients requiring mechanical ventilation, the frequency, amplitude, and 
percentage of propulsive contractions of the esophagus are reduced (Kölbel et al. 
2000). This may explain the propensity for fluid to accumulate within the 
esophagus and result in regurgitation. The most pressing clinical concerns with 
esophageal dysmotility disorders center on the development of gastroesophageal 
reflux, esophagitis, and subsequent aspiration (Nind et al., 2005).
Human critically ill patients often have gastrointestinal intolerance that is 
manifested by an increased gastric residual volume (GRV) (Mentec et al., 2001). 
Published human feeding protocols have tried to define the threshold volume 
above which feeding should be withheld as well as to recommend the frequency 
of GRV assessment (Barr et al., 2004). The GRVs considered to be excessive in 
ventilated patients have ranged from 120 to 500 mL per aspiration (1.7 to 7.1 mL/
kg assuming a 70 kg person) (Soroksky et al., 2010). A low GRV threshold results 
in multiple interruptions in EN provision due to frequent assessments of GRV, 
discarding checked volumes, and withholding feeding or reducing the rate of 
feeding due to presumed high GRV result in overall decrease in caloric intake, 
failure to achieve caloric targets, increased use of parenteral nutrition, which may 
all negatively impact outcome (Mentec et al., 2001; McClave et al., 1999). More 
recent data have questioned the relationship between increased GRV and higher 
risk of aspiration pneumonia as well as the need to check GRV more than once 
daily (McClave et al., 2005; Soroksky et al., 2010; Marik, 2014). In the light of 
these findings, some authors recommend against adjusting enteral feeding unless 
the GRV exceeds 500 mL and to reduce checking GRV to only once daily or not 
at all (Soroksy et al., 2010; Reignier et al., 2013). Unfortunately, there is virtually 
no information available in ventilated veterinary patients in regards to GRV and 
risk of feeding. While some authors (Haskins and King, 2004)  recommended 
Figure 24.1 Nutritional support in 
mechanically ventilated patients often 
receives a low priority, however, early 
institution of enteral nutrition may be 
beneficial in these patients.

===== PDF PAGE 244 =====
230   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
checking GRV before every feed, and that GRV should not be allowed to exceed 
10 mL/kg, there are currently no data to corroborate whether such guidelines are 
necessary, although such recommendations may be sensible. Holahan et al. 
(2010) could not relate GRV and gastrointestinal complications in dogs fed via 
nasogastric tubes and some of these dogs had > 200 mL/kg of GRV, however, it is 
unknown if any of the dogs evaluated were mechanically ventilated. The median 
(range) GRV in this population of critically ill dogs was 4.5 mL/kg (0 to 213 mL/
kg) (Holahan et al., 2010). As current human guidelines (Bankhead et al., 2009) 
state that enteral feedings should not be with held unless GRV are >500 mL 
(approximately 7 ml/kg based on 70 kg person), it may be prudent to use a similar 
approach and so animals with GRV with >10 mL/kg should be treated with pro-
kinetic agents (see Chapter 17) and their feed reduced temporarily.
Nutritional management strategies
In people, the provision of enteral nutrition can be delivered via nasogastric or 
nasojejunal feeding tubes. Nasojejunal feeding has been recommended as the 
preferred route in patients with a high risk of aspiration as well as in those 
patients for whom gastric feeding is not tolerated, or who have repeated high 
gastric residual volumes (McClave et al., 2009). Unfortunately, there are little 
veterinary data regarding nutritional support of small animal patients receiving 
mechanical ventilation. Upon reviewing available veterinary clinical studies on 
mechanical ventilation, as well as veterinary studies on assisted feeding and 
parenteral nutrition, there are only brief mentions of patients that were venti-
lated and received some form of nutritional support (King and Hendricks, 1994; 
Reuter et al., 1998; Beal et al., 2001; Chan et al., 2002; Pyle et al., 2004; Lee 
et al., 2005; Armitage‐Chan, O’Toole and Chan, 2006; Crabb et al., 2006; Hopper 
et al., 2007;Campbell et al., 2010; Holahan et al., 2010; Hoareau, Mellems and 
Silverstein, 2011; Rutter et al., 2011; Gajanayake, Wylie and Chan, 2013; Queau 
et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2013; Edwards et al., 2014). From the information avail-
able, it is clear that, in some studies, only a proportion of ventilated patients 
(40  to 50%) receive any form of nutritional support, that a high proportion 
receive parenteral nutrition (up to 38%) and in those that have enteral nutrition, 
it was stopped in up to 60% of patients due to regurgitation, high GRV and aspi-
ration (Hopper et al., 2007; Rutter et al., 2011). Therefore formulation of feeding 
recommendations in ventilated small animals must be mostly extrapolated from 
information available in other populations and species.
The first question relates to optimal timing of nutritional support initiation. 
The urgency of initiating nutritional support will depend on the nutritional 
assessment (see Chapter  1) and nutritional status of the patient. As in other 
critically ill small animals, nutritional support should only be considered in 
 cardiovascularly stable patients, but should generally be initiated within 48 to 
72 hours of mechanical ventilation. Although avoidance of enteral feeding in 
mechanically ventilated patients may seem reasonable, parenteral nutrition 
should only be used if there are contraindications to enteral feedings, such as 
persistent vomiting or regurgitation (see Chapter 11). Enteral access devices for 

===== PDF PAGE 245 =====
Nutritional support in the mechanically ventilated small animal patient   231
ventilated patients include nasogastric (Chapter 4), esophageal (Chapter 5),  gastric 
(Chapter 6), and nasojejunal feeding tubes (Chapters 8). Nasogastric may be most 
appropriate for most ventilated patients, although some may benefit from post‐
pyloric placement of feeding tubes. Enteral feed may be delivered continuously 
or intermittently as there appears to be little difference in complication rates 
(Holahan et al., 2010; Campbell et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2013).
In terms of optimal caloric intake and composition of the diet for ventilated 
small animals, there are little data available. Overfeeding, particularly of carbo-
hydrates, can result in a number of complications that may have important 
implications for ventilated patients, such as excess carbon dioxide production, 
which increases respiratory work (complicating weaning off the ventilator), and 
hyperglycemia (which can lead to gastrointestinal dysmotility). As in other criti-
cally ill populations, a caloric target of 80–100 % resting energy requirements 
(RER) may be appropriate, with the first day not exceeding 50% RER.
In people, there are encouraging results for patients with acute lung injury and 
acute respiratory distress syndrome that were fed enteral diets that were enriched 
with omega‐3 fatty acids and antioxidants (Gadek et al., 1999;, Singer et al., 2006: 
Pontes‐Arruda, Aragao and Albuquerque, 2006). No data are available in veteri-
nary patients regarding the benefits of such an approach, but further research is 
warranted. A calorically dense, liquid diet appears appropriate for most cases.
Monitoring and complications
Ventilated patients are routinely monitored very closely. In regards to nutritional 
support, patients should be assessed for worsening nutritional status, tolerance 
to enteral feeding (including evidence of regurgitation or vomiting), abdominal 
distension and excessive GRV. As in other critically ill patients, frequent assess-
ment of biochemistry profiles and blood gases are indicated.
Summary
Patients requiring mechanical ventilation are often the most critical and com-
plex cases in any given veterinary hospital and present the veterinary team with 
a number of challenges. Determining the ideal time for initiating nutritional 
support, the route of delivery, the caloric targets, diet composition and closely 
monitoring for tolerance of feeding, are essential components of the strategy to 
manage mechanically ventilated patients.
Key poINtS
•	 Small	animal	patients	receiving	mechanical	ventilation	require	a	host	of	supportive	
measures	including	nutritional	support	to	ensure	successful	management	and	resolution	
of	the	underlying	disease.
•	 Preservation	of	nutritional	status	has	important	implications	for	immune	function,	
wound	healing	and	muscle	function	to	enable	the	patient	to	be	weaned	successfully	
from	mechanical	ventilation.

===== PDF PAGE 246 =====
232   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
references
Armitage‐Chan, E.A., O’Toole, T. and Chan, D.L. (2006) Management of prolonged food depri-
vation, hypothermia and refeeding syndrome in a cat. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and 
Critical Care, 16, S34–S41.
Artinian, V., Krayem, H. and DiGiovine, B. Effects of early enteral feeding on the outcome of 
critically ill mechanically ventilated medical patients. Chest, 129, 960–967.
Bankhead, R., Boullata, J., Brantley, S. et al. (2009) A.S.P.E.N. enteral nutrition practice recom-
mendations. Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition, 33, 122–167.
Barr. J., Hecht, M., Flavin, K.E. et al. (2004) Outcomes in critically ill patients before and after 
the implementation of an evidence‐based nutritional management protocol. Chest, 125, 
1446–1457.
Beal, M.W., Paglia, D.T., Griffin, G.M. et al (2001) Ventilatory failure, ventilator management, 
and outcome in dogs with cervical spinal disorders: 14 cases (1991‐1999). Journal of theAmeri-
can Veterinary Medical Association, 218,1598–1602.
Campbell, J.A., Jutkowitz, A.L., Santoro, K.A. et al. (2010) Continuous versus intermittent 
delivery of nutrition via nasoenteric feeding tubes in hospitalized canine and feline patients: 
91 patients (2002‐ 2007). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 20, 232–236.
Chan, D.L., Freeman, L.M., Labato, M.A. et al. 2002. Retrospective evaluation of partial paren-
teral nutrition in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 16, 440–445.
Crabb, S.E., Chan, D.L., Freeman, L.M. et al. 2006. Retrospective evaluation of total parenteral 
nutrition in cats: 40 cases (1991‐2003). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 16, 
S21–S26.
Doley, J.D., Mallampalli, A. and Sandberg, M. (2011). Nutrition management for the patient 
requiring prolonged mechanical ventilation. Nutrition, Clinical Practice, 26, 232–241.
Edwards, T.H., Coleman, A., Brainard, B.M. et al. (2014) Outcome of positive‐pressure ventila-
tion in dogs and cats with congestive heart failure: 16 cases (1992‐2012). Journal of Veterinary 
Emergency and Critical Care, 24, 586–593.
Gadek, J.E., DeMichele, S.J., Karlstad, M.D. et al. (1999) Effect of enteral feeding with eicosap-
entaenoic acid, gamma‐linolenic acid, and antioxidants on patients with acute respiratory 
distress syndrome. Critical Care Medicine, 27, 1409–1420.
Gajanayake, I., Wylie, C.E. and Chan, D.L. 2013. Clinical Experience Using a Lipid‐free, Ready‐
made Parenteral Nutrition Solution in Dogs: 70 cases (2006‐2012). Journal of Veterinary 
Emergency and Critical Care, 23, 305–313.
Haskins, S.C. and King, L.G. (2004) Positive pressure ventilation. in Textbook of Respiratory 
Diseases in Dogs and Cats (ed. L.G. King) Elsevier, St Louis, MO, pp. 217–229.
Holahan, M., Abood, S., Hauptman, C. et al. (2010) Intermittent and continuous enteral nutri-
tion in criticallu ill dogs: a prospective randomized trial. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and 
Critical Care, 24, 520–526.
Hopper, K., Haskins, S.C., Kass, P.H. et al. (2007) Indications, management and outcome of 
long‐term positive‐pressure ventilation in dogs and cats: 148 cases (1990–2001). Journal of the 
American Veterinary Medical Association, 230, 64–75.
•	 Provision	of	nutrition	in	this	patient	population	is	particularly	challenging	and	measures	such	
as	the	use	of	prokinetic	agents,	nasogastric	or	nasojenunal	feeding	tubes	may	be	necessary.
•	 Aspects	of	nutritional	support	that	require	special	consideration	include	the	timing	that	
nutrition	should	be	initiated,	the	route	of	feeding,	the	composition	of	the	diet	and	other	
aspects	of	management	that	may	impact	nutritional	management.
•	 Enteral	nutritional	support	using	liquid	critical	care	diets	should	be	initiated	within	48	to	
72	hours	in	most	patients	requiring	long‐term	mechanical	ventilation.
•	 Nutritional	support	may	be	a	key	component	in	the	successful	management	of	ventilated	
patients.

===== PDF PAGE 247 =====
Nutritional support in the mechanically ventilated small animal patient   233
Hoareau, G.L., Mellema, M.S. and Silverstein, D.C. (2011) Indications, management, and out-
come of brachycephalic dogs requiring mechanical ventilation. Journal of Veterinary Emergency 
and Critical Care, 21, 226–235.
Lee, J.A., Drobatz, K.J., Koch, M.W. et al. (2005) Indications for and outcome of positive‐ 
pressure ventilation in cats: 53 cases (1993–2002), Journal of the American Veterinary Medical 
Association, 226, 924–31.
King, L.G. and Hendricks, J.C., (1994) Use of positive‐pressure ventilation in dogs and cats:  
41 cases (1990–1992). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 204, 1045–1052.
Kölbel, C.B., Rippel, K., Klar, H. et al. (2000) Esophageal motility disorders in critically ill 
patients: a 24‐hour manometric study. Intensive Care Medicine, 26,1421–1427.
Marik, P.E. (2014) Enteral nutrition in the critically ill: myths and misconception. Critical Care 
Medicine, 42, 962–969.
McClave, S.A., Lukan, J.K., Stefater, J.A. et al. (2005) Poor validity of residual volumes as a 
marker for risk of aspiration in critically ill patients. Critical Care Medicine, 33, 324–330.
McClave, S.A., Martindale, R.G., Vanek, V.W. et al (2009) Guidelines for the provision and assess-
ment of nutrition support in the adult critically ill patient: Society of Critical Care Medicine.
McClave, S.A., Sexton, L.K., Spain, D.A., et al. (1999) Enteral tube feeding in the intensive care 
unit: factors impeding adequate delivery. Critical Care Medicine, 27, 1252–1256.
Mentec, H., Dupont, H., Bomlhetti, M. et al. (2001) Upper digestive intolerance during enteral 
nutrition in critically ill patients: frequency, risk factors, and complications. Critical Care 
Medicine, 29, 1955–1961.
Nind, G., Chen, W‐H., Protheroe, R. et al. (2005) Mechanisms of gastroesophageal reflux in 
critically ill mechanically ventilated patients. Gastroenterology, 128, 600–606.
Parrish, C.R. and McCray, S.F. (2003) Nutrition support for the mechanically ventilated patient. 
Critical Care Nurse, 23, 77–80.
Pontes‐Arruda, A., Aragao, A.M. and Albuquerque, J.D. (2006) Effects of enteral feeding with 
eicosapentaenoic acid, gamma‐linolenic acid, and antioxidants in mechanically ventilated 
patients with severe sepsis and septic shock. Critical Care Medicine, 34, 2325–2333.
Pyle, S.C., Marks, S.L., Kass, P.H. et al. (2004) Evaluation of complication and prognostic factors 
associated with administration of parenteral nutrition in cats: 75 cases (1994–2001). Journal 
of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 225, 242–250.
Queau, Y., Larsen, J.A., Kass, P.H. et al. (2013) Factors associated with adverse outcomes during 
parenteral nutrition administration in dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 25, 
446–452.
Ravasco, P. and Camilo, M.E. (2003) Tube feeding in mechanically ventilated critically ill 
patient: a prospective clinical audit. Nutrition Clinical Practice, 18, 247–433.
Reignier, J. (2013) Feeding ICU patients on invasive mechanical ventilation: Designing the 
optiomal protocol. Critical Care Medicine, 41, 2825–2826.
Reignier, J., Mercier, E., Le Gouge, A. et al. (2013) Effect of not monitoring residual gastric 
volume on risk of ventilator‐associated pneumonia in adults receiving mechanical ventilation 
and early enteral feeding. Journal of the American Medical Association, 309, 249–256.
Reuter, J.D., Marks, S.L., Rogers, Q. R. et al. (1998) Use of total parenteral nutrition in dogs: 
209 cases (1988‐1995). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 8, 201–213.
Rutter, C.R., Rozanski, E.A., Sharp, C.R. et al. (2011) Outcome and medical management in dogs 
with lower motor neuron disease undergoing mechanical ventilation: 14 cases (2003‐2009) 
Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 21, 531–541.
Singer, P., Theilla, M., Fisher, H. et al. (2006) Benefit of an enteral diet enriched with eicosap-
entaenoic acid and gamma‐linolenic acid in ventilated patients with acute lung injury. Critical 
Care Medicine, 34, 1033–1038.
Soroksky, A., Lober, J., Klinowski, E. et al. (2010) A simplified approach to the management of 
gastric residual volumes in crtically ill mechanically ventilated patients: a pilot prospective 
study. Israel Medical Association Journal, 12, 543–548.
Strack van Schijndel, R.J., Weijs, R.J., Koopmans, R.H. et al. (2009) Optimal nutrition during 
the period of mechanical ventilation decreases mortality in critically‐ill, long term acute 
female patients: A prospective observation cohort study. Critical Care, 13, R132.
Yu, M.K., Freeman, L.M., Heinse, C.R., et al. (2013) Comparison of complication rates in dogs 
with nasoesophageal versus nasogastric feeding tubes. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and 
Critical Care, 23, 300–304.

===== PDF PAGE 248 =====
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
234
Introduction
Providing nutritional support to exotic pet (EP) species 1 presents a unique 
 challenge for the practitioner. Malnutrition in these types of animals is com-
mon due to misinformation and an overall lack of research into their nutrient 
requirements. Inadequate caloric and nutrient intake has long‐term detrimen-
tal effects on the immune system, wound healing and overall well‐being, thus 
influencing the outcome of any presentation, whether it be acute trauma or 
chronic infectious disease. There are multiple EPs commonly maintained in 
captivity, none of which are considered domesticated to the extent of dogs and 
cats. Limited research on nutritional requirements for these animals exists, 
with even less on species‐ specific differences within the same taxonomical 
orders or even genera. Common strategies to overcome this challenge include 
extrapolation from known requirements in similar species with comparable 
gastrointestinal morphology to that of the target species, application of research 
on diet specializations of free‐living members of that species, extrapolation 
from the specie’s wild diets and natural history, and experience gained by 
 veterinarians (Koutsos, Matsos and Klasing, 2001), zoologists, curators and 
other animal caretakers.
With the exception of ferrets and some reptiles, most EPs are prey species, 
thus they hide clinical signs of disease until they are comparatively more ill than 
dogs or cats on presentation. EPs may also alter their behavior when in a new 
environment, particularly when people are observing them (Pollock, 2002), 
making imperative training of staff to recognize subtle changes in demeanor 
for multiple species. The practitioner must constantly weigh the pros and cons 
of  aggressive treatment with the risk of stressing the animal with handling. 
Aside from providing warmth, supplemental oxygen if required, a low stress 
environment and restoring hydration, addressing nutritional needs is one of the 
Nutritional support in exotic 
pet species
Jeleen A. Briscoe1, La’Toya Latney2 and Cailin R. Heinze3
1 Animal Care Program, United States Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Service, Riverdale, MD, USA
2 Exotic Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery, University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA
3 Department of Clinical Sciences, Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, MA, USA
Chapter 25

===== PDF PAGE 249 =====
Nutritional support in exotic pet species   235
major keys to treatment success for most presentations ( Figure 25.1), often far 
beyond any medication protocol. For birds and small mammals, metabolic rates 
are higher than those for cats and dogs, and the animals have fewer reserves, 
requiring the practitioner to place nutrition needs high on the list of treatment 
priorities. Basic guidelines for avian and mammalian exotic pets are to feed early 
and often, and to get the animal eating a nutritionally complete diet on its own, 
without assistance, as soon as possible. In addition to monitoring food intake, 
routine and accurate weighing (at least daily) of the animal using proper scales 
(i.e. gram scales for animals less than 1 kg, scales designed for human infants for 
animals over a kg) will provide a good indication of the need to apply or adjust 
assisted feeding strategies to the patient. Assisted feeding should be considered 
when the patient loses 5% or more of its weight, and should be mandatory when 
that loss reaches 10%, or the animal is completely anorexic (Pollock, 2002) for 
more than half a day.
The most common methods used for assisted feeding of EPs, based on ease of 
administration and limited stress on the animal, are syringe feeding for small 
mammals and gavaging for birds and reptiles. Other more invasive methods, 
such as nasogastric or pharyngostomy tubes, should be weighed in the light of 
the effect they may have on natural behaviors of the species, as some may not 
tolerate them. For example, nasogastric tubes may require placement of an 
Elizabethan collar on rabbits to prevent them from pulling them out; this will 
impair their ability to ingest caecotrophs and may interfere with their eating 
habits, thus resulting in anorexia and altering gastrointestinal flora, leading to 
dysbiosis and even death (Figure 25.2).
Basic guidelines across species for syringe‐ or gavage‐feeding are the same: 
customize the diet to the normal feeding strategy of the animal (i.e., meat diets 
for carnivores, vegetarian diets for herbivores), make sure that the consistency of 
the diet administered will pass easily through the syringe or tube without clog -
ging (test on a spare tube if unfamiliar with the diet), and calculate the initial 
caloric dose based on the animal’s resting energy requirement (RER), taking into 
account the health state of the animal (Donoghue, 1998). For severely malnour-
ished animals, start with 10–20% of the RER the first day; gradually increase over 
the next few days by increments of 10–25% until 100% RER is reached. This 
approach is intended to decrease the chance of “refeeding syndrome,” a condi -
tion that occurs when a severely malnourished animal is fed too many calories 
Figure 25.1 Blue‐fronted Amazon parrot 
(Amazona aestiva) in hospital oxygen cage 
with assortment of foods. Addressing 
nutritional needs is a high priority for 
exotic pet species, especially those with 
high metabolic rates, such as birds and 
small mammals.

===== PDF PAGE 250 =====
236   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
too quickly, leading to an insulin spike and resulting phosphorus and potassium 
uptake into cells along with glucose, causing hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia, 
and even death (de la Navarre, 2006, Martinez‐Jimenez and Hernandez‐Divers, 
2007). Animals that have been anorexic for short durations may tolerate 25–100% 
of the RER the first day. It is generally safest to feed less initially until tolerance can 
be determined. The calorie intake should slowly be increased from the RER as 
necessary to maintain a steady body weight or slow weight gain if appropriate.
Special considerations: equipping the hospital to 
accommodate nutritional needs of exotic pets
It is the variety of EPs that require care and nutritional support in the hospital 
that dictates the need for a dedicated storage and food preparation area. Ideally, 
there should be separate food preparation areas for meat and produce, and 
sanitation protocols for these areas, storage containers, and food receptacles 
(Crissey et al., 2001; Schmidt, Travis and Williams, 2006). To increase client 
education, compliance and, potentially, revenue, the practitioner may consider 
offering certain commercial EP diets for sale (Fisher, 2005). Prior to stocking 
commercial foods for patients or offering them for purchase, thorough investi -
gation into the quality of the food is important for patient health and hospital 
credibility. Minimally, manufacturer knowledge, quality control and validity of 
any marketing claims should be assessed (Schmidt et al., 2006).
Setting up a practice to accommodate the nutritional needs of hospitalized 
exotic pets requires detailed planning. First, the types of feeding strategies and 
basic foods that will be kept in stock to meet those feeding strategies should 
be  identified ( Table 25.1). Storage needs for those foods include a pest‐proof 
cabinet for dry goods (Figure 25.3), a refrigerator for fresh produce dedicated to 
animal food only, and a freezer for storage of frozen foods and dry goods (Figure 
25.4) to prolong viability of nutrient content. As the nutrient quality of food 
decreases over time (Schmidt et al., 2006), a schedule for replacement of those 
foods and a protocol for monitoring expiration dates, checking viability of frozen 
prey (Crissey et al., 2001), and discarding spoiled or expired foods should be 
determined. For example, a year after cutting hay, half of its vitamin A activity 
from beta carotene is diminished (Donoghue, 1998).
Figure 25.2 Nasoesophageal tube 
placement in a rabbit (Oryctolagus 
cuniculus). Indications and protocols for 
such procedures in exotic pet species are 
similar for domestic pets, but may not be 
tolerated as well. NE tubes in rabbits may 
impair ingestion of caecotrophs and 
normal eating habits, leading to dysbiosis 
and even death.

===== PDF PAGE 251 =====
Nutritional support in exotic pet species   237
Table 25.1 Suggested foods to stock in a hospital for zoological companion animals. Dry goods 
should be kept in air‐tight, resealable containers, away from extreme temperatures and 
moisture. Foods requiring refrigeration or freezing should be kept separate from food intended 
for human use. In addition to the below, powdered convalescent or hand‐feeding diets 
designed for a range of species (e.g. Oxbow Critical Care for herbivores and Carnivore Care)
a 
should also be in stock, along with a high‐calorie cat and human liquid diets (e.g. Clinicareb 
and TwoCalb).
Feeding strategy Suggested foods to stock
Herbivorous, including rabbits, guinea pigs, 
parrots, iguanas, tortoises.
 • Commercial pelleted diets designed in type 
and size for a range of species (e.g. Mazuri 
Tortoise Diet
c , Zupreem Nature’s PromiseTM 
Premium small mammal lined)
 • Dried hay in long‐stem and cubed forms: 
timothy, alfalfa, and wild grasses
 • Fresh produce: dark leafy greens (e.g. kale, 
chard and parsley); and palatable, brightly 
colored fruits and vegetables to stimulate 
eating (e.g. strawberries, mango, and 
blueberries)
e
Carnivorous/Insectivorous, including ferrets, 
raptors, and turtles
 • Appropriate commercial diets (pelleted and 
canned) designed for range of species (e.g. 
Mazuri Insectivore Diet
c and Marshall 
Premium Ferret Dietf )
 • Insects in ventilated containers with 
appropriate nutritional substrate
 • Frozen prey
g
Granivorous, including passerines and small 
rodents
 • Commercial extruded/pelleted diets and 
seed mixes designed for a range of species 
(e.g. ZuPreem FruitBlend
TM Flavor Premium 
Daily Bird Food linee,d and Kaytee Fiesta lineh)
 • Palatable seeds and nuts to stimulate eating 
in anorexic hospitalized birds, e.g. 
sunflower, safflower seeds and spray millet 
for smaller birds and bird treats, such as 
Lafeber’s Nutri‐Berry line
i
a  Oxbow Animal Health, Murdock, NE, USA.
b  Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL, USA.
c  PMI Nutrition, Henderson, CO, USA (Mazuri products are distributed under the tradename 
“Nutrazu” in the European Union).
d  ZuPreem, Shownee, KS, USA.
e  The following website has a searchable database on nutritional content for fresh produce: http://
www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/foodcomp/search/.
f  Marshall Pet Products Inc., NY, USA.
g  Improper thawing can increase microbial content, lipid peroxidation, and decrease nutrient quality 
and palatability. Thawing under refrigeration is recommended (Crissey et al., 2001).
h  Kaytee Products, Inc., Chilton, WI, USA.
i  Lafeber Company, Cornell, IL, USA.

===== PDF PAGE 252 =====
238   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
For the less common species with specialized diets, owners should be told 
when they call for an appointment that may require hospitalization to bring in 
their pet’s food with instructions for feeding.
Nutritional management strategies
Reptiles
Reptiles are ectothermic and thus are dependent on environmental sources to 
maintain body temperature. Unlike birds and mammals whose generation of 
heat and energy is highly dependent on physiologic processes, reptilian mecha -
nisms for regulation are dictated by complex neuroendocrine processes and are 
for the most part behavioral. They must physically move into and out of differ -
ent thermal zones to maintain their body temperature. Reptiles move to warmer 
thermal zones only for the periods that require more energy, for example, 
mating, territorial defence, predator avoidance and feeding. This strategy allows 
reptiles to have 3% of the daily energy requirements of similarly‐sized mam -
mals. As such, they have a decreased need for food and are more efficient at 
transforming food energy into body tissue, provided they can remain within 
their set point temperature range – or set body temperature – around which 
thermoregulation occurs. This range of temperatures is called the preferred body 
Figure 25.3 Dry goods storage 
of hospital foods for exotic pet 
species. Addressing the 
nutritional needs in 
hospitalized exotic pets 
require protocols for proper 
storage and product 
replacement.
Figure 25.4 Frozen goods 
storage of hospital foods for 
exotic pet species. Addressing 
the nutritional needs in 
hospitalized exotic pets 
require protocols for proper 
storage and product 
replacement.

===== PDF PAGE 253 =====
Nutritional support in exotic pet species   239
temperature (PBT) or preferred optimum temperature zone (POTZ) (Donoghue, 
1998; Pough, 2004; Rossi, 2006).
Hospitalized reptiles should be stabilized and maintained within the upper 
end of their PBT, with the option to move through a range of temperatures, 
prior to addressing nutritional needs. Although reptiles can go longer without 
food due to their physiology, deciding when to offer food or assist feed should 
be one of the top treatment priorities and will depend on a variety of factors, 
including body condition, duration in time from the last meal, thermoregulatory 
behaviour of the animal and hydration status.
Carnivorous reptiles (e.g. snakes) have a relatively short, simple gastrointes-
tinal tract with limited fermentative activity. Diets consumed by strict carnivores 
should consist of 30–60% protein on a metabolizable energy (ME) basis, with fat 
making up the remainder of the daily calories with little to no carbohydrate 
(Donoghue, 1998). Whole prey, either vertebrate or invertebrate, is considered 
the ideal diet for carnivores. Although there are processed diets available com -
mercially, acceptance may be poor. Invertebrate prey must be gut loaded (fed) by 
maintaining them on a nutritious substrate prior to feeding ( Figure 25.5) 
(Donoghue, 1998, Mitchell, 2004). Nutritional analyses are available for many 
commonly reared insects used as prey for insectivorous species and the calcium 
content of some insects has been shown to be influenced by the type of substrate 
available to them (Latney et al., 2009; Finke,Dunham and Kwabi, 2005).
Like other herbivores, herbivorous reptiles (e.g. Iguana iguana and Uromastyx 
spp.) have a longer small intestine where hydrolytic digestion takes place and a 
large, specialized lower bowel for fermentative digestion. Diets consumed by 
herbivorous reptiles are relatively high in carbohydrates and low in dietary fat 
(<10% DM) (Donoghue, 1998).
Omnivorous reptiles (e.g. Pogona vitticeps) consume a mixture of diets utilized 
by carnivorous and herbivorous reptiles, with intermediate levels of carbohy -
drate and protein. Feeding strategies can change over time for some species that 
undergo an ontogenetic diet shift (e.g., aquatic turtles) and consume a more 
carnivorous diet during development while becoming primarily omnivorous or 
herbivorous at maturity (Donoghue, 1998).
Assisted feeding in reptiles
Options for assisted feeding include syringe feeding, orogastric feeding using 
gavage needles or red rubber tubes attached to a syringe, or a pharyngostomy 
(Figure 25.6) or gastrostomy tube. Indications and techniques for these procedures 
Figure 25.5 Nutritional substrate and 
moisture for superworms (Zophobas 
molitor) intended for the insectivorous 
diet. Invertebrate prey for insectivorous 
exotic pet species must be maintained on 
a nutritious substrate, such as an avian 
hand‐feeding formula, with a source of 
moisture (e.g. moistened cotton material, 
seen here).

===== PDF PAGE 254 =====
240   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
are well described elsewhere (de la Navarre, 2006; Martinez‐Jimenez and 
Hernandez‐Divers, 2007; Sykes and Greenacre, 2006).
One equation for estimating RER for reptiles is kcal/day = 10(body weight in 
kg)0.75 (Martinez‐Jimenez and Hernandez‐Divers, 2007). The daily volume of 
food to administer is RER ÷ kcal/mL divided into the number of meals per day 
(Martinez‐Jimenez and Hernandez‐Divers, 2007). Note that these calculations 
represent an artificial generalization across numerous species, and thus should be 
considered basic guidelines until further research on bioenergetics of individual 
species becomes available. All animals should be fed enough while hospitalized 
to at least maintain body weight.
Birds
The anatomy of the avian gastrointestinal tract varies depending on the feeding 
strategy of the species. This section will focus on the species more commonly 
kept as pets, such as psittacines and passerines. The feeding strategies of these 
species range from mostly granivorous (e.g. finches, cockatiels and budgerigar 
parakeets) to omnivorous (e.g. Grey and Amazon parrots), with some tending 
more towards frugivorous (e.g. macaws) or nectivorous (e.g. lorikeets) (Klasing, 
1999). Although many parrot species will often accept meat as part of a captive 
diet, this practice has not been well‐evaluated.
Information on nutrient requirements for commonly kept avian species is 
limited, particularly when considering the vast range of species kept in captivity. 
For example, a study of Grey parrots ( Psittacus erithacus) suggested a protein 
requirement of 10–15% DM, while that of a budgerigar parakeet ( Melopsittacus 
undulatus) is 6.8% (McDonald, 2006). Duplicating the wild diet is often impossi-
ble, as domestic fruits are higher in sugar and water and lower in nutrients while 
seeds from domestic plants are higher in fat and lower in protein and nutrients 
than those found in the natural environments of many companion species’ 
wild counterparts. Additionally, companion birds generally have lower energy 
requirements than free‐living birds due to decreased activity. Based on similari-
ties between the gastrointestinal morphology of psittacines and passerines and 
domestic poultry (e.g. chickens and turkeys), it is assumed, however erroneously, 
that many of the nutritional requirements may be the same across these species. 
Although commonly fed, commercially available seed diets have been found to 
be deficient in numerous essential nutrients including amino acids, calcium, 
phosphorus, sodium, manganese, zinc, iron, vitamins A, D, and K, B‐vitamins, 
Figure 25.6 Green iguana (Iguana iguana) 
receiving a tube feeding. Assisted gavage 
feeding through a tube in reptiles 
requires proper handling and secure 
restraint of the jaw. Herbivorous reptiles, 
such as this iguana, can be fed an 
herbivorous convalescent diet (see 
Table 25.1) diluted enough to be 
administered through a feeding tube.

===== PDF PAGE 255 =====
Nutritional support in exotic pet species   241
choline, iodine, and selenium (Ullrey, Allen and Baer, 1991). Fat often provides 
more than 50% of the calories in nut and seed diets (Stahl and Kronfeld, 1998) 
and can contribute to obesity. Commercial “complete” extruded‐pellet diets 
(Figure 25.7) for psittacines and passerines (initially based on poultry require -
ments) have been available for decades and while these diets are not perfect, they 
are usually an improvement over seed or seed plus fruit and vegetable diets. One 
study showed improved fledgling success in a variety of parrot species fed an 
extruded‐pelleted diet versus seeds (90% success for extruded‐pellets versus 
66% for seeds) (Ullrey et al., 1991). In another study, a variety of commercially‐
available extruded‐pelleted diets were found to contain much less fat than seed 
mixtures (8.6% in pelleted feeds vs. 31.7% in seed mixtures), as carbohydrate, 
rather than fat, is the main energy source in pelleted diets (Werquin, De Cock 
and Ghysels, 2005). Despite their nutritional inferiority, seed diets are very 
palatable and may be more eagerly consumed by hospitalized birds.
Assisted feeding in birds
Options for assisted feeding include syringe feeding, gavage feeding into the 
crop using a gavage needle ( Figure 25.8) or, more rarely, esophagostomy or 
duodenostomy tubes. Indications and techniques for these procedures are well 
described elsewhere (Powers, 2006a; de Matos and Morrisey, 2005; Lennox, 
2006). Powdered convalescent diets made for psittacines or chick hand‐feeding 
diets can be reconstituted with a liquid human enteral product to increase 
calorie content, but the overall mixture may need to be diluted with enough 
water for the solution to pass through the tube being used. Convalescent and 
hand‐feeding diets are not meant to be fed to healthy adult birds long‐term 
(Lennox, 2006).
The energy requirement of birds depends on the environmental climate of 
the species’ natural environment. A proposed RER calculation for tropical 
psittacines is 73.6(body weight in kg) 0.73 while species from temperate climates 
Figure 25.7 Cockatiel (Nymphicus 
hollandicus) perched on a food bowl 
containing a commercial extruded‐
pelleted diet. Commercially available 
extruded‐pelleted diets have been shown 
to be higher in vitamins and minerals and 
lower in fat than seed diets.

===== PDF PAGE 256 =====
242   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
(e.g., Australia) have 21% higher energy requirements due to greater environ -
mental temperature variation (Koutsos et al., 2001). As these equations can be 
quite complex, many practitioners rely on the more general range of 20–50 mL/
kg per feeding, depending on the amount the bird is eating on its own and how 
much food the crop can accommodate (Powers, 2006b); this does not take into 
consideration the caloric density of the diet provided. Regardless of the initial 
feeding amount chosen, close monitoring of body weight and adjustment of 
intake are essential to ensure that adequate calories are being provided.
Small mammals
Herbivorous mammals primarily eat plant material, the digestion of which 
requires a specialized microbial population and large bowel in which to break 
down fiber and extract nutrients from the diet. Fiber is essential to the herbivo-
rous diet of monogastric hind‐gut fermenters, such as rabbits, guinea pigs and 
chinchillas. Low‐fiber diets have been linked to caecocolonic hypomotility, which 
can lead to over‐population of Clostridia and E. coli (Cheeke, 1987) and dysbiosis. 
Because of this, a common recommendation is to offer all species free‐choice 
timothy or other grass hays, with limited to no pellets for rabbits. At least some 
pellets should be offered to guinea pigs and chinchillas since they have been 
shown to eat hay more slowly than rabbits and may not be able to meet their 
nutritional requirements on hay alone (Donnelly and Brown, 2004). Similar to 
non‐human primates, guinea pigs must have a dietary source of vitamin C 
(Donnelly and Brown, 2004). The daily vitamin C dose range is from 10 mg/kg 
body weight to 50 mg daily for any size guinea pig.
Published nutritional requirements are available for small rodents such 
as  rats, mice, and gerbils, due to their extensive use in biomedical research 
Figure 25.8 Gavage feeding of a cockatiel 
(Nymphicus hollandicus). Assisted feeding 
into the crop through a specialized metal 
gavage tube takes proper handling and 
expertise but is a convenient, expedient 
way to meet nutritional requirements in 
hospitalized, anorexic birds.

===== PDF PAGE 257 =====
Nutritional support in exotic pet species   243
(National Research Council, 1995). However, these guidelines were designed for 
laboratory animals and may not be applicable to companion animals with their 
different nutrition end‐goals. Laboratory animal guidelines are often designed to 
optimize lactation or reproduction, rather than health and longevity. Commercial 
”rodent chow” and other formulated diets are readily available and contain a 
minimum of 16% protein and 4–5% fat on a DM basis (Kupersmith, 1998). 
These diets can be supplemented for enrichment and variety with small amounts 
of seed and nuts as well as fresh produce. Specialized rodent blocks with plant‐
based protein sources are available and, with more research, may be proven to 
be more appropriate for overweight or growing animals or those with certain 
disease conditions
Ferrets are obligate carnivores and thus have a relatively short intestinal tract 
and colon (approximately half the length of that of a cat), and lack a caecum and 
ileocolic valve. Ferret diets should be highly digestible (i.e., low in fiber), as the 
gastrointestinal transit time is only 3–4 hours (Kupersmith, 1998, Bixler and Ellis, 
2004). Ferrets require at least 30% high quality protein on a dry matter basis in 
their diets (Kupersmith, 1998) and should be fed minimal carbohydrates.
Assisted feeding in small mammals
Because hindgut fermenters need to maintain constant food intake to stimulate 
proper motility (Cheeke, 1987), and ferrets have such a rapid gut transit time, in 
cases of hyporexia or anorexia, assisted feeding must be instituted as soon as the 
animal is stabilized. Options for assisted feeding of small mammals include 
syringe feeding (Figure 25.9), nasogastric, or esophagostomy tubes. Indications 
and techniques are well described elsewhere (Bixler and Ellis, 2004; Brown, 
1997a,b; de Matos and Morrisey, 2006; Graham, 2006; Klaphake, 2006; Paul‐
Murphy, 2007; Powers 2006c). Canned convalescent diets designed for cats can 
be fed to ferrets, either offered for free‐feeding (Figure 25.10) or mixed with 
water or a commercial liquid cat enteral formulation as needed to pass through 
a syringe or tube. Commercially available powdered convalescent diets designed 
for mammalian carnivores may also be used. Similar products are available for 
mammalian herbivores that can also be diluted with water or a liquid human 
enteral formulation as needed to obtain the consistency that can fit through a 
feeding syringe or tube (Bixler and Ellis, 2004; Powers 2006c). Further study is 
needed to address the impact simple sugars in human enteral formulations have 
on these species, but such products have been used extensively by exotic pet 
veterinarians with no obvious ill‐effects.
Resting energy requirements for most mammals can be estimated by the 
equation RER = 70(body weight in kg)
0.75. Calories administered should be 
adjusted to maintain body weight during hospitalization. Many practitioners 
rely on more general guidelines, focusing on maintaining food intake to stimu-
late gut motility rather than meeting precise caloric requirement. Ferrets can be 
fed as much as they will take in a feeding (usually 12–25 ml per 2–4 feedings a 
day) (Bixler and Ellis, 2004), and the herbivorous/omnivorous mammals can be 
fed 20 ml/kg in each feeding up to 4 times a day, depending on how much they 
are eating on their own. Daily weighing is critical to ensure that the appropriate 
amount of calories is provided.

===== PDF PAGE 258 =====
244   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Summary
Addressing the nutritional needs of exotic pets in practice need not be difficult, as 
long as protocols are in place for stocking, safe food preparation, expiration date 
monitoring, and product replacement as needed. It is imperative for hospital staff 
to have an appreciation for (i) different feeding strategies for exotic pets and 
how to address them, (ii) species‐specific behaviour patterns and food intake and 
(iii) subtle changes in body condition and weight across the range of commonly 
kept exotic pets. Currently much of the approach to nutrition for exotic pets is 
based on extrapolation from domestic animals, but as more research is performed 
and the understanding of ethology and comparative gastrointestinal morphology 
expands, our ability to address nutritional needs at the species level will improve.
Figure 25.9 Syringe feeding of a chinchilla 
(Chinchilla laniger). Anorexic monogastric 
hind‐gut fermenters, such as rabbits, 
chinchillas and guinea pigs, should be 
syringe fed a convalescent diet designed 
for herbivores to stimulate gut motility 
and restoration to health.
Figure 25.10 Assisted feeding of a ferret 
(Mustela putorius furo) with a canned 
convalescent diet. Unlike herbivorous 
small mammals, ferrets are less likely to 
tolerate restraint for syringe feeding, thus 
encouraging them to eat a canned diet 
without restraint is ideal.
Key po IN t S
•	 Species‐specific research on which to rely for nutritional guidance in exotic pets is ideal 
but limited.
•	 Addressing the nutritional needs of exotic pets in practice need not be difficult, as long 
as protocols are in place for stocking, safe food preparation, expiration date monitoring 
and product replacement as needed.
•	 It is imperative for hospital staff to have an appreciation for (i) different feeding 
strategies for exotic pets and how to address them, (ii) species‐specific behaviour 

===== PDF PAGE 259 =====
Nutritional support in exotic pet species   245
Note
1 Exotic pet species include small animals, other than dogs and cats, which are commonly kept 
as pets, including birds, such as canaries and parrots, reptiles, amphibians and small mammals, 
such as rabbits, guinea pigs, ferrets, chinchillas, and rats.
references
Bixler, H. and Ellis, C. (2004) Ferret care and husbandry. Veterinary Clinics Exotic Animal Practice, 
7, 227–255.
Brown, S. A. (1997a) Clinical techniques in rabbits. Seminars Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine, 6, 
86–95.
Brown, S. A. (1997b) Clinical techniques in domestic ferrets. Seminars Avian and Exotic Pet 
Medicine, 6, 75–85.
Cheeke, P. R. (1987) Rabbit Feeding and Nutrition. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Publishers 
(Academic Press), Orlando.
Crissey, S. D., Slifka, K. A., Shumway, P. and Spencer, S. B. (2001) Handling Frozen/Thawed Meat 
and Prey Items Fed to Captive Exotic Animals: A Manual of Standard Operating Procedures. U. S. D. 
A. AWIC, Beltsville, MD.
de la Navarre, B. J. S. (2006) Common procedures in reptiles and amphibians. Veterinary Clinics 
Exotic Animal Practice, 9, 237–267.
de Matos, R. and Morrisey, J. K. (2005) Emergency and critical care of small psittacines and 
passerines. Seminars Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine, 14, 90–105.
de Matos, R. and Morrisey, J. K. (2006) Common procedures in the pet ferret. Veterinary Clinics 
Exotic Animal Practice, 9, 347–365.
Donnelly, T. M. and Brown, C. J. (2004) Guinea pig and chinchilla care and husbandry. 
Veterinary Clinics Exotic Animal Practice, 7, 351–373.
Donoghue, S. (1998) Nutrition of pet amphibians and reptiles. Seminars Avian and Exotic Pet 
Medicine, 7, 148–153.
Finke, M. D., Dunham, S. and Kwabi, C. (2005) Evaluation of four dry commercial gut loading 
products for improving the calcium content of crickets, Acheta domesticus. Journal of 
Herpetological Medicine and Surgery, 15, 7–12.
Fisher, P. G. (2005) Equipping the exotic mammal practice. Veterinary Clinics Exotic Animal 
Practice, 8, 405–426.
Graham, J. (2006) Common procedures in rabbits. Veterinary Clinics Exotic Animal Practice, 9, 
367–388.
Klaphake, E. (2006) Common rodent procedures. Veterinary Clinics Exotic Animal Practice, 9, 
389–413.
patterns and food intake, and (iii) subtle changes in body condition and weight across 
the range of commonly kept exotic pets.
•	 One of the goals for successful treatment of hospitalized exotic pets is to have them 
consume the appropriate diet without assistance. If they are anorexic, nutritional 
supplementation is imperative, especially for those species with high metabolic rates, 
such as birds and small mammals. Gavage and syringe feeding are preferred for ease of 
administration and lower stress on the animal, as compared to more invasive methods 
such as nasoesophageal or pharyngostomy tube placement.
•	 Taking into account the feeding strategy and ethology of the species in the wild is ideal 
for determining which diets to feed in hospital. Convalescent diets tailored to 
carnivorous and herbivorous species are readily available and easy to administer.

===== PDF PAGE 260 =====
246   Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals
Klasing, K. C. (1999) Avian gastrointestinal anatomy and physiology. Seminars Avian and Exotic 
Pet Medicine, 8, 42–50.
Koutsos, E. A., Matson, K. D. and Klasing, K. C. (2001) Nutrition of birds in the order 
Psittaciformes: A review. Journal of Avian Medicine and Surgery, 15, 257–275.
Kupersmith, D. S. (1998) A practical overview of small animal nutrition. Seminars Avian and 
Exotic Pet Medicine, 7, 141–147.
Latney, L. V., Toddes, B. T., Wyre et al., (2009) Improving the nutrition of insectivorous animals: 
evaluation of the nutrient content of Tenebrio molitor and Zophobas morio fed four different 
diets. Proceedings of the Association of Zoo Veterinarians Nutritional Advisory Group. 
October 24 to 28, Tulsa, OK, USA. pp. 22–23.
Lennox, A. M. (2006) Common procedures in other avian species. Veterinary Clinics Exotic Animal 
Practice, 9, 303–319.
Martinez‐Jimenez, D. and Hernandez‐Divers, S. J. (2007) Emergency care of reptiles. Veterinary 
Clinics Exotic Animal Practice, 10, 557–585.
McDonald, D. (2006) Nutritional considerations: nutrition and dietary supplementation. in 
Clinical Avian Medicine (eds G. J. Harrison and T. L. Lightfoot) Spix Publishing, Inc., Palm 
Beach, pp. 86–107.
Mitchell, M. A. (2004) Snake care and husbandry. Veterinary Clinics Exotic Animal Practice, 7, 
421–466.
National Research Council, B. o. A. C. o. L. N., Subcommittee on Laboratory Animal Nutrition 
(1995) Nutrient Requirements of Laboratory Animals, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Paul‐Murphy, J. (2007) Critical care of rabbit, Veterinary Clinics Exotic Animal Practice, 10, 
437–461.
Pollock, C. (2002) Postoperative management of the exotic animal patient. Veterinary Clinics 
Exotic Animal Practice, 5, 183–211.
Pough, F. H. (2004) Herpetology as a field of study. in Herpetology, 3rd edn, (eds F. H. Pough,  
R. M. Andrews, J. E. Cadle et al., Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, pp. 1–228.
Powers, L. V. (2006a)Techniques for drug delivery in psittacine birds. Journal of Exotic Pet 
Medicine, 15, 193–200.
Powers, L. V. (2006b) Common procedures in psittacines. Veterinary Clinics Exotic Animal Practice, 
9, 287–302.
Powers, L. V. (2006c) Techniques for drug delivery in small mammals. Journal of Exotic Pet 
Medicine, 15, 201–209.
Rossi, J. V. (2006) General husbandry and management. in Reptile Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn, 
(eds S.J. Divers and D.R. Madar) Elsevier, St. Louis. pp. 25–41.
Schmidt, D. A., Travis, D. A. and Williams, J. J. (2006) Guidelines for creating a food safety 
HACCP program in zoos or aquaria. Zoo Biology, 25, 125–135.
Stahl, S. and Kronfeld, D. (1998) Veterinary nutrition of large psittacines. Seminars Avian and 
Exotic Pet Medicine, 7, 128–134.
Sykes, J. M. and Greenacre, C. B. (2006) Techniques for drug delivery in reptiles and amphib-
ians. Journal of Exotic Pet Medicine, 15, 210–217.
Ullrey, D. E., Allen, M. E. and Baer, D. J. (1991) Formulated diets versus seed mixtures for psit-
tacines. Journal of Nutrition, 121, S193–S205.
Werquin, G. J., De Cock, K. J. and Ghysels, P. G. (2005) Comparison of the nutrient analysis and 
caloric density of 30 commercial seed mixtures (in toto and dehuled) with 27 commercial 
diets for parrots. Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition, 89, 215–221.

===== PDF PAGE 261 =====
247
Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small Animals, First Edition. Edited by Daniel L. Chan. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Note: Page numbers in italics refer to Figures; those in bold to Tables.
acid-base balance, 193, 194, 197
acid-base disorders, 193
acidosis, consequences of, 193,  
194, 195
acute hepatotoxicosis, 205
management, 206
acute infection, stress response to, 210
acute lung injury (ALI), 173, 231
mechanical ventilation, 228–33
feeding strategies, 230–231
nutritional support recommendations, 
230–231
antioxidants, 231
tube feeding, 231
acute kidney failure, 193–8
acute pancreatitis, 219–27
enteral feeding, 220–222
management strategies, 220–223
parenteral nutrition, 222–3
pathophysiology, 219
acute phase proteins, 103, 120
C-reactive protein (CRP), 224
adverse food reactions, 42, 136–51
gastrointestinal disease, 112
acute kidney injury, 193–8
acute respiratory distress syndrome  
(ARDS), 231
albumin
as antioxidant, 174
indicator of nutrition status,  
1, 153
negative acute phase protein, 120
amino acids
aromatic, 130
branched-chain, 124
conditionally essential, 123, 176
essential, 102, 182
intravenous administration, 102
in superficial necrolytic dermatitis,  
187, 190
amino acid solutions
for parenteral nutrition, 102–3
for hepatocutaneous syndrome,  
187, 190
ammonia
decreased production, 202
increased concentration, 201–4
anemia, 153, 156, 159, 161, 162, 175, 186
anorexia, 3, 51–5, 74, 89, 101, 112, 117–29, 
132–4, 159, 160, 163, 170, 178,  
195–6
in rabbits, 235
in ferrets, 243
antioxidants, 172–5
benefits of, 201, 172–5
supplementation, 201
appetite stimulants, 128–33, 189, 195
arachidonic acid (AA), 87, 124, 173, 185, 196 
ARDS see acute respiratory distress syndrome
arginine, 175, 176, 196
supplementation 221, 224
aromatic amino acids (AAA), 130
aspiration
complication, 4, 38, 66, 165, 196, 215, 229 
dysmotility disorders, 165, 229
pneumonia, 215, 229
tube feeding, 4, 14, 16, 17, 21, 50,  
51, 230
assisted feeding
in birds, 241–2
in reptiles, 239–40
in small mammals, 243
azotemia, 87, 193, 194
complication of parenteral nutrition, 12
BCAAs see branch chain amino acids
blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 8
body condition score, 1–3, 120, 121, 156, 
194, 198, 200, 239
body mass index (BMI), 161
branch chain amino acids (BCAAs) 86,  
124, 124
Index

===== PDF PAGE 262 =====
248   Index
burns, 10, 122
B vitamins, 125, 162, 203, 204
in parenteral nutrition, 104
supplementation, 205
in birds, 240
cachexia, 117, 125–6
cancer, 118
cardiac, 124
pathophysiology of, 118–22
calories
defined, 7
calorimetry see indirect calorimetry
cancer, 118, 121, 124, 132
cachexia, 118
capnography, 24, 25, 34, 35
carbohydrates, 84, 88, 103, 215
in ferrets, 243
in parenteral nutrition, 103
in reptiles, 239
over-feeding of, 213
respiratory quotient, 8
role in refeeding syndrome, 161
cardiac cachexia, 124
cardiovascular disease, 119, 128, 130, 159, 
160, 162, 196
cardiovascular instability, 42, 101, 176, 177, 
213, 216, 228, 230
carnitine see also L-canitine, 84, 204, 205, 206
catabolic state in uremia, 194, 195
catheters, 14, 18, 102
acute complications, 25, 26, 36, 81
selection for parenteral nutrition, 92–3
central venous catheters, 94–7
central parenteral nutrition (CPN), 18, 196
central venous access, 18, 92, 93
cholecystokinin (CCK), 129, 200
cholesterol, 200
cholestyramine, 155
cirrhosis, 183, 199–203, 205, 207
coagulopathy, 30, 30, 39, 42, 43, 52, 93,  
120, 203
colon, 153, 155, 157, 169, 203, 220
in small animals, 242, 243
colonic microflora, 88, 178, 213
colonic motility, 165–166
compounding, parenteral nutrition, 106, 
106, 107, 113, 222 congestive heart 
failure (CHF), 112, 175
copper
in hepatic disease, 200–201, 206
in parenteral nutrition, 104, 206, 207
Corticosteroids, 118, 194
CPN see Central parenteral nutrition (CPN), 
18, 103, 196
creatinine kinase, 3
critical illness, 4, 86, 98, 118, 174,  
211–24, 229
CRP see C-reactive protein (CRP)
cutaneous adverse food reactions (CAFR), 
136
description of, 136, 137, 137
management, 137–8
pathophysiology, 137–8
cytokines
in critical illness, 118–19
in inflammatory conditions, 173, 174
in relation to anorexia, 129
in sepsis, 210–12
dehydration, 153
dextrose, 102, 103, 197, 221, 
contribution to osmolality, 106
hyperglycemia, 103
dextrose solutions, for parenteral nutrition, 
102–5, 107, 111
DHA see docosahexaenoic acid
Diabetes mellitus, 185, 188
diarrhea, 54, 120, 136, 153
in adverse food reactions, 136, 139, 150
in dysmotility disorders, 166, 168, 170
in enterally fed patients, 17, 19, 26, 38, 50, 
62, 71, 74, 85, 88, 89, 221
in kidney failure, 89, 195–7
in liver disease, 200
in short bowel syndrome, 152, 153, 155, 
156  
management of, 138–9,154–7
osmoic, 153
probiotics, 179
Diet history
in elimination diet trial, 140, 148–50
digestibility, 86, 139, 154–5, 168, 169
doxosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 82, 87, 124, 
124–5, 173–4
EFAs see essential fatty acids (EFAs)
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 87–8, 103,  
184, 187
electrolytes
deficiencies, 160, 161
disturbances, 89, 111
in parenteral nutrition, 102, 104
monitoring, 112, 159, 204
refeeding syndrome, 51, 159, 162
short bowel syndrome, 153
elimination diets
for adverse food reaction, 138–40, 138
elizabethan collar
in exotic animals, 235
in tube feeding, 14, 15, 15, 23, 24, 48,  
70, 113

===== PDF PAGE 263 =====
Index   249
EN see enteral nutrition
Encephalopathy see hepatic encephalopathy
energy, 118, 119, 204, 210, 211, 214–16 
calculation of energy requirements, 10, 114
in birds, 241
in reptiles, 240
balance, 129
expenditure, 7, 8, 122, 125, 160, 194
methods of determination, 8–9, 10–11
requirements, 7–11
calculation, 10, 231
in birds, 240, 242
in mammals, 243
in reptiles, 238
enteral nutrition (EN)
accidental intravenous administration 
prevention, 25
benefits of, 213
complications, 16, 17, 26–7, 65
aspiration pneumonia, 4, 16, 66, 215, 
229
gastrointestinal, 10
mechanical, 14, 15
metabolic, 10
contraindications, 29
diet choices, 80, 88, 89
elimination diets, 139–50, 141–147
liquid diets, 88, 221
early enteral nutrition, 168, 210, 212–14, 229
feeding devices 230
esophagostomy feeding tube, 29, 31, 
37–8
gastrostomy feeding tubes, 50, 52
jejunal feeding tubes, 62, 65, 71, 74, 75
nasoesophageal feeding tubes, 195
post pyloric, 76
in acute pancreatitis, 219, 220–222
in adverse food reactions, 138–50
in combination with parenteral  
nutrition, 18
in reptiles, 239
in birds, 241
in small mammals, 243
in hepatic disease, 204
in kidney failure, 194–6
in sepsis, 213–15
intolerance to, 229
osmolality of enteral feeds, 84, 86, 88, 90
residual volume, 230
routes of feeding, 230
transition to, 113
EPA see eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA)
esophageal motility disorders, 165–6, 229
esophagitis, 21, 27, 30, 38, 42, 197, 229
esophagostomy feeding tubes, 29–40, 195, 
221, 222
in birds, 241
in small mammals, 243
essential amino acids, 86, 102
essential fatty acids, 87, 88, 103, 184, 187
fasting, 118, 166
alterations in metabolism during, 118
starvation, 103, 117–19, 159–61
fat
absorption of, 168
in acute gastroenteritis, 168–70
in pancreatitis management, 221, 223
in parenteral nutrition, 103–4
in sepsis, 211, 214
fat-soluble vitamins, see also vitamins; 125
fatty acids see also polyunsaturated fatty acids
absorption, 153
metabolism of, 173–4
omega-3, 124, 173, 174, 195, 215
omega-6, 124, 173
feeding
complications, 27, 37–8, 50–52, 62, 71,  
76, 74
tube blockage, 27 
delivery methods
continuous rate infusion, 36, 98, 169, 221
intermittent boluses, 14, 169
feeding tubes
esophagostomy, 29–39
gastrostomy, 41–52
jejunostomy, 54–63
nasoenteric, 21–8
post-pyloric, 65–77
feline idiopathic hepatic lipidosis, 184, 199, 
204–5
fiber, 62, 207
fermentable, 154–6
in small mammals, 242, 243
short bowel syndrome management and, 
135
soluble, 84, 88–9, 169
fish oils, 61, 87, 210
fluid balance, 85, 162, 196, 197
fluid requirements, 85
fluoroscopic nasojejunal tube, 67
food allergy see also cutaneous adverse food 
reaction (CAFR), 136, 137, 137, 145
food aversion, in cats, 128, 129, 204
food hypersensitivity see food allergy
free radicals, 201
gastric emptying 153, 165–70
gastric residual volume, 229, 230
Management, 230
tube feeding, 14, 167
ventilated patients, 229–30

===== PDF PAGE 264 =====
250   Index
gastroesophageal reflux, 31, 38, 165, 229
gastrointestinal disease
dysmotility, 229
feeding recommendations, 229–30
intestinal permeability, 65, 177, 213
adverse food reactions, 136–149
inflammatory bowel disease, 137
protein-losing enteropathy, 138
short bowel syndrome, 152–7
gastrojejunostomy tubes, 17, 66
gastrostomy feeding, 41–52
complications, 50–52
disadvantages, 42t
low profile, 41, 42f, 42t, 52
overview, 41–42
placement, 43–48
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), 166
glucagon-like peptide-2 (GLP-2), 154, 156
gluconeogenesis, 7, 103, 118, 185, 211
glucose
administration, excess of, 109
homeostasis, 88, 111, 118
metabolism, 125
oxidation, 109
glutamine
depletion, 176
fuel for enterocytes and immune cells, 155
in enteral feeding, 155–6, 177
gastrointestinal health, 177
supplementation, 89, 124, 156, 176
in critical care, 86, 176, 215, 223
glutathione (GSH), 201
glycogen, 118, 211
depletion in liver disease, 199, 200
growth hormone, 118, 156
GSH see glutathione (GSH)
gut function
altered barrier function, 18, 88, 124, 176, 
178, 179, 220
bacterial translocation, 65, 220, 222
gut dysmotility, 229, 231, 165–8, 170
immune system, 172, 234
HCS see hepatocutaneous syndrome (HPS)
hepatic encephalopathy, 201–3
management, 202–3
portosystemic shunts, 202–3
protein restriction, 202–3
hepatic lipidosis, 204
assessment of coagulation, 199
feeding tubes, 204
management, 204
hepatitis, 199, 205, 206
hepatobiliary disease, 200
feline idiopathic hepatic lipidosis, 29, 130, 
199, 201, 204, 205, 206
hepatic encephalopathy, 203
liver failure, 199, 207
hepatocutaneous syndrome, 183
hydrolyzed protein diets, 140–147, 147–9
in elimination diet trial, 139
hyperammonemia in liver failure, 204, 206
hyperbilirubinemia, 112
hyperglycemia
as complication of parenteral nutrition, 
103, 109, 110, 111
in critical illness, 118, 210, 211 
in refeeding syndrome, 159, 162
hyperkalemia
associated with parenteral nutrition, 111
hyperphosphatemia, 193–5
hypoalbuminemia, 49, 125, 120, 153, 186 
hypoallergenic diet, 141–147
hypocaloric feeding, 214
hypoglycemia, 101, 214, 211 
hypokalemia, 111
in refeeding syndrome, 111, 159, 162,  
163, 236
hypomagnesemia, 111
in refeeding syndrome, 111, 159, 160,  
162, 163
hypophosphatemia, 111
in refeeding syndrome, 159, 161, 162,  
163, 236
in hepatic lipidosis, 204
n parenteral nutrition, 104, 111
IBD see inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
IED see immune-enhancing diet (IFD)
IgE mediated type I hypersensitivity, 137, 
137
Ileus, 4, 29, 42, 50, 165, 166, 170, 212
intestinal dysmotility, 167
management, 51, 177
nutritional strategy, 221
illness factors, 10
relationship to complications, 10, 11
immune-enhancing diet (IED), 86, 178, 224
Immunomodulating nutrients, 180, 215, 216
arginine, 80, 82, 84, 86, 122–4, 124, 
175–6, 196, 221, 223
glutamine, 82, 86, 89, 118, 123–4, 124, 
155–8, 172, 175–8, 210, 215, 223–4
nucleotides, 178, 215
omega-3 fatty acids, 172–6 
indirect calorimetry, 9–10, 194
measurement, 8–9, 194
infectious complications, 39, 65, 101, 173–4, 
177, 211–12, 222, 224
catheter related, 65, 92, 94, 97–8, 98, 112
feeding tube stomas, 15–16, 37–8, 42, 
49–51, 52, 62, 66, 74, 75

===== PDF PAGE 265 =====
Index   251
inflammation, 10, 38, 66, 87, 174–8, 219
manipulation of, 169, 172, 180
response to omega-3 fatty acids, 173–4, 195
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 137, 148
diagnosis, 137, 138
management recommendation, 138–48
nutritional derangements IBD, 138
insulin, 118, 129
requirement in parenteral nutrition, 103
resistance, 88, 118, 122, 176, 194, 211
role in refeeding syndrome,  111, 159–61, 
163, 236
therapy, 211, 215
intensive insulin therapy, 215
intestinal permeability, 177, 213
intralipids, 187, 188
jejunal feeding tubes, 62, 76, 220, 230–231
complications, 62
indications, 54, 220, 230
placement techniques, 17, 55
ketone, 204
bodies, 118
in starvation, 118, 119
kidney disease, 103, 112, 128, 172, 193, 197
acid-base balance, 193–7, 198
acute kidney injury (AKI), 193
chronic kidney failure, 195
electrolyte abnormalities, 193
energy, 197
nutritional management, 193–7
omega-3 fatty acids, 195
phosphorus, 172, 195, 240
potassium, 195
protein, 195
Kleiber’s energy equation, 9
L-carnitine, 84, 205, 206, 240
lipid emulsions for parenteral nutrition, 
103–4, 107
Lipids
emulsion, 103–4, 107
metabolic alterations in liver disease, 200
metabolism, 119, 120, 194
lipoprotein lipase, 119, 212
liquid diets for enteral nutrition, 26, 27, 36, 
42, 61–2, 76, 80, 82–83, 84–90, 168, 
221–2, 231, 237
Liver see hepatobiliary diseases
long-chain fatty acids, 61, 87, 103, 172, 173
lower esophageal sphincter, 27, 168
magnessium
in refeeding syndrome, 51, 111, 159–62, 163
maintenance energy requirement (MER), 200
malnutrition, 1–7, 103–4, 113, 117, 120–122, 
125, 159, 161, 193–4, 198, 210, 
220–223, 228, 234
cachexia, 117–18, 120, 121, 124, 125,  
125, 130
indicators of, 1–3, 119–20
management, 121–5
pathophysiology, 118–19
protein-calorie, 193–4
protein-energy, 223
uremia, 193–4
medium-chain triglycerides (MCT), 87, 88, 104
megaesophagus, 21, 30, 42
MER see maintenance energy requirement 
(MER)
metabolic acidosis, 193–5
metabolic epidermal necrosis (MEN), 183
metabolizable energy, 61, 87, 122, 239
metoclopramide, 71, 168
microminerals see trace minerals
milk thistle extract, 202
minerals see also trace minerals;, 84, 89, 162, 
207
in parenteral nutrition, 104
motility disorders, 66, 165–70, 214, 229
muscle mass, 3, 197
scoring system, 3–4, 4
N-acetylcysteine, 205
N-3 fatty acids see also Omega-3 fatty acids, 
124, 130, 172–4, 195, 215–16, 231
mechanism of action, 173
ratio to N-6, 124
nasoenteral feeding see nasoesophageal 
feeding
nasoesophageal feeding, 14
complications, 26–7
overview, 14–15
placement technique, 21–3
nasojejunal feeding, 17, 54, 65–6, 222, 230, 231
complications, 71
overview, 65–6, 77
placement technique, 67–70
uses, 65–6
nausea, 37, 54, 55, 128, 167, 193
antiemetics for, 132
barrier to feeding, 37, 65, 170
management of, 71, 131, 168, 189
necrolytic migratory erythema (NME), 183, 
187
neoplasia, 21, 30, 42, 66, 120, 121, 128,  
130, 174
niacin, 104
nitric oxide, 176
arginine, 80, 82, 84–6, 122–4, 175–6, 188, 
196, 221, 223 

===== PDF PAGE 266 =====
252   Index
nitrogen balance, 119, 122, 124, 126,  
194, 212
NME see necrolytic migratory erythema 
(NME)
nonesterified fatty acids, 212
nonprotein calorie to nitrogen ratio, 103
nonprotein calories, 103, 194
nutritional assessment, 1–5
body condition score, 1–3
nutraceuticals, 201
omega-3 fatty acids, 124, 124, 130, 173, 195, 
215, 216, 231
immunonutrition, 172–6
in respiratory failure, 231
mechanism of action, 173–4
omega-6 fatty acids, 176
n-6 to n-3 ratio, 124
osmotic diarrhea, 85, 153
overfeeding, 10, 214, 231
complications, 8, 10, 105, 106, 214, 231
consequences, 214
oxidative stress, 10, 103, 174–5, 177, 195
pancreatitis, 17, 128, 219–26, 174–5,  
189, 213
nutritional management, 42, 66, 88, 
220–224
parenteral nutrition for, 222–3
pathophysiology, 219
parenteral nutrition, 100–115
administration, 107–9
catheter care, 97–8
catheter placement, 93–7
catheter selection, 94
common solutions, 102–7
compared with enteral nutrition, 100–101
complications, 110–113
mechanical, 112
metabolic, 110–112
septic, 112
components of
carbohydrates, 103
electrolytes, 104
fat, 103
protein, 102–3
trace minerals, 104
vitamins, 104
compounding, 106–7
concurrent enteral feeding, 113
discontinuing, 113
energy requirements, 105, 105
formulation calculations, 105
lipid-free solution, 107
monitoring, 110
nomenclature, 101
Nutritional Assessment, 100–101
in pancreatitis, 100–101
patient selection, 100–101
peripheral administration, 101–102
worksheet, 105
percutaneous endoscopically guided 
gastrostomy(PEG) tube, 41–52, 71, 72
complications, 50–53
overview, 41–2
placement technique, 43–8
removal, 49–50
tubes, 43
peripheral parenteral nutrition (PPN), 18, 
101–3, 109, 196
peritonitis see septic peritonitis
pharyngostomy feeding, 235, 239, 245
complications, 29
phosphorus, 81, 89, 104, 111, 195
in refeeding syndrome, 51, 159, 160, 236
monitoring, 81, 162
polyenylphosphatidylcholine (PEP), 201, 206
polymeric formulations, 61,76, 84
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), 87, 
172–3, 180, 201
portosystemic shunts, 202, 203
diets, 202–3
hepatic encephalopathy, 202, 203
nutritional management, 202
protein restriction, 202
potassium, 81
depletion, 160, 161
in acute kidney failure, 195
in parenteral nutrition, 104
in refeeding syndrome, 51, 111, 159,  
160, 236
supplementation, 162
PPN see peripheral parenteral nutrition(PPN)
prebiotics, 88
probiotics, 88–9, 178, 179
procalAmine, 107, 109
prokinetic, 113
agents, 168
in dysmotility disorders, 51
in ventilated patients, 230, 232
protein, 7, 123, 124, 175
acute phase, 103, 120
allergy to, 137
calorie malnutrition, 193–4, 223
C–reactive protein, 224
in kidney disease, 172, 194
in elimination diets, 139, 140
in hepatic encephalopathy, 199, 200, 202, 
207, 207
in hepatic lipidosis, 199, 204
in gastrointestinal disease, 168
in parenteral nutrition, 110

===== PDF PAGE 267 =====
Index   253
in superficial necrolytic dermatitis, 185, 
187
hydrolyzed, 139, 140, 147
requirements, 105
in critical illness, 61, 103, 122, 215
respiratory quotient, 8
restriction
for acute kidney disease, 195
for hepatic encephalopathy, 199, 203, 
207
sparring effect, 106
protein-energy malnutrition, 223
protein hydrolysate diets, for IBD, 140
in adverse food reactions, 127, 140, 140
protein-losing enteropathies, 138
protein-losing nephropathies, 138
reactive oxygen species (ROS), 174, 201
antioxidants, for management of, 201
modulation of, 174
refeeeding syndrome, 51, 88, 159–63, 196
complications, 159–60
carbohydrates, 88
electrolytes, 159–60
derangements, 111, 159
insulin, 159, 160, 236
management, 161–2
prevention strategy, 122, 161, 196, 204, 
235
risk factors, 161–2
starvation, 159–62
thiamine supplementation, 161
renal failure see kidney failure
RER see Resting Energy Requirements  
(RERs)
residual volume see also gastric residual 
volume), 167
guidelines, 167
respiratory quotient (RQ), 8
Resting Energy Requirements (RER)
calculation, 10, 11, 105, 109, 243
feeding plans, 37, 49, 61, 122, 155,  
204, 231
formulas, 10, 11t
illness factors, 214
ROS see reactive oxygen species (ROS)
S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe), 201, 
 205, 206
supplementation for cirrhosis, 201
SCFA see short-chain fatty acids(SCFA)
Sepsis, 118, 210–216
complications of parenteral nutrition, 92, 
97, 113
enteral nutrition, 121, 173
feeding strategies, 214
nutritional management, 173, 174,  
212–16
protein requirements, 215
short bowel syndrome (SBS), 152–8
feeding recommendations, 154–6
intestinal adaptation, 155–6
pathophysiology, 153–4
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), 88, 153, 154
silymarin, 201, 202, 205
skin testing, 1–2
small intestinal disease
adverse food reactions, 42, 136–51 
inflammatory bowel disease, 137, 148
proteinlosing enteropathies, 138
short-bowel syndrome, 152–8
sodium, 86
disorders, 25, 88, 89, 153
soybean oil, 87, 103
starvation
malnutrition, 117–26
superficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND), 
183–90
amino acid infusion, 187–8
clinical presentation, 184
description, 185
diagnosis, 183–5
treatment, 188
superoxide, 89
superoxide dismutase, 174
supplements, 89, 117, 122, 124, 205
systemic inflammatory distress syndrome 
(SIRS), 61, 175, 193
taurine, 80, 81, 84, 86, 89, 155, 188, 196
thiamin
deficiency, 204
supplementation, 104, 162, 204
in hepatic lipidosis, 204
in refeeding syndrome, 111, 160, 161
TNA see total nutrient admixture (TNA)
total nutrient admixture (TNA) see parenteral 
nutrition
total parenteral nutrition (TPN)  
see parenteral nutrition
trace elements, 89
trace minerals, 104, 162
in parenteral nutrition, 104
triglycerides
excess of, 105, 119, 120, 211, 223
in acute pancreatitis, 223
recommendations when increased, 110
tube feeding see enteral nutrition
complications, 16–17, 26–7, 65
feeding tubes
esophagostomy, 29, 38, 31, 37

===== PDF PAGE 268 =====
254   Index
tube feeding see enteral nutrition (cont’d)
gastrostomy, 50, 52
jejunal, 62, 65, 71, 74, 75
nasoesophageal, 195
pharyngostomy, 235, 239, 245
uremia, 193–5, 197, 198
ursodiol, 202, 206
ventilated patients, 173, 224, 228
nutritional management, 228–31
vitamins, 89
deficiency, 154, 159
fat soluble, 125
for parenteral nutrition, 104
supplements, 81, 84
water soluble, 195, 203–4
vitamin A, 89, 236, 240
vitamin B12, 153, 204 
deficiency, 153, 204
treatment, 155–6
supplementation, 203–4
vitamin B complex
in parenteral nutrition, 125
vitamin C, 89, 174, 242
vitamin D, 240
vitamin E, 89, 124, 174, 175
as antioxidant, 201, 202
supplementation, 201, 206
vitamin K, 203, 205, 240
deficiency, 205
supplementation, 205, 206
in hepatic lipidosis, 205
vomiting
as complication, 8, 15–17, 26–7, 30, 37–8, 
51, 231
in enterally fed patients, 4, 14, 42, 50
water soluble vitamins, 195, 203–4
weight gain, 132, 236
weight loss, 110, 117, 118–21, 125
Weir equation, 9
wounds
exudative, 215
zinc, 129, 187
in copper-associated hepatopathies,  
201–2
requirements, 201
supplementation, 187, 201, 206

===== PDF PAGE 269 =====
WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.