===== PDF_PAGE_0773 =====
746    Levetiracetam
Levetiracetam
(lee-ve-tye-ra-see-tam) Keppra®
Anticonvulsant
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Levetiracetam is a broad-spectrum anticonvulsant that can be 
used as adjunct therapy for canine epilepsy or when pheno-
barbital or bromides are not tolerated. Dogs may become 
refractory to therapy over time.
 ▶ In cats, levetiracetam may be used as a second-line drug when 
phenobarbital alone does not control seizures but can also be 
tried as sole therapy when phenobarbital is not tolerated.
 ▶ Appears to be well tolerated; adverse effects may be transient 
and can include sedation in dogs, and lethargy, decreased 
appetite, and ataxia in cats
 ▶ In dogs, phenobarbital may cause significant drug interactions 
with levetiracetam.
 ▶ Owner compliance with dosing frequency (every 8 hours) of 
immediate-release tablets and oral solution may be problem-
atic.
 ▶ Do not confuse immediate-release and extended-release tab-
lets; use caution when prescribing and dispensing.
Uses/Indications
Levetiracetam can be useful as adjunct therapy to phenobarbital and 
bromides in patients with canine epilepsy. Convincing evidence for 
efficacy of levetiracetam monotherapy is lacking. 1–3 Levetiracetam 
has been shown to be useful in the treatment of status epilepticus and 
acute repetitive seizures (ie, cluster seizures) in dogs.4 It has been used 
at home for oral pulse therapy to abort seizure activity,5 and SC admin-
istration at home may be useful in dogs that develop status epilepticus 
or acute repetitive seizures that do not always respond sufficiently to 
benzodiazepine (via rectal and/or intranasal administration).4 A small 
open-label study found that the addition of rectal levetiracetam to 
standard treatment (rectal/IV diazepam and IV phenobarbital) sig -
nificantly increased response rate for dogs with cluster seizures com-
pared to the standard treatment alone.6 In addition, in a study, IV le-
vetiracetam was used successfully to treat refractory seizures in a dog 
that ingested a lethal dose of fluorouracil (5-FU).7 In one case report, 
levetiracetam was successfully used to manage a dog with paroxysmal 
exertion-induced dyskinesia.8 Another study found levetiracetam to 
be effective for reactive seizures that were thought to be due to exoge-
nous toxicity.9 Levetiracetam may have reduced efficacy in dogs over 
time (ie, “honeymoon effect”), and there have been reports that phe-
nobarbital can significantly affect levetiracetam pharmacokinetics in 
dogs.3,10 Lack of efficacy has also been noted when levetiracetam was 
used as adjunct therapy in dogs with refractory epilepsy.11 
Levetiracetam appears to be useful as add-on therapy in cats when 
phenobarbital does not control seizures or as sole therapy in cats that 
are unable to tolerate phenobarbital.12 Studies have shown levetirac-
etam to be more effective than phenobarbital and well tolerated as a 
monotherapy agent in cats with myoclonic seizures.13
Pharmacokinetic data in horses suggest that levetiracetam may be 
efficacious when given orally.14–16
Pharmacology/Actions
The exact mechanism of levetiracetam’s antiseizure activity is not 
well understood. Levetiracetam appears to affect the release of neu -
rotransmitters in the CNS by selective binding to the presynaptic 
protein SV2A on synaptic vesicles, and it may selectively prevent 
hypersynchronization of epileptiform burst-firing and propagation 
of seizure activity.17 It does not affect normal neuronal excitability. 
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, levetiracetam (immediate-release tablet or oral solution) is 
rapidly and almost completely absorbed after oral administration. 
Volume of distribution is 0.5 to 0.7 L/kg.18–20 Protein binding is min-
imal, and ≈90% of a dose is renally eliminated. 21 Peak concentration 
(Cmax, ≈34 μg/mL; range, 9.2 to 60 μg/mL) occurs 0.6 to 2.2 hours 
after a single dose of immediate-release tablets, and elimination 
half-life (T½) is 2.2 to 4.4 hours.18,22,23 Concurrent phenobarbital re-
duces Cmax and T½. 24–26 Repeat oral doses do not appreciably alter 
pharmacokinetic values.24,26 In a study, peak concentrations occurred 
40 minutes after IM administration; the drug was completely ab -
sorbed, and peak concentration was similar to IV administration. 27 
SC levetiracetam (60 mg/kg, undiluted) yielded drug concentrations 
between 65 μg/mL and 114 μg/mL, 15 to 420 minutes after admin -
istration.28 In fasted dogs given an extended-release tablet formula -
tion at 30 mg/kg PO, maximum plasma drug concentration, time to 
reach maximum plasma concentration, disappearance half-life, and 
bioavailability were 27 μg/mL, 3.4 hours, 4.4 hours, and 100%, re -
spectively. Pharmacokinetics were similar when dogs were fed, with 
the exception of the time to reach maximum plasma concentration, 
which was longer (6.6 hours), and bioavailability, which was greater 
(126%).29 Data from different studies suggest that administering ex-
tended-release tablets every 12 hours should maintain therapeutic 
levels in dogs.22,23,29,30 In a study in dogs, when levetiracetam solution 
for injection was administered rectally at 40 mg/kg, the maximum 
serum concentration was 36 μg/mL and time to reach maximum se-
rum concentration was 1.5 to 1.7 hours. Presence of feces may limit 
absorption.31,32 Bioequivalence of generic extended-release tablets to 
Keppra XR® has been demonstrated in dogs.22 
In cats, oral bioavailability of immediate-release levetiracetam is 
≈100%, and elimination half-life is ≈3 hours. The authors concluded 
that 20 mg/kg administered IV or PO every 8 hours should be ade -
quate in most cats. 33 Similar pharmacokinetic values were reported 
in cats concurrently receiving phenobarbital.12 In healthy cats receiv-
ing a single 500 mg tablet dose of extended-release levetiracetam, 
serum concentrations remained above 5 μg/mL for 21 hours, with 
an average peak concentration of ≈90 μg/mL. 34 CSF concentrations 
appear to parallel serum concentrations, suggesting adequate CSF 
concentrations are attained after oral administration in cats. 35 With 
daily administration of extended-release levetiracetam tablets for 7 
days, median peak and trough serum concentrations were 92.3 μg/
mL and 7 μg/mL, respectively. In a small pilot study, a compounded 
liposomal levetiracetam cream was administered to the inner pinna 
at 60 mg/kg every 8 hours for 6 days, which resulted in serum con -
centrations above 5 µg/mL.36 
In 1- to 10-day-old foals receiving levetiracetam (32 mg/kg PO 
and IV as single doses), oral absorption was ≈100%. Peak concentra-
tion (38.3 μg/mL) occurred after 0.9 hours, and elimination half-life 
was 7.8 hours.15 In adult horses, terminal half-life and volume of dis-
tribution at steady-state after IV administration of levetiracetam at 
20 mg/kg were 6.22 hours and 630 mL/kg, respectively. When imme-
diate-release and extended-release tablets were crushed and admin-
istered orally at 30 mg/kg, maximum plasma concentration, terminal 
half-life, bioavailability, clearance/bioavailability, and time to peak 
concentration were 50.72 μg/mL and 53.58 μg/mL, 6.38 hours and 
7.07 hours, 96% and 98%, 76.8 mL/kg/hour and 76.8 mL/kg/hour, 
and 0.66 hours and 0.64 hours, respectively. 14,37 No difference was 
found between these formulations; however, the extended-release 
tablets were crushed, which may have affected its pharmacokinetic 
profile. The authors concluded that oral administration of 30 mg/kg  
of either the regular or extended-release tablets in healthy adult 
horses is likely to achieve therapeutic concentrations for at least 12 
hours.14 In another study, generic immediate-release levetiracetam 
tablets administered to healthy adult horses resulted in equivalent 

===== PDF_PAGE_0774 =====
Levetiracetam   747
pharmacokinetic parameters as branded levetiracetam. 38 Healthy 
adult horses receiving levetiracetam 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 
achieved trough levetiracetam CSF and serum concentrations of 
33.7 μg/mL and 28.8 μg/mL, respectively, after 4 days.16
In humans, levetiracetam is rapidly and nearly completely ab -
sorbed after oral administration. Peak levels occur ≈60 minutes after 
administration. The presence of food in the gut delays the rate but 
not the extent of drug absorbed, and the drug can be administered 
regardless of feeding status. Less than 10% of the drug is bound to 
plasma proteins. Although not extensively metabolized, the drug’s 
acetamide group is enzymatically hydrolyzed to the carboxylic acid 
metabolite that is apparently not active. Hepatic CYP450 isoenzymes 
are not involved. In humans, half-life is ≈7 hours and ≈66% of a 
given dose is excreted unchanged via renal mechanisms, primarily 
glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion. Clearance can be 
significantly reduced in patients with impaired renal function.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Levetiracetam is contraindicated in patients that have previously ex-
hibited hypersensitivity to it or any of its components. Respiratory 
failure and cardiac arrest were reported in a dog with cluster seizures 
that received an undiluted levetiracetam injection of 60 mg/kg IV .39 
Levetiracetam should be used with caution in patients with re -
nal impairment; changes in dose or frequency should be considered. 
One small retrospective study found that dogs with chronic kidney 
disease (CKD) had a higher incidence of adverse effects from leveti-
racetam than dogs without CKD. 40 In humans, renal elimination of 
levetiracetam correlates with creatinine clearance; total clearance is 
reduced by 40% in patients with mild renal impairment and up to 
60% in patients with severe renal impairment.17,41
Anecdotally, it has been reported that extended-release tablets 
may not fully disintegrate in the canine GI tract. Some neurologists 
have had experience with this situation and found that these patients 
still had levetiracetam concentrations within the therapeutic range.  
The presumption amongst many neurologists is that what is found 
in the stool is the matrix of the pill and that the medication is still 
being absorbed.42 
Discontinuation should be done gradually to decrease risk for 
withdrawal seizures.
LevETIRAcetam should not be confused with levOCARNitine or 
levOFLOXacin. Do not confuse immediate-release tablets with ex -
tended-release tablets; use caution when prescribing or dispensing. 
Immediate-release prescriptions can be written as “levetiracetam” or 
“levetiracetam IR” (immediate-release). “Levetiracetam ER” or “Le-
vetiracetam XR” refers to extended-release tablets.
Adverse Effects
Levetiracetam appears to be well tolerated in dogs and cats. The 
most common adverse effects reported include sedation and ataxia 
in dogs and reduced appetite, ataxia, hypersalivation, and lethargy 
in cats. These effects may be transient. Changes in behavior and GI 
effects (eg, vomiting) can occur.43 Transient head-lowering has been 
observed in horses.14
In a study, IM administration produced less muscle inflammation 
in dogs than the saline control solution. 27 In another study, SC ad -
ministration of undiluted levetiracetam solution for injection was 
well-tolerated, but the sample size was small (n = 4 healthy dogs).28
A systematic review and meta-analysis of adverse effects of antie-
pileptic drugs in dogs showed a strong level of evidence for levetirac-
etam’s safety profile as monotherapy and adjunct therapy. Only type 
I adverse effects (ie, dose-dependent, predictable) were reported and 
these included vomiting and sedation, followed by ataxia and hyper-
activity. Less common adverse effects included anorexia, polyphagia, 
and polydipsia, followed by polyuria, diarrhea, aggression, disobedi-
ence, and attention-seeking.44
In humans, adverse effects include sedation, asthenia, anxiety, and 
headache. Neuropsychiatric adverse effects (eg, aggression, agitation, 
irritability, depression) have also been reported. It is recommended 
to withdraw the drug slowly to prevent withdrawal seizures. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
In pregnant dogs or cats, levetiracetam should be used with caution. 
At high dosages, levetiracetam has caused increased embryofetal 
mortality in rabbits and rats. At doses equivalent to the maximum 
human therapeutic dose, levetiracetam has caused minor skeletal ab-
normalities and retarded offspring growth in rats.45 
Levetiracetam is excreted into maternal milk, and its safety in 
nursing offspring is unknown. Levetiracetam should be used with 
caution in nursing patients. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Levetiracetam is a relatively safe agent. Dogs receiving 1200 mg/kg/
day (≈20 times the therapeutic dose) developed only salivation and 
vomiting.46 Other clinical signs seen with overdose in dogs include 
lethargy, hyperthermia, and recumbency. Human patients receiving 
6000 mg/kg during drug testing developed only drowsiness.45 Other 
effects noted in human overdoses (doses not specified) after the drug 
was released included depressed levels of consciousness, agitation, 
aggression, and respiratory depression.
Treatment is supportive based on clinical signs; levetiracetam can 
be removed with hemodialysis. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving levetiracetam and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks 
should be weighed and additional monitoring performed when ap -
propriate.
 ■ Carbamazepine : Concurrent use may result in signs of carba -
mazepine toxicity (eg, nystagmus, ataxia, dizziness).
 ■ CNS Depressants (eg, antihistamines, benzodiazepines, gab-
apentin, opioids): May increase risk for CNS depression
 ■ Methotrexate : May increase methotrexate concentrations and 
risk for toxicity
 ■ Phenobarbital : In dogs, ongoing (21 days in the study) phe -
nobarbital use significantly increased levetiracetam clearance and 
reduced half-life; levetiracetam dose adjustments (increases) may 
be required.24,25 Pharmacokinetic values of levetiracetam appear 
unchanged in cats concurrently receiving phenobarbital.12
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No specific laboratory interactions or considerations were noted.
Dosages
DOGS:
Refractory epilepsy (extra-label):
a) Using immediate-release tablets: 20 mg/kg PO every 8 hours,10 
although recommendations up to 30 mg/kg PO every 8 hours 
have been noted. Because of the drug’s safety, doses may be in-
creased (every 1 to 2 weeks; up to 60 mg/kg PO every 8 hours) 
further until efficacy is achieved, adverse effects become ap -

===== PDF_PAGE_0775 =====
748    Levetiracetam
parent, or drug cost becomes prohibitive. If using as an add-on 
to phenobarbital therapy, levetiracetam exposure is reduced 
and half-life may be shortened; levetiracetam dose adjustment 
(increase) may be necessary.24,25,47 
b) Using extended-release tablets: Begin with 30 mg/kg PO with 
or without food every 12 hours. Because of the drug’s safety, 
doses may be increased (up to 60 mg/kg PO every 12 hours) 
further until efficacy is achieved, adverse effects become ap -
parent, or drug cost becomes prohibitive. Administering ev -
ery 24 hours may be acceptable in some dogs. Tablets should 
not be split or crushed. The smallest extended-release tablet is  
500 mg, so it cannot be practically administered in small 
dogs.22,23,29 Higher doses may be needed if using concurrently 
with phenobarbital.24 
Prevention of seizures following surgical correction of porto -
systemic shunt (extra-label): 20 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for a 
minimum of 24 hours prior to surgery may decrease the likeli -
hood of seizures after portosystemic shunt ligation, 48 although 
another study found that perioperative use did not reduce postat-
tenuation neurologic signs or seizures.49
Status epilepticus or acute repetitive (cluster) seizures  (ex -
tra-label): 
a) IV use : 30 mg/kg or 60 mg/kg IV were considered safe and 
effective in 56% of treated dogs. 4 In healthy dogs from a sin -
gle-dose pharmacokinetic study, a 60 mg/kg IV bolus dose of 
levetiracetam was well tolerated and achieved plasma drug 
concentrations within or above the therapeutic range reported 
for humans for at least 8 hours after administration.19 IV doses 
should be administered over 5 to 15 minutes.
b) Rectal use: 40 mg/kg rectally using a 200 mg/mL suspension 
compounded with levetiracetam powder and sterile water in 
combination with benzodiazepine and IV phenobarbital. 32 A 
study in healthy dogs reported that levetiracetam at 40 mg/kg 
(using commercial levetiracetam 100 mg/mL solution for in -
jection) administered rectally achieved target concentrations 
in the target range within 10 minutes of administration.31
c) Home administration as pulse therapy for cluster seizures : 
30 mg/kg PO every 8 hours until seizure-free for 24 hours50
d) Home administration in dogs that do not always respond 
sufficiently to benzodiazepine (rectal and/or intranasal ad -
ministration): 60 mg/kg SC; based on a pilot study in healthy 
dogs28 
Reactive seizures (extra-label): From one open-label study,  
60 mg/kg IV loading dose followed by maintenance dosage of  
20 mg/kg PO every 8 hours until reaching a 6-month sei -
zure-free period. Levetiracetam may then be tapered slowly and 
 discontinued.9
CATS:
Epilepsy (extra-label): 
a) Based on the drug’s pharmacokinetics in cats and the presumed 
therapeutic levels for the drug, 20 mg/kg IV or PO every 8 hours. 
Doses up to 40 mg/kg PO every 8 hours may be necessary.33 
b) As an add-on to phenobarbital treatment: Initially, 20 mg/kg 
PO every 8 hours. If ineffective, levetiracetam dose should be 
increased in 20 mg/kg increments.12,51 
c) Using extended-release tablets: 500 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO 
once daily52
Myoclonic seizures (extra-label): 60 – 75 mg/kg PO divided ev -
ery 8 hours achieved a reduction greater than or equal to 50% in 
the number of myoclonic seizure days in 100% of patients.13
HORSES :
Anticonvulsant (extra-label): Based on pharmacokinetic studies 
and presumed therapeutic levels: 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 
using immediate-release tablets. 14,16 Crushing extended-release 
tablets has yielded similar serum concentrations (see Pharmaco-
kinetics) but may be cost-prohibitive.
Monitoring
 ■ The levetiracetam therapeutic range for animals has not been spe-
cifically determined, but it is thought to be similar to humans at  
5 – 45 μg/mL. Because the drug appears to be very safe, thera -
peutic drug monitoring is usually unnecessary but can be consid-
ered to establish individual patient variation in drug absorption 
or half-life.53
 ■ Owners should be encouraged to keep a record of seizure activity 
(eg, seizure frequency, severity, and duration; severity and dura -
tion of any postictal signs) to document efficacy and report any 
potential levetiracetam-associated adverse effects.
Client Information
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. If your animal 
vomits or acts sick after getting it on an empty stomach, give the 
medicine with food or small treat to see if this helps. If vomiting 
continues, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ Give this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Lethargy (ie, tiredness, lack of energy) and reduced appetite are 
the most common side effects.
 ■ Do not crush or allow your pet to chew the extended-release tab-
lets. The matrix of the extended-release tablets may not fully dis-
integrate in the GI tract and is sometimes seen in the dog’s feces. 
However, the medication is still being absorbed. 
 ■ Do not discontinue therapy without talking with your veterinar -
ian first as withdrawal seizures or severe neurologic side effects 
may result.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Levetiracetam, a pyrrolidone-derivative antiepileptic agent, occurs 
as an odorless, bitter-tasting, white to off-white crystalline powder. 
It is very soluble in water and soluble in ethanol. It is a chiral mole -
cule with one asymmetric carbon atom. Levetiracetam is not related 
chemically to other antiseizure medications.
Levetiracetam may also be known as S-Etiracetam, UCB-22059, 
UCB-L059, and Keppra®.
Storage/Stability
Levetiracetam tablets and oral solution should be stored at 25°C 
(77°F); excursions between 15°C and 30°C (59°F-86°F) are permitted.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
A levetiracetam 50-mg/mL oral suspension prepared with imme -
diate-release levetiracetam tablets crushed and suspended in Ora-
Blend® was determined to be stable when stored at either 4°C (39.2°F) 
or 25°C (77°F) in plastic prescription bottles for 91 days.54 
Extended-release tablets should be taken whole; do not split or 
crush tablets or allow animal to chew it. In a study, a 200 mg/mL rec-
tal suspension was prepared by mixing levetiracetam powder with 
sterile water; a new suspension was prepared every month, and it 
was stored at room temperature and away from direct sunlight; anal-
ysis of potency and stability was not reported.32
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Levetiracetam Oral Tablets (film-coated, scored): 250 mg, 500 mg, 
750 mg, and 1000 mg; Keppra®, generic; (Rx)
Levetiracetam Extended-Release Oral Tablets (film-coated): 500 mg 
and 750 mg; Keppra XR®, generic; (Rx). Do not crush or split.
Levetiracetam Oral Solution: 100 mg/mL in 473 mL, 480 mL, and 

===== PDF_PAGE_0776 =====
Levothyroxine   749
500 mL; Keppra®, generic; (Rx). May also contain acesulfame K, am-
monium glycyrrhizinate, or maltitol
Levetiracetam Concentrate for Injection: 100 mg/mL in 5 mL  
single-use vials, 5 mg/mL in 100 mL, 15 mg/mL in 100 mL, and  
10 mg/mL in 100 mL; Keppra®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Levothyroxine
(lee-voe-thye-rox-een)
Thyro-Tabs® Canine, Leventa®,  Synthroid®
Thyroid Hormone
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for the treatment of hypothyroidism in all species
 ▶ Contraindications include thyrotoxicosis and untreated adre-
nal insufficiency.
 ▶ Use with caution in geriatric animals and those with con-
current hypoadrenocorticism (treated), cardiac disease, and 
diabetes mellitus.
 ▶ Adverse effects are associated with iatrogenic hyperthyroid-
ism (eg, tachycardia, polyphagia, polyuria/polydipsia, excit-
ability, nervousness, and excessive panting); some cats may 
appear apathetic.
 ▶ Review drug–drug and drug–laboratory interactions prior to 
prescribing.
 ▶ Should not be confused with liothyronine or desiccated 
 thyroid
Uses/Indications
Levothyroxine is indicated for the treatment of hypothyroidism in 
all species. In horses, it has been used as an adjunct therapy to treat 
equine metabolic syndrome (EMS).1 
Pharmacology/Actions
Levothyroxine is a synthetic form of thyroxine (T 4), which is the 
principal hormone released by the thyroid. Levothyroxine is mainly 
converted (deiodinated) to triiodothyronine (T3) peripherally in the 
human body. In humans, T3 is the primary hormone responsible for 
activity. Approximately 80% of T3 found in the peripheral tissues is 
derived from T4.
Thyroid hormones affect the rate of many physiologic processes, in-
cluding increasing fat, protein, and carbohydrate metabolism, protein 
synthesis, gluconeogenesis, cellular metabolism, oxygen consumption, 
body temperature, heart rate and cardiac output, blood volume, en-
zyme system activity, and growth and maturity. Thyroid hormones 
also promote mobilization and utilization of glycogen stores. The thy-
roid hormone is particularly important for adequate development of 
the CNS. Although the exact mechanisms of how thyroid hormones 
exert their effects are not fully understood, it is known that thyroid 
hormones (primarily triiodothyronine) act at the cellular level by con-
trolling DNA transcription and protein synthesis.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, orally administered levothyroxine has relatively low bio -
availability (ie, 10% to 20%) and short elimination half-life as com -
pared with humans. Peak serum concentrations reportedly occur 4 
to 6 hours after oral administration and the serum half-life is ≈10 
to 14 hours. However, there can be wide interpatient variability in 
pharmacokinetic parameters. Elimination in the feces may account 
for 50% of a dose.
An oral liquid formulated for dogs (Leventa®, not approved in the 
United States) appears to be better absorbed than tablet formula -
tions. When comparing oral tablets given at 200 μg twice daily with 
oral liquid given at 200 μg once daily, the relative bioavailability of 
the liquid was 206% (median) that of the tablets.2
Studies in dogs have shown that levothyroxine absorption is af -
fected by delivery with food; administration with food causes less 
medication to be absorbed and delays time to full absorption. 2 Be-
cause absorption of levothyroxine is affected by food at different rates 
and the levothyroxine dose is titrated individually to each animal, it 
is important that owners give this medication to their animal at the 
same time each day, in a consistent manner relative to food, and that 
the same method of delivery is used each time.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Levothyroxine (and other replacement thyroid hormones) are con -
traindicated in animals with thyrotoxicosis or untreated adrenal 
insufficiency. It should be used with caution, and at a lower initial 
dosage, in animals with concurrent hypoadrenocorticism (treated), 
cardiac disease, diabetes mellitus, or in senior animals. For these an-
imals, the recommendation for reduction in the initial levothyroxine 
dose varies and ranges from 25% to 75% of the usual dose. Because 
levothyroxine can cause an increased basal metabolic rate that may 
exacerbate electrolyte disturbances, dogs with hypoadrenocorticism 
should receive replacement mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid 
therapy before receiving levothyroxine.
Do not confuse levothyroxine with liothyronine or desiccated 
thyroid.
Adverse Effects
The most commonly reported adverse effects include anorexia, der-
matitis, vomiting, otitis externa, lethargy, polydipsia, diarrhea, leuko-
cytosis, pruritus, tachypnea, polyuria, hyperactivity, and seborrhea.3 
Case reports of rare incidences of fixed drug eruptions and erythema 
multiforme have been reported in dogs treated with levothyroxine.
Hypersensitivity to 2 inactive ingredients, magnesium stearate 
and polyvinylpyrrolidone, found in certain levothyroxine products 
has been observed in dogs. Reactions include cutaneous reactions 
that resolve after medication has been discontinued. Dogs that expe-
rienced this reaction were then treated with levothyroxine products 
that did not contain magnesium stearate or polyvinylpyrrolidone 
and tolerated the medication well.4
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Levothyroxine is considered safe for use during pregnancy, as thyroid 
hormone is essential for fetal development.5 In humans, levothyroxine 
is considered the drug of choice for hypothyroidism during pregnancy. 
Levothyroxine requirements may increase during pregnancy. In 
humans, increasing levothyroxine dose on confirmation of preg -
nancy is recommended. 6 In hypothyroid bitches, one small study 
found that standard levothyroxine supplementation was adequate to 
maintain a euthyroid state during pregnancy7; however, thyroid sta-
tus should be monitored regularly throughout pregnancy and in the 
postparturient period. 
Minimal amounts of thyroid hormones are excreted in milk and 
should not affect nursing offspring. The World Health Organization 
(WHO) considers levothyroxine to be compatible with breastfeeding.8
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Long-term overdoses produce signs of hyperthyroidism, including 
tachycardia, polyphagia, chronic vomiting and diarrhea, weight loss, 
polyuria/polydipsia, excitability, nervousness, and excessive pant -
ing. The dose should be reduced and/or temporarily withheld until 
signs subside. Some cats (≈10%) may exhibit signs of apathy (eg, list-
lessness, anorexia).9 Toxicosis occurred in a dog that routinely con -
sumed the feces of a housemate receiving levothyroxine.
A single, acute overdose in small animals is less likely to cause se-
vere thyrotoxicosis as compared with long-term overdoses. Vomiting, 

===== PDF_PAGE_0777 =====
750   Levothyroxine
diarrhea, hyperactivity to lethargy, hypertension, tachycardia, tachy-
pnea, dyspnea, and abnormal pupillary light reflexes may be noted in 
dogs and cats 1 to 9 hours after ingestion. If ingestion occurred within 
2 hours, treatment to reduce absorption of the drug should be accom-
plished using standard protocols (eg, emetics, cathartics, charcoal) un-
less contraindicated by the animal’s condition. Treatment is supportive 
based on clinical signs. Oxygen, artificial ventilation, cardiac glyco -
sides, beta-blockers (eg, propranolol), fluids, dextrose, and antipyretic 
agents have all been suggested if necessary. One case of a healthy dog 
that ingested up to 10 g/kg was managed with gut decontamination, 
and the dog had normal T 3 concentrations 6 days postingestion and 
normal T4 concentrations after 36 days.10
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving levothyroxine and may be of 
significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use to -
gether is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks must 
be weighed and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
 ■ Amiodarone : May decrease the metabolism of T4 to T3
 ■ Antacids, Oral (eg, aluminum, calcium, or magnesium 
salts): May reduce levothyroxine absorption; doses should be 
separated by 4 hours
 ■ Antidiabetic Agents  (eg, insulin, oral agents ): Levothyrox-
ine may increase requirements for insulin or oral agents.
 ■ Antithyroid Agents  (eg, carbimazole, methimazole ): De -
creased conversion of T4 to T3
 ■ Cholestyramine : May reduce levothyroxine absorption; doses 
should be separated by 4 hours
 ■ Corticosteroids, High-Dose  (eg, dexamethasone, fludro-
cortisone, prednis(ol)one): Decreased conversion of T4 to T3
 ■ Digoxin : Potential for reduced digoxin concentrations and/or 
therapeutic response
 ■ Estriol : May decrease serum free thyroxine concentration
 ■ Ferrous Sulfate : May reduce levothyroxine absorption; doses 
should be separated by 4 hours
 ■ Fiber Supplements ( eg, psyllium), High Fiber Diet : May 
reduce levothyroxine absorption
 ■ Ketamine : May cause tachycardia and hypertension
 ■ Lanthanum : May reduce levothyroxine absorption; doses 
should be separated by 4 hours 
 ■ Phenobarbital : Possible increased metabolism of thyroxine; 
dosage adjustments may be needed
 ■ Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs; eg, omeprazole, pantopra-
zole): Reduced gastric acid may reduce levothyroxine absorption.
 ■ Rifampin : Possible increased clearance of thyroxine; dosage ad-
justments may be needed.
 ■ Sertraline : May increase levothyroxine requirements; likely 
applies to other SSRIs 
 ■ Sevelamer : May reduce levothyroxine absorption; doses should 
be separated by 4 hours 
 ■ Sodium Polystyrene Sulfonate : May reduce levothyroxine 
absorption; doses should be separated by 4 hours
 ■ Sucralfate : May reduce levothyroxine absorption; doses 
should be separated by 4 hours
 ■ Sympathomimetics (eg, epinephrine, norepinephrine): 
Levothyroxine can potentiate effects.
 ■ Theophylline, Aminophylline : Levothyroxine may decrease 
theophylline concentration. 
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline, clomip -
ramine): Increased risk for CNS stimulation and cardiac 
 arrhythmias
 ■ W arfarin : Thyroid hormones increase the catabolism of vita -
min K-dependent clotting factors that may increase the anticoag-
ulation effects in animals on warfarin.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Renal function tests: Hypothyroid dogs can have a decreased glo-
merular filtration rate (GFR); restoration to a euthyroid state can 
increase GFR and reduce serum creatinine concentrations. 
The following drugs may have effects on thyroid function tests; re -
sults should be evaluated accordingly.
 ■ Effects on serum total T4 (TT4): Decreases may be caused by ami-
noglutethimide, anabolic steroids/androgens, antithyroid drugs 
(eg, propylthiouracil [PTU], carbimazole, methimazole), aspara -
ginase, barbiturates, corticosteroids, danazol, diazepam, heparin, 
methadone, mitotane, nitroprusside, phenylbutazone, phenytoin, 
salicylates (large doses), sulfonamides, and sulfonylureas; increas-
es may be caused by estrogens ( NOTE: Estrogens may have no 
effect on canine T 3 or T 4 concentrations), fluorouracil, insulin, 
and propranolol.
 ■ Effects on serum total T3: Decreases may be caused by antithyroid 
drugs (eg, PTU, carbimazole, methimazole), barbiturates, corti -
costeroids, heparin, propranolol, salicylates (large doses), and 
sulfonamides; increases may be caused by estrogens, fluorouracil, 
and thiazides.
 ■ Effects on T3 uptake resin: Decreases may be caused by antithy -
roid drugs (eg, PTU, carbimazole, methimazole), estrogens, and 
fluorouracil; increases may be caused by anabolic steroids/andro-
gens, asparaginase, corticosteroids, danazol, heparin, phenylbuta-
zone, and salicylates (large doses).
 ■ Effects on serum TSH : Decreases may be caused by corticoste -
roids, danazol; increases may be caused by aminoglutethimide, 
antithyroid drugs (eg, PTU, carbimazole, methimazole), sulfon -
amides, and toceranib.11
 ■ Effects on serum free T4: Decreases may be caused by antithyroid 
drugs (eg, PTU, methimazole), barbiturates, corticosteroids, and 
NSAIDs; increases may be caused by furosemide and heparin.
Dosages
DOGS: 
Hypothyroidism:
Oral therapy: 
a) Replacement therapy for diminished thyroid function (label 
dosage; FDA-approved): The initial recommended daily dose 
is 0.022 mg/kg (22 µg/kg) PO in single or divided doses. The 
dosage is then adjusted by monitoring serum TT 4 concentra-
tions 4 to 6 hours after a dose is given, every 4 to 8 weeks until 
an adequate maintenance dose is established. In field stud -
ies, the majority of dogs required at least one dosage adjust -
ment, and most dogs were maintained on an oral dosage of  
0.018 – 0.026 mg/kg/day (18 – 26 µg/kg/day). Administer con-
sistently, with or without food.3
b) Oral tablets (extra-label): NOTE: Initial dosages vary. There 
is inadequate published evidence or general consensus sup -
porting one recommendation over another. Initial dosages of  
0.01 – 0.02 mg/kg (10 – 20 µg/kg) PO every 12 to 24 hours 
are typical. A maximum initial dosage of 0.8 mg/dog (NOT 
mg/kg) every 12 hours is often recommended. Lower doses 
(eg, 25% reduction) are recommended in dogs with certain 
concurrent conditions (see Contraindications/Precautions/

