===== PDF_PAGE_1034 =====
Phenobarbital   1007
(GABA). At high anesthetic doses, barbiturates have been demon -
strated to inhibit the uptake of calcium at nerve endings. The seizure 
threshold is raised, and the spread of seizures is limited. In humans, 
selective anticonvulsant activity of phenobarbital is independent of 
the degree of sedation produced.
The degree of CNS depression produced is dependent on the 
dose, route of administration, the pharmacokinetics of the drug, and 
species treated. In addition, patient age, physical condition, and/or 
concurrent use of other drugs can alter drug effects. Barbiturates 
may depress the sensory cortex, lessen motor activity, and produce 
sedation at low doses. In humans, barbiturates have been shown to 
reduce the rapid eye movement (REM) stage of sleep. Barbiturates 
have no true intrinsic analgesic activity.
In most species, barbiturates can cause dose-dependent respira -
tory depression and, in some species, can cause slight respiratory 
stimulation. At sedative/hypnotic doses, respiratory depression is 
similar to that during normal physiologic sleep. As doses increase, 
the medullary respiratory center is progressively depressed, with re-
sultant decreases in rate, depth, and volume. Respiratory arrest can 
occur at doses 4 times lower than those that can cause cardiac arrest. 
Barbiturates must be used very cautiously in cats, as cats are particu-
larly sensitive to their respiratory depressant effects.
Barbiturates can cause reduced tone and motility of the intestinal, 
uterine, ureteral, and bladder musculature, likely secondary to their 
central depressant action. Barbiturates can reduce the sensitivity of 
the motor endplate to acetylcholine, thereby slightly relaxing the 
skeletal muscle. 
Liver function is not directly affected when barbiturates are used 
short-term, but hepatic microsomal enzyme induction is well doc -
umented with extended barbiturate administration, 11–14 particularly 
with phenobarbital, and may persist for up to 4 weeks after discon -
tinuation.11 Although barbiturates reduce oxygen consumption in all 
tissue, no change in metabolic rate is measurable when barbiturates 
are administered at sedative doses; however, basal metabolic rates 
may be reduced with resultant decreases in body temperature when 
barbiturates are administered at anesthetic doses.
Pharmacokinetics
Phenobarbital is slowly absorbed from the GI tract. Bioavailability 
ranges from 70% to 90% in humans and ≈90% in dogs. 15,16 Absorp-
tion is practically complete in cats17 and adult horses.18 Peak concen-
trations occur 4 to 8 hours after oral administration in dogs 19 and 8 
to 12 hours in humans. One study in cats showed that phenobarbi -
tal compounded in PLO gel and applied transdermally to the pinna 
twice daily achieved steady-state serum concentrations within the 
therapeutic range in some cats; more individual variation was seen 
when Lipoderm ActiveMax® was used instead of PLO.20
Phenobarbital is widely distributed throughout the body, but be-
cause of its lower lipid solubility, it does not distribute as rapidly into 
the CNS as compared with most other barbiturates. In humans, peak 
drug concentration in the CNS may be delayed up to 15 minutes after 
IV administration. In humans, the amount of phenobarbital bound 
to plasma proteins has been reported to be 40% to 60%. The report-
ed apparent volumes of distribution are ≈0.8 to 1 L/kg in horses, 21,22 
≈0.86 L/kg in foals, ≈0.7 L/kg in cats, 23 and ≈0.75 L/kg in dogs. 24
The drug is metabolized in the liver primarily by hydroxylated 
oxidation to p-hydroxyphenobarbital; sulfate and glucuronide con -
jugates are also formed. In humans, elimination half-life ranges 
from 2 to 6 days compared to 12 to 125 hours (average of ≈2 days) 
in dogs. 16,19,24 Elimination half-life in dogs fed protein- or fat-re -
stricted diets appears to be shorter (26 and 24 hours, respectively).25 
Because of phenobarbital’s ability to induce the hepatic enzymes 
used to metabolize itself and other drugs, elimination half-life may 
decrease with time, along with concomitant reductions in serum 
concentrations. The half-life of phenobarbital may be less than 24 
hours in some dogs that may require 3 times daily administration 
for maximal control.26 An elimination half-life of 34 to 43 hours has 
been reported in cats.23 Elimination half-life in horses is considerably 
shorter, with reported values of ≈13 hours in foals and 10 to 12 hours 
in adult horses with chronic administration.21,22 Approximately 25% 
of a dose is excreted unchanged by the kidney; alkalinizing urine 
and/or substantially increasing urine flow increases phenobarbital 
excretion rates. The remaining 75% of a dose is renally excreted as 
metabolites. Anuric or oliguric patients may accumulate the unmet-
abolized drug; dose adjustments may be required.
In dogs, changes in diet, body weight, and body composition may 
alter the pharmacokinetics of phenobarbital and necessitate dosage 
adjustment.
In goats given phenobarbital 10 mg/kg IV and PO, bioavailability 
was ≈25%, and half-life was ≈4 hours for both routes. 27
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Barbiturates are contraindicated in patients that have severe liver 
disease, severe respiratory distress, or those that have demonstrat -
ed previous hypersensitivity reactions to these drugs. 28 Large doses 
are contraindicated in patients with nephritis.29 Barbiturates should 
be used cautiously in patients with hypovolemia, anemia, border -
line hypoadrenal function, and/or cardiac or respiratory disease. 
Dose reductions may be necessary in patients with significant renal 
 impairment.
The drug should be given slowly (not more than 1 – 2 mg/kg per 
minute) when administered IV; IV administration that is too rapid 
can cause respiratory depression. Commercially available injectable 
preparations are very alkaline and must not be administered SC, in-
traarterially, or perivascularly, as significant pain, tissue irritation, 
and possible necrosis can result. 29 Extreme care should be taken to 
avoid extravasation. Applications of moist heat and local infiltration 
of 0.5% procaine solution have been recommended to treat extrava-
sation reactions.
In humans, IM injection is limited to a total volume of 5 mL and 
injected into a large muscle to avoid tissue irritation.29
PHENobarbital should not be confused with PENTobarbital.
Adverse Effects
Dogs may exhibit increased clinical signs of anxiety/agitation or 
lethargy when therapy is initiated. These effects are generally transi-
tory in nature. Occasionally, dogs will exhibit profound depression at 
lower doses (and plasma concentrations). Decreased physical activ -
ity levels have been observed in dogs receiving phenobarbital-con -
taining antiepileptic drug combinations.30
Polydipsia, polyuria, and polyphagia are also commonly observed; 
these signs usually begin 2 to 3 weeks after initiating phenobarbital 
therapy. Sedation and/or ataxia often become significant concerns 
as serum phenobarbital concentrations reach the higher ends of the 
therapeutic range. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and/or neutropenia 
occur rarely and are reversible if detected early. 31–33 Increased tri -
glycerides34 and pancreatic lipase activity 35,36 have been reported in 
dogs. 
Increases in liver enzymes with phenobarbital in dogs are well de-
scribed37–39 and are not necessarily indicative of liver dysfunction but 
should raise concern if serum ALT or ALP is more than 4 to 5 times 
the upper limit of normal or if any elevation in gamma-glutamyl -
transferase (GGT) is noted. Of note, in a study, serum ALP was high-
er in dogs receiving phenobarbital and fed protein- or fat-restricted 
diets as compared with dogs receiving a maintenance diet.25 Pheno-
barbital should generally be discontinued if any increases in serum 
bilirubin, total serum bile acids, or hypoalbuminemia are detected. If 
phenobarbital needs to be discontinued yet antiepileptic medication 
is required, alternative antiepileptic therapy (eg, potassium bromide, 

===== PDF_PAGE_1035 =====
1008    Phenobarbital
levetiracetam) should be started immediately. Frank hepatic failure 
is uncommon and is usually associated with higher serum pheno -
barbital levels (greater than 30 to 40 µg/mL). 39 In a study, hemato -
logic abnormalities occurred within the first 3 months of therapy in 
4.2% of dogs treated with standard doses.40
In dogs, phenobarbital rarely causes superficial necrolytic der -
matitis (SND) associated with changes in hepatocytes (ie, severe pa-
renchymal collapse with glycogen-laden hepatocytes and moderate 
fibrosis sharply demarcated by nodules of normal hepatic parenchy-
ma)41 distinct from that seen with phenobarbital hepatotoxicity (ie, 
chronic hepatic fibrosis with nodular regeneration [cirrhosis]). 39 A 
presumed case of Stevens-Johnson syndrome in a dog has also been 
reported.42 
Phenobarbital may increase the metabolism of cortisol and has 
been implicated in contributing to relative adrenal insufficiency, 43 
including a case of Addisonian crisis in an Irish setter.44 Pseudolym-
phoma has been documented or suspected in at least 1 dog 45 and 2 
cats.46,47
Cats may develop ataxia, persistent sedation and/or lethargy, 
 facial pruritus, polyphagia/weight gain, and/or polydipsia/polyuria. 
Rarely, immune-mediated reactions and bone marrow hypoplasia 
(eg, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia) may be seen. 48 A presumed 
case of phenobarbital-induced fever has been reported in a cat. 49 
Phenobarbital-induced anticonvulsant hypersensitivity syndrome 
has also been reported. In 1 cat, tachypnea, hyperthermia, high se -
rum amyloid A, and abdominal lymph node enlargement were seen 
8 days after initiation of phenobarbital.50 Another cat presented im-
mune-mediated anemia 2 weeks after starting phenobarbital.51 
Cats, unlike dogs, do not develop increased liver enzymes; in -
creases in liver enzymes in cats on phenobarbital should prompt fur-
ther investigation. High doses (ie, 10 – 40 mg/kg/day) have caused 
coagulopathies in cats.52,53 
Although there is much less information regarding phenobarbital 
use in horses (and foals in particular), cattle, goats, and ferrets, it 
would generally be expected for adverse effects to mirror those seen 
in other species.
In humans, phenobarbital can cause rare, possibly fatal, hypersen-
sitivity reactions, including exfoliative dermatitis and Stevens-John-
son syndrome. 28 It is recommended to discontinue use whenever 
dermatologic reactions occur.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Barbiturates readily cross the placenta. 28,29 Phenobarbital has been 
associated with rare congenital defects and bleeding problems in 
newborns but may be safer than other anticonvulsants. Clinical signs 
related to withdrawal can occur in offspring born to dams receiving 
phenobarbital.
Caution should be used when administering to a nursing dam, as 
small amounts are excreted in maternal milk. Drowsiness in nursing 
offspring has been reported. A foal born to a mare receiving phe -
nobarbital reportedly had a serum phenobarbital concentration of  
12.2 µg/mL, and the concentration in the mare’s milk was  
7.5 µg/mL.54
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Clinical signs caused by overdoses of phenobarbital are an extension 
of its adverse effect profile. Animals may present with ataxia, lethar-
gy/sedation, hypothermia, recumbency, and mydriasis (cats). 
Barbiturates have no direct effect on the kidneys, but severe renal 
impairment can occur secondary to hypotensive effects in overdose 
situations.
Treatment of phenobarbital overdose consists of GI decontami -
nation, if appropriate, and respiratory and cardiovascular support. 
Activated charcoal has been shown to be of considerable benefit in 
enhancing the clearance of phenobarbital even when the drug was 
administered parenterally. Charcoal acts as a sink for the drug to dif-
fuse from the vasculature back into the gut. Forced alkaline diure -
sis can also be of substantial benefit in augmenting the elimination 
of phenobarbital in patients with normal renal function. Peritone -
al dialysis or hemodialysis can be helpful in severe intoxications or 
anuric patients.55
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
In humans, phenobarbital induces CYP 3A strongly and most other 
CYP isoenzymes to a lesser degree; it is a substrate of CYP 2C19. The 
following drug interactions have either been reported or are theoret-
ical in humans or animals receiving phenobarbital and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Acetaminophen : Increased risk for hepatotoxicity, particularly 
when large or chronic doses of barbiturates are administered
 ■ Alpha-2 Agonists (eg, dexmedetomidine, xylazine): Concur-
rent use may result in additive respiratory depression. 
 ■ Antihistamines (eg, diphenhydramine): May increase the ef -
fects of phenobarbital
 ■ Benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam, midazolam): Concurrent use 
may result in additive respiratory depression.
 ■ Bromides : Synergistic efficacy and toxicity 
 ■ Carprofen : There may be an increased risk for hepatotoxicity 
secondary to carprofen metabolites. One source states that pa -
tients should not receive phenobarbital or other hepatic drug-me-
tabolizing enzyme inducers when receiving carprofen.56
 ■ Chloramphenicol : May increase the effects of phenobarbital
 ■ Cholestyramine : May reduce phenobarbital absorption and/
or levels. Should be administered separately
 ■ CNS Depressants (eg, methocarbamol, mirtazapine, tra-
zodone): Concurrent use may result in additive respiratory and 
CNS depression.
 ■ Felbamate : May increase the effects of phenobarbital
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors  (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, sele-
giline): May prolong phenobarbital effects
 ■ Opioids (eg, buprenorphine, hydrocodone, morphine, trama-
dol): Concurrent use may result in additive respiratory and CNS 
depression.
 ■ Phenothiazines  (eg, acepromazine): May increase the effects 
of phenobarbital
 ■ Rifampin : May induce enzymes that increase the metabolism of 
barbiturates
 ■ Urinary Acidifiers  (eg, ammonium chloride ): Unchanged 
phenobarbital elimination in urine may be decreased and cause 
an increase in serum half-life.57
Phenobarbital (particularly after chronic therapy) may decrease the 
effects of the following drugs/drug classes by lowering their serum 
concentrations; effects may persist for several weeks after pheno -
barbital is discontinued 11; these drugs may require initial or main -
tenance doses that are at or above the higher end of the dosing range, 
and doses of these drugs may need to be reduced when phenobarbi-
tal is being discontinued:

===== PDF_PAGE_1036 =====
Phenobarbital   1009
 ■ Azole Antifungals (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole, 
voriconazole): Phenobarbital levels may be increased, and anti -
fungal levels may be decreased. Concurrent use is contraindicated 
in humans.
 ■ Benzimidazoles (eg, albendazole, fenbendazole): May reduce 
active metabolite concentration
 ■ Benzodiazepines ( eg, clorazepate, diazepam)58
 ■ Buspirone
 ■ Chloramphenicol : Concurrent use also may increase the risk 
for phenobarbital toxicity.
 ■ Clarithromycin
 ■ Clindamycin
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, methylprednisolone, 
prednis[ol]one)
 ■ Cyclosporine 59
 ■ Digoxin 60
 ■ Doxorubicin
 ■ Doxycycline
 ■ Estrogens (eg, diethylstilbestrol [DES], estriol)
 ■ Felbamate : Phenobarbital concentrations may increase, and fel-
bamate concentrations may decrease.
 ■ Griseofulvin
 ■ Ivermectin
 ■ Levetiracetam : Levetiracetam dosage requirements are in -
creased by phenobarbital. In dogs receiving immediate-release 
levetiracetam, phenobarbital therapy reduced levetiracetam 
elimination half-life by ≈35% to 50%. 61 In dogs receiving extend-
ed-release levetiracetam, phenobarbital reduced levetiracetam 
peak concentration and increased clearance, although half-life 
appeared to be unaffected.62
 ■ Levothyroxine
 ■ Methadone
 ■ Metoprolol
 ■ Metronidazole
 ■ Quinidine
 ■ Paroxetine
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine)
 ■ Praziquantel
 ■ Progestins (eg, medroxyprogesterone)
 ■ Sulfonamides 14
 ■ Tacrolimus
 ■ Theophylline, Aminophylline
 ■ Topiramate
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants
 ■ Urinary Alkalinizers  (eg, potassium citrate ): Unchanged 
phenobarbital elimination in urine may be increased and cause a 
decrease in serum half-life.57
 ■ Verapamil
 ■ Vincristine
 ■ Vitamin D
 ■ W arfarin
 ■ Zonisamide 63
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Barbiturates may cause increased retention of bromosulfophtha-
lein (BSP; sulfobromophthalein) and give falsely elevated results. 
It is recommended that barbiturates not be administered within 
the 24 hours before a BSP retention test is performed or, if they 
must be administered (eg, for seizure control), the results be in -
terpreted accordingly.64,65
 ■ Phenobarbital can alter the results of thyroid testing. Decreased 
total and free thyroxine (T 4), normal triiodothyronine (T 3), and 
either normal or increased thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 
have been reported. It has been suggested to wait at least 4 weeks 
after discontinuing phenobarbital to perform thyroid testing.38,66
 ■ In some dogs, phenobarbital may cause a false-positive low dose 
dexamethasone suppression test by increasing the clearance of 
dexamethasone. Phenobarbital apparently has no effect either on 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation tests or on the 
hormonal equilibrium of the adrenal axis. Because phenobarbital 
can potentially increase the metabolism of cortisol, it has been 
implicated in contributing to relative adrenal insufficiency.
Dosages
DOGS:
Idiopathic epilepsy (extra-label): Initially, 2.5 – 3 mg/kg PO ev -
ery 12 hours is commonly recommended, although starting dos -
ages may vary. To achieve therapeutic phenobarbital concentra -
tions sooner in phenobarbital-naïve dogs, some clinicians suggest 
an initial loading dose of 12 – 20 mg/kg (total dose); this dose 
can be administered as a single, slow (over at least 5 minutes) IV 
injection but may cause profound sedation and respiratory de -
pression.67 To minimize these effects, the total dose can be divided 
into increments of 3 – 4 mg/kg IV every 1 to 4 hours; the degree 
of sedation and respiratory depression during administration 
should be monitored, and subsequent doses should be adjusted 
accordingly. Doses should be adjusted based on phenobarbital 
concentrations, efficacy, and adverse effects. Administration of 
3 – 5.6 mg/kg PO every 8 hours in dogs with a shorter pheno -
barbital elimination half-life appeared safe and improved seizure 
management in some patients.26 Combination with other anticon-
vulsants is common. 
Adjunctive treatment of status epilepticus  (extra-label): After 
use of benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam, midazolam), phenobarbital 
4 – 8 mg/kg IV slow (over at least 5 minutes) can be administered. 
If seizure activity continues, additional increments of phenobar -
bital can be administered at 4 mg/kg IV every 20 to 30 minutes 
with a maximum total phenobarbital dose of 20 – 24 mg/kg IV .67,68 
Once seizure activity has diminished and the patient is alert, the 
patient can be transitioned to oral phenobarbital, as noted above.
Sialadenosis (extra-label): In case reports, 1 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours appears to be most common, although dosages up to  
2.5 mg/kg PO twice daily have been noted. 69 In one case, 5  
6 mg/kg IM every 12 hours was initially prescribed. In several but 
not all cases, dogs were slowly weaned off phenobarbital without 
relapse.5,6,9,70
Discontinuing phenobarbital therapy (taper guidelines) : Ta-
pering guidelines may vary and are anecdotal. In general, for 
patients stabilized on another anticonvulsant, a typical tapering 
schedule involves reducing the phenobarbital dose by 25% every 
2 weeks. Smaller dose decreases (eg, 10% to 20%) or longer inter-
vals between reductions (eg, every 3 to 4 weeks) can be consid -
ered. Available tablet size may dictate actual dose decrease. Re -
ductions can be made more rapidly (eg, every 7 days) if necessary 
(eg, fulminant phenobarbital hepatotoxicity); because seizure 
activity may increase during a rapid taper, concurrently initiat -
ing another anticonvulsant is recommended. Doses of other anti-
convulsants may need to be reduced as phenobarbital’s effects on 
CYP enzyme induction wane, which may take several weeks after 
discontinuation.
CATS:
Idiopathic epilepsy (extra-label): Initially, 1 – 3 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours is commonly recommended, although starting dosages 
may vary. Cats receiving phenobarbital 2.5 – 8.6 mg/kg/day PO 

===== PDF_PAGE_1037 =====
1010   Phenobarbital
had a therapeutic serum phenobarbital concentration between 15 
and 45 µg/mL; seizure control can be achieved in most cats in 
this range regardless of the cause of the seizures. 71 Practically, ½ 
to one 15 mg tablet/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 12 hours is used. 
To achieve therapeutic phenobarbital concentrations sooner in 
phenobarbital-naïve cats, some suggest an initial phenobarbi -
tal loading dose of 12 – 24 mg/kg IV given in increments of 3 to  
4 mg/kg IV every 2 to 6 hours. The dose should be adjusted based 
on phenobarbital concentrations, efficacy, and adverse effects. 
Transdermal phenobarbital compounded in PLO (extra-label): 
9 mg/kg applied to the inside of the pinna every 12 hours  
(18 mg/kg/day). Therapeutic concentrations may be achieved in 
some cats, and consistent monitoring is recommended. 20,72 Fur-
ther study is warranted to prove this route effectively controls 
 seizures.
Adjunctive treatment of status epilepticus  (extra-label): After 
use of benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam, midazolam), phenobarbi -
tal 3 mg/kg IV can be administered. Phenobarbital can be repeat-
ed every 20 minutes up to 24 mg/kg in a 24-hour period or given 
as loading of 10 mg/kg IV bolus.67,68,73
Discontinuing phenobarbital therapy (taper guidelines) : In 
patients stabilized on another anticonvulsant, a typical tapering 
schedule involves reducing the phenobarbital dose by 25% every 2 
weeks. Smaller dose decreases (eg, 10% to 20%) or longer intervals 
between reductions (eg, every 3 to 4 weeks) can be considered. 
Available tablet size may dictate actual dose decrease. Reductions 
can be made more rapidly (eg, every 7 days) if necessary; because 
seizure activity may increase during a rapid taper, concurrently 
initiating another anticonvulsant is recommended. Doses of other 
anticonvulsants may need to be reduced as phenobarbital’s effects 
on CYP enzyme induction wane, which may take several weeks 
after discontinuation.
HORSES : 
Seizure control (extra-label): 
a) Adult horses: Loading dose of 16 – 20 mg/kg IV once; mainte-
nance dose of 1 – 5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours
b) Foals: Loading dose of 16 – 20 mg/kg IV once; maintenance 
dose of 100 – 500 mg/foal (NOT mg/kg) PO every 12 hours74,75
CATTLE:
Enzyme induction in organochlorine toxicity  (extra-label):  
5 g/animal (NOT mg/kg) PO for 3 to 4 weeks, off 3 to 4 weeks, 
then repeat for 3 to 4 more weeks76
FERRETS :
Seizure control (extra-label): Loading dose of 16 – 20 mg/kg IV 
once; maintenance dose of 1 – 2 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours74,75
Monitoring
 ■ Anticonvulsant efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, CNS related, polyuria/polydipsia, weight 
gain)
 ■ Serum phenobarbital concentration:
• After initiation of therapy or dosage change: 
 ■ If a loading dose of phenobarbital was not administered, 
at least 5 to 6 half-lives (dogs, ≈12 to 14 days; cats, 9 to 10 
days) should be allowed to pass before measuring serum 
phenobarbital concentrations to confirm that therapeutic 
levels have been reached; on the day of sampling, the time 
between drug administration sampling does not appear to 
be significant.77,78 
 ■ Re-measure at 6 weeks postinitiation of phenobarbital to 
determine the patient’s steady-state concentration and the 
extent of autoinduction of phenobarbital metabolism.2 
• Once steady-state is achieved and the patient’s clinical con -
dition is controlled with a maintenance dose: measure serum 
phenobarbital concentrations every 6 months in dogs and cats. 
Rechecking concentration more often should be considered 
when efficacy is reduced or adverse effects are suspected.
• Dogs: Serum phenobarbital concentrations of 15 to 35 µg/mL 
(86 to 150 mmol/L) have been recommended, with the high 
end of the range reflecting suggested changes to minimize the 
potential for hepatotoxicity.2 Approximately ⅓ of dogs receiv -
ing phenobarbital with bromides may require lower phenobar-
bital doses and serum concentrations that are ≈33% less for 
seizure control.79 
• Cats: In a retrospective study of 30 cats, 93% of cats had sei -
zures controlled with serum phenobarbital concentrations be-
tween 15 and 45 µg/mL. 71 Optimum therapeutic levels of 23 
to 30 µg/mL (100 to 130 mmol/L) have been recommended in 
cats in an attempt to maximize seizure control with the lowest 
potential for adverse effects.80 Cats being treated with a trans -
dermal formulation will require more frequent monitoring.
 ■ If phenobarbital is used long term, routine CBC and comprehen-
sive serum chemistry profile are recommended at least every 6 
months.
 ■ If results of routine serum chemistry profile suggest possible hep-
atotoxicity, bile acids and abdominal ultrasonography should be 
considered for further evaluation.
Client Information
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. If your ani -
mal vomits or acts sick after getting it on an empty stomach, give 
it with food or a small treat. If vomiting continues, contact your 
veterinarian.
 ■ Do not skip doses. Try to give doses at the same time each day. Do 
not suddenly stop giving this medicine to your animal.
 ■ Do not change the amount you are giving your animal without 
first talking with your veterinarian.
 ■ Sleepiness, lack of energy, greater thirst, appetite, and increased 
need to urinate commonly occur when starting therapy.
 ■ Liver problems can occur in dogs. Contact your veterinarians if 
your animal has any vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, loss of appe -
tite, or swollen abdomen. Y our veterinarian will need to perform 
examinations and blood work on your dog while it is taking this 
medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
 ■ Phenobarbital is classified as a schedule-IV controlled drug by the 
federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA). The use of this medi -
cation in animals or humans other than those for whom they are 
prescribed is illegal.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Phenobarbital, a barbiturate, occurs as glistening, odorless, small, 
white crystals or a white crystalline powder with a melting point of 
174°C to 178°C (345.2°F-352.4°F) and a p Ka of 7.41. One gram is 
slightly soluble in ≈1000 mL of water and freely soluble in 10 mL of 
alcohol. Compared with other barbiturates, it has a low lipid solu -
bility.
Phenobarbital sodium occurs as bitter-tasting, odorless, flaky, 
white crystals, crystalline granules, or powder. It is very soluble in 
water, soluble in alcohol, and freely soluble in propylene glycol. The 
injectable product has a pH of 8.5 to 10.5.
SI units (mmol/L) are multiplied by 0.232 to convert phenobar -
bital levels to conventional units (µg/mL); conversely, conventional 
units are multiplied by 4.31 to obtain SI units.
Phenobarbital may also be known as fenobarbital, phenemalum, 
phenobarbitalum, phenobarbitone, phenylethylbarbituric acid, pheny-
lethylmalonylurea, Luminal Sodium®, or Solfoton®.

===== PDF_PAGE_1038 =====
Phenoxybenzamine    1011
Storage/Stability
Store phenobarbital tablets in tight, light-resistant containers at 
room temperature 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F); protect from moisture.
Store phenobarbital elixir in tight containers at room temperature 
(15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]).
Store phenobarbital sodium injection at room temperature 
(15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]). Do not add solutions of phenobarbital so-
dium to acidic solutions or use them if they contain a precipitate or 
are grossly discolored.
Aqueous solutions of phenobarbital are not very stable. Propyl -
ene glycol is often used in injectable products to help stabilize the 
solution. 
Phenobarbital is a DEA Schedule-IV controlled substance (C-IV) 
that should be stored in an area that is substantially constructed and 
securely locked. Follow applicable local, state, and federal rules re -
garding the disposal of unused or wasted controlled drugs.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
The following solutions and drugs have been reported to be phys-
ically compatible with phenobarbital sodium: dextrose IV solutions, 
Ringer’s injection, lactated Ringer’s injection, sodium chloride IV 
solutions, dextrose-sodium chloride combinations, dextrose-Ring -
er’s combinations, dextrose-Ringer’s lactate combinations, amikacin 
sulfate, aminophylline, atropine sulfate (stable for at least 15 minutes 
but not 24 hours), calcium chloride and gluconate, dexmedetomi -
dine, dimenhydrinate, glycopyrrolate, heparin sodium, methylpred-
nisolone sodium succinate, piperacillin-tazobactam, polymyxin B 
sulfate, ranitidine, sodium bicarbonate, and verapamil.
The following drugs have been reported to be physically  incom-
patible with phenobarbital sodium: buprenorphine, chlorproma -
zine, codeine phosphate, cyclosporine, diazepam, diphenhydramine, 
dobutamine, ephedrine sulfate, fentanyl citrate, glycopyrrolate, 
hydralazine, hydrocortisone sodium succinate, hydroxyzine, insu -
lin (regular), ketamine, meperidine, midazolam, morphine sulfate, 
nalbuphine, norepinephrine bitartrate, oxytetracycline, pentazocine 
lactate, procaine, prochlorperazine, promazine, and promethazine. 
Phenobarbital 10 mg/mL oral suspension can be made by crush -
ing the appropriate number of tablets and suspending in ORA-Blend® 
(regular or sugar-free). In a study, potency was maintained over the 
115-day study period when stored at room temperature in amber 
plastic bottles.81
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International [ARCI] 
Uniform Classification Guidelines for Foreign Substances [UCGFS] 
has designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may 
not be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and reg-
ulations before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Phenobarbital Tablets: 15 mg, 16.2 mg, 30 mg, 32.4 mg, 60 mg,  
64.8 mg, 97.2 mg, and 100 mg; Solfoton®, generic; (Rx; C-IV). NOTE: 
Phenobarbital strengths previously were expressed in grains, whose 
abbreviation (“gr”) can easily be confused with gram (g). To prevent 
medication errors, using grains to express strength should be avoid-
ed when prescribing phenobarbital.
Phenobarbital Elixir/Oral Solution: 20 mg/5 mL (4 mg/mL); generic; 
(Rx, C-IV). Contains 15% ethanol
Phenobarbital Sodium Injection: 65 mg/mL and 130 mg/mL; Lumi-
nal Sodium®, generic; (Rx; C-IV). Contains benzyl alcohol
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Phenoxybenzamine 
(fen-ox-ee-ben-za-meen) Dibenzyline®
Alpha-adrenergic Antagonist (nonselective), Vasodilator 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ An alpha-adrenergic antagonist used primarily in small ani-
mals for urethral hypertonus and urethral obstruction and to 
control hypertension in cases of pheochromocytoma 
 ▶ May be contraindicated in patients with hypotension, glauco-
ma, or diabetes mellitus and in horses with colic
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with congestive heart failure or 
other heart disease, renal impairment, or cerebral/coronary 
arteriosclerosis.
 ▶ Adverse effects include hypotension, rebound hypertension, 
miosis, increased intraocular pressure, tachycardia, inhibition 
of ejaculation, nasal congestion, weakness, ataxia, and GI ef-
fects (eg, nausea, vomiting). Constipation may occur in horses.
 ▶ Availability and cost can be problematic; product may need to 
be obtained from compounding pharmacy.
 ▶  The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies phenoxybenzamine as a hazardous drug; 
use appropriate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Phenoxybenzamine is used primarily for its effect in reducing in -
ternal urethral sphincter tone when urethral sphincter hypertonus 
is present. It can also be used to treat hypertension associated with 
pheochromocytoma before surgery. It was used in the management 
of tachycardia resulting from phenylpropanolamine overdose in a 
dog.1 In cats with recurrence of urethral obstruction, prazosin ap -
pears to be more effective to prevent the incidence of reobstruction 
as compared with phenoxybenzamine.2,3
Phenoxybenzamine has been anecdotally reported to increase 
acupuncture effectiveness.4
In horses, phenoxybenzamine has been used to decrease urethral 
sphincter tone with bladder paresis. It has also been historically tried 
for preventing or treating laminitis in early stages5-7 and treating se-
cretory diarrhea.8,9
Pharmacology/Actions
Phenoxybenzamine noncompetitively blocks the alpha-adrenergic 
response to circulating epinephrine or norepinephrine; it is consid -
ered a nonselective alpha-adrenergic antagonist, with greater affinity 
for alpha-1 receptors than alpha-2 receptors. The effect of phenoxy-
benzamine has been described as a chemical sympathectomy. Phe -
noxybenzamine has no effects on beta-adrenergic receptors or on 
the parasympathetic nervous system.
Phenoxybenzamine increases cutaneous blood flow, but little ef -
fect is noted on skeletal muscle or cerebral blood flow. 
Phenoxybenzamine can also block pupillary dilation, lid retrac -
tion, and nictitating membrane contraction. Prevention of epineph-
rine inhibitory action on insulin secretion is noted. Both standing 
and supine systolic blood pressures are decreased when this drug is 
used in humans.
Pharmacokinetics
No information was located on the pharmacokinetics of this agent 
in veterinary species. In humans, phenoxybenzamine is variably ab-
sorbed from the GI tract and has a bioavailability of 20% to 30%. 

