

===== PDF_PAGE_1186 =====
Sildenafil   1159
ALPACAS:
General anesthesia : (extra-label): Induction: sevoflurane 6% in 
oxygen delivered by face mask from a circle system attached to a 
small animal anesthetic machine. Maintenance: sevoflurane 2.3%. 
MAC is 1.9 to 2.3.18
SHEEP/GOATS:
General anesthesia (extra-label): Small animal anesthetic circuits 
can be used to deliver inhalational anesthetics in small ruminants. 
During maintenance, the vaporizer setting should be adjusted to 
2.5% to 4%. The oxygen flow rate should be 2 to 4 L/minute during 
induction and reduced to 0.5 to 1 L/minute during maintenance.19
BIRDS:
General anesthesia  (extra-label): Induction: 5% to 8% sevoflu -
rane via a mask using a nonrebreathing (Bain) system. 20 Mainte-
nance: 1% to 4% sevoflurane to effect via a mask or endotracheal 
tube.17 Approximate MAC was found to be 3 in pigeons. 7 Birds 
should always be intubated during general anesthesia.
AMPHIBIANS :
General anesthesia  (extra-label): A 38% sevoflurane jelly has 
been compounded for use in cane toads and applied at 37.5 µL/g 
of body weight for induction. (See Compatibility/Compounding 
Considerations)
Monitoring
 ■ Respiratory and ventilatory status
 ■ Cardiac rate/rhythm; blood pressure (particularly with at-risk 
 patients)
 ■ Level of anesthesia
Client Information
 ■ Sevoflurane is used for general anesthesia only by veterinarians.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Sevoflurane is an isopropyl ether inhalational anesthetic with a mo-
lecular weight of 200, a saturated vapor pressure of 20°C (68°F) of 
160 mm Hg, and a boiling point of 58.5°C (137°F). It is reported to 
have a pleasant odor and is not irritating to the airways. It is non -
flammable and nonexplosive. Sevoflurane is a clear, colorless liquid 
that is miscible with ethanol or ether and slightly soluble in water. 
Sevoflurane may also be known as BAX-3084, MR-654, Sevocris®, 
SevoFlo®, Sevorane®, Petrem®, or Ultane®.
Storage/Stability
Store sevoflurane at room temperature. Sevoflurane does not react 
with metal but can react with Lewis acids to form hydrofluoric acid.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
A 38% sevoflurane jelly was compounded for use in amphibians, com-
posed of 3 parts liquid sevoflurane, 3.5 parts aqueous nonspermacidal 
jelly, and 1.5 parts distilled water. Each component of the mixture was 
added to a catheter-tip 60 mL syringe, and the syringe was shaken vig-
orously while the end of the syringe was occluded with a finger. When 
mixed thoroughly, the mixture changed from colorless to an opaque, 
white jelly of uniform consistency. Attempts at higher concentrations 
of sevoflurane were unsuccessful as this caused separation. No stability 
analysis was performed. See cited study for more information.21
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Sevoflurane in 250 mL bottles; SevoFlo®, Petrem®; (Rx). FDA-
approved for use in dogs
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Sevoflurane in 250 mL bottles; Ultane®, Sojourn®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Sildenafil
(sil-den-ah-fil) Viagra®, Revatio®
Vasodilator; Phosphodiesterase Type 5 Inhibitor
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used in veterinary medicine for the treatment of pulmonary 
arterial hypertension or to improve clinical signs associated 
with congenital megaesophagus
 ▶ Contraindicated in patients receiving organic nitrates (eg, 
nitroglycerin)
 ▶ Adverse effects appear to be uncommon; inguinal flushing 
and possible GI effects have been reported.
Uses/Indications
Sildenafil may be of benefit in the adjunctive treatment of pulmonary 
hypertension of a variety of causes in small animals. Studies have 
demonstrated reduced estimates of pulmonary arterial pressure, 
lessened clinical signs, and improved exercise capacity and quality 
of life after sildenafil administration.1-5 An open label study in 5 dogs 
with Eisenmenger’s syndrome found that sildenafil improved clinical 
signs and secondary erythrocytosis. 6 Sildenafil has also been shown 
to resolve alveolar infiltrates in dogs with pulmonary arterial hy -
pertension5 and to slow the rate of cardiac remodeling in dogs with 
myxomatous mitral valve disease, as compared with dogs receiving 
no therapy.7 Sildenafil and pimobendan administered to 4 dogs with 
heartworms entangled in the tricuspid apparatus resulted in worm 
migration to the pulmonary arteries. 
In a study of puppies with congenital megaesophagus, sildenafil 
reduced the number of regurgitation episodes and improved weight 
gain.8 Sildenafil also reduced basal tone and increased electrically 
induced relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter (in vitro) in a 
dose-dependent manner, thus, suggesting that sildenafil may be use-
ful as an alternative treatment for controlling signs related to con -
genital megaesophagus. 
In cattle, an intrauterine sildenafil infusion increased intensity of 
blood flow in the uterine wall; this may be beneficial in conditions 
of reduced uterine blood flow (eg, endometritis) or help initiate lu -
teolysis.9 
In humans, sildenafil is indicated for erectile dysfunction or pul -
monary arterial hypertension.
Pharmacology/Actions
Sildenafil inhibits cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) specific 
phosphodiesterase type-5 (PDE5) found in the smooth muscle of the 
pulmonary vasculature, corpus cavernosum, and elsewhere where 
PDE5 is responsible for degradation of cGMP . Sildenafil increases 
cGMP thereby, resulting in nitric oxide mediated vasodilation with-
in pulmonary vascular smooth muscle cells.
In Thoroughbred horses, sildenafil 5 mg/kg PO did not alleviate 
pulmonary hemorrhage or enhance performance-related indices.10
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of sildenafil have been reported in dogs. 11-
13 Oral bioavailability is ≈50% to 80% (approximately the same as 
in humans); giving the drug with food significantly reduces peak 
concentration. Volume of distribution is 4.5 to 6.5 L/kg (vs 1.2 L/kg  
in humans); elimination half-life is ≈3 to 6 hours (significant inter -
patient variability; average human half-life is ≈4 hours). Humans 
metabolize sildenafil (mainly via CYP3A4) to an active metabolite, 
which has an elimination half-life of ≈4 hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Sildenafil should not be used concurrently with nitrates (see Drug 
Interactions) or in patients documented as being hypersensitive to 
the drug.

===== PDF_PAGE_1187 =====
1160    Sildenafil
Pulmonary arterial vasodilators may significantly worsen the car-
diovascular status of patients with pulmonary veno-occlusive dis -
ease (PVOD). Sildenafil should be used cautiously in animals with 
pulmonary arterial hypertension from congenital cardiac shunts or 
left-sided heart disease because vascular reactivity or responsiveness 
to sildenafil can be hard to predict, and sildenafil may increase ve -
nous return to the left side of the heart, resulting in congestive heart 
failure in some cases.4
An in vitro study demonstrated that sildenafil at supratherapeu -
tic concentrations possesses direct, positive inotropic and chrono -
tropic effects together with coronary vasodilator action. Caution 
should be used when giving sildenafil to patients with ischemic heart 
disease, obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or ventricular 
 arrhythmias.14
Use with extreme caution in patients with resting hypotension, 
fluid depletion, severe left ventricular outflow obstruction, bleeding 
disorder, or autonomic dysfunction. One dose of sildenafil caused 
acute decompensation leading to euthanasia in a cat with a vasopro-
liferative disorder resembling pulmonary capillary hemangiomato -
sis.15 Dosage reduction may be required in patients with significant 
hepatic or renal impairment.
Adverse Effects
Sildenafil appears to be well tolerated. Cutaneous flushing of the in-
guinal region has been reported,1 and GI adverse effects (eg hyporex-
ia, vomiting, diarrhea) 12,13,16 are possible. The magnitude of systolic 
blood pressure reduction (12 – 24 mm Hg) did not reach statistical 
significance in clinical reports. 1,3,17 In humans, hypotension, head -
ache, visual disturbances (including retinal toxicity and vision loss), 
dyspepsia, epistaxis, nasal congestion, hearing loss, myalgia, pria -
pism, dizziness, and back pain have been reported.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
No evidence of teratogenicity, embryotoxicity, or fetotoxicity was 
observed in pregnant rats or rabbits given sildenafil 200 mg/kg/day 
during organogenesis. In a pre- and postnatal development study 
in rats given 30 mg/kg/day, there were no observed adverse effects. 
Sildenafil did not impair fertility in male or female rats.
Sildenafil and its metabolites are excreted into maternal milk.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Little information is available. An adult woman ingested 2000 mg 
and survived but developed tachycardia, nonspecific ST-T changes 
on ECG, headache, dizziness, and flushing.
It is expected that overdoses in animals would mirror the drug’s 
adverse effect profile; treat supportively.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged that a 24-hour poison 
consultation center that specializes in providing information specific 
for veterinary patients be consulted. For general information related 
to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact information for 
poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving sildenafil and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ ACE Inhibitors (eg, benazepril, enalapril ): Potential to in -
crease hypotensive effects
 ■ Alpha-1-Adrenergic Receptor Antagonists  (eg, phe-
nothiazines [eg, acepromazine], phenoxybenzamine, phentol -
amine, prazosin): May increase hypotensive effects
 ■ Alpha-2-Adrenergic Receptor Agonists (eg, dexmedeto-
midine, xylazine): Potential to increase hypotensive effects
 ■ Amlodipine : Potential to increase hypotensive effects
 ■ Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARBs, eg, telmisartan): 
Potential to increase hypotensive effects
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole ): May 
reduce sildenafil metabolism and increase AUC; consider lower 
sildenafil dosages
 ■ Cimetidine : May reduce sildenafil metabolism and increase 
AUC
 ■ Ciprofloxacin : May reduce sildenafil metabolism and increase 
AUC
 ■ Clarithromycin, Erythromycin ( not azithromycin ): May 
reduce sildenafil metabolism and increase AUC; consider lower 
sildenafil dosages
 ■ Furosemide : Concurrent use may increase the risk for hearing 
loss. May increase concentration of sildenafil active metabolite
 ■ Heparin : May increase bleeding risks
 ■ Nitrates  (eg, isosorbide, nitroglycerin): Significant potentia -
tion of vasodilatory effects; life-threatening hypotension is possi-
ble. Combination is contraindicated
 ■ Nitroprusside Sodium : Significant potentiation of vasodilato-
ry effects; life-threatening hypotension is possible. May increase 
bleeding risks
 ■ Paclitaxel : May alter paclitaxel plasma concentrations
 ■ Phenobarbital : May decrease sildenafil concentrations
 ■ Propranolol : May increase concentration of sildenafil active 
metabolite
 ■ Rifampin : May decrease sildenafil concentrations
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ None noted
Dosages
DOGS:
Pulmonary hypertension  (extra-label): Initially, 0.5 – 1 mg/kg 
PO every 8 hours, may increase to 3 mg/kg PO every 8 hours 
based on clinical signs1-3,5,16,17 
Congenital idiopathic megaesophagus  (extra-label): 1 mg/kg 
PO every 12 hours; from a prospective study8
Eisenmenger’s syndrome (extra-label): 0.5 mg/kg PO twice daily 
improved clinical signs and secondary erythrocytosis6
Subclinical myxomatous mitral valve disease  (extra-label):  
1 – 3 mg/kg PO every 12 hours7,18
CATS:
Pulmonary hypertension  (extra-label): A case report of a cat 
with atrial septal defect that developed pulmonary hypertension 
leading to Eisenmenger’s syndrome (ie, right to left shunting) was 
treated with sildenafil 0.25 to 1.6 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for 10 
months. There was improvement in clinical signs but increasing 
doses of sildenafil were required. After 10 months the cat deterio-
rated and was euthanized.19
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: improved exercise capacity, cough, respiratory 
effort, regurgitation frequency, or weight gain; fewer episodes of 
syncope
 ■ Pulmonary arterial pressure, systemic blood pressure
 ■ Adverse effects
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine on an empty stomach (ie, 1 hour before or 2 

===== PDF_PAGE_1188 =====
Sodium Bicarbonate   1161
hours after feeding). If your animal vomits or acts sick after re -
ceiving this drug on an empty stomach, try giving the next dose 
with food or a small treat. If vomiting continues, contact your vet-
erinarian.
 ■ Be sure to give this medicine exactly as prescribed.
 ■ This medicine may cause flushing (ie, redness) in the groin area; 
gastrointestinal side effects (eg, lack of appetite, vomiting, diar -
rhea) are also possible.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Sildenafil citrate occurs as a white to off-white crystalline powder 
with a solubility of 3.5 mg/mL in water and a molecular weight of 
666.7.
Sildenafil may also be known as UK 92480, UK 92480-10, Aphro-
dil®, Revatio®, or Viagra®.
Storage/Stability
Sildenafil tablets and oral suspension should be stored at room tem-
perature (25°C [77°F]); excursions are permitted to 15°C to 30°C 
(59°F-86°F). Oral suspension may be refrigerated at 2°C to 8°C 
(36°F-46°F) after reconstitution; do not freeze. Discard 60 days after 
reconstitution. Store sildenafil injection at room temperature of 20°C 
to 25°C (68°F-77°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
A stable 2.5 mg/mL sildenafil citrate oral suspension can be made 
with tablets and either a 1:1 mixture of methylcellulose 1% and sim-
ple syrup NF or a 1:1 mixture of Ora-Sweet® and Ora-Plus®. Crush 
30 sildenafil 25 mg tablets in a mortar and reduce to a fine powder. 
Add small portions of the chosen vehicle and mix to a uniform paste. 
Continue to add the vehicle in incremental proportions to almost 
300 mL and then transfer to a graduated cylinder, rinse mortar with 
vehicle, and add a quantity of the vehicle sufficient to make a total 
of 300 mL. Store in amber plastic bottles and label “shake well. ” The 
drug is stable for 90 days at room temperature or when refrigerated.20
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Sildenafil Citrate Oral Tablets: 20 mg, 25 mg, 50 mg, and 100 mg (of 
sildenafil); Revatio® (20 mg only), Viagra®, generic; (Rx) 
Sildenafil Citrate Oral Powder for Suspension: 10 mg/1 mL; Revatio®, 
generic; (Rx). Cost may be prohibitive.
Sildenafil Injection Solution: 10 mg/12.5 mL (dextrose 50.5 mg/mL) 
in 12.5 mL single-use vials; Revatio®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Sodium Bicarbonate
(soe-dee-um bye-kar-boe-nate) 
Alkalinizer
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Alkalinizing agent used to treat metabolic acidosis and to 
alkalinize urine; may also be used adjunctively for hypercalce-
mic or hyperkalemic crises. Not commonly used secondary to 
potential complications/adverse effects
 ▶ Contraindications include patients with metabolic or respira-
tory alkalosis, excessive chloride loss secondary to vomiting or 
GI suction, patients at risk for developing diuretic-induced hy-
pochloremic alkalosis, and patients with hypocalcemia where 
alkalosis may induce tetany.
 ▶ Use with extreme caution in patients with hypocalcemia. 
 ▶ Caution in patients with CHF, nephrotic syndrome, hyperten-
sion, oliguria, or volume overload
 ▶ Adverse effects, especially with parenteral administration or 
high doses, include metabolic alkalosis, hypokalemia, hypocal-
cemia, overshoot alkalosis, hypernatremia, volume overload, 
CHF, shifts in the oxygen dissociation curve causing decreased 
tissue oxygenation, and paradoxical CNS acidosis leading to 
respiratory arrest. 
 ▶ If used during CPR, hypercapnia can occur if the patient is not 
well ventilated; patients may be predisposed to ventricular 
fibrillation.
Uses/Indications
Sodium bicarbonate may be used to treat severe metabolic acidosis. 
It is not a substitute for diagnosing and treating the underlying cause 
of the acid/base disturbance. In small animal species, acidotic con -
ditions that may be amenable to bicarbonate therapy include those 
that occur as a result of cardiopulmonary arrest, renal failure, renal 
tubular acidosis, or toxin exposure. The use of bicarbonate for meta-
bolic acidosis secondary to diabetic crises (eg, diabetic ketoacidosis) 
is controversial. 
Sodium bicarbonate can also be used as adjunctive therapy for the 
treatment of hypercalcemia or hyperkalemia crises and to alkalinize 
the urine.
Pharmacology/Actions
The bicarbonate ion is the conjugate base component of bicarbon -
ate:carbonic acid buffer, the principal extracellular buffer in the body.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Parenterally administered sodium bicarbonate is considered gener -
ally contraindicated in patients with metabolic or respiratory alka -
losis, excessive chloride loss secondary to vomiting or GI suction, 
those at risk for development of diuretic-induced hypochloremic 
alkalosis, or with hypocalcemia where alkalosis may induce tetany. 
Patients that are unable to adequately ventilate are at risk for devel -
oping hypercapnia.
Use with extreme caution and give very slowly in patients with hy-
pocalcemia. Ideally, low calcium or potassium serum concentrations 
should be corrected prior to administration. Bicarbonate therapy 
during a diabetic crisis (ie, diabetic ketoacidosis) is rarely indicated. 
Administering sodium bicarbonate before potassium replenishment 
can be detrimental and potentially life-threatening as it can exacer -
bate hypokalemia. 
Because of the potential sodium load, use with caution in patients 
with CHF , renal insufficiency, nephrotic syndrome, hypertension, ol-
iguria, or volume overload.
Rapid IV boluses of sodium bicarbonate should be avoided be -
cause of the production of carbon dioxide and its diffusion into the 

===== PDF_PAGE_1189 =====
1162    Sodium Bicarbonate
central nervous system, making CSF acidosis even worse. Other dis-
advantages of sodium bicarbonate administration include shifting of 
the oxygen/hemoglobin dissociation curve to the left and increasing 
osmolality.
Sodium bicarbonate is generally not effective for treating lactic 
acidosis, and fluid therapy remains the mainstay of treatment.
Adverse Effects
Sodium bicarbonate therapy (particularly high-dose parenteral use) 
can lead to metabolic alkalosis, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, over -
shoot alkalosis, hypernatremia, volume overload, CHF , shifts in the 
oxygen dissociation curve causing decreased tissue oxygenation, and 
paradoxical CNS acidosis, leading to depression, stupor, coma, respi-
ratory arrest, and death.
When sodium bicarbonate is used during cardiopulmonary re -
suscitation, hypercapnia may result if the patient is not well ventilat-
ed; patients may be predisposed to ventricular fibrillation.
Oral and parenteral bicarbonate (especially at higher doses) may 
contribute significant amounts of sodium and result in hypernatre -
mia and volume overload; use with caution in patients with CHF or 
acute kidney injury. Inadvertent extravasation during IV adminis -
tration of hypertonic sodium bicarbonate solutions has caused cellu-
litis, tissue necrosis, and sloughing at the infiltration site.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug should 
only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks 
to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Sodium bicarbonate can cause severe alkalosis if overdosed or given 
too rapidly, with signs including irritability or tetany. Doses should 
be thoroughly checked prior to administration, and patients should 
be frequently monitored of electrolyte and acid/base status per -
formed. Treatment of mild alkalosis may only require discontinu -
ing bicarbonate or use of a rebreathing mask. Severe alkalosis may 
require IV calcium therapy. Sodium chloride or potassium chloride 
may be necessary if hypokalemia is present.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving sodium bicarbonate and 
may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise not -
ed, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the po-
tential risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Anticholinergic Agents (eg, hyoscyamine, oxybutynin ): 
Concomitant oral sodium bicarbonate may reduce absorption of 
oral anticholinergic agents; administer separately.
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, ketoconazole, itraconazole ): Con -
comitant oral sodium bicarbonate may reduce absorption; ad -
minister separately.
 ■ Ciprofloxacin; Enrofloxacin : The solubility of ciproflox -
acin and enrofloxacin is decreased in an alkaline environment; 
patients with alkaline urine should be monitored for signs of crys-
talluria.
 ■ Corticosteroids ( eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one ): Pa -
tients receiving high dosages of sodium bicarbonate and ACTH 
or glucocorticoids may develop hypernatremia.
 ■ Digoxin : Concomitant oral sodium bicarbonate may reduce di-
goxin concentrations.
 ■ Diuretics  (eg, furosemide, thiazides): Concurrent use of sodi-
um bicarbonate in patients receiving potassium-wasting diuretics 
may cause hypochloremic alkalosis.
 ■ Ephedrine : When urine is alkalinized by sodium bicarbonate, 
excretion may be decreased.
 ■ Histamine Type 2 Receptor Antagonists  (eg, famotidine): 
Concomitant oral sodium bicarbonate may reduce absorption; 
separate dosages by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Iron Products : Concomitant oral sodium bicarbonate may re-
duce absorption; separate dosages by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Methenamine : Methenamine efficacy may be decreased when 
urine is alkalinized by sodium bicarbonate.
 ■ Oral Medications : Because oral sodium bicarbonate can ei -
ther increase or reduce the rate and/or extent of absorption of 
many orally administered drugs, it is recommended to avoid giv-
ing other drugs within 1 to 2 hours of oral sodium bicarbonate.
 ■ Quinidine : When urine is alkalinized by sodium bicarbonate, 
excretion may be decreased.
 ■ Salicylates : (eg, aspirin): When urine is alkalinized by sodium 
bicarbonate, excretion of weakly acidic drugs may be increased.
 ■ Sucralfate : Oral sodium bicarbonate may reduce the efficacy 
of sucralfate if administered concurrently; separate dosages by at 
least 2 hours.
 ■ Tetracyclines (eg, doxycycline): Concomitant oral sodium 
bicarbonate may reduce absorption; separate dosages by at least 
2 hours.
Dosages
NOTE: In most cases it is suggested to administer sodium bicarbon-
ate IV infusions as an isotonic 1.4% sodium bicarbonate solution 
(≈150 mEq/L). See Compatibility/Compounding Considerations  
for preparation instructions. 
DOGS/CATS:
Severe metabolic acidosis  (extra-label): The main therapeutic 
goal should be to first eliminate the underlying cause of acidosis. 
If causes are not readily reversible, arterial pH is less than 7 to 7.2, 
and fluid therapy and ventilatory procedures have not reduced ac-
idemia, bicarbonate therapy should be considered. 
a) Sodium bicarbonate requirement (dose, in mEq) = 0.3 × body 
weight (kg) × (desired HCO3
- - measured patient HCO3
-). Ad-
minister ¼ to ⅓ of the calculated dose as a slow IV bolus, and 
the remaining amount via IV infusion over 4 to 6 hours. 1 To 
minimize the risk for alkalinization, recheck blood gases and 
assess the clinical status of the patient. 
b) Prolonged cardiac arrest (ie, greater than 10-15 minutes) 
or if blood gas measurement is not possible, and it is be -
lieved that the animal is severely acidotic: 1 – 2 mEq/kg slow  
IV/IO.2,3
Adjunctive therapy for hyperkalemic crisis  (extra-label): Must 
be used judiciously. Hyperkalemia associated with hypoadreno -
corticism typically improves with fluid resuscitation alone. 4 Em-
pirical dosage of 1 – 2 mEq/kg slow IV (over 10 to 20 minutes) can 
be used5; alternatively, bicarbonate dose in mEq can be calculated 
as 0.3 × body weight (kg) × (desired HCO3
- - measured HCO3
-).6
Alkalinizing the urine  (extra-label): Rarely recommended. Ini -
tially, 650 mg – 5.85 g/animal (NOT mg or g/kg) PO daily, de -
pending on the size of the patient and the pretreatment urine pH 
value. Dosage must be individualized to the patient, with the goal 
of maintaining a urine pH of ≈7 to 7.5.7
HORSES :
Metabolic acidosis associated with colic  (extra-label): If pH is 
less than 7.3 and the base deficit is greater than 10 mEq/L, esti -

===== PDF_PAGE_1190 =====
Sodium Bicarbonate   1163
mate the sodium bicarbonate requirement (dose in mEq) = base 
deficit (mEq/L) × body weight (kg) × 0.4 (use 0.6 for foals 8). It is 
suggested to administer as an isotonic sodium bicarbonate 1.4% 
solution (150 mEq/L). Alternatively, may administer as a sodium 
bicarbonate 5% solution, which contains 600 mEq of bicarbon -
ate/L (hypertonic) and should be administered IV but at a rate no 
faster than 1 – 2 L/hour.9,10
CATTLE:
Correction of acidosis in mature cattle (extra-label): Estimate 
the sodium bicarbonate requirement (dose in mEq) = base deficit 
(mEq/L) × body weight (kg) × 0.3. When laboratory data are un-
available, estimate a base deficit of 10 mEq/L.11 Sodium bicarbon-
ate may be administered IV as an isotonic (1.4%, 150 mEq/L) or 
hypertonic (8.4%) solution. 
Severely dehydrated (10% to 16% dehydrated) acidotic calves 
(usually comatose)  (extra-label): Using isotonic sodium bicar -
bonate (1.4%, 150 mEq/L), most calves require ≈2 L of this solu -
tion IV given over 1 to 2 hours, then change to isotonic saline and 
sodium bicarbonate or a balanced electrolyte solution. 12 Isotonic 
saline and sodium bicarbonate can be made by mixing 1 L of iso-
tonic saline with 1 L of isotonic sodium bicarbonate.
Empiric correction of acidosis in calves dehydrated due to diar-
rhea (extra-label): For situations where prolonged IV fluid admin-
istration is difficult or impractical: using sodium bicarbonate 8.4% 
solution, administer 10 mL/kg IV over 10 to 20 minutes. Sodium 
bicarbonate may be given alone, followed by oral administration of 
isotonic electrolyte solutions or given concurrently with IV fluids.13
CAMELIDS :
Correction of acidosis in New World Camelids  (extra-label): 
Determine the bicarbonate requirement and give up to ½ of the 
calculated dose IV over 2 to 4 hours, with adjustments made 
based on blood gases and patient status to avoid over alkalini -
zation. Sodium bicarbonate may be administered as an isotonic 
(1.4%) or hypertonic (8.4%) solution. Calculate the bicarbonate 
requirement with the following formulas: 
a) Neonates: mEq bicarbonate needed = base deficit × body 
weight (kg) × 0.6 
b) Adults: mEq bicarbonate needed = base deficit × body weight 
(kg) × 0.3. 
GOATS:
Floppy kid syndrome in goats (extra-label): Give 1 or 2 doses 
of 2.5 – 3 g/kid (NOT g/kg) PO mixed in water. For severe cas -
es or cases where the kid is unable to swallow, determine the bi -
carbonate requirement and administer IV as an isotonic (1.4%,  
150 mEq/L) sodium bicarbonate solution, giving up to ½ of the 
calculated dose over 2 to 4 hours, with adjustments made based 
on blood gases and patient status to avoid over alkalinization. Es-
timate the sodium bicarbonate requirement (dose in mEq) = base 
deficit (mEq/L) × body weight (kg) × 0.5.   
BIRDS:
Metabolic acidosis (extra-label): 1 mEq/kg initially IV (then SC) 
for 15 to 30 minutes to a maximum of 4 mEq/kg14
Monitoring
 ■ Acid/base status. Blood gas analysis should be performed ≈2 to 4 
hours after initiating sodium bicarbonate treatment, and periodi-
cally as treatment continues.2
 ■ Serum electrolytes
 ■ IV infusion site for infiltration
 ■ Urine pH (if being used to alkalinize urine)
Chemistry/Synonyms
Sodium bicarbonate is an alkalinizing agent that occurs as a white, 
crystalline powder and has a slightly saline or alkaline taste. It is sol-
uble in water and insoluble in alcohol. One gram of sodium bicar -
bonate contains ≈12 mEq (mMol) each of sodium and bicarbonate; 
84 mg of sodium bicarbonate contains 1 mEq each of sodium and 
bicarbonate. Instructions to prepare an isotonic sodium bicarbonate 
solution are found in Compatibility/Compounding Considerations.
Sodium bicarbonate may also be known as baking soda, E500, 
monosodium carbonate, natrii bicarbonas, natrii hydrogenocar -
bonas, sal de vichy, sodium acid carbonate, NaHCO 3, sodium hy -
drogen carbonate; many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Store sodium bicarbonate tablets in tight containers at room tem -
perature (15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]). Store sodium bicarbonate injec -
tion at temperatures less than 40°C (104°F), preferably at room tem-
perature; avoid freezing.
Sodium bicarbonate powder is stable in dry air but will slowly 
decompose upon exposure to moist air.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist can be consulted for more specific information.
Sodium bicarbonate for injection is reportedly physically  com -
patible with the following IV solutions and drugs: Dextrose in wa -
ter, dextrose/sodium chloride combinations, sodium chloride injec-
tions, amikacin sulfate, aminophylline, atropine sulfate, cefazolin, 
ceftazidime, ceftriaxone sodium, chloramphenicol sodium succi -
nate, clindamycin phosphate, cyclosporine, dexamethasone sodium 
phosphate, dexmedetomidine, erythromycin gluceptate/lactobion -
ate, fentanyl citrate, fluconazole, furosemide, gentamicin sulfate, gly-
copyrrolate, heparin sodium, hyaluronidase, hydrocortisone sodium 
succinate, regular insulin, labetalol HCl, mannitol, naloxone HCl, 
oxytocin, pamidronate disodium, penicillin G potassium, phenobar-
bital sodium, phenylephrine HCl, phenytoin sodium, phytonadione, 
piperacillin/tazobactam, potassium chloride, propofol, ranitidine 
HCl, sodium iodide, vasopressin, vincristine, and zoledronic acid.
Sodium bicarbonate for injection compatibility information 
conflicts or is dependent on diluent or concentration factors with 
the following drugs or solutions: lactated Ringer’s injection, Ringer’s 
injection, sodium lactate 1/6 M, ampicillin sodium, bupivacaine HCl, 
doxorubicin, famotidine, hydralazine, methylprednisolone sodium 
succinate, pentobarbital sodium, promazine HCl, thiopental sodi -
um, verapamil HCl, vitamin B-complex with C, and voriconazole. 
Sodium bicarbonate for injection is reportedly physically incom-
patible with the following solutions or drugs: alcohol 5%/dextrose 
5%, D5-lactated Ringer’s, amiodarone HCl, amphotericin B (all 
formulations), ascorbic acid injection, atracurium besylate, bu -
prenorphine HCl, butorphanol HCl, calcium chloride/gluconate, 
carboplatin, cefoxitin sodium, ciprofloxacin, codeine phosphate, 
corticotropin, diazepam, diphenhydramine HCl, dobutamine HCl, 
dolasetron HCl, dopamine HCl, epinephrine HCl, glycopyrrolate, 
hydromorphone HCl, imipenem-cilastatin, isoproterenol, lidocaine 
HCl, HCl, ketamine HCl, levorphanol bitartrate, magnesium sul -
fate, meperidine HCl, meropenem, metoclopramide HCl, midazol -
am, morphine sulfate, norepinephrine bitartrate, ondansetron HCl, 
oxytetracycline HCl, pantoprazole sodium, pentazocine lactate, and 
succinylcholine chloride.
A 1.4% solution of sodium bicarbonate (≈13 g sodium bicarbon -
ate/L) is approximately isotonic. An 8.4% solution of sodium bicar -
bonate, with a calculated osmolarity of 2000 mOsm/L, can be made 
isotonic by diluting each mL with 4.6 mL of sterile water for injec -
tion; remove 150 mL from a 1 L bag of sterile water for injection (or 
other isotonic fluid) and add 150 mL of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate for 
injection. Practically, a slightly hypertonic solution can be prepared 

===== PDF_PAGE_1191 =====
1164    Sodium Stibogluconate
by adding 200 mL of sodium bicarbonate 8.4% solution to a 1000 mL 
bag of sterile water for injection or other isotonic solution; do not 
remove any fluid from the bag prior to adding sodium bicarbonate.
Because converting volume measurements into weights is not 
very accurate for powders, it is recommended to actually weigh 
powders when using them for pharmaceutical purposes. However, 
if this is not possible, one (1) level teaspoon (5 mL) of commercially 
available baking soda contains ≈4.8 to 5.9 g of sodium bicarbonate.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Sodium Bicarbonate Injection: 8.4% (1 mEq/mL) in 50 mL and  
100 mL vials; generic; (Rx). Not FDA-approved
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Injectable Products:
Sodium Bicarbonate Neutralizing Additive Solution: 4%  
(0.48 mEq/mL) in 5 mL vials; 4.2% (0.5 mEq/mL) in 5 mL vials  
(2.5 mEq); Neut®, generic; (Rx).
Sodium Bicarbonate Injection: 4.2% (0.5 mEq/mL) in 10 mL syring-
es; generic; (Rx)
Sodium Bicarbonate Injection: 7.5% (0.9 mEq/mL) in 50 mL syring-
es; generic; (Rx)
Sodium Bicarbonate Injection: 8.4% (1 mEq/mL) in 10 mL syringes, 
50 mL syringes, and 50 mL vials; generic; (Rx)
Oral Products:
Sodium Bicarbonate Tablets: 325 mg and 650 mg; generic; (OTC)
Sodium Bicarbonate Powder: 113 g, 120 g, and 0.5 kg (1 lb); generic; 
(OTC)
Omeprazole/Sodium Bicarbonate Capsules (immediate release):  
20 mg or 40 mg omeprazole/1100 mg sodium bicarbonate; Zegerid®, 
generic; (Rx)
Omeprazole/Sodium Bicarbonate Powder for Oral Suspension:  
20 mg or 40 mg omeprazole/1680 mg sodium bicarbonate in unit-
dose packets; Zegerid®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Sodium Stibogluconate
(sti-boe-gloo-koe-nate) Pentostam®
Antileishmanial
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Antimony compound for treatment of leishmaniasis in dogs
 ▶ Not commercially available in the United States
 ▶ Contraindicated in patients with renal failure or pre-existing 
arrhythmias
 ▶ Many potential severe adverse effects are possible.
Uses/Indications
Sodium stibogluconate has been used for the treatment of leishmania-
sis in dogs. Availability and adverse effects limit clinical use; therefore, 
meglumine antimoniate is typically the preferred antimony product.
Pharmacology/Actions
Sodium stibogluconate is a pentavalent antimonial. Its exact mecha-
nism of action is unknown, but it is believed to reduce ATP and GTP 
synthesis in susceptible amistagotes. 1 It may also alter membrane 
permeability or active transport mechanisms. 
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, the steady-state volume of distribution of sodium stiboglu-
conate was 0.25 L/kg, with a clearance of 1.71 L/kg/hr. Terminal half-
life ranged from 0.6 to 1.5 hours.2 The main route of excretion is via 
the kidneys; glomerular filtration rate determines excretion rate.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Sodium stibogluconate is contraindicated in patients with pre-exist-
ing cardiac arrhythmias or significantly impaired renal function. It 
should not be used in patients that have had a serious adverse reac -
tion to a previous dose.
Adverse Effects
Dogs given stibogluconate 40 mg/kg developed increased AST lev -
els.2 Other reported adverse effects include pain on injection, mus -
culoskeletal pain, hemolytic anemia, leukopenia, vomiting, diar -
rhea, pancreatitis, myocardial injury and arrhythmias, renal toxicity, 
shock, and sudden death. IV administration can cause thrombophle-
bitis. The incidence of adverse effects reportedly increases with dura-
tion of use longer than 2 months.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Sodium stibogluconate has not been shown to cause fetal harm, but 
it should be withheld during pregnancy unless the benefits outweigh 
the risks. Sodium stibogluconate use during nursing is controversial; 
it is usually compatible with nursing,3 the manufacturer states that it 
should not be used in nursing mothers. Because safety has not been 
established in animals, this drug should only be used when the ma -
ternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Antimony can potentially be chelated with dimercaprol (BAL in oil), 
dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) or d-penicillamine.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
 ■ No specific drug interactions were noted. Stibogluconate has re -
portedly been used with allopurinol, paromomycin, or pentami -
dine without problems.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No specific laboratory interactions or considerations noted.
Dosages
DOGS:
Cutaneous leishmaniasis (extra-label): 30 – 50 mg/kg IV or SC 
daily for 3 to 4 weeks. May be administered every other day for 
longer durations if adverse effects occur. If administered IV , give 
slowly over 5 minutes or longer using a fine needle or catheter to 
avoid thrombophlebitis. Concomitant allopurinol (10 mg/kg PO 
twice daily) is recommended.4,5
Monitoring
 ■ Baseline and periodic (ie, 1 month after therapy begins then every 
3 to 4 months) CBC, serum chemistry panel including amylase 
and lipase, urinalysis with urine:protein creatinine ratio6
 ■ Baseline and periodic ECG 
 ■ Clinical efficacy; serology +/- PCR at least 6 months after the start 
of therapy then every 6 months6
Client Information
 ■ Clients should understand the potential public health implica -
tions of this disease in dogs (dependent on country), the guarded 

===== PDF_PAGE_1192 =====
Sodium Thiosulfate   1165
prognosis (even with treatment), risks of treatment, and associat-
ed expenses.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Sodium stibogluconate is a pentavalent antimony compound that 
contains between 30% and 34% antimony. It is a colorless, odorless 
or almost odorless, amorphous powder. Sodium stibogluconate is 
very soluble in water and practically insoluble in alcohol or ether. 
The injection commercially available in other countries has a pH be-
tween 5 and 5.6.
Sodium stibogluconate may also be known as sodium antimo -
ny gluconate, stiboglucat-natrium, natriumstibogluconat-9-wasser, 
solusurmin, stibogluconat, sodio stibogluconato, and natrii stiboglu-
conas.
Storage/Stability
Store the injection at temperatures below 25°C (76°F) and protect 
from freezing and exposure to light. After removing the first dose, 
the vial should not be used after one month. Use of a 5 micron filter 
during preparation is recommended to remove particulates that may 
be formed by an interaction between the vial stopper and the solu -
tion’s preservative.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Sodium Stibogluconate for Injection: Sodium antimony gluconate 
100 mg (of pentavalent antimony) per mL in 100 mL vials; Pentos-
tam®. Not available in the United States. Check with the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for availability. https://www.
cdc.gov/laboratory/drugservice/formulary.html
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Sodium Thiosulfate
(soe-dee-um thye-oh-sul-fayte) Sodium Hyposulfite
Antidote (Arsenic, Cyanide)
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for cyanide, arsenic, or copper poisoning; localized treat-
ment for chemotherapy extravasation injuries
 ▶ No known contraindications
 ▶ Adverse effects may include profuse diarrhea when large 
doses are given by mouth. 
 ▶ Injectable forms should be given slowly IV.
Uses/Indications
Sodium thiosulfate is used in the treatment of cyanide toxicity, in -
cluding poisoning from cyanogenic glycoside-containing plants. It 
has synergistic effects when used in sequence with sodium nitrate. It 
has been used in treating arsenic toxicosis in cattle, 1,2 and has been 
proposed for other heavy metal poisonings but its efficacy is in ques-
tion for these purposes. When used in combination with sodium 
molybdate, sodium thiosulfate may be useful for the treatment of 
copper poisoning, 3 although penicillamine may be preferable but 
cost may be an issue.
In humans, sodium thiosulfate has been used to reduce cisplatin 
nephrotoxicity4,5 and has been shown to reduce cisplatin related oto-
toxicity.6 A 3% or 4% solution has been used to infiltrate the site of 
extravasations of cisplatin, carboplatin, or dactinomycin.7,8  Sodium 
thiosulfate has been used in the management of mechlorethamine 
extravasation,9,10 and, in combination with steroids, sodium thiosul-
fate may reduce the healing time associated with doxorubicin extrav-
asation. It is also used in humans in the management of calciphylaxis 
in dialysis patients.
Pharmacology/Actions
Administration of thiosulfate provides an exogenous source of sulfur 
to the body, thereby hastening the detoxification of cyanide using the 
enzyme rhodanese. Rhodanese (thiosulfate cyanide sulfurtransferase) 
converts cyanide to the relatively nontoxic thiocyanate ion; thiocya-
nate is then excreted in the urine.
Sodium thiosulfate’s topical antifungal activity is probably due to 
its slow release of colloidal sulfur.
Although sodium thiosulfate has been recommended for treat -
ing arsenic (and some other heavy metal) poisoning, the proposed 
mechanism of action is not known and its efficacy is in question. 
Presumably, the sulfate moiety may react with and chelate the metal 
allowing its removal.
Pharmacokinetics
Sodium thiosulfate is relatively poorly absorbed from the GI tract. 
When substantial doses are given PO, it acts as a saline cathartic. 
When administered IV , it is distributed in the extracellular fluid and 
then rapidly excreted via the urine. In dogs, a therapeutic IV dose 
is eliminated in urine within 90 minutes. In dogs with renal failure, 
metabolic clearance rate is reduced, and the plasma thiosulfate con-
centration is increased and remains elevated for at least 16 hours.11
Elimination half-life in humans is ≈1.5 hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Sodium  thiosulfate  may exacerbate hypertension or edema and 
should be used with caution in patients who may have these signs 
including those with congestive heart failure or renal impairment.
NOTE: With cyanide poisoning, sodium nitrite is given first, fol-
lowed by sodium thiosulfate, except in cases involving smoke inha -
lation, as nitrite acts by  converting hemoglobin to methemoglobin; 
however, in subjects with carbon monoxide inhalation (from smoke) 
increasing the concentration of methemoglobin would worsen oxy-
gen carrying capacity already reduced by CO exposure. In cyanide 
poisoning the dose of sodium thiosulfate can be repeated if required, 
but only one dose of sodium nitrite should be given because of the 
risk of producing a high concentration of methemoglobinemia and 
exacerbating tissue hypoxia.
Adverse Effects
Sodium thiosulfate is relatively nontoxic. Large doses by mouth may 
cause profuse diarrhea. Hypernatremia and edema are possible. In -
jectable forms should be given slowly IV to minimize the risk of nau-
sea, vomiting, and hypotension.
In humans, hypernatremia, hypotension, nausea and vomiting, 
diarrhea, diuresis, and metabolic acidosis have been reported and 
are thought to be due to both the intrinsic osmotic properties of so -
dium  thiosulfate, and from thiocyanate formed when it  is used to 
treat cyanide poisoning. Increased clotting times 1 to 3 days after 
dosing have also been reported. Sodium thiosulfate preparations 
may contain trace impurities of sodium sulfite; however, in an emer-
gency sodium thiosulfate should not be withheld in subjects with 
sulfite hypersensitivity.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
There were no teratogenic effects in the offspring of hamsters treat-
ed with sodium thiosulfate during pregnancy. Sodium thiosulfate 
reduces cyanide maternal toxicity in animal studies. 12,13 In addition 
sodium thiosulfate was not embryotoxic or teratogenic in rodents or 
rabbits at maternal doses of up to 580 mg/kg/day.
No lactation information was found; use when the maternal ben-
efits outweigh the potential risks to offspring.

===== PDF_PAGE_1193 =====
1166    Somatotropin
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In dogs the LD50 of IV sodium thiosulfate is greater than 3000 mg/kg.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
No specific drug interactions were noted.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Sodium thiosulfate may produce clinically significant falsely 
increased chloride measurements, depending on the analyzer 
used.14,15
Dosages
DOGS, CATS:
Cyanide toxicity (extra-label): First give sodium nitrite 3% solu -
tion 10 – 20 mg/kg IV followed by sodium thiosulfate 25% solu -
tion 150 – 500 mg/kg IV bolus or CRI. 16 In mild cases sodium 
thiosulfate alone may be sufficient. 
Treating extravasation injuries secondary to doxorubicin, car-
boplatin, cisplatin, and mechlorethamine infusions (extra-la-
bel): Prepare a 0.17 Mol/L solution by mixing 4 mL sodium thio-
sulfate 10% w/v with 6 mL sterile water for injection. Inject into 
extravasation site. NOTE: These are recommendations for human 
patients.8–10
HORSES :
Cyanide toxicity (extra-label): First give sodium nitrite 20% solu-
tion 10 – 20 mg/kg IV followed by sodium thiosulfate 20% solu -
tion 30 – 40 mg/kg IV17
Arsenic toxicity (extra-label): Sodium thiosulfate 20 – 30 grams 
per horse (NOT mg/kg) in 300 mL of water orally with di -
mercaprol (BAL) 3 mg/kg IM every 4 hours18
RUMINANTS :
Note: When used in food animals, FARAD states that this salt 
is rapidly excreted and not considered a residue concern in ani -
mal tissues; therefore a 24-hour preslaughter withdrawal interval 
(WDI) would be sufficient.19
Copper poisoning  in combination with sodium molybdate  
(extra-label): In conjunction with fluid replacement therapy, so -
dium thiosulfate 500 mg with ammonium or sodium molybdate 
200 mg PO daily for up to 3 weeks will help decrease total body 
burden of copper20
Cyanide toxicity secondary to cyanogenic plants  (extra-label): 
Sodium thiosulfate in a 30% solution 660 mg/kg IV given rapidly 
using a 12- or 14- gauge needle.21
Arsenic poisoning : (extra-label) In a meta-analysis, the most 
commonly administered antidote was sodium thiosulfate  
20 – 40 mg/kg IV every 8 hours and 80 mg/kg PO once a day, 
but one study using 40 mg/kg IV every 8 hours and 80 mg/kg PO 
once a day reported better outcomes. Administration of oral or IV 
fluids was highly associated with survival.1
Monitoring
For cyanide poisoning, vital signs (eg, respiratory rate, heart rate, 
blood pressure, CNS) and acid-base status. 
For heavy metal poisoning, blood and/or urinary concentrations 
of the metal.
Client Information
 ■ This agent should only be used with close professional supervi -
sion.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Sodium thiosulfate occurs as large, colorless, odorless crystals or 
coarse, crystalline powder. It is very soluble in water, deliquescent 
in moist air and effloresces in dry air at temperatures greater than 
33°C (91.4°F).
Sodium thiosulfate may also be known as natrii thiosulfas, na -
trium thiosulfuricum, sodium hyposulphite, sodium thiosulphate, 
Consept Step 2®, Hiposul®, Hyposulfene®, or S-hydril®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise stated by the manufacturer, store at room tem -
perature 20° to 25°C (68°F-77°F); excursions permitted from 15°C 
to 30°C (59°F-86°F). Crystals should be stored in tight containers.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Sodium thiosulfate is compatible with sodium nitrate and sodi -
um nitroprusside and is not compatible mixed with hydroxocobal-
amin.
No chemical incompatibility has been reported between sodi -
um thiosulfate and sodium nitrite, when administered sequentially 
through the same IV line.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Sodium Thiosulfate for Injection: 10% (100 mg/mL, as pentahy -
drate) and 25% (250 mg/mL as pentahydrate) preservative-free in  
10 mL and 50 mL single-use vials; generic; (Rx)
Sodium thiosulfate crystals or powder may be available from chemi-
cal suppliers, and the use of pharmaceutical grade (USP- or NF- des-
ignation) is recommended. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Somatotropin
Growth Hormone
(soe-ma-toe-troe-pin) Posilac®
Hormone
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for treatment of canine hypopituitary dwarfism; it may 
also be used to increase milk production in cows.
 ▶ Hypersensitivity reactions are possible. May cause irreversible 
diabetes mellitus in dogs
 ▶ Products used for dogs may be expensive and difficult to 
obtain.
Uses/Indications
Somatotropin may be useful in treating hypopituitary dwarfism. 
Historically, it was used to treat alopecia X (also previously known 
as growth hormone-responsive dermatosis) in adult dogs; however, 
somatotropin is no longer recommended given the current under -
stating of the disease etiology.
Bovine somatotropin is indicated for increasing production of 
marketable milk in healthy lactating dairy cattle.
Pharmacology/Actions
Somatotropin (growth hormone) is responsible for and contributes 
to musculoskeletal growth (linear growth and increased bone and 
muscle mass) as well as other cellular and organ growth. It is also a 
factor in protein, carbohydrate, lipid, connective tissue, and mineral 

===== PDF_PAGE_1194 =====
Somatotropoin   1167
metabolism, and it plays an important role in thymus development 
and T-cell function. 
Pharmacokinetics
No canine-specific information was located. Somatotropin is a pep-
tide, and elimination via the liver and kidneys would be expected.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Growth hormone is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensi-
tive to it. 
In humans, active malignancy is considered a contraindication for 
use of recombinant growth factor and increased risk for neoplasm is 
listed as a warning1; however, this is controversial.2 The drug should 
not be used for growth promotion in pediatric patients with closed 
epiphyses.1 Use somatotropin with caution in patients with impaired 
glucose tolerance or diabetes mellitus, and hypoadrenocorticism. 
Concurrent secondary adrenocortical insufficiency and hypothy -
roidism must be treated appropriately. Patients with hypothyroidism 
may experience a suboptimal response to somatotropin.
Lactating cows receiving bovine somatotropin may require diets 
that meet or exceed typical nutritional requirements.3
Adverse Effects
Growth hormone may cause diabetes mellitus in dogs and may be 
transient or permanent even after discontinuing treatment. Blood 
and urine glucose should be routinely monitored. Discontinue ther-
apy if hyperglycemia occurs. Hypersensitivity reactions are possible, 
but less so if using products of porcine origin in dogs; porcine growth 
hormone appears to have little immunogenicity in dogs. Long-term 
treatment at high doses may cause acromegaly. Acromegaly in dogs 
can cause increased size of paws and head, increased skin folds 
around head and neck area, prognathism, and inspiratory stridor.
Cows receiving somatotropin may have increased body tempera-
ture and injection site reactions and are at increased risk for clinical 
mastitis.3
In humans receiving recombinant growth hormone, adverse ef -
fects include upper respiratory infections, fever, pharyngitis, otitis 
media, edema, arthralgia, paresthesia, myalgia, peripheral edema, 
hypothyroidism, pancreatitis, hyperglycemia, and impaired glucose 
tolerance.1,4
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Because safety has not been established in small animal species, this 
drug should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the 
potential risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Acute overdoses could cause hypoglycemia initially and then hyper-
glycemia. Blood glucose should be monitored, and supportive treat-
ment (eg, dextrose or insulin) should be provided.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving somatotropin and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Glucocorticoids ( eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one): May 
inhibit the growth-promoting effect of somatotropin. If concur -
rent adrenal insufficiency is diagnosed, adjust glucocorticoid dose 
carefully to avoid negative effects on growth.
 ■ Insulin/Oral Hypoglycemic Agents ( eg, glipizide, met -
formin): Doses of hypoglycemic agents may require modification 
when somatotropin is initiated and/or discontinued.
Dosages
DOGS:
Hypopituitary dwarfism using porcine growth hormone  (ex -
tra-label): 2 units/dog (NOT units/kg) SC every other day OR  
0.1 unit/kg SC 3 times weekly for 4 to 6 weeks5,6; adjust dose based 
on clinical response and IGF-1 measurements. See Monitoring. 
Improvement of skin and hair coat signs can be seen within 6 to 8 
weeks. Because growth plates close rapidly, no significant change 
in stature (ie, minimal linear growth) is noted. 
CATTLE:
Increasing production of marketable milk in lactating dairy 
cows: 500 mg (one syringe) SC every 14 days. 3 Start during the 
ninth or tenth week after calving and continue until the end of 
lactation. Recommended administration sites are the neck area, 
behind the shoulder, or in the depression on either side of the 
tailhead.
Monitoring
When used in dogs:
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Blood glucose (weekly)
 ■ Urine glucose (daily)
 ■ Baseline and periodic thyroid function and adrenal function
When used in lactating dairy cows:
 ■ Milk output
 ■ Mastitis
Client Information
 ■ Clients should be instructed on the methods for SC injection and 
testing urine glucose.
 ■ Be sure to understand the cost of this medicine, as it may be a 
barrier to treatment.
 ■ Dogs treated with this medicine may develop diabetes mellitus 
that does not go away once the medicine is stopped.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Somatotropin may also be known as CB-311, hGH, human growth 
hormone, LY-137998, somatropinum; many trade names are avail -
able. The bovine somatotropin product is also known as sometribove 
zinc, BGH, rBGH. Synthetic recombinant human forms (rhGH) are 
known as somatropin.
Storage/Stability
Porcine growth hormone should be stored according to product 
label. Store the bovine somatotropin product under refrigeration 
(2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]); do not freeze.3 Avoid prolonged exposure to 
excessive heat or sunlight. Allow syringes to warm to room tempera-
ture (15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]) before use.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
No FDA-approved formulations of porcine growth hormone are 
commercially available. 
Bovine somatotropin, prolonged-release injectable: 500 mg sin -

===== PDF_PAGE_1195 =====
1168    Sorbitol
gle-dose syringes in 25 or 100 count boxes; Posilac®; (OTC). Ap -
proved for use in lactating dairy cattle. Withdrawal intervals: slaugh-
ter, 2 weeks; milk, none. NOTE: This formulation is not suitable for 
canine use as it is a sustained release formulation and not easily di -
luted to smaller doses that are required for dogs.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
There are several manufacturers of human recombinant growth hor-
mone (somatropin) products; however, these products are expen -
sive, can cause immunogenicity reactions in dogs, and are not sold 
for veterinary use.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Sorbitol
(sore-bit-ahl)
Laxative/Cathartic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Orally administered cathartic that is often used in combination 
with activated charcoal to accelerate expulsion of GI toxins or 
with sodium polystyrene sulfonate (SPS) for hyperkalemia
 ▶ Do not use as part of a retention enema due to risk for colonic 
necrosis.
 ▶ Adverse effects include loose stools, diarrhea, vomiting,  
and potential fluid and electrolyte disturbances (eg,  
hypernatremia).
Uses/Indications
Sorbitol is an osmotic laxative that can is typically used in combina-
tion with activated charcoal for GI decontamination or with sodium 
polystyrene sulfonate (SPS) for treating mild hyperkalemia. Sorbitol 
is also used as a sweetener (½ the sweetening power of sucrose).
Pharmacology/Actions
Sorbitol is a nonabsorbable sugar alcohol that acts as an osmotic 
laxative. Stool pH may be reduced in patients taking sorbitol, thus 
trapping ammonia in the stool, which may be useful in patients with 
hepatic encephalopathy.
Pharmacokinetics
Depending on dose and additional fluid consumed, sorbitol can have 
a laxative effect within 1 hour of dosing.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Do not use sorbitol mixed with sodium polystyrene sulfonate (SPS) 
as a retention enema. Retention enemas with sorbitol and SPS have 
been implicated in some human cases of colonic necrosis, 1 presum-
ably secondary to sorbitol causing cellular dehydration.
When sorbitol is used in combination with activated charcoal, 
only the first dose should contain sorbitol, as multiple doses can in-
crease the risks for hypernatremia and dehydration.
Adverse Effects
Products containing sorbitol may cause loose stools, diarrhea, and 
vomiting. Fluid and electrolyte imbalances are also possible.
There have been reports of hypernatremia occurring in small 
dogs and cats after activated charcoal and sorbitol administration, 
presumably due an osmotic effect pulling water into the GI tract. 
Administration of reduced-sodium IV fluids (eg, 5% dextrose, 0.45% 
sodium chloride with 2.5% dextrose) in conjunction with warm wa-
ter enemas may be helpful to alleviate hypernatremia.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safe use during nursing has not been established but it is unlikely 
to pose much risk to nursing offspring. Because safety has not been 
established in animals, this drug should only be used when the ma -
ternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdoses or multiple doses can cause fluid and electrolyte disorders 
including dehydration and hypernatremia.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving sorbitol and may be of sig -
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Sodium Polystyrene Sulfonate (SPS ): Although commonly 
used together for oral administration in veterinary patients, there 
is an increased risk for colon necrosis, especially if used as a re -
tention enema.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Sorbitol may cause false-positive ethylene glycol test results.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Adjunctive treatment for toxin ingestion using sorbitol with ac-
tivated charcoal (extra-label): Using activated charcoal containing 
sorbitol, 1 – 2 g/kg PO but doses up to 5 g/kg have been described. 
Charcoal with sorbitol is commonly employed (only with the first 
dose) to shorten GI transit time. For drugs and toxins that undergo 
enterohepatic recirculation (eg, caffeine, phenobarbital, theobro-
mine, theophylline, bromethalin, pyrethrins, marijuana, NSAIDs, 
organophosphate insecticides, ivermectin, digoxin, antidepres -
sants), multiple subsequent doses of activated charcoal WITHOUT 
sorbitol at 1 – 2 g/kg PO every 4 to 8 hours for 24 to 48 hours are 
recommended. Dogs and cats with no clinical signs may freely con-
sume the charcoal suspension if administered via syringe. A small 
amount of food may be added to the solution to enhance palatabil-
ity.2 In animals exhibiting clinical signs, administration of activated 
charcoal suspensions may be done via a nasogastric tube, as it may 
be better accepted, easier to place (especially in cats), and offer a 
greater margin of safety; always ensure adequate airway protec -
tion.3–6 There is little need to administer a cathartic if significant 
diarrhea is already present. See also Charcoal, Activated.
Adjunctive treatment of hyperkalemia  using sorbitol with so-
dium polystyrene sulfonate (SPS) (extra-label): SPS resin 2 g/kg 
mixed with 70% sorbitol PO, DIVIDED into 3 to 4 doses per day. 
Do not mix with potassium-rich foods (eg, bananas, potatoes). 7,8 
See also Sodium Polystyrene Sulfonate.
Shorten GI transit time, cathartic (extra-label): 0.5 – 2 mL/kg 
PO once daily, adjusted to effect9
HORSES : 
Cathartic for plant intoxications using sorbitol with activated 
charcoal (extra-label): 70% sorbitol 3 mL/kg mixed with an acti -
vated charcoal slurry 1 – 5 g/kg (≈1 g of activated charcoal/5 mL 
of water). There is little need to administer a cathartic if signifi -
cant diarrhea is already present.10 See also Charcoal, Activated.
Monitoring
 ■ Monitoring for efficacy of charcoal is usually dependent on the 
toxin/drug’s mechanism of action, extent of toxicity, and patient’s 
clinical signs.

===== PDF_PAGE_1196 =====
Sotalol   1169
 ■ When sorbitol is given with activated charcoal, repeated serum 
sodium measurements (eg, every 8 to 12 hours) are recommend-
ed to address potential hypernatremia before clinical signs (eg, 
tremors, ataxia, seizures) occur. Serum sodium increases can be 
seen 6 to 10 hours after cathartic administration.11 
 ■ Hydration status
Client Information
 ■ This medicine may cause diarrhea, excess gas (flatulence), cramp-
ing, and vomiting.
 ■ Although sorbitol is available without a prescription, do not give 
this medicine without first consulting your veterinarian.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Sorbitol is a sugar alcohol and occurs as a white, odorless, hygro -
scopic powder, granules, or crystalline masses having a sweet taste 
with a cold sensation. It is very soluble in water; it is sparingly soluble 
in alcohol and practically insoluble in solvent ether.
Sorbitol may also be known as D-glucitol, E420, D-sorbitol, sorbi-
toli, sorbitolis, sorbitolum, or szorbit.
Storage/Stability
Store the 70% oral solution at controlled room temperature 
(20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Only available in combination products. 
Oral Suspension: Sorbitol 10%, activated charcoal 10%, and kaolin 
6.25% in 240 mL bottles; Toxiban® Suspension with Sorbitol; (OTC)
Oral Granules: Sorbitol 20%, activated charcoal 47.5%, and kaolin 
10% in 1 lb jars and 5 kg pails; Toxiban® Granules; (OTC)
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Sorbitol 70% Enema Solution: 16 oz; generic; (OTC)
In combination with activated charcoal:
Activated Charcoal Oral Suspension in Sorbitol Base: Sorbitol 26 g  
and activated charcoal 25 g in 120 mL; Insta-Char®; and Sorbitol  
48 g and activated charcoal 25 g in 120 mL containers and sorbitol  
96 g and activated charcoal 50 g in 240 mL containers; ActiDose® with 
Sorbitol; (OTC)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Sotalol
(soh-ta-lole) Betapace®
Beta-Adrenergic Antagonist
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Nonselective beta-adrenergic receptor antagonist and potas-
sium channel blocker commonly used to control ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias, as well as some forms of supraventricular 
tachyarrhythmia in dogs, cats, and horses
 ▶ Contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it, with asthma, 
sinus bradycardia, second- or third-degree AV block, sick sinus 
syndrome, hypokalemic bradycardia, long QT syndromes, car-
diogenic shock, or uncontrolled congestive heart failure (CHF).
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with controlled CHF, decreased 
myocardial function, diabetes mellitus, or hyperthyroidism.
 ▶ Dose reduction or extended dosing intervals may be needed 
for patients with renal dysfunction.
 ▶ Most serious adverse effects include negative inotropic and 
pro-arrhythmic effects but dyspnea, bronchospasm, fatigue, 
and nausea or vomiting are also possible.
Uses/Indications
Sotalol can be useful in the long-term oral management of ventric -
ular and supraventricular tachycardias in dogs, cats, and horses. It is 
used alone or as combination therapy (eg, mexiletine) in dogs with 
ventricular tachycardia that are refractory to IV antiarrhythmic ther-
apy (eg, lidocaine, procainamide, amiodarone), in boxer dogs, and in 
other breeds with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy 
(ARVC), and in German shepherd dogs with inherited arrhythmias.1 
Although research data support its efficacy to suppress ventricular 
ectopy, it is unknown if it significantly impacts survival, particularly 
when compared with other therapies.2,3 Sotalol has been used for the 
treatment of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias such as in dogs with 
accessory pathway-mediated reciprocating tachycardia, 4 in a dog 
with atrial flutter,5 and in a cat with supraventricular tachycardia.6  
In horses, it has been used to treat both supraventricular and ven-
tricular tachyarrhythmias.7–9 Based on a small clinical trial, 10 sotalol 
may lower the cardioversion threshold for atrial fibrillation in horses 
and has been postulated to have potential for limiting recurrence of 
atrial fibrillation in that species.11 
Pharmacology/Actions
Sotalol is a nonselective beta-blocker and class III antiarrhythmic 
agent (potassium channel blocker). The beta-blocking activity of 
sotalol is ≈30% that of propranolol. The pharmacologic action is 
believed to be caused by selectively inhibiting potassium channels. 
Like other class III drugs, it prolongs repolarization and refractori -
ness without affecting conduction. In animals with supraventricular 
tachycardias, sotalol may be more effective in preventing recurrence 
of the arrhythmia than in terminating it.
Pharmacokinetics
Unlike propranolol, sotalol does not have any appreciable first pass 
effect after oral administration. Food may reduce the bioavailability 
of sotalol by ≈20% in humans and, if given on an empty stomach, 
bioavailability is 90% to 100%. Peak plasma concentrations occur 
between 2 to 4 hours after a dose. The drug has relatively low lipid 
solubility and virtually no protein binding. Elimination is almost all 
via the kidney and most of the drug is excreted unchanged. In dogs, 
sotalol’s elimination half-life is 5 hours; in humans, it is ≈12 hours.
In horses, after IV administration of 1 mg/kg, maximum plasma 
concentration, clearance, and elimination half-life were 1624 ng/mL, 
0.15 L/hour/kg, and 8.7 hours, respectively. When the same dose was 
administered orally, maximum plasma concentration, time to reach 

===== PDF_PAGE_1197 =====
1170    Sotalol
maximum plasma concentration, clearance, elimination half-life, 
and bioavailability were 317 ng/mL, 0.9 hours, 0.15 L/hour/kg, 15.2 
hours, and 47.8%, respectively.12 In a follow-up study, mean steady-
state plasma concentrations were 287 ng/mL (range 234 to 339),  
409 ng/mL (359 to 458), and 543 ng/mL (439 to 646) for oral dosages 
of 2, 3, and 4 mg/kg (respectively) of sotalol given orally every 12 
hours over 9 days.13 Pharmacodynamic effects in the horse include a 
significant increase in QT interval and the effective refractory period 
after oral dosing.13 
In dogs, sotalol administered at 1 – 2 mg/kg orally twice daily for 
12 to 16 days resulted in a 5.8% mean reduction in ejection fraction 
by echocardiography and a reduction in maximum heart rate of 17 
beats per minute on 24-hour Holter monitor, demonstrating mild 
negative inotropic and chronotropic effects in healthy dogs.14 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Sotalol is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it and in pa -
tients with asthma, sinus bradycardia, second- or third-degree heart 
block (unless artificially paced), sick sinus syndrome, hypokalemia, 
long QT syndromes, cardiogenic shock, or uncontrolled congestive 
heart failure (CHF). Because of the potential for negative inotropic 
effects, use with caution in controlled CHF and in those with de -
creased myocardial function. Also, use sotalol with caution in pa -
tients with diabetes mellitus or hyperthyroidism, as it may mask 
clinical signs associated with both conditions. Use with caution in 
patients with renal dysfunction; dosages may need to be decreased 
or dosage intervals may need to be extended.
Adverse Effects
Primary concerns with sotalol in dogs are the potential for negative 
inotropic, chronotropic, and proarrhythmic effects. These effects 
generally are not clinically important if dosage is not excessive. Rare-
ly, dogs receiving sotalol will demonstrate an increase in arrhythmia 
number or complexity on follow-up ambulatory ECG; it is not well 
studied how often this perceived proarrhythmic effect occurs nor is 
it known which patient factors may contribute. Other potential ad -
verse effects include dyspnea, bronchospasm, fatigue/dizziness, nau-
sea, and vomiting.15 Sotalol’s beta-blocking effects can worsen synco-
pe or cause lethargy, particularly if the ventricular tachyarrhythmia 
coexists with intermittent bradycardia (eg, AV block).
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Sotalol did not cause any fetotoxicity or teratogenicity when given 
to pregnant laboratory animals at high dosages, but clear safety in 
pregnancy has not been established. 
Sotalol enters human breastmilk in concentrations ≈5 times those 
found in the serum and is not recommended for use in nursing hu -
mans.15 Consider using a milk replacer in nursing animals.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdoses may result in panting, bradycardia, lethargy, vomiting, 
hypotension, CHF , bronchospasm, and hypoglycemia. Use GI de -
contamination (if not contraindicated) when significant risk of mor-
bidity is possible. Treat adverse effects symptomatically and support-
ively.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving sotalol and may be of signif-
icance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Amiodarone : May prolong refractory periods; concurrent use 
not recommended in human patients
 ■ Anesthetics, General : Additive myocardial depression may 
occur with the concurrent use of sotalol and myocardial depres -
sant anesthetic agents.
 ■ Antacids, Aluminum- or Magnesium- Containing : May 
reduce oral sotalol absorption; separate doses by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Antiarrhythmics, Class 1A  (eg, disopyramide, procain -
amide, quinidine): May prolong refractory periods; concurrent 
use not recommended in human patients; may also prolong QT 
interval
 ■ Antiarrhythmics, Class 1B, 1C  (eg, lidocaine, mexiletine, 
phenytoin): May prolong QT interval
 ■ Azithromycin : May increase risk for cardiotoxicity
 ■ Beta-2-Adrenergic Agonists  (eg, metaproterenol, terbu -
taline, albuterol): May have their actions blocked by sotalol 
 ■ Calcium Channel Blockers  (eg, diltiazem, verapamil): Po-
tential to increase hypotensive effects; may have additive effects 
on AV conduction or ventricular function; use with caution, par-
ticularly in patients with pre-existing cardiomyopathy or CHF .
 ■ Cisapride : May prolong QT interval
 ■ Clonidine : If clonidine is discontinued after concomitant 
therapy with sotalol, there is an increased risk for rebound 
 hypertension.
 ■ Digoxin : Potential for increased risks for proarrhythmic events
 ■ Diuretics (eg, furosemide): May increase risk for cardiotoxicity
 ■ Erythromycin; Clarithromycin : May prolong QT interval
 ■ Fluoroquinolones : May increase risk for QT interval prolon-
gation
 ■ Fluoxetine : May increase risk for cardiotoxicity
 ■ Lidocaine : Clearance may be impaired by sotalol
 ■ Methimazole, Carbimazole : May result in altered metabo -
lism of sotalol
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs ; May 
decrease antihypertensive effect of sotalol
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine): May prolong QT interval
 ■ Reserpine : May have additive effects (hypotension, bradycardia) 
with sotalol
 ■ Sympathomimetics (eg, phenylpropanolamine): May have 
their actions blocked by sotalol
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants (TCAs; eg, amitriptyline, clo -
mipramine): May prolong QT interval
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Beta-adrenergic antagonists may potentiate hypoglycemia and in-
terfere with glucose or insulin tolerance tests.
 ■ Sotalol may falsely elevate urine metanephrine concentrations 
(pheochromocytoma screen) if using a fluorometric or photo -
metric assay.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Nonurgent control of ventricular tachyarrhythmias ± supra -
ventricular tachycardia  (extra-label): Anecdotal dosage range 
recommendations are 1 – 3.5 mg/kg (most clinicians advocate 
2 – 2.5 mg/kg) PO every 12 hours. Often, patients are initially 
started at the low end of the dosing range and the dosage is esca -
lated based on control of the arrhythmia. Patients with significant 

===== PDF_PAGE_1198 =====
Spectinomycin   1171
renal dysfunction may require reduced dosages or increased time 
between dosages.
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias associated with arrhythmogenic 
right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC; eg in boxers) (ex-
tra-label): 
a) Single agent: 1.5 – 3.5 mg/kg PO twice daily2
b) In combination with mexiletine : Sotalol 1.5 – 3 mg/kg PO 
twice daily in combination with mexiletine 5 – 7.5 mg/kg PO 
3 times daily.16,17 Evidence in normal dogs suggests that when 
mexiletine is used with sotalol in dogs weighing more than  
10 kg, mexiletine could be dosed at 8 – 10 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours, though confirmation in clinically affected dogs is 
 needed.18
Ventricular arrhythmias in German shepherds with inherited 
arrhythmias (extra-label): Sotalol 2.5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 
in combination with mexiletine 8 mg/kg PO every 8 hours were 
more effective than either drug alone in suppressing ventricular 
premature complexes. Mexiletine concentrations were also higher 
when sotalol was added.1 
HORSES :
Lower cardioversion threshold and prevent recurrence of atri -
al fibrillation in horses  (extra-label): Sotalol at 2 – 3 mg/kg PO 
twice daily used for 3 days before cardioversion and for a few 
weeks after has been proposed as a potential strategy to reduce 
the risk of recurrent atrial fibrillation though this has not been 
confirmed by clinical studies.10,11 
Control of ventricular arrhythmias (extra-label): Sotalol  
1 – 2 mg/kg PO twice daily for 1 day, followed by 2 – 3 mg/kg PO 
twice daily9 
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy: ECG, heart rate, and pulse
 ■ Resting respiratory rate
 ■ Blood pressure
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, dyspnea, bronchospasm, lethargy, syncope, 
nausea/vomiting, worsening of arrhythmias, and progression of 
heart failure)
Client Information
 ■ Sotalol is best given on an empty stomach.
 ■ Most common side effects include lack of energy and weakness, 
poor appetite, and vomiting. Contact your veterinarian if these 
signs persist or worsen.
 ■ If your animal has trouble breathing or has episodes of collapse, 
call your veterinarian immediately.
 ■ Y our veterinarian may start with a low dose and gradually in -
crease the dose. Do not administer more than your veterinarian 
prescribes.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal closely while 
it is taking this medication. Do not miss these important fol -
low-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A non-selective beta-adrenergic antagonist and class III antiarrhyth-
mic agent, sotalol HCl is a racemic mixture of the d- and l- forms. 
Both isomers exhibit antiarrhythmic (class II) activity, but only the 
levo- form has beta-adrenergic receptor antagonist activity. Sotalol 
HCl occurs as white, crystalline solid that is soluble in water.
Sotalol may also be known as MJ-1999, d,l-sotalol hydrochloride, 
or sotaloli hydrochloridum; many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Store tablets at room temperature.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Approval
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Sotalol HCl Tablets: 80 mg, 120 mg, 160 mg, and 240 mg; Betapace®, 
Sorine®, generic; (Rx)
Sotalol HCl Oral Solution: 5 mg/mL; Sotylize®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Spectinomycin
(spek-ti-noe-mye-sin) Spectogard®
Aminocyclitol Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Aminocyclitol antibiotic used primarily in food-producing an-
imals; relatively broad spectrum but minimal activity against 
anaerobes and most strains of Pseudomonas spp
 ▶ Contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it
 ▶ Adverse effects appear to be minimal at labeled dosages; can 
cause neuromuscular blockade and swelling at SC injection 
sites
Uses/Indications
Spectinomycin is FDA-approved for infectious synovitis and chronic 
respiratory disease in chickens and for bacterial enteritis (scours) in 
swine. It is only rarely used in dogs, cats, and horses for suscepti -
ble infections, and there are no suitable dosage forms available for 
these species. There are FDA-approved uses in cattle and dogs but no 
currently available products. In addition, spectinomycin/lincomycin 
combination products are FDA-approved for airsacculitis and chron-
ic respiratory disease in chickens. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated spectinomy-
cin as an Important antimicrobial for human medicine.1 The Office In-
ternational des Epizooties (OIE) Antimicrobial Classification has desig-
nated spectinomycin as a Veterinary Critically Important antimicrobial.
Pharmacology/Actions
Spectinomycin is primarily a bacteriostatic antibiotic that inhibits 
protein synthesis in susceptible bacteria by binding to the 30S ribo -
somal subunit.
Spectinomycin has activity against a wide variety of gram-posi -
tive and gram-negative bacteria, including Escherichia coli, Klebsiella 
spp, Proteus spp, Enterobacter spp, Salmonella spp, Streptococcus spp, 
and Staphylococcus spp. It has minimal activity against anaerobes, 
most strains of Pseudomonas spp, Chlamydia spp, Moraxella bovis, 
or Treponema spp.
In human medicine, spectinomycin is used principally for its ac -
tivity against Neisseria gonorrhoeae.
Pharmacokinetics
After oral administration, only ≈7% of the dose is absorbed, but the 
drug that remains in the GI tract is active. When injected SC or IM, the 
drug is reportedly absorbed well, with peak levels occurring in ≈1 hour.
Tissue levels of the absorbed drug are lower than those found in 

===== PDF_PAGE_1199 =====
1172    Spectinomycin
the serum. Spectinomycin does not appreciably enter the CSF or the 
eye and is not bound significantly to plasma proteins.
The absorbed drug is excreted via glomerular filtration into the 
urine, mostly unchanged. In cattle, the terminal half-life is ≈2 hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Spectinomycin is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it.
Adverse Effects
When used as labeled, adverse effects are unlikely with this drug. It 
is reported that parenteral use of this drug is much safer than with 
other aminocyclitol antibiotics, but little is known regarding its pro-
longed use. Hypersensitivity reactions and injection site reactions 
have been reported.2 Spectinomycin could potentially cause neuro -
muscular blockade; parenteral calcium administration will generally 
reverse the blockade.
Adverse effects that have been reported in human patients receiv-
ing the drug in single or multidose studies include soreness at the in-
jection site, rash, increases in BUN, alkaline phosphatase, and ALT, 
and decreases in hemoglobin, hematocrit, and creatinine clearance. 
Although increases in BUN and decreases in creatinine clearance 
and urine output have been noted, overt renal toxicity has not been 
demonstrated with this drug.
Cattle receiving the sulfate form subcutaneously have developed 
swelling at the injection site.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
It is unknown whether spectinomycin crosses the placenta. Specti -
nomycin is excreted into milk.3
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
No specific information was located on oral overdoses, but because 
the drug is negligibly absorbed after oral administration, significant 
toxicity is unlikely via this route. 
Cattle receiving 150 mg/kg/day SC for 5 days experienced injec -
tion site reactions.2 Injected doses of 90 mg produced transient atax-
ia in turkey poults.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions with spectinomycin have either been 
reported or are theoretical in humans or animals and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Chloramphenicol : Antagonism has been reported when used 
with spectinomycin.
 ■ Tetracycline : Antagonism has been reported when used with 
spectinomycin.
Dosages
SMALL MAMMALS :
Rabbits; susceptible infections  (extra-label): 1 g/L in drinking 
water for 7 days in weanling rabbits; may cause diarrhea4
SWINE:
Bacterial enteritis (white scours) in piglets associated with  
E coli susceptible to spectinomycin (label dose; FDA-approved): 
Piglets weighing less than 4.5  kg (10 lb): 50  mg/piglet (NOT  
mg/kg) PO twice daily for 3 to 5 days; Piglets weighing more than 
4.5 kg (10 lb): 100 mg/piglet (NOT mg/kg) PO twice daily for 3 
to 5 days.5 
BIRDS:
Prevention and control of chronic respiratory disease asso -
ciated with Mycoplasma gallisepticum in broilers (label dose; 
FDA-approved): Add sufficient amount to drinking water to at -
tain a final concentration of 2 g/gallon. (Label directions; Spect-
am® Water-Soluble)6
Infectious synovitis associated with Mycoplasma synoviae in 
broilers (label dose; FDA-approved): Add sufficient amount to 
drinking water to attain a final concentration of 1 g/gallon. (Label 
directions; Spectam® Water-Soluble)6
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
Chemistry/Synonyms
Spectinomycin, an aminocyclitol antibiotic obtained from Strepto-
myces spectabilis, is available as the dihydrochloride pentahydrate 
and hexahydrate sulfate salts. It occurs as a white to pale buff, crys -
talline powder with pKa of 7 and 8.7. It is freely soluble in water and 
practically insoluble in alcohol.
Spectinomycin may also be known as M-141, actinospectacin, 
spectinomycini, U-18409AE, Adspec®, Amtech Spectam ®, Kempi ®, 
 Kirin®, Spectoguard Scour-Chek ®, Stanilo ®, Togamycin ®, Trobicin ®, 
Trobicine®, or Vabicin®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise instructed by the manufacturer, store spectino -
mycin products at room temperature (15°C to 30°C [59°F to 86°F]). 
Protect from freezing.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Spectinomycin Water Soluble Powder: 0.5 g of spectinomycin per 
gram in 1 kg containers. Spectogard® Water Soluble Powder ; (Rx). 
FDA-approved for use in broiler chickens (not layers). Slaughter 
withdrawal (at labeled doses) = 5 days.
Spectinomycin Oral Solution: 50 mg/mL in 240 mL pump bottle, 
1000 mL pump bottle, and 1-gallon refill without pump; Spectogard 
Scour-Chek®, (OTC). FDA-approved for use in swine (weighing less 
than 6.8 kg [15 lb] and not older than 4 weeks of age). Slaughter 
withdrawal (at labeled doses) = 21 days.
The following products are listed in FDA ’s Green Book of approved 
animal drugs but may no longer be commercially available in the US: 
 ■ Spectinomycin Dihydrochloride Oral Tablets: 100 mg; (Rx)
 ■ Spectinomycin Dihydrochloride Injection: 100 mg/mL; (Rx)
 ■ Spectinomycin Sulfate Injection: 100 mg/mL in 500 mL vials; Ad-
spec®; (Rx). When used as labeled, slaughter withdrawal in cattle = 
11 days; not to be used in veal calves or in dairy cattle 20 months 
of age or older
 ■ Spectinomycin Dihydrochloride Pentahydrate Injection: 100 mg/mL, 
Prospec®; (OTC). For use in 1 to 3 days old chicks and poults 
 ■ Spectinomycin/Lincomycin in a 2:1 ratio; in 2.65 oz packets. Each 
packet contains lincomycin 16.7 g and spectinomycin 33.3 g;  LS 
50 Water Soluble Powder®, SepcLinx-50®, generic; (Rx). FDA-ap -
proved for use in chickens up to 7 days of age
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb

===== PDF_PAGE_1200 =====
Spinosad   1173
Spinosad
(spin-oh-sad) Comfortis®, Trifexis® 
Oral Flea Adulticide
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Oral flea adulticide for dogs and cats; labeled for one month 
prevention/treatment; not effective for flea eggs or other 
immature flea forms
 ▶ Combination product with milbemycin approved for dogs 
for heartworm prevention, prevention and treatment of flea 
infestations, and for the treatment and control of adult hook-
worms, roundworms, and whipworms.
 ▶ Fast onset of action; fleas begin to die within 30 minutes of 
administration
 ▶ Appears safe and well tolerated in dogs and cats.
 ▶ Give with food. 
 ▶ Potentially serious drug interaction with extra-label doses of 
ivermectin (and possibly other drugs)
Uses/Indications
In dogs, oral spinosad is FDA-approved for the prevention and treat-
ment of flea ( Ctenocephalides felis) infestations for one month in 
dogs 14 weeks of age and older and weighing 2.2 kg (5 lb) or more. 1 
Spinosad has also been shown to be effective in the prevention of 
Pulex irritans (human flea) infestation in dogs that live in close prox-
imity to flea-infested sheep.2
In cats, oral spinosad is FDA-approved to kill fleas ( C felis) and 
for the prevention and treatment of flea infestations (C felis) for one 
month in cats 14 weeks of age and older and weighing 1.8 kg (4.1 lb) 
or more.1
Spinosad is not labeled for use against ticks and it has been stat -
ed as not effective for this use; however, in a pilot study evaluating 
the efficacy of spinosad dosed at 50 mg/kg (1.7 times minimum flea 
dose) and 100 mg/kg (3.3 times minimum flea dose) against adult 
brown dog tick ( Rhipicephalus sanguineus ) infestations in dogs, 
≈95% of ticks were killed within 24 hours of dosing. The results sug-
gested that some posttreatment residual tick control persisted up to 
1 month.3
The spinosad/milbemycin combination product is FDA-approved 
for the prevention of heartworm infection ( Dirofilaria immitis), for 
the prevention and treatment of flea infestations (C felis), and for the 
treatment and control of adult hookworm ( Ancylostoma caninum), 
adult roundworm (Toxocara canis and Toxascaris leonina) and adult 
whipworm (Trichuris vulpis) infections in dogs 8 weeks of age or 
older and weighing 2.2 kg (5 lb) or more. 4 Monthly treatments with 
spinosad/milbemycin may prevent Angiostrongylus vasorum (French 
heartworm) infection in dogs.5
Pharmacology/Actions
Spinosad is a macrocyclic lactone containing a combination of two 
naturally occurring macrocyclic lactones (spinosyn A and spinosyn 
D). Its primary mode of action in insects is as a nicotinic acetylcho -
line D-alpha receptor agonist causing involuntary muscle contrac -
tions and tremors secondary to motor neuron activation.6 Prolonged 
exposure causes paralysis and flea death. Flea death is rapid, begin -
ning within 30 minutes of dosing and is complete in 4 hours in dogs 
and 24 hours in cats.1 In insects, spinosad also opens chloride chan-
nels similarly to other macrocyclic lactones.
Pharmacokinetics
After oral administration of spinosad (with food) to dogs, peak plas-
ma concentrations for spinosyn A and spinosyn D occur in ≈2 and 3 
hours, respectively. Spinosyn D concentrations are ≈5 times greater 
than those of spinosyn A. Spinosyn A and D are extensively bound 
(≈99%) to canine plasma proteins. Spinosad is hepatically biotrans -
formed with glutathione conjugates and 70% to 90% is eliminated 
in the feces via the bile. The plasma elimination half-life is ≈10 days.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
There are no labeled contraindications. 
For treatment of flea infestations, it is recommended to combine 
treatment with an insect growth regulator or insect development in-
hibitor (eg, methoprene, lufenuron) as well as environmental control 
measures.
It has been recommended not to use spinosad in combination 
with high extra-label doses of ivermectin due to potential severe 
neurotoxicity.7,8 
Use with caution in breeding females and dogs with pre-existing 
epilepsy at higher than label dosages as this may decrease seizure 
threshold.1,4
The chewable tablets are beef flavored and although they do not 
contain beef proteins, pork proteins and hydrolyzed soy are used. 
Dogs with pork or soy allergies may develop adverse effects.9
A study evaluating the safety of spinosad (doses up to 5 times 
the maximum label recommendation) with or without milbemy -
cin (doses up to 10 times the maximum label recommendation) in 
collies homozygous and heterozygous for the MDR1 mutation (also 
known as ABCB1-1delta) did not cause signs of neurotoxicosis.10
When using the spinosad/milbemycin combination product for 
dogs, ensure the patient has recently tested negative for heartworm; 
do not use in patients with heartworm infection.
Adverse Effects
Spinosad appears to be well tolerated in dogs and most animals will 
not show any adverse effects after dosing. In field studies, vomit -
ing was the most frequent adverse effect, occurring in up to 12% of 
dogs.6 The following additional adverse effects are possible and based 
on postapproval adverse drug event reporting (listed in decreasing 
order of frequency): depression/lethargy, anorexia, ataxia, diarrhea, 
pruritus, trembling, hypersalivation, and seizures.1
In cats, adverse effects are infrequent but vomiting (≈14%), leth -
argy, reduced appetite, weight loss, and diarrhea have been reported.1
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Use spinosad and spinosad/milbemycin with caution in breeding 
bitches; however, the drug appears to be relatively safe to use during 
pregnancy and lactation.1,4 In female beagles dosed at 1.3 times and 
4.4 times the recommended dose every 28 days prior to mating, 
during gestation, and during a 6 week lactation period, no changes 
in dam conception rates or mortality, body temperature, necropsy, or 
histopathology were seen in dams or puppies. 6 Treated dams expe-
rienced more frequent vomiting, especially at 1 hour postdose, than 
control dams.11 Puppies from dams treated at 1.3 times the recom -
mended rate had lower body weights; those from the 4.4 times group 
experienced more lethargy, dehydration, weakness, and felt cold to 
the touch. Safe use in breeding males has not been evaluated.
Safe use in breeding, pregnant, or lactating cats has not been 
 evaluated.6
In a pilot study in 3 dogs, spinosyns were excreted in milk at con-
centrations ≈2.5 times of that found in the plasma.6 Puppy mortality 
and morbidity was highest in puppies from the dam with the highest 
spinosyn milk concentrations, but causal effect cannot be inferred 
due to the small sample size of the study.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Spinosad appears to be safe in mammals, with an oral LD 50 in mice 
and rats of more than 5000 mg/kg.12 Acute overdoses in dogs appear 
to be relatively harmless. Common adverse effects seen in dogs with 
a spinosad overdose include lethargy, vomiting, ataxia, and trem -
bling; with vomiting the most common adverse effect in cats. In a 

===== PDF_PAGE_1201 =====
1174    Spinosad
dose tolerance study in adult beagles dosed orally up to 100 mg/kg 
PO once daily (16.7 times recommended dose) for 10 consecutive 
days, vomiting was routinely seen after the dose was administered. 6 
No significant changes in hematology, blood coagulation, or urinal-
ysis parameters were noted, but phospholipidosis (vacuolation) of 
the lymphoid tissue and mild elevations in ALT occurred in all dogs.
Vomiting and anorexia was noted in kittens receiving monthly 
oral doses as high as 500 mg/kg. 6 Phospholipidosis occurred in the 
liver, lung, and adrenal gland of dogs (4.4 times label dosage for 6 
months) and cats (3 times label dosage for 6 months)6 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving spinosad and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Ivermectin : It has been recommended not to use spinosad with 
high extra-label doses of ivermectin,7 as spinosad can increase the 
plasma concentrations of ivermectin in dogs with the area under 
curve (AUC) increasing 3.6-fold. 13 When used with heartworm 
preventives at their label dosages, spinosad appears safe to use. No 
signs of neurotoxicosis were seen in collies homozygous and het-
erozygous for the MDR1 genetic mutation receiving up to 5 times 
the recommended spinosad label dose with or without milbemy-
cin (up to 10 times the recommended label dose).10
 ■ Other Drugs Affected By P-Glycoprotein Inhibitors : 
Spinosad has been shown to be a substrate and potent inhibitor of 
canine p-glycoprotein, and other orally dosed drugs such as cyc -
losporine, verapamil, ketoconazole, or loperamide could poten -
tially interact at the level of the intestinal tract. Because spinosad 
is so highly bound to plasma proteins, the risk for additional in -
teractions at the blood-brain barrier appear to be limited.14 
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No specific concerns noted.
Dosages
DOGS:
Spinosad as a single agent - prevention and treatment of flea 
infestations in dogs 14 weeks of age and older and weighing 
2.2 kg (5 lb) or more  (label dosage; FDA-approved): Given oral-
ly once a month with food at the minimum dosage of spinosad 
30 mg/kg.1 Dogs weighing more than 54.5 kg (120 lb) should be 
administered the appropriate combination of tablets. See weight-
based dosage table below specifically for dogs. NOTE: Do not use 
the cat dosing table for dogs as overdoses could occur. 
Body weight in kg (lb) Spinosad per 
tablet (mg)
Number of tablets  
to administer
2.3-4.5 (5-10) 140 1
4.6-9.1 (10.1-20) 270 1
9.1-18.2 (20.1-40) 560 1
18.2-27.3 (40.1-60) 810 1
27.3-54.5 (60.1-120) 1620 1
Spinosad/Milbemycin - prevention of heartworm disease, pre-
vention and treatment of flea infestations, and treatment and 
control of adult hookworm, adult roundworm, and adult whip-
worm infections in dogs 8 weeks of age or older and weighing 
2.2 kg (5 lb) or more (label dosage; FDA-approved): Given orally 
once a month at the minimum dosage of spinosad 30 mg/kg with 
milbemycin oxime 0.5 mg/kg. 4 For heartworm prevention, give 
once monthly for at least 3 months after exposure to mosquitoes. 
Dogs weighing more than 54.5 kg (120 lb) should be administered 
the appropriate combination of tablets. See weight-based dosage 
table below.
Body weight in kg (lb) Spinosad/Milbemycin 
per tablet (mg)
Number of tablets 
to administer
2.3-4.5 (5-10) 140/2.3 1
4.6-9.1 (10.1-20) 270/4.5 1
9.1-18.2 (20.1-40) 560/9.3 1
18.2-27.3 (40.1-60) 810/13.5 1
27.3-54.5 (60.1-120) 1620/27 1
CATS:
Prevention and treatment of flea infestations  in cats 14 weeks 
of age and older and weighing 1.8 kg (4.1 lb) or more (label dos-
age; FDA-approved): Given orally once a month at the minimum 
dosage of spinosad 50 mg/kg just prior to or after feeding, once 
monthly.1 Alternatively, it may be offered in food or administered 
like other tablet medications. For cats weighing more than 10.9 kg 
(24 lb), the appropriate combination of tablets should be admin -
istered. See weight-based dosage table below specifically for cats. 
NOTE: Do not use the dog dosing table for cats as underdosing 
could occur.
Body weight in kg (lb) Spinosad per 
tablet (mg)
Number of tablets to 
administer
1.9-2.7 (4.1-6) 140 1
2.8-5.5 (6.1-12) 270 1
5.5-10.9 (12.1-24) 560 1
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy and adverse effects
 ■ Heartworm status prior to administration of Trifexis® to dogs
Client Information
 ■ Spinosad is an oral tablet given monthly that kills adult fleas on 
dogs and cats. It begins to kill fleas 30 minutes after dosing. When 
used alone, this medicine does not kill flea eggs or other imma -
ture flea forms. Y our veterinarian will talk with you about a flea 
control program. This medicine does not kill ticks.
 ■ The spinosad/milbemycin oral combination product is given 
monthly to kill adult fleas, prevent heartworm infection, and 
control hookworms, roundworms, and whipworms in dogs. This 
combination product does not kill ticks.
 ■ Give this medicine with food or immediately after a meal. 
 ■ When used as directed on the label, this medication appears safe.  
 ■ Keep chewable tablets well out of reach of children and animals.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Spinosad is a spinosyn class insecticide and contains two major 
factors, spinosyn A and spinosyn D, that are both derived from the 
naturally occurring bacterium, Saccharopolyspora spinosa. Spinosad 
may also be known as spinosyn A and D, DE-105, or XDE-105. Trade 
names include Comfortis®, Natroba® (human topical), Acuguard®, or 
Extinosad®.
Storage/Stability
Chewable tablets should be stored at 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F). Ex -
cursions are permitted between 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F).

===== PDF_PAGE_1202 =====
Spironolactone   1175
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Spinosad Chewable Tablets: 140 mg (dogs 2.3-4.5 kg [5-10 lb]),  
270 mg (dogs 4.6-9.1 kg [10.1-20 lb]), 560 mg (dogs 9.1-18.2 kg 
[20.1-40 lb]), 810 mg (dogs 18.2-27.3 kg [40.1-60 lb]), 1620 mg (dogs 
27.3-54.5 kg [60.1-120 lb]); Comfortis®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use 
in dogs. Dogs over 54.5 kg (120 lb) should be administered the ap -
propriate combination of tablets.
Spinosad Chewable Tablets: 140 mg (cats 1.9-2.7 kg [4.1-6 lb]),  
270 mg (cats 2.8-5.5 kg [6.1-12 lb]), 560 mg (cats 5.5-10.9 kg [12.1-
24 lb]); Comfortis® for Cats; (Rx). FDA-approved for cats. Cats over 
10.8 kg (24 lb) should be administered the appropriate combination 
of tablets.
Spinosad/Milbemycin Chewable Tablets: 140 mg/2.3 mg (dogs  
2.3-4.5 kg [5-10 lb]); 270 mg/4.5 mg (dogs 4.6-9.1 kg [10.1-20 lb]); 
560 mg/9.3 mg (dogs 9.1-18.2 kg [20.1-40 lb]); 810 mg/13.5 mg 
(dogs 18.2-27.3 kg [40.1-60 lb]); 1620 mg/27 mg (dogs 27.3-54.5 kg 
[60.1-120 lb]); Trifexis®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs. Dogs 
over 54.5 kg (120 lb) should be administered the appropriate combi-
nation of tablets.
NOTE: Tablets are beef flavored (but contain pork and soy proteins), 
and the sizes are color-coded and provided in packets of 6 or 12 
 tablets.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
None for systemic use
Spinosad 0.9% Topical Suspension (120 mL): Natroba®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Spironolactone
(speer-on-oh-lak-tone) Aldactone®
Aldosterone Antagonist
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Aldosterone antagonist used as a potassium-sparing diuretic 
and for adjunctive treatment for heart failure or ascites; should 
not be substituted for furosemide in patients with CHF
 ▶ Contraindications include hyperkalemia, Addison’s disease, 
anuria, acute kidney injury, or significant renal impairment.
 ▶ Caution in patients with renal impairment or hepatic disease
 ▶ Adverse effects include facial dermatitis in cats. Hyperkalemia, 
hyponatremia, and dehydration possible; increased BUN and 
mild acidosis in patients with renal impairment. GI distress 
(eg, vomiting, anorexia), CNS effects (eg, lethargy, ataxia), 
and endocrine changes (eg, reduced testosterone, increased 
estrogen) possible.
 ▶ The National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies spironolactone as a hazardous drug; use 
appropriate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Spironolactone may be used in patients with congestive heart failure 
(CHF) for its cardioprotective effects. It is also administered to pa -
tients that develop hypokalemia while receiving other diuretics and 
are unwilling or unable to supplement with exogenous potassium 
sources. In a study evaluating spironolactone’s efficacy for improv-
ing survival in dogs with naturally occurring mitral regurgitation in 
myxomatous mitral valve disease (MMVD), the authors concluded 
that spironolactone added to conventional cardiac therapy decreased 
the risk for cardiac-related death, euthanasia, or severe worsening 
of the disease.1 However, the clinical relevance of these findings has 
been questioned due to the study design, event rate, patient with -
drawals, and patient categorization with regard to heart failure. 2 A 
prospective, randomized, single-blinded, placebo-controlled study 
evaluating the efficacy of spironolactone in combination with benaz-
epril in dogs with preclinical MMVD failed to demonstrate a protec-
tive effect of the 2 drugs as compared with placebo. 3 Although effi-
cacy remains in doubt, a randomized, double-blinded, prospective 
study found that spironolactone added to conventional treatment 
(ACE inhibitors, furosemide ± digoxin) did not increase risk for ad-
verse effects, death caused by cardiac disease, renal disease, hyperka-
lemia, or azotemia.4 
Spironolactone may also be effective in treating ascites, as it 
has less potential to increase ammonia concentrations than other 
 diuretics. 
Spironolactone may find a role in treating renal disease. In rats, 
it has been shown to decrease proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis 
in experimental models of renal disease, but clinical effectiveness in 
dogs has been disappointing. It has potential therapeutic benefit in 
feline chronic kidney disease,5 but studies demonstrating efficacy are 
lacking.
Pharmacology/Actions
Spironolactone is also categorized as a potassium-sparing diuretic 
or a mineralocorticoid-receptor antagonist. Aldosterone is compet-
itively inhibited by spironolactone in the distal renal tubules with 
resultant increased excretion of sodium, chloride, and water, and de-
creased excretion of potassium, ammonium, phosphate, and titrat -
able acid. Spironolactone has no effect on carbonic anhydrase or re-
nal transport mechanisms and has its greatest effect in patients with 
hyperaldosteronism. When used alone in healthy dogs, spironolac -
tone does not appear to cause significant diuresis.6 As a diuretic, spi-
ronolactone is not commonly used alone, as most sodium is reab -
sorbed at the proximal tubules. Combining it with a thiazide or loop 
diuretic maximizes its diuretic effect. Aldosterone also plays a role 
in the progression of myocardial fibrosis, vascular remodeling, and 
endothelial dysfunction in heart failure. In humans with heart fail -
ure, spironolactone has been shown to reduce remodeling, cardiac fi-
brosis, and the progression of left ventricular dysfunction.7 Whether 
this occurs in veterinary patients with heart failure is controversial. 
One study in Maine Coon cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
but not heart failure showed that spironolactone did not cause sig -
nificant changes in diastolic function or left ventricular mass after 4 
months of treatment.8
Pharmacokinetics
Because spironolactone is unstable if frozen and thawed, pharma -
cokinetic studies in animals are not readily performed. In fasted 
dogs, oral bioavailability of spironolactone (measured via its main 
metabolites) is ≈50% but increases up to 90% when the drug is given 
with food. Approximately 70% of a dose is found in the feces and 
18% in the urine. In a recent pharmacodynamic study in 15 beagles, 
the dose required to inhibit the action of aldosterone by 50% was 
estimated to be ≈1.1 mg/kg, and the authors suggest that the dose 
for spironolactone would be ≈2 mg/kg PO once daily to effectively 
inhibit the aldosterone concentrations associated with CHF in dogs.9
In humans, spironolactone is more than 90% bioavailable and 
peak concentrations are reached within 1 to 2 hours. The diuretic 
action of spironolactone when used alone is gradually attained and 
generally reaches its maximal effect on the third day of therapy. Spi-
ronolactone and its active metabolite, canrenone, are both ≈98% 
bound to plasma proteins. Both spironolactone and its metabolites 
may cross the placenta. Canrenone has been detected in breast milk. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1203 =====
1176    Spironolactone
Spironolactone is rapidly metabolized (half-life of 1 to 2 hours) to 
several metabolites, including canrenone, which has diuretic activity. 
Canrenone is more slowly eliminated, with an average half-life of 
≈20 hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Spironolactone is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it and 
those with hyperkalemia, Addison’s disease, anuria, or acute renal 
failure. It should be used cautiously in patients with significant renal 
impairment or hepatic disease but is often used to treat ascites.
The label for Prilactone®Next (the canine product licensed in the 
UK) states Do not use in dogs suffering from hypoadrenocorticism, 
hyperkalemia, or hyponatremia. Do not administer spironolactone in 
conjunction with NSAIDs to dogs with renal insufficiency. As spirono-
lactone has an antiandrogenic effect, it is not recommended to admin-
ister the product to growing dogs.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies spironolactone as a hazardous drug; personal 
protective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize 
the risk of exposure.10 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are usually considered mild and reversible upon 
discontinuation of the drug. The most likely adverse effects are GI 
effects (eg, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea) and electrolyte (hyperkale-
mia, hyponatremia) and water balance (dehydration) abnormalities. 
In dogs, electrolytes do not appear to be significantly affected. After 
cats received spironolactone 2.7 mg/kg PO twice daily for 7 to 9 days, 
the following serum values significantly increased (on average): po -
tassium 0.39 mEq/L, calcium 0.48 mg/dL, creatinine 0.22 mg/dL, 
phosphorus 0.63 mg/dL, and total protein 0.51 mg/dL.12
A study in dogs found that spironolactone added to conventional 
treatment (ACE inhibitors, furosemide ± digoxin) did not increase 
risk for adverse effects, death caused by cardiac disease, renal dis -
ease, hyperkalemia, or azotemia. 4 In the prospective study evaluat -
ing the efficacy of spironolactone in combination with benazepril 
in dogs with preclinical MMVD, there was no difference in adverse 
events between those dogs receiving active medication as compared 
with the placebo group.3
In cats, an interim report of a study using spironolactone  
1.7 – 3.3 mg/kg PO once daily ( n = 16) with benazepril and furose -
mide reported no severe adverse events except worsening of heart 
failure (death, euthanasia, aortic thromboembolism, and one case of 
severe anorexia). However, of the original 16 cats enrolled, 11 died 
or were euthanized, 2 were withdrawn, 1 completed 15 month fol -
low-up ,and 2 cats remain in the study. 13 The final report from this 
study reported that 9 of 11 cats in the placebo group reached the 
primary endpoint of death due to cardiac causes as compared with 2 
of 9 cats in the spironolactone group.14 In the study in Maine Coon 
cats,8 ≈⅓ of treated subjects developed severe facial dermatitis. 
Transient increases in BUN and mild acidosis may occur in pa -
tients with renal impairment. Use of spironolactone in patients with 
severe renal impairment may lead to hyperkalemia. 
Spironolactone reportedly inhibits the synthesis of testosterone 
and may increase the peripheral conversion of testosterone to estra-
diol; gynecomastia has been reported in human males. Long-term 
toxicity studies in rats have demonstrated that spironolactone is tu-
morigenic in that species.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Spironolactone or its metabolites may cross the placental barrier. 
Feminization occurs in male rat fetuses, and endocrine dysfunction 
in females with in utero spironolactone exposure. 
Canrenone, a metabolite of spironolactone, appears in maternal 
milk. In humans, the estimated maximum dose to the infant is ≈0.2% 
of the mother’s daily dose. Use with caution in nursing patients, but it 
is unlikely to have clinical significance in veterinary patients.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Information on spironolactone overdoses is limited. Dose-depen -
dent adverse effects (see Adverse Effects) were noted in healthy dogs 
after administration of up to 10 times the recommended dose. If an 
acute overdose occurs, it is suggested to follow the guidelines out -
lined in the Chlorothiazide and Furosemide monographs. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged to consult with one of 
the 24-hour poison consultation centers that specialize in providing 
information specific for veterinary patients. For general information 
related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact informa-
tion for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving spironolactone and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ ACE Inhibitors  (eg, enalapril, lisinopril): Hyperkalemia is pos-
sible but unlikely and usually clinically irrelevant if it occurs.4,11 
 ■ Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARBs) (eg, irbesartan, 
telmisartan): Hyperkalemia is possible.
 ■ Beta-Adrenergic Antagonists (eg, atenolol, carvedilol, 
propranolol): Hyperkalemia is possible.
 ■ Cholestyramine : Hyperkalemic metabolic acidosis is possible.
 ■ Deoxycorticosterone Piv alate (DOCP) : May reduce di -
uretic and natriuretic effects of spironolactone
 ■ Digoxin : Spironolactone may increase the half-life of digoxin; 
enhanced monitoring of digoxin serum concentrations and ef -
fects is warranted when spironolactone is used with these agents.
 ■ Mitotane : Spironolactone may mute the effects of mitotane if 
given concurrently, but very limited information is available on 
this potential interaction; monitor carefully.
 ■ Neuromuscular Blockers, Non-Depolarizing (eg, pan-
curonium, rocuronium, vecuronium): Increase in neuromuscu-
lar blockade effects is possible
 ■ Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; eg, 
carprofen, robenacoxib): NSAIDs may reduce diuretic and natri-
uretic effects of spironolactone. Ensure adequate hydration before 
using combination.15
 ■ Potassium-Sparing Diuretics, Other  (eg, triamterene): 
Hyperkalemia is possible.
 ■ Potassium Supplements : Hyperkalemia is possible.
 ■ Salicylates (eg, aspirin, bismuth subsalicylate ): Spironolac-
tone’s diuretic effects may be decreased if aspirin or other salicy-
lates are administered concomitantly.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Spironolactone may give falsely elevated digoxin values if using a 
radioimmunoassay (RIA) method.
 ■ Fluorometric methods of determining plasma and urinary  
17-hydroxycorticosteroids (cortisol) may be interfered with by 
spironolactone.
Dosages
DOGS:
Preclinical myxomatous mitral valve disease  (extra-label):  
2 – 4 mg/kg PO once daily in combination with benazepril, al -
though this study failed to demonstrate the drug combination 
could delay onset of heart failure compared to placebo.3
Compensated MMVD (extra-label): 2 mg/kg PO once daily in 

===== PDF_PAGE_1204 =====
Spironolactone/Benazepril    1177
combination with ACE-inhibitor and furosemide. Pilot study 
suggestive of benefit from spironolactone, but further studies are 
warranted.16
Adjunctive treatment of congestive heart failure caused by 
MMVD (extra-label): 
a) 2 mg/kg PO once daily with food17,18
b) 1 – 2 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours 19; dosing ranges of  
0.5 – 4 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours have been noted. 
Ascites (extra-label): 1 – 2 mg/kg PO once daily. If no response 
observed within 7 to 10 days, titrate dose upward every 3 to 5 days 
to a maximum of 4 mg/kg/day.20
Adjunctive treatment of hypertension (extra-label): 1 – 2 mg/kg 
PO every 12 hours.21 Not first-line therapy; effectiveness has been 
marginal when the drug is used as sole therapy for the manage -
ment of hypertension.22
CATS:
Diuretic in heart failure (extra-label): No definitive studies doc-
umenting efficacy were located. Anecdotally, some may add spi -
ronolactone using dog dosages when furosemide and ACE inhib-
itors do not control fluid accumulation in refractory CHF .
Cardiomyopathy (extra-label): 1.7 – 3.3 mg/kg once daily. 14 This 
was a pilot study, and the authors suggest further study is war -
ranted.
Adjunctive treatment of hypertension (extra-label): 1 – 2 mg/kg  
PO every 12 hours.21 Not first-line therapy; effectiveness has been 
marginal when the drug is used as sole therapy for the manage -
ment of hypertension, even in cats with hyperaldosteronism. 
 Cutaneous drug reactions may also limit usefulness.22
Monitoring
 ■ Serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine. Initially, 5 to 14 days after 
starting therapy and every 2 months thereafter23
 ■ Hydration status and body weight
 ■ Respiratory rate and effort
 ■ Blood pressure, if indicated
 ■ Clinical signs of edema and ascites; serial girth measurements
Client Information
 ■ When beginning this medicine, your animal may urinate more 
often than normal.
 ■ Administer with a meal.
 ■ Because this drug can change electrolytes (salts) in the blood, 
more frequent blood testing may be required. Do not miss these 
important follow-up visits.
 ■ If your animal shows any of the following signs, contact your vet-
erinarian immediately: sores or face scratching (cats), severe or 
continuing vomiting or diarrhea, acting extremely tired, trouble 
walking or keeping balance, or stopping eating, drinking, or uri -
nating.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Spironolactone is a synthetically produced aldosterone antagonist 
that occurs as a cream to light tan, crystalline powder with a faint 
mercaptan-like odor. Spironolactone is practically insoluble in water 
and soluble in alcohol.
Spironolactone may also be known as espironolactona, SC-9420, 
spirolactone, and spironolactonum; many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Spironolactone tablets should be stored at room temperature in 
tight, light-resistant containers.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
An extemporaneously prepared oral suspension can be prepared by 
pulverizing commercially available tablets and adding cherry syrup, 
simple syrup, or a mixture of Ora-Sweet® and Ora-Plus®. This prepa-
ration is reportedly stable for 60 days.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
No single-agent FDA-approved formulations in the United States; 
may be available in other countries
Spironolactone/Benazepril Tablets: 20 mg/2.5 mg, 40 mg/5 mg, and 
80 mg/10 mg; Cardalis®;(Rx)
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 4 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Spironolactone Oral Tablets: 25 mg, 50 mg, and 100 mg; Aldactone®, 
generic; (Rx)
Spironolactone/Hydrochlorothiazide Oral Tablets: 25 mg/25 mg and 
50 mg/50 mg; Aldactazide®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Spironolactone/Benazepril
(speer-on-oh-lak-tone /ben-a-za-pril) Cardalis®
Aldosterone Antagonist/Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme (ACE) 
Inhibitor
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Indicated for the adjunctive management of clinical signs of 
mild, moderate, or severe congestive heart failure in dogs due 
to atrioventricular valvular insufficiency (AVVI) 
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity, hypoadrenocorti-
cism, hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, in cases of cardiac output 
failure due to aortic or pulmonary stenosis, pregnancy, or in 
growing dogs or dogs with renal impairment that are receiv-
ing NSAIDs.
 ▶ Use with caution in dogs with renal or hepatic impairment.
 ▶ Adverse effects include vomiting and elevations of serum 
magnesium and potassium.
 ▶ The National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies spironolactone as a hazardous drug; use 
appropriate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
The spironolactone/benazepril combination product is FDA-ap -
proved with concurrent therapy (eg, furosemide) for the manage -
ment of clinical signs related to mild, moderate, or severe congestive 
heart failure in dogs due to atrioventricular valvular insufficiency 
(AVVI). In a field study, 1 all dogs received furosemide in addition 
to spironolactone/benazepril; digoxin or calcium channel blockers 
were used to control supraventricular arrhythmias.1 
Spironolactone/benazepril delayed the onset of cardiac death, 
recurrent or worsening pulmonary edema, new cardiogenic ascites, 
or clinical signs of heart failure requiring high-dose furosemide, al -
though treatment failure rates were high (81% for spironolactone/
benazepril; 88% for benazepril alone). 2 In contrast, a prospective, 
randomized, single-blinded, placebo-controlled study evaluating the 
efficacy of the spironolactone/benazepril combination in dogs with 
preclinical MMVD failed to demonstrate a protective effect from the 
combination product compared with placebo.3 

===== PDF_PAGE_1205 =====
1178    Spironolactone/Benazepril
Pharmacology/Actions
Spironolactone is an aldosterone antagonist and a potassium-spar -
ing diuretic; it also has an affinity for androgen and progesterone re-
ceptors. Aldosterone is competitively inhibited by spironolactone in 
the distal renal tubules with resultant increased excretion of sodium, 
chloride, and water, and decreased excretion of potassium, ammoni-
um, phosphate, and titratable acid. In dogs, aldosterone also plays a 
role in the progression of myocardial fibrosis, vascular remodeling, 
and endothelial dysfunction in heart failure, and spironolactone has 
been shown to reduce these effects in dogs.4 The addition of spirono-
lactone to an ACE inhibitor treatment regimen helps prevent the un-
wanted effects of aldosterone synthesized from other (ie, non-ACE) 
pathways.
In a pharmacodynamic study in 15 beagles, 5 the spironolactone 
dose required to inhibit the action of aldosterone by 50% was esti -
mated to be ≈1.1 mg/kg, and the authors suggest that the dose for 
spironolactone would be ≈2 mg/kg PO once daily to obtain concen-
trations effective at inhibiting the aldosterone levels associated with 
CHF in dogs. The spironolactone/benazepril combination inhibited 
plasma ACE activity by 95% at peak effect, and by over 80% over 24 
hours.6
Benazepril is a prodrug and has little pharmacologic activity of 
its own. After being hydrolyzed in the liver to benazeprilat, the drug 
inhibits angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), preventing the con-
version of angiotensin-I to angiotensin-II. Angiotensin-II is a po -
tent vasoconstrictor and stimulates production of aldosterone in 
the adrenal cortex. By blocking angiotensin-II formation, ACE in -
hibitors reduce blood pressure in hypertensive patients and vascu -
lar resistance in patients with congestive heart failure. Aldosterone 
breakthrough (ie, insufficient suppression of aldosterone secretion) 
has been documented with ACE inhibitor administration to healthy 
dogs.7
Pharmacokinetics
In fasted dogs, oral bioavailability of spironolactone (measured via 
its primary active metabolites: 7-alpha-thiomethyl-spironolactone 
and canrenone) is ≈50%, but increases up to 90% when given with 
food.6 Metabolite half-lives are ≈7 to 10 hours.2,6 Approximately 70% 
of a dose is found in the feces and 20% in the urine.2,6 
After oral administration in healthy dogs, benazepril is rapidly 
absorbed and converted into the active metabolite benazeprilat, with 
peak concentrations of benazeprilat occurring 85 to 120 minutes after 
administration.8-11 Protein binding is ≈85%. Benazeprilat half-life is 12 
to 21 hours9,11 and it is cleared via both renal (45%) and hepatic (55%) 
routes.2 Renal impairment does not alter benazeprilat clearance.8 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Spironolactone/benazepril is contraindicated in patients hypersensi-
tive to either spironolactone or ACE inhibitors, and in patients with 
hypoadrenocorticism, hyperkalemia, or hyponatremia.2,6 Do not use 
in cases of cardiac output failure due to aortic or pulmonary steno -
sis.6 Pulmonary edema should be stabilized prior to use of the com -
bination.2 Use with caution in growing dogs due to antiandrogenic 
effects associated with spironolactone, and in patients with renal or 
hepatic impairment.2,6 
Do not administer spironolactone/benazepril in conjunction 
with NSAIDs to dogs with renal insufficiency. 2,6 Adequate hydra -
tion should be ensured in all treated dogs to reduce the risk for renal 
 toxicity.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies spironolactone as a hazardous drug. Therefore, 
personal protective equipment (PPE) should be used to minimize 
the risk for exposure.12 
Do not confuse Cardalis® with Cialis® or Cardizem®. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in FDA field studies included anorexia, 
vomiting, lethargy, diarrhea, renal insufficiency, collapse, hepatopa-
thy, and urinary incontinence.1 In one study,3 adverse effects from the 
combination did not differ from dogs that received placebo. Renal 
insufficiency was seen more frequently in dogs treated with the spi -
ronolactone/benazepril combination; however, renal function values 
were not statistically different between the treatment groups. In dogs 
receiving spironolactone/benazepril, elevations of serum magne -
sium and potassium can be significantly higher than dogs receiving 
only benazepril. Reversible prostatic atrophy has been observed in 
male dogs.6 Spironolactone inhibits the synthesis of testosterone and 
may increase the peripheral conversion of testosterone to estradiol. 
Adverse endocrine effects in humans include menstrual irregulari -
ties and gynecomastia; significance in veterinary patients is unclear.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Spironolactone/benazepril is contraindicated during pregnancy.6 In 
rats, use of ACE inhibitors (eg, benazepril) at labeled dosages during 
the second and third trimesters is associated with fetal malformation 
and fetal and neonatal morbidity and mortality. Spironolactone or 
its metabolites may cross the placental barrier. Feminization occurs 
in male rat fetuses, and endocrine dysfunction in females with utero 
spironolactone exposure. Reversible prostatic atrophy has been ob -
served in male dogs treated with spironolactone, and in dogs receiv-
ing 3 to 5 times the labeled dosage of the spironolactone/benazepril 
combination.2,6
Canrenone, a metabolite of spironolactone, appears in maternal 
milk. Benazepril is excreted in maternal milk. Use this combination 
product with caution in nursing patients. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Clinical signs associated with an overdose typically are extensions of 
the adverse effects of both drugs and may include hypotension and 
vomiting. Hyperkalemia and hyponatremia may occur. Compensa -
tory hypertrophy of the zona glomerulosa occurred at doses 3 times 
or greater than the recommended dose.2 
Supportive treatment including volume expansion with appropri-
ate IV fluid therapy is recommended if hypotension is documented. 
Because of benazepril’s long duration of action, prolonged monitor-
ing and treatment may be required. The manufacturer recommends 
inducing vomiting, gastric lavage, and electrolyte monitoring as ap-
propriate.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged to consult with one of 
the 24-hour poison consultation centers that specialize in providing 
information specific for veterinary patients. For general information 
related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact informa-
tion for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving spironolactone and/or 
benazepril and may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless 
otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but 
weigh the potential risks and perform additional monitoring when 
appropriate.
 ■ Allopurinol : Concurrent use may cause severe hypersensitiv -
ity reactions, neutropenia, agranulocytosis, or serious infections.
 ■ Alpha-2-Adrenergic Agonists  (eg, clonidine, dexmedeto-
midine): Concurrent use may result in additive effects on blood 
pressure and heart rate.
 ■ Antidiabetic agents  (eg, glipizide, insulin): Possible increased 
risk for hypoglycemia; enhanced monitoring is recommended
 ■ Histamine H1 Receptor Antagonists  (eg, diphenhydr-
amine): Concurrent use may result in additive hypotension.
 ■ Apomorphine : Concurrent use may result in additive hypoten-

===== PDF_PAGE_1206 =====
Spironolactone/Benazepril    1179
sion.
 ■ Angiotensin Receptor Blockers  (ARBs; eg, candesartan, 
telmisartan): Concurrent use may increase the risk for adverse 
effects such as hypotension, syncope, hyperkalemia, changes in 
renal function, or acute renal insufficiency.
 ■ Aspirin : Aspirin may potentially negate the decrease in system -
ic vascular resistance induced by ACE inhibitors; however, one 
study in dogs using low-dose aspirin showed that the hemody -
namic effects of enalaprilat (active metabolite of enalapril, a relat-
ed drug) were not affected.13
 ■ Azathioprine : Concurrent use may result in an increased risk 
for neutropenia or leukopenia.
 ■ Barbiturates (eg, phenobarbital): Concurrent use may en -
hance the hypotensive effects of benazepril.
 ■ Benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam, midazolam): Concurrent use 
may lead to low blood pressure.
 ■ Beta-Blockers (eg, atenolol, propranolol ): Concurrent use 
may result in additive hypotension or hyperkalemia.
 ■ Buspirone : Concurrent use may increase risk for hypotension.
 ■ Cabergoline : Concurrent use may lead to additive hypotension.
 ■ Calcium Channel Blockers (eg, amlodipine, diltiazem ): 
Concurrent use may result in hypotension.
 ■ Cholestyramine : Concurrent use may increase risk for hyper-
kalemic metabolic acidosis due to spironolactone.
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one): May 
decrease antihypertensive effects by causing fluid and sodium re-
tention
 ■ Cyclosporine : Concurrent administration may increase the 
risk for hyperkalemia or precipitate acute renal failure.
 ■ Dalteparin/Enoxaparin : Concurrent use may increase risk 
for hyperkalemia.
 ■ Desoxycorticosterone Piv alate (DOCP) : DOCP may 
cause moderate reduction in the natriuretic effect of spironolac -
tone.6 Spironolactone may reduce the effect of DOCP .2 
 ■ Diazoxide : Concurrent use may lead to hypotension and ortho-
stasis.
 ■ Digoxin : Spironolactone may increase the half-life of digoxin; 
however, field studies supported that digoxin can be safely used 
with the spironolactone/benazepril combination. 1 Enhanced 
monitoring of digoxin serum levels and effects should be consid-
ered.
 ■ Diuretics  (eg, furosemide, hydrochlorothiazide): Potential for 
increased hypotensive effects. Field studies demonstrated that fu-
rosemide can be safely used with the spironolactone/benazepril 
combination.
 ■ Diuretics, Potassium-Sparing (eg, triamterene): Concur -
rent use may increase hyperkalemic effects. Enhanced monitoring 
of serum potassium is recommended.
 ■ Fenoldopam : Concurrent administration may theoretically in -
crease the risk for severe hypotension.
 ■ Heparin : Concurrent use may increase the risk for hyperkale -
mia.
 ■ Interferon Alfa : Concurrent use may increase risk for gran -
ulocytopenia.
 ■ Iodinated Contrast Agents  (eg, iohexol): Concurrent use 
may increase risk for nephrotoxicity. 
 ■ Iron : Benazepril may increase severity and risk for systemic ad -
verse effects associated with parenteral administration of iron.
 ■ Lanthanum : In theory, lanthanum may bind with drugs in the 
GI tract and interfere with absorption. Lanthanum should be giv-
en 2 hours before or after benazepril.
 ■ Methotrexate : Concurrent use may potentiate risk for liver 
injury.
 ■ Mirtazapine : Concurrent administration may result in additive 
hypotension and orthostasis.
 ■ Mitotane : Spironolactone may mute the effects of mitotane if 
given concurrently, but very limited information is available on 
this potential interaction; monitor carefully.
 ■ Muscle Relaxants  (eg, baclofen, methocarbamol): Concur-
rent use may have additive blood pressure lowering effects.
 ■ Naltrexone : Concurrent administration may increase risk for 
hepatotoxicity.
 ■ Nitroglycerin : Benazepril may enhance the vasodilatory and 
hypotensive effects.
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs  ( NSAIDs; eg, 
carprofen, meloxicam, robenacoxib): Potentially could increase 
the risk for nephrotoxicity and/or reduce efficacy of the ACE in -
hibitor in animals with cardiac or renal disease. Combination is 
considered contraindicated in dogs with renal insufficiency.2,6,14,15
 ■ Opioids (eg, butorphanol, morphine): Concurrent use may re-
sult in additive hypotension and orthostasis.
 ■ Pentoxifylline : Concurrent use may increase risk for hypo -
tension.
 ■ Phenothiazines  (eg, acepromazine, chlorpromazine): Con -
current administration may cause orthostatic hypotension and 
syncope associated with vasodilation.
 ■ Polyethylene Glycol 3350 : Concurrent use may increase 
risk for fluid and electrolyte imbalances leading to renal impair -
ment, cardiac arrhythmias, or seizures.
 ■ Potassium Supplements : Increased risk for hyperkalemia
 ■ Prazosin : Concurrent use can cause additive hypotension.
 ■ Pregabalin : Concurrent use may increase risk for angioedema.
 ■ QT Prolonging Agents  (eg, amiodarone, cisapride, fluoro-
quinolones, ondansetron, sotalol): Concurrent use may increase 
risk for QTc prolongation and arrhythmias. 
 ■ Salicylates (eg, aspirin): Spironolactone’s diuretic effects may 
be decreased if aspirin or other salicylates are administered con -
comitantly. 
 ■ Selegiline : Concurrent use can cause additive hypotension and 
orthostasis.
 ■ Sildenafil : Concurrent use may potentiate the blood pressure 
lowering effects of benazepril and cause orthostasis and hypoten-
sion.
 ■ Sulfa-/Trimethoprim : Concurrent use may increase the risk 
for hyperkalemia.
 ■ Trazodone : Concurrent use may result in additive hypotension 
and orthostasis.
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants  ( TCAs; eg, amitriptyline, clo -
mipramine): Concurrent use may result in additive hypotension 
and orthostasis.
Laboratory Considerations 
 ■ Spironolactone may give falsely elevated digoxin values, if using a 
radioimmunoassay (RIA) method.
 ■ Fluorometric methods of determining plasma and urinary  
17-hydroxycorticosteroids (cortisol) may be interfered with by 
spironolactone.
Dosages
DOGS:
Management of clinical signs of mild, moderate, or severe con-
gestive heart failure due to AVVI (label dosage, FDA-approved): 
Spironolactone 2 mg/kg with benazepril 0.25 mg/kg PO once 

===== PDF_PAGE_1207 =====
1180    Stanozolol
daily with food, using an appropriate combination of whole and/or 
half tablets.1 Begin use once pulmonary edema is stabilized; use in 
conjunction with concomitant therapy (eg, furosemide).
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: respiratory rate and effort and other clinical 
signs of heart failure
 ■ Hydration status and body weight 
 ■ Clinical signs of pulmonary edema and ascites; serial girth mea -
surements 
 ■ Baseline and periodic serum electrolytes (particularly potassium 
and magnesium), BUN, and creatinine2,16
 ■ Measure digoxin levels regularly if dog is receiving concomitant 
digoxin; spironolactone can decrease the elimination (and thus 
increase plasma concentrations) of digoxin and cause toxicity.
 ■ Cardiovascular parameters: blood pressure, ECG, thoracic radio-
graphs, echocardiogram 
Client Information
 ■ This medicine should be given with food, or within 30 minutes 
of feeding.
 ■ Ensure that your dog always has access to fresh water
 ■ It is important to give this medicine as prescribed. Do not stop or 
change the amount you are giving your dog without your veteri -
narian’s guidance.
 ■ Y our dog will need to have periodic examinations, blood pressure 
measurements, and blood tests performed while taking this med-
icine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
 ■ If your dog shows any of the following side effects, contact your 
veterinarian immediately: severe or continuing vomiting or diar-
rhea, acting extremely tired, panting or increased breathing rate, 
trouble walking or keeping balance, or stopping eating, drinking, 
or urinating.
 ■ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies spironolactone as a hazardous drug; wearing 
gloves should be considered (especially if you are pregnant) when 
giving this medicine to your dog.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Spironolactone is a synthetically produced aldosterone antagonist 
that occurs as a cream to light tan crystalline powder with a faint 
mercaptan-like odor and is practically insoluble in water and soluble 
in alcohol. Benazepril HCl occurs as a white to off-white crystalline 
powder that is soluble in water and ethanol.
Storage/Stability
Store in the manufacturer’s original container at room temperature 
20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F), with excursions permitted between 15°C 
to 30°C (59°F-86°F). Store securely out of reach of pets or children.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No information noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Spironolactone and Benazepril HCl Chewable Tablets (scored; in 
a fixed 8:1 ratio of spironolactone to benazepril hydrochloride):  
20 mg spironolactone + 2.5 mg benazepril , 40 mg spironolactone + 
5 mg benazepril, and 80 mg spironolactone + 10 mg benazepril in 
30-count bottles; Cardalis®; (Rx). NADA # 141-538. Contains meat 
flavoring.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
None, although separate formulations of spironolactone and benaz-
epril as a sole agent are readily available and generic.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Stanozolol
(stah-no-zo-lahl) Winstrol®-V
Anabolic Steroid
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ FDA-approved controlled substance that is no longer market-
ed in the United States. Potentially useful in dogs for medical 
treatment of tracheal collapse
 ▶ Contraindications include in pregnant animals, breeding stal-
lions, and food animals. 
 ▶ Use extreme caution if using in cats or animals with hepatic 
dysfunction, hypercalcemia, history of myocardial infarction, 
pituitary insufficiency, prostate carcinoma, mammary carci-
noma, benign prostatic hypertrophy, or are in the nephrotic 
stage of nephritis. 
 ▶ Use caution in animals with cardiac and renal dysfunction; 
perform enhanced fluid and electrolyte monitoring.
 ▶ Adverse effects include high incidence of hepatotoxicity in 
cats. Other possible effects include sodium, calcium, potassi-
um, water, chloride, and phosphate retention; hepatotoxicity; 
behavioral (androgenic) changes; and reproductive abnormal-
ities (oligospermia, estrus suppression).
 ▶ Drug interactions and laboratory interactions are possible.
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies androgens as hazardous drugs; use appro-
priate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
The previously marketed veterinary stanozolol product Winstrol®-V 
was approved as an adjunct to other specific and supportive therapy, 
including nutritional therapy to improve appetite, promote weight 
gain, and increase strength and vitality in dogs, cats, and horses. In a 
review of the evidence supporting anabolic steroid use in horses, the 
authors conclude: Level 1 evidence for the efficacy of anabolic steroids 
in horses for therapeutic uses is not found in the biomedical literature. 
Evidence in other species exists for the efficacy of anabolic steroids in 
treating anemia and increasing muscle mass after illness or injury, but 
that evidence is not unequivocal, and the applicability to horses has 
not been demonstrated. There is little evidence in other species for the 
efficacy of anabolic steroids for increasing appetite.1
In sheep, a study that used an experimental model of osteoar -
thritis (OA) found intra-articular stanozolol reduced osteophytes 
formation and subchondral bone reaction and promoted articular 
cartilage regeneration.2 Intra-articular administration once weekly 
to horses with both acute and chronic OA improved physical charac-
teristics of synovial fluid as well as lameness scores. 3 Intra-articular 
bilateral stanozolol improved clinical signs in police dogs with OA, 
but was less effective than hyaluranate.4 
Stanozolol has been used to treat anemia of chronic disease. Be -
cause stanozolol has been demonstrated to enhance fibrinolysis after 
parenteral injection, it may be efficacious in the treatment of feline 
aortic thromboembolism or thrombosis in nephrotic syndrome; 
however, clinical studies and/or experience are apparently lacking 
for this indication at present. In humans, stanozolol may also raise 
plasma antithrombin III and plasminogen levels.
A controlled study in dogs using stanozolol as a conservative 
treatment for collapsing trachea (without bronchitis) reported that 
at the end of the study (75 days), 93% of dogs in the stanozolol group 
had an improvement in the tracheal collapse grade. Eight of the 14 
treated dogs were deemed cured.5 

===== PDF_PAGE_1208 =====
Stanozolol   1181
Pharmacology/Actions
Stanozolol possesses the actions of other anabolic agents, but it may 
be less androgenic than other anabolics used in veterinary medicine. 
In the presence of adequate protein and calories, anabolic steroids 
promote body tissue-building processes and can reverse catabolism. 
As these agents are either derived from or are closely related to tes -
tosterone, the anabolics have varying degrees of androgenic effects. 
Endogenous testosterone release may be suppressed by inhibiting 
luteinizing hormone (LH). Large doses can impede spermatogene -
sis by negative feedback inhibition of follicle stimulating hormone 
(FSH).
Anabolic steroids can also stimulate erythropoiesis, possibly by 
stimulation of erythropoietic stimulating factor. Anabolics can cause 
nitrogen, sodium, potassium, and phosphorus retention and de -
crease the urinary excretion of calcium. 
For medical treatment of tracheal collapse in dogs, it is postulated 
that stanozolol could increase tracheal wall strength via enhancing 
protein or collagen synthesis, increasing chondroitin sulfate content, 
increasing lean body mass, and decreasing inflammation.
Pharmacokinetics
In horses ( n = 26), following a 0.55 mg/kg IM injection of com -
pounded stanozolol suspension, peak levels occur at 7 days. 6 The 
median halflife was 3 to 4 days but ranged from 1.6 to 14.7 days.6 
In horses (n = 10), following a 5 mg intra-articular injection into 
both tarsal joints, a maximum plasma concentration (1.7 ng/mL) 
was observed 6 hours postdose. 7 The elimination half-life was be -
tween 4 and 12 hours and was completed cleared from plasma within 
36 hours after dosing.
In humans, stanozolol is extensively metabolized by the liver.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Stanozolol is contraindicated in pregnant animals and in breeding 
stallions and should not be administered to horses intended for food 
purposes. 
Because of reported hepatotoxicity associated with stanozolol in 
cats, it should only be used in this species with extreme caution.
The manufacturer recommends using stanozolol cautiously in pa-
tients with cardiac and renal dysfunction with enhanced fluid and 
electrolyte monitoring.
In humans, anabolic agents are contraindicated in patients with 
hepatic dysfunction, hypercalcemia, patients with a history of myo -
cardial infarction (can cause hypercholesterolemia), pituitary insuf-
ficiency, prostate carcinoma, benign prostatic hypertrophy, during 
the nephrotic stage of nephritis, and in selected patients with breast 
carcinoma. In children, anabolic agents should be used with caution 
because of hormonal effects and possible effects on bone growth.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies androgens as hazardous drugs representing 
an occupational hazard to healthcare workers; personal protective 
equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the risk 
for exposure.8 
Adverse Effects
The manufacturer lists only mild androgenic effects in dogs, cats, and 
horses and then only when used with excessively high doses for a 
prolonged period.
One study in cats demonstrated a high incidence of hepatotoxicity 
associated with stanozolol use.
Transient postinjection swelling was observed after IA adminis -
tration to horses. 3 A horse that received stanozolol monthly for 8 
years developed adrenal insufficiency following abrupt discontinu -
ation, which the authors attributed to stanozolol-induced adrenal 
suppression.9 
Potentially (from human data), adverse reactions of the anabolic 
agents in dogs and cats could include sodium, calcium, potassium, 
water, chloride, and phosphate retention, hepatotoxicity, behavior -
al (androgenic) changes, and reproductive abnormalities (eg, oli -
gospermia, estrus suppression).
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Stanozolol is contraindicated in pregnant animals and in breeding 
stallions. It is not known whether anabolic steroids are excreted in 
maternal milk. Because of the potential for serious adverse reactions 
in nursing offspring, use it with extreme caution in patients that are 
nursing.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
No information was located for this specific agent. In humans, sodi-
um and water retention can occur after overdosage of anabolic ste -
roids. It is suggested to treat supportively and monitor liver function 
should an inadvertent overdose be administered.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving stanozolol and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Anticoagulants  (eg, heparin, warfarin): Anabolic agents as 
a class may potentiate the effects of anticoagulants; monitor anti-
coagulation (eg, aPTT, PT) closely and adjust dosage if necessary.
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, predniso(lo)ne): Ana-
bolics may enhance the edema that can be associated with ACTH 
or adrenal steroid therapy.
 ■ Insulin : Diabetic patients receiving insulin may need dosage ad-
justments if anabolic therapy is added or discontinued; anabolics 
may decrease blood glucose and decrease insulin requirements.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Concentrations of protein-bound iodine (PBI) can be decreased 
in patients receiving androgen/anabolic therapy, but the clinical 
significance of this is probably not important. Androgen/anabolic 
agents can decrease amounts of thyroxine-binding globulin and 
decrease total T 4 concentrations and increase resin uptake of T3 
and T4. Free thyroid hormones are unaltered, and there is no evi-
dence of dysfunction.
 ■ Both creatinine and creatine excretion can be decreased by ana-
bolic steroids.
 ■ Anabolic steroids can increase the urinary excretion of 17-keto-
steroids.
 ■ Androgenic/anabolic steroids may alter blood glucose levels.
 ■ Androgenic/anabolic steroids may suppress clotting factors II, V , 
VII, and X.
 ■ Anabolic agents can affect liver function tests and liver enzymes 
(BSP retention, AST, ALT, bilirubin, and ALP).
Dosages
DOGS:
Anabolic agent (label dosage; FDA-approved): Small breeds :  
1 – 2 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO twice daily or 25 mg/dog (NOT 
mg/kg) deep IM, may repeat weekly. Large breeds: 2 – 4 mg/dog 
(NOT mg/kg) PO twice daily or 50 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) deep 
IM, may repeat weekly. Treatment should continue for several 
weeks, depending on the response and condition of the  animal.10–12 

===== PDF_PAGE_1209 =====
1182    Staphylococcus Aureus Phage  Lysate
Tracheal collapse: (extra-label): In the study, dogs in the treat -
ment group received 0.15 mg/kg PO twice daily for 2 months, 
then tapered for 15 days.5
Hip osteoarthritis (extra-label): 0.3 mg/kg via intra-articular in-
jection into both hip joints4
CATS: 
NOTE: See Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings regarding 
hepatotoxicity in cats. Most clinicians do not recommend using 
stanozolol in cats.
Anabolic agent (label dosage; FDA-approved): 1 – 2 mg/cat (NOT 
mg/kg) PO twice daily or 25 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) deep IM; may 
repeat weekly. Treatment should continue for several weeks, de -
pending on the response and condition of the animal.11,12 
HORSES : 
Anabolic agent per (former) labeled indications : 0.55 mg/kg 
(25 mg/45 kg [100 lb] of body weight) deep IM. May repeat week-
ly for not more than 4 weeks11 
Acute or chronic osteoarthritis (OA) (extra-label): 5 mg/joint 
(NOT mg/kg) via intra-articular injection into affected joint, re -
peated weekly up to 4 times (acute OA) or 6 times (chronic OA)3
BIRDS:
Anabolic agent to promote weight gain and recovery from dis-
ease (extra-label): 0.5 – 1 mL/kg (25 – 50 mg/kg) IM once or twice 
weekly. Use with caution in birds with renal disease.13
FERRETS :
Anabolic agent (extra-label): 0.5 mg/kg PO or SC twice daily; use 
with caution in ferrets with hepatic disease.14
RABBITS, RODENTS, SMALL MAMMALS :
Rabbits; Appetite stimulant  (extra-label): 0.5 – 2 mg/rabbit 
(NOT mg/kg) PO once15
REPTILES :
Most species postsurgically and in debilitated animals  (ex -
tra-label): 5 mg/kg IM once weekly as needed16
Monitoring
 ■ Androgenic adverse effects
 ■ Fluid and electrolyte status, if indicated
 ■ Liver enzymes, if indicated
 ■ RBC count, indices, hemoglobin, if indicated
 ■ Weight, appetite
Client Information
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. If your animal 
vomits or acts sick after receiving the drug on an empty stomach, 
try giving the next dose with food or a small treat. If vomiting 
continues, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ This medicine can cause behavior changes, including more sexual 
behaviors. 
 ■ Cats may be prone to developing liver problems while receiving 
this medication. 
 ■ Pregnant women should handle this medicine with caution. 
 ■ This medicine is a controlled substance in the United States. It 
is against federal law to use, give away, or sell this medication to 
others than for whom it was prescribed.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Stanozolol is an anabolic steroid that occurs as an odorless, nearly 
colorless, crystalline powder that can exist in 2 forms: prisms that 
melt at ≈235°C (455°F) and needles that melt at ≈155°C (311°F). It is 
sparingly soluble in alcohol and insoluble in water.
Stanozolol may also be known as androstanazole, estanozolol, 
methylstanazole, NSC-43193, stanozololum, win-14833, Menabol®, 
Neurabol®, Stanol®, Stromba®, Strombaject®, and Winstrol®.
Storage/Stability
Store stanozolol in light-resistant packaging, preferably at room tem-
perature; store tablets in tight containers.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
Although Winstrol®-V tablets and injections still appear in the FDA ’s 
Green Book, they are no longer commercially marketed but may be 
available from reputable compounding pharmacies. See Compound-
ing: How to Find a Quality Assured Pharmacy.
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Staphylococcus Aureus Phage 
 Lysate
(staf-ih-loe-kok-us or-ee-us fayj lie-sayt) Staphage Lysate®
Immunostimulant
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat dogs with recurrent and idiopathic staphylococ-
cal pyodermas
 ▶ Use with caution in highly allergic patients; desensitizing 
doses are required.
 ▶ May cause local or systemic hypersensitivity reactions, includ-
ing redness, itching, swelling, and anaphylaxis
Uses/Indications
Staphylococcus aureus phage lysate (SPL) is USDA-licensed for 
treatment of canine pyoderma and related staphylococcal hypersen-
sitivity or polymicrobial skin infections with a staphylococcal com -
ponent. SPL, or similar Staphylococcus aureus bacterins, reduces pru-
ritus and recurrence of superficial and deep pyodermas in dogs. 1–3 
One small study in dogs showed a 77% reduction of recurrent canine 
pyoderma caused by Staphylococcus pseudintermedius when treated 
with antibiotics and SPL compared to antibiotics alone.4
Pharmacology/Actions
Staphylococcus aureus phage lysate (SPL) enhances cell-mediated 
immunity and increases the capability of macrophages to inactivate 
staphylococci. It stimulates production of tumor necrosis factor, in-
terleukin-6, interleukin-gamma, and gamma-interferon.
Pharmacokinetics
No information was located.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
In highly allergic patients, it is recommended to first perform a 
skin test to evaluate the patient’s response to Staphylococcus aureus 
phage lysate (SPL); if the skin test indicates tolerance, then weekly 
doses should be gradually increased until the full weekly label dose 
is achieved.5 Use SPL with extreme caution, if at all, in patients with 
prior systemic hypersensitivity reactions to SPL or documented hy -
persensitivity reactions to beef products, as the product contains ul-

===== PDF_PAGE_1210 =====
Staphylococcus Aureus Phage Lysate   1183
trafiltered beef heart infusion broth. 
Avoid administering subsequent doses at the same injection site.5 
The product contains no preservative so it must be handled aseptically. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported for Staphylococcus aureus phage lysate 
(SPL) include vaccine-type reactions (eg, fever, malaise) and injec -
tion site reactions, including redness, itching, and swelling, that may 
occur within 2 to 3 hours after injection and persist up to 3 days. 5 
Reduce dose by 50% if significant injection site reaction occurs.
Although thought to be rare, systemic hypersensitivity reactions 
are possible. Signs may include weakness, vomiting, diarrhea, severe 
itching, rapid breathing, and fatigue or lassitude. Should an anaphy-
lactic-type reaction occur, treat the patient supportively (eg, epi -
nephrine and atropine). 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Studies performed in rats and rabbits demonstrated no impaired fer-
tility or fetal harm. 5 No information was located on safety during 
nursing. Because safety has not been established, this drug should 
only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks 
to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
No specific information was located. Other than an increased risk 
for local or systemic hypersensitivity reactions, significant morbidity 
appears unlikely.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in animals receiving SPL. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Immunosuppressants (eg, corticosteroids, cyclosporine ): 
May reduce the efficacy of Staphylococcus aureus phage lysate 
(SPL)
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No significant concerns noted
Dosages
DOGS:
Treatment of canine pyoderma and related staphylococcal hy -
persensitivity or treatment of polymicrobial skin infections 
with a staphylococcal component  (label dosage; USDA-li -
censed): NOTE: It is recommended to administer this agent with 
concomitant topical and/or systemic antibiotic therapy according 
to current antimicrobial stewardship guidelines. Avoid adminis -
tration in previous injection sites. 
a) Highly allergic patients: Skin test with 0.05 – 0.1 mL intrader-
mally. If no immediate reactions are seen within 1 hour and no 
delayed reactions are seen after 48 hours, initiate treatment at 
0.2 mL SC. Incrementally increase by 0.2 mL once weekly to  
1 mL (a total of 5 injections). Then continue at 1 mL SC weekly 
for ≈10 to 12 weeks.5
b) Nonallergic patients : 0.5 mL SC twice weekly for 10 to 12 
weeks, then 0.5 – 1 mL SC every 1 to 2 weeks. Skin testing is 
not required prior to treatment.5
c) All patients: Dosage adjustments should be guided by infec -
tion severity and patient response to treatment.5 The maximum 
dose should be decreased in small dogs and can be cautiously 
increased to 1.5 mL in large dogs if necessary. Continue this 
dosage regimen until clinical signs improve, then gradually 
lengthen dosing interval to the longest interval that maintains 
adequate clinical control.
Adjunctive treatment of chronic recurrent idiopathic pyoder -
ma (extra-label): 
a) 0.5 mL SC twice weekly, slowly reducing to 0.5 mL every 2 
weeks6
b) 1 mL SC once weekly or 0.5 mL twice weekly for 4 to 6 months. 
If no significant recurrence of pyoderma, decrease adminis -
tration to every 2 weeks, then every 3 weeks. SPL is best used 
to prevent pyoderma from recurring and should be used with 
antibiotics initially to induce remission.7
Recurrent staphylococcal infection in dogs with atopic dermati-
tis following treatment with antibiotics to resolve active pyo -
derma (extra-label): 0.5 mL SC twice weekly for 12 weeks, then  
1 mL once weekly for 4 weeks, then 1 mL every 15 days for 2 
doses, then 1 mL every 3 weeks for 2 doses3
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Local and systemic reactions which may occur within 2 to 3 hours 
after injection and persist up to 3 days
Client Information
 ■ The first dose of this medication should be administered at a vet-
erinary practice where suitable treatment can be given if a serious 
reaction to the medicine (eg, anaphylaxis) occurs.
 ■ Report any side effects to your veterinarian, including injection 
site redness or irritation, itching, changes in behavior or activity 
level, difficulty breathing, unexplained rapid breathing, vomiting, 
or diarrhea.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Staphylococcus aureus phage lysate (SPL) is prepared by lysing cul -
tures of Staphylococcus aureus (Cowan serologic types I and III; 
human strains) by a staphylococcal bacteriophage. Pre-lysed cell 
counts (120 to 180 CFU/mL) are used to standardize the product; 
ultrafiltration achieves bacteriologic sterility. The prepared solution 
contains Staphylococcus aureus components (protein A extracts), 
bacteriophage, and unfiltered beef heart infusion.
Storage/Stability
Staphylococcus aureus phage lysate (SPL) should be stored in the 
refrigerator at 2°C to 7°C (36°F-45°F); do not freeze.5
Unopened, properly stored vials and ampules have an average ex-
piration date of one year past the shipment date. The product con -
tains no preservative and must be handled aseptically. Do not use if 
contents are cloudy.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Do not mix Staphylococcus aureus phage lysate (SPL) with other 
drugs or solutions prior to administration.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Staphylococcal Phage Lysate (serotypes I and III): in 1 mL ampules 
and 10 mL multi-dose vials; Staphage Lysate (SPL)®; (OTC); USDA 
license #339
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb

===== PDF_PAGE_1211 =====
1184    Streptozocin
Streptozocin
(strep-toe-zoe-sin) Zanosar®
Antineoplastic 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used primarily for treating recurrent insulinoma in dogs
 ▶ Severe nephrotoxicity is known to occur with streptozocin; 
myelotoxicity and hepatotoxicity are also possible.
 ▶ Adverse effects include severe vomiting after treatment, tran-
sient hypoglycemia, or diabetes mellitus.
 ▶ Saline diuresis is required before, during, and after administra-
tion to reduce risk for nephrotoxicity.
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies streptozocin as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
The primary indication for streptozocin use in veterinary medicine 
is for treatment for insulinomas in dogs, particularly those with re -
fractory hypoglycemia and when tumors are nonresectable or have 
metastasized. Its use has been limited by high rates of nephrotoxicity 
and other serious adverse effects. Streptozocin potentially could be 
used for other neoplastic conditions as well.
Pharmacology/Actions
Streptozocin is a nitrosourea antineoplastic. Although its antineo -
plastic activity is not well understood, streptozocin is considered an 
alkylating agent, and it inhibits DNA synthesis, likely by inhibiting 
precursor incorporation into DNA and cross-linking DNA strands. 
It is cell cycle–phase nonspecific.
Streptozocin also exhibits a diabetogenic effect by reducing nic -
otinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) concentration in pancreatic 
beta cells. This effect is usually irreversible in animals with a pre-ex-
isting normal beta cell function. Although streptozocin has activity 
against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, its cytotoxicity 
prevents it from clinical usefulness for this purpose.
Pharmacokinetics
Streptozocin must be administered IV . Its distribution characteris -
tics are not well known, but the drug does distribute to most tissues; 
concentrations in the pancreas are higher than those found in plas -
ma. Streptozocin is metabolized, probably in the liver and kidneys. 
Both the unchanged and metabolized drug are excreted in the urine.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Streptozocin should only be used for recurrent insulinoma in dogs 
that have undergone previous surgery in which complete tumor 
resection was not possible. A confirmed histologic diagnosis is 
 mandatory.
Streptozocin must be used with extreme caution in patients with 
decreased renal, bone marrow, or hepatic function. Streptozocin is 
known to cause renal toxicity. In humans, nephrotoxicity is dose-re-
lated, cumulative, can be irreversible, and can be fatal. 1 Monitor re-
nal function before and after each treatment. Streptozocin is a tissue 
irritant and may cause severe irritation or necrosis if extravasated.  
Streptozocin is known to be carcinogenic and tumorigenic in lab 
rodents. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies streptozocin as a hazardous drug; personal pro -
tective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure.2 
Adverse Effects
The primary concern with streptozocin is the potential for serious, 
permanent renal toxicity. In dogs, Fanconi syndrome and likely 
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus have been reported. 3 In humans, 
nephrotoxicity is dose-related, cumulative, can be irreversible, and 
can be fatal. Nephrotoxicity in humans can present as azotemia, 
anuria, hypophosphatemia, glycosuria, and renal tubular acidosis. 1 
Adequate hydration during drug administration is strongly recom -
mended in order to reduce the risk for nephrotoxicity. 
GI effects (eg, nausea, vomiting) often occur and can be severe 
or protracted; increased liver enzymes (ALT) may also occur. Acute, 
transient hypoglycemia has been reported secondary to streptozo -
cin-damaged tumor cells releasing intracellular insulin stores. Per -
manent diabetes mellitus has also been reported. Less commonly, 
hematologic changes such as mild myelosuppression can be seen. 
Injection site reactions (including severe necrosis) can occur if the 
drug extravasates.1 
In one small study, adverse effects included GI signs (eg, nausea, 
anorexia, vomiting, regurgitation, diarrhea, colitis) diabetes mellitus, 
renal injury, increased ALT, and hypoglycemic collapse or seizure; 
no neutropenia or thrombocytopenia was observed.3
Many dogs receiving chemotherapy will have minor hair coat 
changes (eg, shagginess, loss of luster). Breeds with continuously 
growing hair coats (eg, poodles, terriers, Afghan hounds, or old En-
glish sheepdogs) are more likely to experience significant alopecia.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Streptozocin has been shown to be teratogenic in rats and abortifa -
cient in rabbits. For sexually intact patients, verify pregnancy status 
prior to administration.
It is not known whether streptozocin is excreted in milk. Because 
of the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing offspring, 
milk replacer should be used if treating nursing patients.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Severe toxicity may result if acutely overdosed (see Adverse Effects); 
calculate dosages carefully.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving streptozocin and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Doxorubicin : Streptozocin may prolong the half-life of doxoru-
bicin; dosage adjustment may be required.4
 ■ Myelosuppressive Drugs, Other : When streptozocin is 
used with other myelosuppressive drugs (eg, lomustine), additive 
or synergistic myelosuppression may occur.
 ■ Nephrotoxic Drugs, Other  (eg, aminoglycosides, ampho-
tericin B, cisplatin ): May cause additive nephrotoxicity when 
used with streptozocin
 ■ Niacinamide /Nicotinamide : Can block the diabetogenic ef -
fects of streptozocin without altering its antineoplastic activity; 
this may be beneficial or detrimental depending on the reason 
for use.
Dosages
DOGS:
NOTE: Because of the potential toxicity of this drug to patients, 
veterinary personnel, and clients, and since chemotherapy indi -

===== PDF_PAGE_1212 =====
Succimer   1185
cations, treatment protocols, monitoring, and safety guidelines 
often change, the following dosages should be used only as a gen-
eral guide. Consultation with a veterinary oncologist and referral 
to current veterinary oncology references 5–9 are strongly recom-
mended.
Insulinoma (extra-label):
a) Dilute 500 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) in 36.6 mL/kg of 0.9% sodium 
chloride and administer IV over 2 hours every 2 weeks for a 
total of 5 doses. Administer 0.9% sodium chloride 18.3 mL/kg 
per hour IV CRI for 3 hours before streptozocin and continu-
ing for 2 hours after streptozocin administration. Prophylactic 
antiemetics may be administered with each dose, and pred -
nisone 0.5 – 1 mg/kg PO every 24 hours or divided every 12 
hours may be used for patients with persistent hypoglycemia.3
b) 500 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) IV over 2 hours. Prior to admin -
istration of streptozocin, administer 0.9% sodium chloride  
18.3 mL/kg/hour IV CRI for 3 hours. Dilute the dose of strep-
tozocin to the appropriate volume of IV fluids to be adminis -
tered over 2 hours. Following the streptozocin infusion, con -
tinue 0.9% sodium chloride 18.3 mL/kg/hour IV CRI for an 
additional 2 hours. May repeat this protocol at 3week intervals 
until evidence of tumor progression, recurrence of hypoglyce-
mia, or drug toxicity occurs. Give with antiemetics.10
c) 500 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) IV over 2 hours every 3 weeks. Ad -
minister only with aggressive saline diuresis: 0.9% sodium 
chloride 18 to 20 mL/kg/hour IV CRI for 7 to 8 hours, starting 
4 hours before streptozocin administration. Give maropitant 
at the beginning of the 0.9% sodium chloride infusion and 
continue daily for 3 to 4 days following streptozocin admin -
istration.11
Monitoring
 ■ Blood glucose (efficacy)
 ■ Baseline and periodic (eg, prior to each treatment) CBC, serum 
chemistry profile with electrolytes, and urinalysis; proteinuria is 
usually the first indicator of renal toxicity.
 ■ Hydration status, especially for the first few days after treatment 
or if vomiting is persistent
 ■ Baseline and periodic (eg, every 2 to 3 months) abdominal ultra -
sound or CT scan to assess tumor size during therapy
Client Information
 ■ Streptozocin is a chemotherapy (anticancer) drug. This medicine 
can be hazardous to other animals and people that come in con -
tact with it. On the day your animal gets the drug and then for 
a few days afterward, wear disposable gloves when handling all 
bodily waste (urine, feces, litter), blood, and vomit of the animal. 
Seal the waste in a plastic bag and then place both the bag and 
gloves in with the regular trash.
 ■ Be sure that your animal has ready access to plenty of clean drink-
ing water.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Streptozocin is a nitrosourea antineoplastic antibiotic produced by 
Streptomyces achromogenes, although the commercial product is pre-
pared synthetically. It occurs as an ivory-colored, crystalline powder. 
It is very soluble in water and saline and has a pKa of 1.35.
Streptozocin may also be known as NSC-85998, streptozotocin, 
U-9889, and Zanosar®.
Storage/Stability
Store the lyophilized powder for injection in the refrigerator at 2°C 
to 8°C (36°F-46°F) and protect it from light. It is stable for at least 
3 years after manufacture when refrigerated. If stored at room tem -
perature, it is stable for at least 1 year after manufacture.
After reconstitution, the lyophilized powder for injection has a 
pH of 3.5 to 4.5. Add citric acid to buffer the solution at a concentra-
tion of 22 mg/mL. The solution is stable for 48 hours at room tem -
perature and 96 hours if refrigerated, but as there is no preservative, 
the manufacturer recommends using the drug within 12 hours of 
mixing.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent upon factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information.
Reconstitute the vial using 9.5 mL of either 5% dextrose or 0.9% 
sodium chloride, and it can be further diluted with either solution 
if desired. Streptozocin is reported to be Y-site compatible with 
the following drugs (partial list): dolasetron, hydromorphone, oc -
treotide, and ondansetron. It is incompatible with amphotericin B 
(lipid complex), pantoprazole, and piperacillin-tazobactam. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Streptozocin Powder for Injection: 1 g (100 mg/mL) vials; Zanosar®; 
(Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Succimer
(sux-i-mer) Chemet®
Antidote; Chelator
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Oral heavy metal chelator used for lead poisoning in dogs, 
cats, and birds
 ▶ Appears to be safe and effective despite limited experience
 ▶ Most common adverse effects noted are GI in nature; may also 
cause increased liver enzymes or rash.
 ▶ Unpleasant odor of capsules may cause odorous feces, urine, 
and saliva.
 ▶ May be cost prohibitive
Uses/Indications
Succimer may be useful for the oral treatment of lead poisoning in 
dogs, cats, and birds. It may also be beneficial for the treatment of 
other toxic heavy metals such as arsenic or mercury. Succimer is not 
nephrotoxic, does not increase lead absorption from the GI tract 
and does not significantly increase elimination of other essential 
 minerals.
Pharmacology/Actions
Succimer physically chelates heavy metals such as lead, mercury, and 
arsenic. These water-soluble chelates are then excreted via the kid -
neys. Succimer-lead complexes are also eliminated in the feces and 
undergo enterohepatic recycling.
Pharmacokinetics
The absorption of oral succimer is less than or equal to 20% in mon-
keys and less than or equal to 32% in rabbits. In rats, oral succimer is 
rapidly absorbed and 95% is eliminated from the body by 24 hours. 
In experimental animals succimer is eliminated in feces and urine af-
ter oral administration. After IV administration, most is eliminated 
in the urine with only trace amounts in the feces.
In humans, the drug is rapidly but incompletely absorbed after 
oral ingestion. Absorbed drug is excreted primarily through the kid-
neys into the urine. Half-life in humans is ≈2 days. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1213 =====
1186    Succimer
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Succimer is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to it.1 
Chelation therapy should only be attempted after the source of lead 
is removed to prevent further exposure. Use with caution in patients 
with renal or hepatic impairment. In humans, treatment courses lon-
ger than 3 weeks have not been proven safe.
Adverse Effects
In humans, the most common adverse effects are GI related (eg, 
vomiting, diarrhea) or flu-like symptoms (eg, body aches, fatigue, 
rhinitis, cough).1 Clinically insignificant increases in liver enzymes 
occur in up to 60% of patients. Rashes and allergic mucocutaneous 
reactions (which can be severe) may occur; skin reactions occur in 
≈6% of patients. Mild to moderate neutropenia has also been report-
ed. Adverse effects in humans are usually mild, self-limiting and do 
not require cessation of therapy. In humans succimer produces a 
small increase in urinary excretion of zinc and copper.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
It is unknown if succimer is safe to use during pregnancy. At high 
doses, it was fetotoxic and teratogenic in mice and rats. 1 It is not 
known whether this drug is excreted in breast milk, but mothers are 
discouraged from nursing when taking succimer. Because safety has 
not been established in animals, this drug should only be used when 
the maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Succimer is generally well tolerated in overdoses. In toxicology 
studies, there was no renal toxicity in dogs given 50 mg/kg/day 
orally for 14 days. 1 In a 28-day oral toxicity study dogs given 30 or  
100 mg/kg/day had lower urine specific gravity and an increase in 
renal tubular regenerative hyperplasia. Doses of less than or equal 
to 200 mg/kg/day in dogs did not cause overt toxicity. Doses of  
300 mg/day did cause fatalities in dogs; primarily kidney and GI 
tract lesions were seen. Doses of 80 mg/kg PO every 12 hours caused 
a significant number of fatalities in cockatiels (but 40 mg/kg every 
12 hours did not). Doses up to 270 mg/kg twice daily for 15 days 
caused an initial increase in plasma uric acid concentration but did 
not cause significant adverse effects in pigeons with experimental 
lead-intoxication.2
If overdose occurs, standard GI decontamination protocols with 
subsequent activated charcoal may be used.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving succimer and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Chelating Agents, Other  (eg, CaEDTA, dimercaprol, pen-
icillamine, trientine ): Concomitant use with other chelating 
agents is not recommended in humans.1 Succimer may be used 4 
weeks after CaEDTA treatment.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ False positive urine ketones can be reported when using nitro -
prusside reagents (eg, Ketostix®).
 ■ Falsely low measurements of CPK or serum uric acid can be 
caused by succimer.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Lead poisoning (extra-label): 10 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for 5 
to 10 days. Blood lead concentrations should be rechecked a few 
days following the last dose of succimer; a second round of chela-
tion therapy may be necessary to reduce the lead load. 3 The total 
length of treatment should be based on clinical improvement and 
blood lead concentrations.4
HORSES :
Lead poisoning (extra-label): Anecdotally, 30 mg/kg/day PO in 
divided doses
BIRDS:
Lead poisoning  (extra-label): 20 – 40 mg/kg twice daily for a 
minimum of 7 days5,6
Monitoring
 ■ Baseline and periodic complete blood count and measurement of 
blood lead concentration
 ■ GI adverse effects
 ■ Baseline and periodic liver enzymes (AST, ALT)
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is used to remove excess metals, particularly lead, 
from the body
 ■ Capsules can be opened and sprinkled on soft food. The capsules 
may have an unpleasant odor, which may increase the odor of sa-
liva, urine, and feces.
 ■ Animals should always have plenty of clean drinking water avail-
able while taking this medicine.
 ■ This medicine may cause diarrhea and vomiting. Contact your 
veterinarian if you have any concerns.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is tak-
ing this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A heavy metal chelating agent also known as meso-2,3 dimercap -
tosuccinic acid (DMSA), succimer is a water-soluble analog of di -
mercaprol. It occurs as a white crystalline powder with a sulfurous 
odor.
Succimer may also be known as meso-2,3 dimercaptosuccin -
ic acid, dimercaptosuccinic acid, DIM-SA, DMSA, Chemet®, or 
 Succicaptal®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, store succimer capsules in tight contain-
ers at room temperature. Protect from light.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Succimer Capsules: 100 mg; Chemet®; (Rx)
Succimer 200 mg capsules may be available in some countries.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 

===== PDF_PAGE_1214 =====
Succinylcholine   1187
Succinylcholine
(suks-sin-nil-koe-leen) Anectine®
Neuromuscular Blocking Agent 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for short-term muscle relaxation during surgery, diag-
nostic procedures, or mechanical ventilation
 ▶ No analgesic or anesthetic effects
 ▶ Contraindications include severe liver disease, chronic anemia, 
malnourishment, glaucoma or penetrating eye injuries, predis-
position to malignant hyperthermia, and increased CPK values 
with resultant myopathies.
 ▶ Use with extreme caution in patients with traumatic wounds 
or burns, patients receiving quinidine or digoxin therapy, and 
patients with hyperkalemia or other electrolyte imbalances.
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with pulmonary, renal, cardiovas-
cular, metabolic, or hepatic dysfunction.
 ▶ Adverse effects include muscle soreness, malignant hyperther-
mia, excessive salivation, hyperkalemia, rash, myoglobinemia/
myoglobinuria, and cardiovascular effects (eg, bradycardia, 
tachycardia, hypertension, hypotension, arrhythmias).
 ▶ High-alert drug; ensure appropriate respiratory support, 
reversal agents, and error-reducing safeguards are in place to 
minimize risk for patient harm.
Uses/Indications
Succinylcholine is indicated for short-term muscle relaxation need -
ed during surgery, diagnostic procedures, and mechanical ventila -
tion. Newer nondepolarizing agents with fewer adverse effects (eg, 
atracurium, vecuronium, rocuronium) have largely replaced succi -
nylcholine.
In humans, succinylcholine can be used to facilitate endotracheal 
intubation.1
Pharmacology/Actions
Succinylcholine is an ultrashort-acting depolarizing skeletal muscle 
relaxant that binds to motor endplate nicotinic cholinergic receptors 
to produce depolarization (perceived as fasciculations). The neuro -
muscular block remains as long as sufficient quantities of succinyl -
choline remain and is characterized by flaccid paralysis. 
Pharmacokinetics
After IV administration, the onset of action with complete muscle 
relaxation is usually within ≈60 seconds.1 In humans, this effect lasts 
for 2 to 3 minutes and then gradually diminishes within 10 minutes. 
The very short duration of action after a single IV dose is thought 
to occur because the drug diffuses away from the motor endplate. 
If multiple injections or a continuous infusion are performed, the 
brief activity is a result of rapid hydrolysis by pseudocholinesterases 
at the site of action. After IM injection, the onset of action is gener -
ally within 2 to 3 minutes and may persist for 10 to 30 minutes. Dogs 
exhibit a prolonged duration of action of ≈20 minutes; this species 
appears unique in this idiosyncratic response. 
Succinylcholine is metabolized by plasma pseudocholinesteras -
es to succinylmonocholine and choline; 10% is excreted unchanged 
in the urine. Succinylmonocholine is partially excreted in the urine 
and may accumulate in patients with impaired renal function. Suc -
cinylmonocholine has ≈1/20 the neuromuscular blocking activity of 
succinylcholine, but if it accumulates, prolonged periods of apnea 
may result.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Succinylcholine is contraindicated in patients with severe liver dis -
ease, chronic anemia, chronic malnourishment, increased intracra -
nial pressure, glaucoma or penetrating eye injuries, predisposition 
to malignant hyperthermia, and increased creatine phosphokinase 
(CPK) values with resultant myopathies. As succinylcholine can ex-
acerbate the effects of hyperkalemia, it should be used with extreme 
caution in patients that have suffered traumatic wounds or burns, are 
receiving quinidine or digoxin therapy, or have pre-existing hyper -
kalemia or electrolyte imbalances, as arrhythmias or cardiac arrest 
may occur. Use succinylcholine with caution in patients with pulmo-
nary, renal, cardiovascular, metabolic, or hepatic dysfunction.
Succinylcholine should only be used in patients that are adequate-
ly anesthetized as it has no analgesic or sedative/anesthetic actions. 
Respiratory support (eg, intubation, mechanical ventilation), neuro-
muscular blocker reversal agents, and staff experienced in the use of 
these agents must be readily available. Inadvertent administration of 
neuromuscular blocking agents to patients for which they were not 
intended may cause significant harm, including death. Neuromuscu-
lar blocking agents should be sequestered from other medications, 
and with access limited to those familiar with their use. 2 Prominent 
placement of warning labels (eg, paralyzing agent- causes respiratory 
arrest, causes respiratory paralysis; patient must be ventilated) on stor-
age containers is highly recommended.
Ruminants are deficient in pseudocholinesterase, and succi -
nylcholine is considered contraindicated these species. 3 The drug 
should be used with caution in horses due to the risk for malignant 
hyperthermia.4–6
Succinylcholine should not be used if organophosphate agents 
have been given or applied recently.7
Adverse Effects
Succinylcholine chloride can cause muscle soreness, malignant hy -
perthermia, excessive salivation, hyperkalemia, rash, and myoglo -
binemia/myoglobinuria. Cardiovascular effects can include brady -
cardia, tachycardia, hypertension, hypotension, or arrhythmias.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
It is unknown if succinylcholine can cause fetal harm. The drug does 
cross the placenta in low concentrations, and a newly delivered neo-
nate may show signs of neuromuscular blockade if the dam received 
high doses or prolonged administration of the drug prior to deliv -
ery. It is not known whether this drug is excreted into milk; exercise 
caution when succinylcholine is administered to a nursing patient. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug should 
only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks 
to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Inadvertent overdoses or standard doses in patients deficient in 
pseudocholinesterase may result in prolonged apnea. Mechanical 
ventilation with oxygen should be used until recovery. 
Repeated or prolonged high doses may cause patients to convert 
from a phase I to a phase II block.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving succinylcholine and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors  (eg, neostigmine, pyr -
idostigmine): May prolong depolarizing phase I block but may 
antagonize phase II block

===== PDF_PAGE_1215 =====
1188    Succinylcholine
 ■ Amphotericin B : May increase succinylcholine’s effects by 
causing electrolyte imbalances
 ■ Digoxin : Succinylcholine may cause a sudden outflux of potas -
sium from muscle cells, thus causing arrhythmias in digitalized 
patients.
 ■ Opioids : Potential for increased incidences of bradycardia and 
sinus arrest
 ■ Thiazide Diuretics (eg, hydrochlorothiazide): May increase 
succinylcholine’s effects by causing electrolyte imbalances
The following drugs/drug classes may increase or prolong neuro -
muscular blockade if used concurrently with succinylcholine:
 ■ Aminoglycosides
 ■ Anesthetics, Inhalation  (eg, desflurane, isoflurane)
 ■ Antiarrhythmics  (eg, quinidine, lidocaine, procainamide)
 ■ Beta-Adrenergic Receptor Antagonists (eg, atenolol)
 ■ Chloroquine
 ■ Clindamycin
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one)
 ■ Cyclophosphamide
 ■ Magnesium Salts
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
 ■ Metoclopramide
 ■ Organophosphates
 ■ Oxytocin
 ■ Pancuronium
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine)
 ■ Terbutaline
Dosages
DOGS:
Neuromuscular blockade  (extra-label): 0.3 – 0.4 mg/kg IV are 
recommended8; rarely used today
CATS:
Neuromuscular blockade  (extra-label): 0.2 mg/kg IV1 mg/kg 
IV8; rarely used today
HORSES : 
Neuromuscular blockade (extra-label): 0.12 – 0.15 mg/kg IV8
SWINE:
Intubation/abolish laryngospasm (extra-label): 1 – 2 mg/kg IV9–11
REPTILES :
Neuromuscular blockade in Crocodilia spp, chelonians, and liz-
ards (extra-label): 0.4 – 1 mg/kg IM with time to onset of 5 to 30 
minutes. The recovery period is based on the administered dose 
and the patient’s metabolic activity; however, recovery generally oc-
curs within 1 hour with doses in this range. Some large crocodiles 
require 2 – 5 mg/kg IM, which results in a recovery of 7 to 9 hours. 
Administration of an anxiolytic prior to induction is helpful. The 
clinician must have the means to ventilate the patient.12
Monitoring
 ■ Level of neuromuscular blockade. It is strongly recommended 
to be familiar with techniques required to monitor the level of 
neuromuscular blockade (eg, acceleromyography, train-of-four 
twitch ratio) when using succinylcholine. 13 Visual or tactile as -
sessments of the level of blockade are inaccurate and unreliable. 
Correct placement of electrodes is essential to minimize direct 
muscle stimulation and prevent misinterpretation of the degree of 
the blockade and minimize risk for overdose.
 ■ Assess ventilation (eg, arterial blood gas, ETCO2)
 ■ Heart rate and rhythm
 ■ Blood pressure
Client Information
 ■ Only professionals familiar with the use of succinylcholine should 
use this drug.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Succinylcholine chloride is a depolarizing neuromuscular blocking 
agent that occurs as an odorless, white, crystalline powder. The dihy-
drate form melts at 190°C (374°F) and the anhydrous form at 160°C 
(320°F). Aqueous solutions are acidic, with a pH of ≈4. One gram is 
soluble in ≈1 mL of water and ≈350 mL of alcohol. Commercially 
available injections have a pH from 3 to 4.5.
Succinylcholine chloride may also be known as choline chloride 
succinate, succicurarium chloride, succinylcholine chloride, suxa -
methonii chloridum, suxametonklorid, suxamethonium chloride; 
many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Store commercial injectable solutions refrigerated (2°C-8°C 
[36°F-46°F]). One manufacturer states that multiple-dose vials are 
stable for up to 2 weeks at room temperature with no significant loss 
of potency.14
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Succinylcholine chloride is physically  compatible with all com -
monly used IV solutions, amikacin sulfate, isoproterenol HCl, me -
peridine HCl, norepinephrine bitartrate, and scopolamine HBr. It 
may not be compatible with pentobarbital sodium and is physically 
incompatible with sodium bicarbonate and thiopental sodium.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Succinylcholine Chloride Injection: 20 mg/mL; Anectine®, Quelicin®; 
(Rx)
Succinylcholine Chloride Injection: 100 mg/mL; Quelicin-1000®; 
(Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 

===== PDF_PAGE_1216 =====
Sucralfate   1189
Sucralfate
(soo-kral-fate) Carafate®
GI-Mucosal Protectant
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Local-acting treatment for GI ulcers/esophagitis; may also 
protect somewhat against GI ulceration
 ▶ No contraindications have been identified; however, sucralfate 
should be used with caution when decreased GI transit times 
may be harmful.
 ▶ Adverse effects are unlikely, although constipation is possible. 
Vomiting has been reported in cats.
 ▶ Tablets should be dissolved in water before administration. 
Should be administered on an empty stomach, if possible
 ▶ To avoid possible drug interactions (eg, drug binding, de-
creased drug bioavailability), other medications should be 
administered 2 hours before sucralfate is administered. 
Uses/Indications
Sucralfate has been used to treat oral, esophageal, gastric, and duode-
nal ulcers and to prevent drug (eg, aspirin)-induced gastric erosions. 
Despite sucralfate’s theoretical benefits and widespread use, research 
has shown limited or no evidence to support the effectiveness of su-
cralfate for these indications. 1–3 A consensus panel has determined 
that evidence supporting sucralfate use in small animal species for 
the prevention or treatment of esophageal injury is weak 4; howev-
er, sucralfate in combination with omeprazole is recommended for 
treating horses with equine glandular gastric disease.5
Sucralfate has been used in humans with hyperphosphatemia 
secondary to renal failure and could be useful for this indication in 
animals; however, in a study, sucralfate did not significantly change 
serum or urine phosphorus levels in healthy cats or normophospha-
temic cats with CKD, and adverse effects (eg, vomiting, anorexia, 
constipation, worsening azotemia) may interfere with treatment.6 
Pharmacology/Actions
Although the exact mechanism of action of sucralfate as an antiulcer 
agent is unknown, the drug appears to have a local effect rather than 
a systemic one. After oral administration, sucralfate may react with 
hydrochloric acid in the stomach to form a paste-like complex that 
preferentially binds to the proteinaceous exudates that are generally 
found at ulcer sites (eg, albumin, fibrinogen). This insoluble com -
plex may form a barrier at the site and protect the ulcer from further 
damage caused by pepsin, acid, or bile. Sucralfate can bind bile acids 
and reduce pepsin activity. As an aluminum salt, sucralfate can bind 
to GI phosphorus.
Sucralfate may have some cytoprotective effects, possibly by stim-
ulation of prostaglandins E2 and I2. It also has some antacid activity, 
although this may not be of clinical importance. Sucralfate may also 
bind to intact GI mucosa to form a protective layer. 
Sucralfate does not significantly affect gastric acid output or tryp-
sin or pancreatic amylase activity. It may slightly decrease the rate of 
gastric emptying but will not alter peristalsis.
Pharmacokinetics
By reacting with hydrochloric acid in the gut, most of the drug is 
converted to sucrose sulfate, which is excreted in the feces within 
48 hours. 7 The duration of action (binding to ulcer site) may persist 
up to 6 hours after oral administration. A negligible amount of an 
oral dose is absorbed into the systemic circulation and excreted in 
the urine unchanged within 48 hours.8
Dissolving tablets in water before administration to dogs and cats 
is recommended to increase the dispersion of the drug, as tablet frac-
tions have been observed in dog feces.9
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Sucralfate is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity 
to it. Because it may cause constipation, it should be used with cau -
tion in animals in which decreased GI transit times might be dele -
terious. Hyperglycemia has been reported rarely in diabetic humans 
receiving sucralfate suspension. Small amounts of aluminum may be 
absorbed following oral administration and may accumulate in pa -
tients with renal failure. 
Concurrent use of sucralfate with proton pump inhibitors (eg, 
omeprazole) or histamine-H 2 receptor antagonists (eg, ranitidine) 
does not enhance the treatment of gastroduodenal injury in small 
animal species.4
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are uncommon with sucralfate therapy. Constipation 
is the most prominent adverse effect reported in humans (2%) and 
dogs receiving the drug. Vomiting has been reported in cats. Sucral-
fate can have an unpalatable taste, and patient acceptance may be a 
problem.
Sucralfate administration to cats with CKD resulted in clinical 
decompensation (vomiting, anorexia, constipation, worsening azo -
temia) in 3 of the 5 studied cats.6
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
In rats, sucralfate doses up to 38 times those used in humans have 
not been shown to cause impaired fertility, and doses up to 50 times 
normal used in humans have not been shown to cause signs of tera-
togenicity.7 
Sucralfate is most likely not excreted in breast milk because of 
minimal systemic absorption.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdoses are unlikely to cause significant problems. Laboratory an-
imals receiving up to 12 g/kg PO have demonstrated no incidence of 
mortality.7 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving sucralfate and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Antacids, Aluminum Containing : Additive absorption of 
aluminum may occur, particularly in patients with renal insuf -
ficiency.
Sucralfate may impair the oral absorption of the following medica -
tions; administration should be separated by at least 2 hours to min-
imize this effect (with other medication being administered before 
sucralfate)4:
 ■ Alendronate : Other oral bisphosphonates should be assumed 
to have the same effects.
 ■ Antacids, Aluminum Containing : Can decrease sucralfate 
effectiveness; administration should be separated by 30 minutes. 
Additive absorption of aluminum may occur, particularly in pa -
tients with renal insufficiency.
 ■ Antacids, Calcium/Magnesium Containing : Can decrease 
sucralfate effectiveness; administration should be separated by 30 
minutes.
 ■ Ciprofloxacin : Other oral fluoroquinolones, except enrofloxa-
cin, should be assumed to be affected.9,10 

===== PDF_PAGE_1217 =====
1190    Sufentanil
 ■ Diclofenac
 ■ Digoxin
 ■ Feeding, Enteral : Administration should be separated by an 
hour.
 ■ Ferrous Sulfate
 ■ Furosemide
 ■ Ketoconazole
 ■ Lanthanum
 ■ Levothyroxine : A dministration should be separated by 4 
hours.
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics  (eg, azithromycin, clarithromycin, 
erythromycin)
 ■ Penicillamine
 ■ Tetracyclines  (eg, doxycycline, minocycline, tetracycline)11,12
 ■ Theophylline
 ■ Vitamins, Fat Soluble
 ■ W arfarin
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
GI-mucosal protectant for conditions such as esophagitis, gas-
tric or duodenal ulcers, and uremic gastritis  (extra-label): Em-
pirically administered at ¼ to ½ of a 1 g tablet (250 – 500 mg)/ani-
mal (NOT g/kg) for toy-breed dogs and cats and 1 g/animal (NOT 
g/kg) PO 2 to 4 times daily for large-sized dogs. When using tablet 
formulations, it is recommended to crush the tablet then suspend 
it in a small amount of water prior to administration.
FERRETS :
GI-mucosal protectant (extra-label): 
a) 75 mg/kg PO every 4 to 6 hours; should be administered 10 
minutes prior to feeding13
b) 25 – 125 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours14
HORSES :
GI-mucosal protectant (extra-label): 
a) Gastric glandular disease: Sucralfate 12 – 20 mg/kg PO twice 
daily in combination with omeprazole 4 mg/kg PO once dai -
ly.5,15,16
b) Prevention of stress-induced ulcers (used with acid-sup -
pressive drugs) in foals: 
i. 10 – 20 mg/kg PO every 6 to 8 hours17
ii. 20 – 40 mg/kg PO every 6 hours18
iii. 2 – 4 g/foal (NOT g/kg) PO every 6 hours18
c) Right dorsal colitis | colonic ulcers: 22 mg/kg PO every 6 to 8 
hours19,20 
REPTILES :
GI irritation in most species (extra-label): 500 – 1000 mg/kg PO 
every 6 to 8 hours21
BIRDS:
Upper GI mucosal hemorrhage (extra-label): 50 – 100 mg/kg PO 
every 12 hours22
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy (dependent on the reason for use); may be moni-
tored by a decrease in clinical signs, endoscopic examination, and 
fecal occult blood testing
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is best given on an empty stomach and not at the 
same time as other medications. If you are giving your animal any 
other medication, be sure to give the other medications 2 hours 
before you give the sucralfate. 
 ■ Sucralfate be given several times a day to be most effective.
 ■ Shake liquids well before using. If using tablets, it is best to dis -
solve the tablets in lukewarm water just before giving them.
 ■ This medicine is usually tolerated well. Some animals may devel-
op constipation. Some cats may vomit after receiving this medi -
cine. Contact your veterinarian if you have concerns about your 
animal taking this medicine.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Sucralfate, a basic aluminum complex of sucrose sulfate, can occur 
as a white, amorphous powder. It is practically insoluble in alcohol 
or water. Each 1 g sucralfate tablet contains ≈207 mg of aluminum.
Sucralfate is structurally related to heparin but does not possess 
any appreciable anticoagulant activity. It is also structurally related to 
sucrose but is not utilized as sugar by the body.
Sucralfate is also known as basic aluminum sucrose sulfate and 
Carafate®, Sulcrate®, and Cytogard®.
Storage/Stability
Store sucralfate tablets in tight containers at room temperature 
(15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]). Store sucralfate suspension at controlled 
room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]); do not freeze.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
A sucralfate 200 mg/mL suspension can be extemporaneously pre -
pared. For a volume of 100 mL, twenty (20) sucralfate 1 g tablets 
should be crushed, and a sufficient quantity of distilled water added 
to bring the volume to 100 mL. Suspending agents (eg, acacia, trag -
acanth) should not be used, as they can bind to sucralfate and make 
it inactive. “Shake well” and “refrigerate” should be labeled on the 
compounded solution. When refrigerated, it is stable for 14 days.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Sucralfate Tablets: 1 g; Carafate®, generic; (Rx)
Sucralfate Suspension: 1 g/10 mL in 10 mL unit-dose cups and  
415 mL bottles; Carafate®, generic; (Rx)
Formulations are available as oral mucosal coating agents and regu-
lated by the FDA as medical devices.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Sufentanil
(soo-fen-ta-nil) Sufenta®
Opioid Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Injectable opioid that is 5 to 7 times more potent than 
fentanyl. May be useful for adjunctive anesthesia or epidural 
analgesia
 ▶ Dose-related respiratory and CNS depression most likely 
adverse effects
 ▶ DEA Schedule II (C-II) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Sufentanil is an opioid analgesic that may be useful as an anesthesia 
adjunct or as an epidural analgesic. In humans, it has been used as 
the primary anesthetic in intubated patients with assisted ventilation 
and as a postoperative analgesic.
Pharmacology/Actions
Sufentanil is a potent mu opioid with the expected sedative, anal -
gesic, and anesthetic properties. When comparing analgesic poten -
cies when injecting IM, 0.01 to 0.04 mg of sufentanil is equivalent to 

===== PDF_PAGE_1218 =====
Sufentanil   1191
0.4 to 0.8 mg of alfentanil, 0.1 to 0.2 mg of fentanyl, and ≈10 mg of 
morphine. Like fentanyl, sufentanil appears to have less circulatory 
effects than morphine. Sufentanil has a rapid onset of action (1 to 3 
minutes) and a faster recovery time than fentanyl.
Pharmacokinetics
In isoflurane-anesthetized cats, a sufentanil 1 µg/kg IV bolus had a 
volume of distribution (at steady-state) of ≈0.77 L/kg, a clearance of 
≈17.6 mL/minute/kg, and a terminal half-life of ≈54 minutes. Elimi-
nation of sufentanil is expected to be more rapid than either fentanyl 
or alfentanil because of a small volume of distribution and moderate 
clearance.1
In humans, the drug has a rapid onset of action (1 to 3 minutes) 
after IV injection. The drug is highly lipid-soluble and has a volume 
of distribution in the central compartment of 0.1 L/kg. Approxi -
mately 93% is bound to plasma proteins. Plasma concentrations 
rapidly decline because of redistribution, and its terminal elimina -
tion half-life is ≈2.5 hours. Plasma clearance has been reported to be  
≈12 mL/minute/kg. Sufentanil is metabolized primarily in the liv -
er and small intestine via O-demethylation and N-dealkylation. 
The parent drug and these metabolites are excreted primarily in 
the urine. Although the manufacturer states to use sufentanil with 
caution in patients with impaired renal or hepatic function, limited 
pharmacokinetic studies in these patients rarely showed any drug 
accumulation.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Sufentanil is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to 
it or other opioids.2 It should be used with caution in debilitated or 
geriatric patients and those with severely diminished renal or hepatic 
function. Initial dose reduction may be required in geriatric or debil-
itated patients, particularly those with diminished cardiopulmonary 
function.
Because of the drug’s potency, the use of a tuberculin syringe to 
measure doses less than 1 mL in addition to a double-check system 
for dose calculations and measurement is recommended. It should 
only be used in situations where patient vital signs can be continu -
ously monitored. 
Opioid analgesics are contraindicated in patients stung by scor -
pions (eg, Centruroides spp), as they may potentiate venom effects.3
Do not confuse SUfentanil with fentanyl or ALfentanil.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are generally dose-related and consistent with other 
opioid agonists. Respiratory depression and/or CNS depression are 
most likely to be encountered and can be exacerbated if sufentanil is 
given with other drugs that can cause those effects.
In humans, bradycardia may occur, but it is usually responsive 
to anticholinergic agents. Dose-related skeletal muscle rigidity has 
been reported, particularly with high doses and/or rapid IV admin -
istration and can be managed with concurrent use of neuromuscular 
blockers. Sufentanil has rarely been associated with asystole, hyper -
carbia, and hypersensitivity reactions.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Although sufentanil is indicated for epidural use (mixed with bupiv-
acaine ± epinephrine) in women for labor/delivery, it should not be 
administered systemically to a dam close to giving birth, as offspring 
may show behavioral alterations (eg, hypotonia, depression) associ-
ated with opioid administration.
The effects of sufentanil on lactation and its safety for nursing off-
spring are not well defined, but sufentanil milk levels approximate 
those found in serum. This, coupled with its low oral bioavailability, 
makes it unlikely to cause significant effects in nursing offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In dogs, the LD 50 of IV sufentanil is 10.1 to 19.5 mg/kg. Severe IV 
overdoses may cause apnea, circulatory collapse, pulmonary edema, 
seizures, cardiac arrest, and death. Treatment is a combination of 
supportive therapy and administration of an opioid antagonist, such 
as naloxone. Although sufentanil has a fairly rapid half-life, multiple 
doses of naloxone may be necessary. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving sufentanil and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Alpha-2 Receptor Agonists  (eg, dexmedetomidine, xyla -
zine): Concurrent use may increase the risk for CNS and/or re -
spiratory depression. 
 ■ Anesthetic Agents  (eg, alfaxalone, isoflurane, ketamine, 
propofol): Concurrent use may increase the risk for CNS and/or 
respiratory depression. 
 ■ Anticholinergic Agents  (eg, acepromazine, atropine, gly -
copyrrolate): Concurrent use may increase the risk for urinary 
retention, constipation, and CNS and respiratory depression.
 ■ Antihypertensive Agents  (eg, atenolol, lisinopril): Concur-
rent use may increase the risk for bradycardia, hypotension, and 
orthostasis. Use cautiously and monitor blood pressure and heart 
rate. Opioids may decrease the therapeutic effects of diuretics. 
 ■ Benzodiazepines  (eg, diazepam, midazolam ): Concurrent 
use may increase the risk for CNS and/or respiratory depression. 
 ■ Bethanechol : Concurrent use may antagonize the beneficial 
effects of bethanechol on GI motility. Avoid combination.
 ■ CNS Depressants  (eg, methocarbamol, phenobarbital): Con-
current use may increase the risk for CNS and/or respiratory de -
pression. Monitor and adjust dosages accordingly.
 ■ Desmopressin : Concurrent use may increase levels of oral des -
mopressin and increase the risk for water intoxication and/or 
hyponatremia, which can progress to seizures, coma, respiratory 
arrest, and death. Monitor electrolytes and renal function.
 ■ Domperidone : Concurrent use may antagonize the GI effects 
of domperidone.
 ■ Drugs That Inhibit Hepatic Isoenzymes  (eg, cimetidine, 
diltiazem, erythromycin, fluconazole, itraconazole, keto -
conazole) May increase the half-life and decrease the clearance 
of sufentanil, leading to prolonged effects and an increased risk 
for respiratory depression. Consider adjusting doses accordingly.
 ■ Drugs That Induce Hepatic Isoenzymes  (eg, griseofulvin, 
mitotane, phenobarbital ): Current use may decrease levels of 
sufentanil. Monitor clinical response and adjust doses  accordingly.
 ■ Drugs That Depress Cardiac Function Or Reduce V agal 
Tone (eg, beta-blockers or other anesthetic agents): May produce 
bradycardia or hypotension if used concurrently with sufentanil
 ■ Ifosfamide : Concurrent use may increase the risk for neurotox-
icity, including somnolence, confusion, hallucinations, blurred 
vision, urinary incontinence, seizures, and coma. Use cautiously 
and monitor.
 ■ Iohexol : Concurrent use of opioids with intrathecal iohexol 
may increase the risk for seizures. Opioids should be withheld for 
48 hours before and 24 hours after intrathecal administration of 
iohexol.

===== PDF_PAGE_1219 =====
1192    Sufentanil
 ■ Loperamide : Concurrent use may increase the risk for consti -
pation.
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors  (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, sele-
giline): Concurrent use may increase the risk for anxiety, con -
fusion, hypotension, respiratory depression, cyanosis, and coma. 
MAOIs should be withheld for 14 days prior to administration of 
opioids. Avoid combination.
 ■ Metoclopramide : Concurrent use may antagonize the proki -
netic effects of metoclopramide.
 ■ Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  (eg, atracurium): Con-
current use may increase the risk for tachycardia, bradycardia, 
and/or hypotension. Use cautiously and monitor
 ■ Serotonin Receptor Antagonists  (eg, dolasetron, fluox-
etine): Concurrent use may increase the risk for serotonin syn -
drome. Avoid combination.
 ■ Tramadol : Concurrent use may increase the risk for seizures, 
serotonin syndrome, urinary retention, and constipation. The risk 
for CNS and respiratory depression may be additive.
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants  ( TCAs; eg, amitriptyline, clo -
mipramine): Concurrent use may increase risk for urinary reten-
tion, constipation, and CNS and respiratory depression.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Because opioids can increase biliary tract pressure and raise se -
rum amylase and lipase values, these values may be unreliable for 
24 hours after sufentanil is administered.
Dosages
NOTE: In obese patients, calculate doses based on lean body 
weight.
DOGS/CATS:
Opioid analgesic (extra-label): 0.5 –  1 µg/kg slow IV followed 
by 0.5 – 1 µg/kg/ HOUR IV CRI has been noted. 1,4–8 Dosage is ti -
trated to effect. Dosages as high as 2.5 µg/kg slow IV followed by  
2 – 4 µg/kg/HOUR IV CRI have been noted.9
Epidural analgesia in dogs  (extra-label): 0.5 – 1 µg/kg diluted 
to a volume of 0.2 – 0.36 mL/kg with sterile saline. The onset of 
action is 10 to 15 minutes; duration 1 to 4 hours.10–12
RABBITS :
Anesthesia (extra-label): 0.5 µg/kg IV bolus, followed by  
0.72 µg/kg/HOUR IV CRI13
Monitoring
 ■ Anesthetic and/or analgesic efficacy
 ■ Cardiac and respiratory rate
 ■ Pulse oximetry or other methods to measure blood oxygenation 
when used for anesthesia
 ■ Blood pressure
Client Information
 ■ Sufentanil is a very potent opioid that should only be used by 
professionals in a setting where adequate patient monitoring is 
available.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Sufentanil citrate is a phenylpiperidine derivative opioid related to 
fentanyl. It occurs as a white or almost white powder that is soluble 
in water and sparingly soluble in alcohol, acetone, and chloroform. 
The commercially available injection has a pH (adjusted with citric 
acid) of 3.5 to 6.
Sufentanil citrate may also be known as R-33800, sufentanili ci -
tras, fentathienel citrate, sufentanyl citrate, sulfentanil citrate, Fast-
fen®, Fentaientel®, and Sufenta®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, store sufentanil injection protected from 
light at room temperature 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F). Sufentanil ci -
trate is hydrolyzable in acidic solutions.
Sufentanil citrate is a DEA Schedule II (C-II) controlled sub -
stance; store it in a substantially constructed and securely locked 
area. Follow applicable local, state, and federal rules regarding the 
disposal of unused or wasted controlled drugs.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Sufentanil citrate is reportedly compatible with 5% dextrose and 
bupivacaine. Sufentanil is Y-site compatible with solutions contain-
ing atropine, dexamethasone sodium phosphate, diazepam, diphen-
hydramine, etomidate, metoclopramide, midazolam, phenobarbital, 
and propofol. It is incompatible with lorazepam, phenytoin, and 
thiopental.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE.
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 1 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See the Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Sufentanil Citrate Injection: 50 µg/mL (as base) in 1 mL, 2 mL, and  
5 mL ampules; Sufenta® (preservative free), generic; (Rx, C-II)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 

===== PDF_PAGE_1220 =====
Sulfa-/Trimethoprim   1193
Sulfa-/Trimethoprim
Sulfadiazine/Trimethoprim
Sulfamethoxazole/Trimethoprim
(sul-fa-dye-a-zeen; sul-fa-meth-ox-a-zole/trye-meth-ohe-prim)
Bactrim®, EquiSul-SDT®, Uniprim®
Potentiated Sulfonamide Antimicrobial
NOTE: In the United States, 2 FDA-approved combinations of sulfon-
amide with trimethoprim (ie, sulfa-/trimethoprim) are used clinically 
in animals: sulfadiazine/trimethoprim for parenteral and oral use in 
dogs, cats, and horses and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim for oral 
use in humans. In Canada, sulfadoxine is also available in combina -
tion with trimethoprim for veterinary use.
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Combination antimicrobial agent, often referred to as a po-
tentiated sulfonamide, used to treat bacterial and protozoal 
infections
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity to sulfonamides 
and severe renal or hepatic impairment.
 ▶ Caution is advised in cases of diminished renal or hepatic 
function, urinary obstruction, urolithiasis, and in dog breeds 
predisposed to sulfonamide hypersensitivity (eg, Doberman 
pinschers).
 ▶ Adverse effects in dogs include keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 
hypersensitivity (type 1 or type 3), acute neutrophilic hepatitis 
with icterus, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, fever, hemolytic 
anemia, urticaria, polyarthritis, facial swelling, polydipsia, 
crystalluria, hematuria, polyuria, cholestasis, hypothyroidism, 
anemia, agranulocytosis, and idiosyncratic hepatic necrosis.
 ▶ Adverse effects in cats include anorexia, crystalluria, hematu-
ria, leukopenia, and anemia.
 ▶ Adverse effects in horses include diarrhea, hypersensitivity 
reactions, and hematologic effects (eg, anemia, thrombocy-
topenia, leukopenia) when administered orally and transient 
pruritus after IV injection.
 ▶ Local injection adverse effects (eg, warmth, edema, pain) are 
possible.
 ▶ Sulfa-/trimethoprim is potentially teratogenic; weigh the risks 
versus the benefits before prescribing.
 ▶ In the United States, extra-label use of sulfonamides is prohib-
ited in lactating dairy cattle.
Uses/Indications
Although sulfadiazine/trimethoprim is only FDA-approved for use 
in dogs and horses, this drug is used to treat infections caused by 
susceptible bacteria and parasitic organisms in various species. 
Sulfadiazine/trimethoprim is commonly used in horses because it 
is 1 of a limited number of safe oral options. Although use in dogs is 
more limited because of concerns about adverse effects and availabil-
ity of other antimicrobial options, this antibiotic is a potential choice 
for treatment of various infections (eg, cystitis, prostatitis) and is also 
sometimes used for treatment of atypical pathogens (eg, Nocardia 
spp). Prophylactic use of sulfadiazine/trimethoprim reduced mor -
bidity in dogs receiving doxorubicin.1
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated sulfa -
methoxazole/trimethoprim as a Highly Important antimicrobial for 
human medicine.2 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) An-
timicrobial Classification has designated sulfadiazine/trimethoprim 
as a Veterinary Critically Important antimicrobial.3
Pharmacology/Actions
Sulfonamides are bacteriostatic agents while trimethoprim is bac -
tericidal; both agents are time-dependent antibiotics. When used in 
combination, the resulting potentiated sulfonamides are bactericid-
al. Potentiated sulfonamides sequentially inhibit enzymes in the folic 
acid pathway, inhibiting bacterial thymidine synthesis. Sulfonamides 
compete with para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) to reduce bacterial 
dihydrofolic acid (DFA) formation, and trimethoprim blocks the 
conversion of DFA to tetrahydrofolic acid by preferentially inhibiting 
bacterial dihydrofolate reductase. Infected tissue and cellular debris 
can inhibit the activity of sulfa-/trimethoprim by secreting PABA 
and thymidine. The effects of sulfa-/trimethoprim on the equine GI 
microbiome appear to be reversible.4
The in vitro optimal ratio for most susceptible bacteria is ≈1:20 
(trimethoprim:sulfonamide), but synergistic activity can reportedly 
occur with ratios of 1:1 to 1:40. The serum concentration of the tri -
methoprim component is considered more important than the sul -
fonamide concentration. 
Potentiated sulfonamides have a fairly broad spectrum of activi -
ty. Generally susceptible gram-positive bacteria include most strep -
tococci and staphylococci and Nocardia spp. Many gram-negative 
organisms of the Enterobacteriaceae family are inherently suscep -
tible to potentiated sulfonamides but acquired resistance can occur. 
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is ineffective against Pseudomonas aeruginosa; 
some protozoa (ie, Pneumocystis jiroveci, Coccidia spp, Neospora spp, 
Toxoplasma spp) are also inhibited. Potentiated sulfonamides appear 
to have little activity against most atypical bacteria and anaerobes; 
methicillin-resistant staphylococci are usually resistant. Enterococcus 
spp infections may appear to be susceptible to sulfonamide-contain-
ing antibiotics in vitro; however, they are intrinsically resistant, so 
sulfa-/trimethoprim should not be used for these bacteria.
Resistance development is thought to occur more slowly to the 
combination of drugs than to either drug alone. In gram-negative 
organisms, sulfamethoxazole resistance is usually plasmid mediat -
ed, although a point mutation for dihydropteroate synthase also may 
confer resistance.  
Pharmacokinetics
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is relatively well absorbed after oral adminis -
tration, with peak concentrations occurring ≈1 to 4 hours after ad -
ministration; however, the drug is absorbed more slowly after SC 
absorption. Oral bioavailability in fed horses after a single dose of 
30 mg/kg paste was 74% for sulfadiazine and 46% for trimethoprim.5 
Bioavailability was ≈84% in male goats.6 Food has no apparent effect 
on the absorption of sulfadiazine, but trimethoprim absorption is 
decreased.
In calves 1 day and 1 week of age, trimethoprim and sulfadia -
zine were absorbed after oral administration, although serum tri -
methoprim concentration was diminished in the 1-week-old calves. 
In calves 6 weeks of age, peak sulfadiazine concentration was only 
60% as compared with calves 1 day of age, and trimethoprim was 
undetectable.7 In a separate study, sulfadiazine half-life was 8.5 to 10 
hours in calves 6 weeks of age and ≈8 to 13 hours in calves 12 weeks 
of age.8 In ruminants older than 8 weeks of age, trimethoprim is ap-
parently trapped in the ruminoreticulum after oral administration 
and undergoes some degradation that limits its usefulness.
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is well distributed in the body; however, in 
horses, concentrations are lower in the pulmonary epithelial lining 
fluid than in plasma. 5 Both sulfadiazine and trimethoprim attain 
therapeutic concentrations in the equine endometrium. 9 In dogs, 
therapeutic concentrations of both agents are reached in the skin. 10 
In patients with inflamed meninges, the drugs enter the CSF in con-
centrations ≈50% of those found in the serum. Sulfa-/trimethoprim 

===== PDF_PAGE_1221 =====
1194    Sulfa-/Trimethoprim
is relatively well distributed into the prostate, and both drugs con -
centrate in the urine. The volume of distribution for trimethoprim is 
1.49 L/kg in dogs; 0.59 to 1.51 L/kg in horses; and 2.7 L/kg in don -
keys.11 The volume of distribution for sulfadiazine is 1.02 L/kg in 
dogs and 0.6 L/kg in donkeys. 11 Sulfadiazine and trimethoprim are 
20% and 35% bound to equine plasma proteins.12
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is both renally excreted unchanged via glo -
merular filtration and tubular secretion and metabolized by the liver. 
Sulfonamides are primarily acetylated (not in dogs) and conjugated 
with glucuronic acid, and trimethoprim is metabolized to oxide and 
hydroxylated metabolites. Trimethoprim may be more extensively 
metabolized in the liver of adult ruminants than in other species. The 
serum elimination half-life for trimethoprim is 2.5 hours in dogs, ≈2 
to 3 hours in horses, 10.9 hours in goats,6 and 1.5 hours in cattle. The 
serum elimination half-life for sulfadiazine is 9.84 hours in dogs, ≈4 
to 8 hours in horses, and 2.5 hours in cattle. Sulfadiazine and tri -
methoprim clearances in donkeys were 1.7 and 4.4 mL/minute/kg,  
respectively.11 Although trimethoprim is rapidly eliminated from the 
serum, the drug may persist for a longer period of time in tissue.
Because of the number of variables involved, it is extremely dif -
ficult to apply pharmacokinetic values in making dosage recom -
mendations with these combinations. Each drug (ie, trimethoprim, 
sulfonamide) has different pharmacokinetic parameters (eg, absorp-
tion, distribution, elimination) in each species. Because different 
organisms have different MIC values and the optimal ratio of tri -
methoprim to sulfonamides differs from organism to organism, this 
problem is exacerbated.
Considerable controversy exists regarding the frequency of ad -
ministration of these combinations. Sulfadiazine/trimethoprim is 
labeled for once daily administration in dogs and horses, but many 
clinicians believe that sulfa-/trimethoprim is more efficacious if giv-
en twice daily, regardless of the sulfonamide used.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
The veterinary manufacturer states that sulfadiazine/trimethoprim 
should not be used in dogs or horses with marked liver parenchymal 
damage, impaired hepatic function, blood dyscrasias, or a history 
of sulfonamide or trimethoprim sensitivity. Sulfadiazine/trimetho -
prim is not for use in horses (or FDA-approved for other animals) 
intended for food. Sulfonamides are not considered contraindicated 
in patients allergic to thiazide diuretics or sulfonylurea agents.13
Doberman pinschers, Samoyeds, and miniature schnauzers ap -
pear to be more susceptible to sulfonamide-induced polysystemic 
immune complex disease14; use sulfa-/trimethoprim with caution in 
these breeds.
Sulfa-/trimethoprim should be used with caution in patients with 
pre-existing hepatic or renal disease or folate deficiency. In animals 
with moderate to severe renal dysfunction, consider dosage reduc -
tion; avoid products containing sulfadiazine.
Sulfadiazine has potential for crystallization in the urine, so use 
should be avoided in dogs with uroliths, at increased risk for devel -
oping uroliths, with highly concentrated urine (from dehydration), 
or with acidic urine.
Horses receiving sulfadiazine/trimethoprim that are under con -
ditions of stress may develop potentially fatal acute diarrhea. 15 Dis-
continue antimicrobial therapy if acute diarrhea or persistent changes 
in fecal consistency are observed and initiate appropriate treatment. 
Sulfadiazine/trimethoprim should not be administered to horses with 
drug-induced cardiac arrhythmias (eg, anesthetic and sedative agents) 
and it should not be given IV concurrently or with previous adminis-
tration of CNS depressants (eg, anesthetic agents, phenothiazines).16
In humans, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim is contraindicated in 
patients younger than 2 months of age, with known hypersensitivity 
to either drug component, with marked hepatic or renal impairment, 
and with megaloblastic anemia due to folate deficiency.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects noted in dogs include keratoconjunctivitis sic -
ca (KCS; which may be irreversible), acute neutrophilic hepatitis 
with icterus, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, fever, hemolytic anemia, 
urticaria, polyarthritis, facial swelling, polydipsia, polyuria, and 
cholestasis. Potentiated sulfonamides may cause clinical hypothy -
roidism in dogs, particularly with extended therapy. Acute hyper -
sensitivity reactions manifesting as type I (ie, anaphylaxis) or type 
III (ie, formation of antigen:antibody complexes) reactions can be 
seen. Hypersensitivity reactions appear to be more common in large-
breed dogs. Doberman pinschers, Samoyeds, and miniature schnau-
zers may be more susceptible to hypersensitivity reactions than other 
breeds.14 Other hematologic effects (eg, anemia, agranulocytosis) are 
possible but are rare, although the incidence may increase with pro-
longed use of high doses.17 Sulfa-/trimethoprim has rarely caused an 
idiosyncratic, moderate to massive hepatic necrosis in dogs. 18 Use 
of sulfa-/trimethoprim may increase the risk for developing acute 
pancreatitis,14 but cause and effect have not been definitively shown.
Adverse effects noted in cats may include anorexia, leukopenia, 
and anemia.
In horses, transient pruritus has been noted after IV injection. 
Oral therapy has resulted in dose-related diarrhea, but incidence is 
relatively low. Previous administration of potentiated sulfonamides 
has been implicated in increasing the mortality rate associated with 
severe diarrhea. If the 48% injectable product is administered IM or 
SC, or if it extravasates after IV administration, swelling, pain, and 
minor tissue damage may result. Hypersensitivity reactions, neuro -
logic effects (eg, gait alterations, behavior changes), cutaneous vas -
culitis, and hematologic effects (eg, anemia, thrombocytopenia, leu-
kopenia) may also be seen.19 In experimental models, trimethoprim 
inhibited equine voltage-gated K+ channel K(v)11.1, suggesting that 
trimethoprim could induce repolarization disorders in horses 20,21; 
validation with in vivo studies are needed. Neurologic adverse ef -
fects (agitation, erratic behavior, hypermetric gait) have been noted 
in horses being treated with typical doses of sulfa-/trimethoprim; all 
adverse effects resolved with discontinuation of the drug.22
Sulfonamides (and their metabolites) can precipitate in the urine, 
particularly when given at high dosages for prolonged periods. Acid-
ic or highly concentrated urine may also contribute to increased risk 
for crystalluria, hematuria, and renal tubule obstruction.
Regurgitation may occur in birds.
Sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim can markedly reduce tear pro -
duction in rabbits,23 but sulfadiazine/trimethoprim had no effect in 
horses.24
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Trimethoprim and sulfonamides cross the placenta. Safety of sulfa-/
trimethoprim has not been clearly established in pregnant animals. 
Reports of teratogenicity (eg, cleft palate, fetal loss) have been re -
ported in rats and rabbits. Studies in male animals have not demon-
strated reduced reproductive performance. First trimester exposure 
in humans has been associated with increased risk for congenital 
malformations. 
Trimethoprim and sulfonamides are distributed into milk. Use 
sulfa-/trimethoprim products in nursing animals with caution. 
Sulfonamides are distributed into maternal milk, but in humans 
are considered compatible with breastfeeding in healthy, full-term 
infants.25,26 Premature infants and infants with hyperbilirubinemia 
may be at risk for adverse effects.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Manifestations of an acute overdose can include clinical signs of GI 
distress (eg, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea), CNS toxicity (eg, depres -
sion,), facial swelling, bone marrow depression, and increased se -
rum aminotransferase (ie, ALT, AST) activity. Oral overdoses can be 

===== PDF_PAGE_1222 =====
Sulfa-/Trimethoprim   1195
treated by emptying the stomach (following typical protocols) and 
initiating supportive therapy based on clinical signs. Acidification 
of the urine may increase the renal elimination of trimethoprim but 
could also cause sulfonamide crystalluria, particularly with sulfadi -
azine-containing products. CBC and other laboratory parameters 
should be monitored as necessary. Severe bone marrow suppression 
associated with chronic overdoses can be treated with folinic acid 
(leucovorin). Peritoneal dialysis is not effective in removing tri -
methoprim or sulfonamides from circulation.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
In humans, trimethoprim may be a substrate of p-glycoprotein, 
sulfamethoxazole is a substrate of the CYP2C family, and both tri -
methoprim and sulfamethoxazole may inhibit CYP2C enzymes. The 
following drug interactions have either been reported or are theoret-
ical in humans or animals receiving sulfa-/trimethoprim and may 
be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Amantadine : A human patient developed toxic delirium while 
receiving amantadine in conjunction with sulfamethoxazole/tri -
methoprim.27
 ■ Amiodarone : May reduce sulfonamide metabolism and in -
crease the risk for adverse effects.
 ■ Anesthetic Agents : Concurrent IV administration is contra -
indicated. Ester-type local anesthetics (eg, procaine, tetracaine) 
may locally inhibit sulfonamide effects.28,29
 ■ Angiotensin II-Receptor Blockers  ( ARBs; eg, telmisar-
tan): May increase the risk for hyperkalemia when used with po-
tassium-sparing drugs
 ■ Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors  (ACEIs; eg, 
benazepril, enalapril ): May increase the risk for hyperkalemia 
when used with potassium-sparing drugs
 ■ Antacids : Concurrent administration may decrease sulfon -
amide bioavailability.
 ■ Azathioprine, Mercaptopurine : Increased risk for myelo -
suppression
 ■ Cyclosporine : Sulfa-/trimethoprim may increase the risk for 
nephrotoxicity.
 ■ Detomidine : Concurrent use has resulted in fatal arrhythmias 
in horses.21 
 ■ Digoxin : Sulfa-/trimethoprim may increase digoxin  concentration.
 ■ Diuretics, Thiazide : May increase the risk for thrombocyto -
penia
 ■ Hypoglycemic Agents, Oral  (eg, glipizide, metformin ): 
Sulfa-/trimethoprim may potentiate hypoglycemic effects.
 ■ Leucovorin : May reduce therapeutic effect of sulfa-/trimetho -
prim
 ■ Methenamine : May form an insoluble precipitate in the urine
 ■ Methotrexate (MTX): Sulfa-/trimethoprim may displace 
from plasma proteins and increase the risk for toxic effects; it can 
also interfere with MTX assays (competitive protein binding tech-
nique, but not when measured by radioimmunoassay).
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine, promethazine): Concur-
rent administration is contraindicated. 
 ■ Potassium Supplements : Increased risk for hyperkalemia
 ■ Procainamide : Sulfa-/trimethoprim may increase the concen -
tration of procainamide and its active metabolite.
 ■ Pyrimethamine : May increase the risk for megaloblastic ane -
mia and myelosuppression
 ■ Rifampin : May reduce serum concentrations of trimethoprim 
and sulfonamide
 ■ Spironolactone : May increase the risk for hyperkalemia when 
used with potassium-sparing drugs
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants (TCAs; eg, amitriptyline, clo -
mipramine): Sulfa-/trimethoprim may decrease efficacy.
 ■ W arfarin : Sulfa-/trimethoprim may prolong prothrombin time 
and INR.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ When using the Jaffe alkaline picrate reaction assay for creatinine 
determination, sulfa-/trimethoprim may cause an overestimation 
of ≈10%.
 ■ Sulfonamides may give false-positive results for urine glucose de-
terminations when using the Benedict’s method.
Dosages
NOTE: There is significant controversy regarding the frequency 
of administration of these drugs. See Pharmacokinetics for more 
information. Unless otherwise noted, doses are for combined sul-
fa-/trimethoprim. See Monitoring if treatment is expected to be 
longer than 7 days.
DOGS:
For systemic antibacterial action against sensitive organisms, 
either alone or as an adjunct to surgery or debridement with 
associated infection; treatment of acute urinary tract infections, 
acute bacterial complications of distemper, acute respiratory 
tract infections, acute alimentary tract infections, wound infec-
tions, and abscesses (label dosage; FDA-approved): 30 mg/kg PO 
once daily. Alternatively, especially in severe infections, the initial 
dose may be followed by 15 mg/kg every 12 hours.30  
Superficial bacterial folliculitis (extra-label): 15 – 30 mg/kg PO 
twice daily.31 Potentiated sulfonamides (ie, sulfa-/trimethoprim, 
sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim) are first-tier drugs only if region-
al susceptibility of Staphylococcus pseudintermedius is known.
Bacterial cystitis  (extra-label): Potentiated sulfonamides (ie,  
sulfa-/trimethoprim, sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim) are first-tier 
drugs only if regional pathogen susceptibility patterns are 
known.32 
a) Uncomplicated UTI: 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. Treatment 
may be as short as 3 days.32,33 
b) Complicated UTI: 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours32
Parasitic diseases (extra-label):
Coccidiosis: 
a) Body weight less than 4 kg (8.8 lb): 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 12 
to 24 hours34
b) Body weight greater than 4 kg (8.8 lb): 30 – 60 mg/kg PO every 
24 hours34
Neosporosis: Sulfadiazine/trimethoprim 15 – 20 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours for 4 weeks in combination with pyrimethamine 1 mg/kg  
PO once daily for 4 weeks. If observable clinical improvement is 
slow, treatment should be extended beyond the recommended 4 
weeks until 2 weeks after clinical signs have plateaued. All litter -
mates of affected puppies should be treated regardless of clinical 
signs. Alternative treatment is clindamycin 12.5 – 25 mg/kg PO or 
IM every 12 hours for 4 weeks. 35 NOTE: There is no approved or 
curative treatment for canine neosporosis. Arrestment of clinical 
disease is best achieved when treatment is initiated before the oc-
currence of contracture or paralysis.

===== PDF_PAGE_1223 =====
1196    Sulfa-/Trimethoprim
Toxoplasmosis: Sulfa-/trimethoprim 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 
for 4 weeks can be used. Supportive care should be provided as 
needed.35 There is no approved treatment for toxoplasmosis in dogs.
Pneumocystosis (Pneumocystis jiroveci): 15 mg/kg PO every 8 
hours for 3 weeks or 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for 3 weeks 
American canine hepatozoonosis ( Hepatozoon americanum): 
Triple-combination therapy (TCP) consists of sulfadiazine/tri -
methoprim 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for 14 days, clindamy -
cin 10 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for 14 days, and pyrimethamine  
0.25 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for 14 days or ponazuril  
10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for 14 days. Prolonged therapy con-
sists of decoquinate 10 – 20 mg/kg mixed in food twice daily; treat-
ment is continued for 2 years. If relapse occurs, either ponazuril 
or TCP should be administered again for 14 days, followed by 
long-term decoquinate therapy.36 NOTE: No treatment is effec -
tive in eliminating H americanum in infected dogs. Treatment can 
increase survival time, improve quality of life, and decrease the 
number and severity of clinical relapses. Supportive care can en -
sure hydration, and NSAIDs can assist with pain control.
CATS:
Bacterial cystitis (extra-label): Potentiated sulfonamides (ie, sulfa-/
trimethoprim, sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim) are first-tier drugs 
only if regional pathogen susceptibility patterns are known.32 
a) Uncomplicated UTI: 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. Treatment 
may be as short as 3 days.32,33 
b) Complicated UTI: 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours.32 
Parasitic diseases (extra-label):
Coccidiosis: 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours34
Toxoplasmosis: 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for 4 weeks can be 
used. Supportive care should be provided as needed.35
HORSES :
Control of bacterial infections of horses during treatment of 
acute strangles, respiratory tract infections, acute urogeni -
tal infections, wound infections, and abscesses  (label dosage; 
FDA-approved): 
a) Powder and paste formulations: 75 mg/kg PO once daily; ad-
minister in a small amount of feed. Continue treatment for 2 
to 3 days after clinical signs have subsided. Usual treatment 
course is 5 to 7 days.37,38
b) IV injection formulation: 21.3 mg/kg IV once daily38
Lower respiratory tract infections by susceptible strains of Strep-
tococcus equi subsp zooepidemicus (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
24 mg/kg (combined active ingredients) PO twice daily for 10 days15 
Respiratory infections (extra-label): 30 mg/kg PO or IV twice 
daily.5 NOTE: Potentiated sulfonamides for treatment of low -
er airway infections in horses should be restricted to treatment 
against highly susceptible pathogens.
Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly P carinii) in foals (extra-label): 
30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours
Dermatologic infections (extra-label): 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours, often in conjunction with topical antibacterial sham -
poo. Treatment for 3 weeks may be necessary.39
BIRDS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label):
a) Respiratory and enteric infections in psittacines  using the 
24% (240 mg/mL) injectable suspension: 0.22 mL/kg IM once 
to twice daily
b) Respiratory and enteric infections in hand-fed baby psittac-
ines: Using the sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim oral suspen -
sion 240 mg/5 mL (48 mg/mL): 0.22 mL/30 g 2 to 3 times daily 
for 5 to 7 days
c) Coccidiosis in toucans and mynahs : Using the sulfame -
thoxazole/trimethoprim oral suspension 240 mg/5 mL  
(48 mg/mL): 2.2 mL/kg once daily for 5 days; may be added 
to feed.
d) Canaries, finches, and mynah birds : Sulfadiazine/trimetho-
prim 100 mg/kg PO twice daily is recommended for treatment 
of avian coccidian parasitic diseases. 40 NOTE: Atoxoplasma 
spp treatment is difficult.
e) GI protozoal infections in pigeons: 25 – 50 mg/kg PO twice 
daily for 10 to 14 days41
FERRETS :
Susceptible infections (extra-label):
a) 30 mg/kg PO twice daily
b) Coccidiosis: 30 mg/kg PO once daily for 14 days
RABBITS, RODENTS, SMALL MAMMALS :
Susceptible infections (extra-label):
a) Rabbits: 
 i. 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours; 30 – 48 mg/kg SC 
every 12 hours. Sulfadiazine has a very short half-life (ie, ≈1 
hour) in rabbits.42 
 ii. GI protozoal infections: 25 – 30 mg/kg PO twice daily for 
10 to 14 days41
b) Chinchillas, Gerbils, Guinea Pigs, Hamsters, Mice, Rats :  
15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours
c) Chinchillas, Hedgehogs: 30 mg/kg PO or SC every 12 hours43
REPTILES :
Susceptible infections (extra-label):
a) Most species: 30 mg/kg IM (upper part of body) once daily for 
2 treatments, then every other day for 5 to 12 treatments; may 
be useful for enteric infections.44
b) All species : 30 mg/kg IM, first 2 doses should be 24 hours 
apart, then every other day45
c) 15 – 25 mg/kg/day IM for 7 to 14 days46
d) GI protozoal infections in bearded dragons : 15 – 20 mg/kg 
PO once daily for 7 to 14 days; may consider giving dose every 
other day after the second dose.41 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ Renal function (creatinine, BUN) and potassium
 ■ If prolonged therapy (ie, greater than 7 days) is anticipated, the 
following is recommended: 
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC and hepatic profile 
 ■ In dogs, baseline Schirmer tear testing, with periodic re-evaluation 
(eg, in 5 days, then every 2-3 weeks) and owner monitoring for oc-
ular discharge
 ■ Thyroid function tests should also be considered (baseline and 
ongoing) in dogs
Client Information
 ■ Shake the oral suspension well before using. It does not need to 
be refrigerated.
 ■ Give to horses on an empty stomach.
 ■ Animals must be allowed free access to water and not become 
dehydrated while receiving this medication.
 ■ If the animal’s eyes are dry, develop a discharge, or become irritat-
ed, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ In horses, discontinue treatment and contact your veterinarian 
immediately if there are changes in stool consistency or diarrhea. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Trimethoprim occurs as odorless, bitter-tasting, white to cream-col-

===== PDF_PAGE_1224 =====
Sulfadimethoxine   1197
ored crystals or crystalline powder. It is very slightly soluble in water 
and slightly soluble in alcohol.
Sulfadiazine occurs as an odorless or nearly odorless, white to 
slightly yellow powder. It is practically insoluble in water and spar -
ingly soluble in alcohol.
Sulfamethoxazole occurs as a practically odorless and tasteless, 
white to off-white, crystalline powder. Approximately 0.29 mg is sol-
uble in 1 mL of water, and 20 mg is soluble in 1 mL of alcohol.
In combination, sulfadiazine and trimethoprim may be known 
as co-trimazine, sulfadiazine/trimethoprim, trimethoprim/sulfadia-
zine, SDZ-TMP , TMP-SDZ, and various trade names.
In combination, sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim may be 
known as co-trimoxazole, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, tri -
methoprim/sulfamethoxazole, SMX-TMP , TMP-SMX, and various 
trade names.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise instructed by the manufacturer, sulfa-/trimetho -
prim products should be stored at room temperature of 20°C to 25°C 
(68°F-77°F) in tight containers and protected from freezing. Shake 
suspensions well before use.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Trimethoprim/Sulfadiazine Oral Suspension: Each gram contains 
67 mg trimethoprim and 333 mg sulfadiazine (proprietary formula-
tion) in 135 mL, 280 mL, 560 mL, and 900 mL bottles; Equisul-SDT®; 
(Rx). FDA-approved for use in horses not intended for food. NADA# 
141-360
Trimethoprim/Sulfadiazine Powder: Each gram contains 67 mg tri-
methoprim and 333 mg sulfadiazine; Uniprim® Powder in 37.5 g and 
1125 g packets; 200 g, 400 g, and 1200 g jars; 2000 g pails; and 12 kg 
box; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in horses not intended for food. 
NADA# 200-033
Trimethoprim/Sulfadiazine Oral Paste: Each gram contains 67 mg 
trimethoprim and 333 mg sulfadiazine. Available in 37.5 g (total 
weight) syringes; Tribrissen® 400 Oral Paste; (Rx). FDA-approved for 
use in horses not intended for food. NOTE: Not currently marketed 
in the United States; approved products are available in other coun-
tries.
Trimethoprim/Sulfadiazine Sterile Injection: 48% in 100 mL vials: 
Di-Biotic® 48% , Tribrissen® 48% Injection; (Rx). FDA-approved for 
use in horses not intended for food. NOTE: Not currently marketed 
in the United States; approved products are available in other coun-
tries under different trade names. A 24% solution may also be avail-
able.
In Canada, trimethoprim and sulfadoxine are available for use in cat-
tle and swine ( Trimidox®; Borgal®). Slaughter withdrawal = 10 days; 
milk withdrawal = 96 hours. (In the United States, extra-label use of 
sulfonamides is prohibited in lactating dairy cattle.)
In the United Kingdom, trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole oral 
drops ( Sulfatrim®) are available for use in rabbits, pigeons, and 
bearded dragons.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Trimethoprim Tablets: 100 mg; generic; (Rx). A 50 mg/5 mL oral 
solution (trimethoprim HCl, Primsol®) is also available.
Trimethoprim and Sulfamethoxazole (Co-Trimoxazole; TMP-SMZ) 
Oral Tablets: 80 mg trimethoprim and 400 mg sulfamethoxazole; 
Double Strength Tablets: 160 mg trimethoprim and 800 mg sulfame-
thoxazole; Bactrim® and Bactrim® DS; generic; (Rx)
Trimethoprim 8 mg/mL and Sulfamethoxazole 40 mg/mL (labeled as 
40 mg/5 mL and 200 mg/5mL) oral suspension; Sulfatrim®; generic; 
(Rx)
Trimethoprim and Sulfamethoxazole Injection: 80 mg sulfamethox-
azole, 16 mg trimethoprim per mL in 5 mL single-use vials, 10 mL, 
or 30 mL multiple-dose vials; generic; (Rx). Contains benzyl alcohol, 
propylene glycol (40%); pH ≈10. NOTE: Refer to product label for 
administration guidelines.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Sulfadimethoxine
(sul-fa-dye-meth-ox-een) Albon®
Sulfonamide Antimicrobial
See also Sulfadimethoxine/Ormetoprim
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat bacterial and protozoal infections
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity to sulfonamides 
and severe renal or hepatic impairment. 
 ▶ Use with caution in breeds that are prone to sulfonamide hy-
persensitivity (ie, Doberman pinschers, Samoyeds, miniature 
schnauzers). 
 ▶ Adverse effects include the possibility of the drug precipitat-
ing in the urine (particularly with high doses administered for 
prolonged periods, acidic urine, or highly concentrated urine). 
In dogs, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, hypersensitivity reactions 
(eg, rashes, fever, bone marrow suppression, dermatitis, non-
septic polyarthritis), focal retinitis, and vomiting are possible. 
Diminished renal or hepatic function or urinary obstruction 
may occur.
 ▶ Potentially teratogenic; potential risks versus benefits should 
be considered.
 ▶ In the United States, extra-label use of sulfonamides is prohib-
ited in lactating dairy cattle.
Uses/Indications
Sulfadimethoxine injection and tablets are FDA-approved for use in 
dogs and cats for respiratory, genitourinary, enteric, and soft tissue 
infections caused by susceptible organisms. Efficacy is greater when 
treatment is initiated early in the course of disease. Sulfadimethoxine 
is also used to treat coccidial infections in small animals.
In horses, sulfadimethoxine injection is FDA-approved for the 
treatment of respiratory infections caused by Streptococcus equi.
In cattle, sulfadimethoxine is FDA-approved for treatment of 
shipping fever complex, calf diphtheria, bacterial pneumonia, and 
foot rot caused by susceptible organisms.
In poultry, sulfadimethoxine is added to drinking water to treat 
coccidiosis, fowl cholera, and infectious coryza.
Although sulfadimethoxine is not used in human medicine, the 
World Health Organization (WHO) has designated sulfonamides as 
highly important antimicrobials for human medicine. 1 The Office 
International des Epizooties (OIE) has designated sulfonamides as 
Veterinary Critically Important Antimicrobial (VCIA) Agents for 
veterinary species.2
Pharmacology/Actions
Sulfonamides are time-dependent, bacteriostatic agents when used 
alone, but are considered bactericidal when used in combination with 
dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors (eg, ormetoprim, trimethoprim). 
They are thought to prevent bacterial replication by competing with 

===== PDF_PAGE_1225 =====
1198    Sulfadimethoxine
para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) in the biosynthesis of tetrahydrofo-
lic acid in the pathway to form folic acid. Only microorganisms that 
synthesize their own folic acid are affected by sulfonamides.
Microorganisms usually affected by sulfonamides include some 
gram-positive bacteria, including some strains of streptococci, 
staphylococcus, Bacillus anthracis, Clostridium tetani, Clostridium 
perfringens, and many strains of Nocardia spp. Sulfonamides also 
have in vitro activity against some gram-negative species, including 
some strains of Shigella spp, Salmonella spp, Escherichia coli, Klebsi-
ella spp, Enterobacter spp, Pasteurella spp, and Proteus spp. Sulfon-
amides have activity against some protozoa (eg, Toxoplasma spp, 
Coccidia spp). Sulfonamides are inactive against atypical bacterial, 
viral, or fungal infections.
Sulfonamides are less efficacious in pus, necrotic tissue, or in areas 
with extensive cellular debris.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, cats, swine, and sheep, sulfadimethoxine is reportedly read-
ily absorbed and well distributed. Relative volumes of distribution 
range from 0.17 L/kg in sheep to 0.35 L/kg in horses and cattle. Pa -
rameters in dogs include 33% bioavailability, 75% protein binding, 
and 13.1-hour elimination half-life. 3 Bioavailability was 52% in lla -
mas and ≈100% in camels.4,5
In most species, sulfadimethoxine is acetylated in the liver to ace-
tylsulfadimethoxine and excreted unchanged in the kidneys. In dogs, 
the drug is not appreciably metabolized by the liver; renal excretion 
is the major route of drug elimination as the unchanged drug. Sul -
fadimethoxine’s long elimination half-lives are a result of its appre-
ciable reabsorption in the renal tubules. Serum half-lives reported in 
various species are 9 to 10 hours in llamas, 11.7 hours in camels, 13 
hours in swine, 15 hours in sheep, and 11.3 hours in horses.4–6
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Sulfonamides are contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive 
to them. They are also considered contraindicated in patients with 
severe renal or hepatic impairment. They should be used with cau -
tion in animals with diminished renal or hepatic function or urinary 
obstruction. Sulfonamides are not considered contraindicated in pa-
tients that are allergic to thiazide diuretics or sulfonylurea agents.7
Doberman pinschers, Samoyeds, and miniature schnauzers ap -
pear to be highly susceptible to sulfonamide-induced polysystemic 
immune complex disease, 8–11 and these drugs should be used with 
caution in these breeds.
IV injection of sulfonamides given too rapidly can cause muscle 
weakness, blindness, ataxia, and collapse.
Adverse Effects
Sulfonamides (or their metabolites) can precipitate in the urine, 
particularly when given at high doses for prolonged periods. Acidic 
urine or highly concentrated urine may also contribute to increased 
risk for crystalluria, hematuria, and renal tubule obstruction. Dif -
ferent sulfonamides have different solubilities at various pH levels. 
Alkalinization of the urine using sodium bicarbonate may prevent 
crystalluria, but the amount available for tubular reabsorption de -
creases. Crystalluria can usually be avoided with most commercially 
available sulfonamides by maintaining an adequate urine flow. Nor-
mal urine pH in herbivores is usually 8 or more, so crystalluria is 
not frequently a problem. Sulfonamides can also cause various hy -
persensitivity reactions or diarrhea by altering the normal gut flora.
In dogs, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, hypersensitivity reactions (eg, 
rashes, dermatitis, fever, myelosuppression, nonseptic polyarthritis), 
focal retinitis, and vomiting have been reported with sulfonamides.8 
Dose-dependent hypothyroidism has been reported in dogs receiv -
ing sulfonamides.12 
Oral sulfonamides can depress the normal cellulytic function of 
the ruminoreticulum, but this effect is generally temporary, and the 
animal typically adapts.
Because solutions of sulfonamides are usually alkaline, they can 
cause tissue irritation and necrosis if injected IM or SC.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Sulfonamides cross the placenta and may reach fetal concentrations 
of greater than or equal to 50% of those found in maternal serum; 
teratogenicity has been reported in some laboratory animals when 
sulfonamides are given at high doses. 
Sulfonamides are distributed into maternal milk, but in humans, 
they are considered compatible with breastfeeding in healthy, full-
term infants.13,14 Premature infants and infants with hyperbilirubin-
emia may be at risk for adverse effects.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Acute toxicity secondary to overdoses apparently occurs only rarely 
in veterinary species. Dogs receiving single oral doses of 3.2 g/kg of 
body weight experienced only diarrhea. Dogs receiving 160 mg/kg 
PO daily for 13 weeks showed no signs of toxicity. 15 In addition to 
the adverse effects listed above, CNS stimulation and myelin degen-
eration have been noted after high doses are given.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving sulfonamides and may be of 
significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use to -
gether is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks must 
be weighed and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
 ■ Amiodarone : May reduce sulfonamide metabolism and in -
crease the risk for adverse effects
 ■ Antacids, Aluminum-, Calcium- and Magnesium- Con -
taining : May decrease oral bioavailability of sulfonamides if ad-
ministered concurrently
 ■ Azathioprine, Mercaptopurine : Increased risk for myelo -
suppression 
 ■ Cyclosporine : Increased risk for cyclosporine nephrotoxicity; 
decreased cyclosporine concentration is possible. 
 ■ Leucovorin : May reduce therapeutic effect of sulfadimethoxine
 ■ Methotrexate : Concurrent use of sulfonamides may poten -
tiate methotrexate toxicity by interfering with plasma protein 
binding and/or renal clearance of methotrexate and its toxic 
 metabolite. 
 ■ Pyrimethamine : Concurrent use of sulfonamides with high 
doses of pyrimethamine may increase the risk for megaloblastic 
anemia and pancytopenia through additive antifolate effects.
 ■ W arfarin : Sulfonamides may prolong prothrombin time (PT).
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Sulfonamides may give false-positive results for urine glucose de-
terminations when using the Benedict’s method.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Sulfadimethoxine-susceptible bacterial infections in dogs and 
cats and bacterial enteritis associated with coccidiosis in dogs  
(label dosage; FDA-approved): 55 mg/kg PO once on the first day, 
with subsequent daily doses of 27.5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours. 15 
Length of treatment depends on the clinical response. Treatment 
should be continued until the animal shows no clinical signs for 
48 hours. In most cases, treatment for 3 to 5 days is adequate.

===== PDF_PAGE_1226 =====
Sulfadimethoxine   1199
Coccidiosis (extra-label): 50 – 60 mg/kg PO once daily for 5 to 
20 days16
Coccidiosis in dogs  (extra label): 25 mg/kg PO in combination 
with amprolium 150 mg/kg PO once daily for 14 days17
HORSES :
Susceptible infections (label dosage; FDA-approved): 55 mg/kg 
IV initially, then 27.5 mg/kg every 24 hours IV until free of clini-
cal signs for 48 hours18 
CATTLE:
Susceptible infections (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
a) Bolus tablets: 55 mg/kg PO initially, then 27.5 mg/kg PO ev -
ery 24 hours.19 Length of treatment depends on the clinical re-
sponse but should not exceed 5 days. 
b) Injection: 55 mg/kg IV initially, then 27.5 mg/kg IV every 24 
hours until free of clinical signs for 48 hours. 20 The injection 
should be made moderately slow, never rapidly.
NEW-WORLD CAMELIDS :
Coccidiosis (Eimeria alpacae, Eimeria lamae, Eimeria punoen-
sis, Eimeria peruviana ) (extra-label): 15 mg/kg PO twice daily 
for 5 days; monitor for signs of polioencephalomalacia21
Eimeria spp infection (extra-label): Treatment is generally di -
rected at clinically affected animals using sulfadimethoxine  
110 mg/kg PO every 24 hours (or amprolium). Treatments are 
effective only against the immature stages and therefore may not 
have a significant impact on fecal oocyst count initially. Eimeria 
macusaniensis infections have a long prepatent period, treatment 
should last 10 to 15 days and should be directly administered to 
the animal rather than by medicating water supplies.22
FERRETS :
Coccidiosis (extra-label): 50 mg/kg PO once, then 25 mg/kg 
 every 24 hours for 5 to 10 days. Alternatively, 25 mg/kg PO every 
24 hours for 21 days.23 Treatment may not clear the organism.
RABBITS/RODENTS/SMALL MAMMALS :
a) Rabbits (extra-label): 10 – 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours24
b) Coccidiosis in rabbits (extra-label): 
i. 25 mg/kg PO once daily25 
ii. 50 mg/kg PO once, followed by inclusion in drinking water 
at 1 g/4 L for 9 days26
c) Hedgehogs (extra-label): 2 – 20 mg/kg/day IM, SC, or PO27
d) Coccidiosis in mice, rats, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, 
chinchillas (extra-label): 50 mg/kg PO once, then 25 mg/kg 
PO once daily for 10 to 20 days or 75 mg/kg PO for 7 to 14 days
REPTILES :
Coccidia spp (extra-label): 90 mg/kg PO once initially, followed 
by 45 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for 5 successive days; may also be 
given IM or IV . Maintain adequate hydration during treatment.28
Isospora spp (extra-label): 50 mg/kg PO once daily for 21 days 
has been recommended for bearded dragons.29
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC and serum liver chemistry panel 
should be considered with long-term therapy.
 ■ Baseline Schirmer tear testing is recommended in dogs if pro -
longed therapy (ie, more than 7 days) is anticipated or in dogs 
with a predisposition for KCS (eg, shih tzus, cocker spaniels). 
Dogs should be re-evaluated periodically (ie, within 5 days of 
starting therapy, then every 2 to 3 weeks during treatment). Own-
ers should monitor dogs for red eye and ocular discharge.
Client Information
 ■ If using the oral suspension, shake well before using. The oral sus-
pension does not need to be refrigerated.
 ■ It is important that your animal has access to plenty of fresh water 
while taking this medicine.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian if the dog’s eyes are dry, become red or 
irritated, or develops a discharge. Y ou should also contact your 
veterinarian if your dog develops a rash or other skin lesions, low 
energy level, poor appetite, or has difficulty walking.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Sulfadimethoxine, a long-acting sulfonamide, occurs as an odorless 
or almost odorless, almost tasteless white powder. It is practically 
insoluble in water and slightly soluble in alcohol.
Sulfadimethoxine may also be known as solfadimetossina, sol -
fadimetossipirimidina, sulphadimethoxine, Albon®, Bactrovet®, Agri-
bon®, Chemiosalfa®, Deltin®, Di-Methox®, Levosin®, Risulpir®, Ritarsul-
fa®, SDM®, Sulfadren®, Sulfastop®, Sulfasol®, and Sulfathox®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise instructed by the manufacturer, store sulfadime -
thoxine products protected from light at a room temperature of 15°C 
to 30°C (59°F-86°F). Solutions may discolor if exposed to direct sun-
light. If crystals form due to exposure to cold temperatures, either 
gently warm the vial in a warm water bath or store at room tem -
perature until crystals dissolve. Freezing and discoloration of liquid 
formulations do not alter potency.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Sulfadimethoxine Injection: 400 mg/mL (40%) in 250 mL vials; gener-
ic; (OTC). FDA-approved for use in cattle. Not to be used in calves to 
be processed for veal. Slaughter withdrawal (at labeled doses) is 5 days 
(cattle); milk withdrawal (at labeled doses) is 60 hours (5 milkings). A 
withdrawal period has not been established for preruminating calves.
Sulfadimethoxine Oral Tablets: 125 mg, 250 mg, and 500 mg; Albon® 
Tablets; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs and cats
Sulfadimethoxine Oral Suspension: 50 mg/mL (5%) in 60- and  
473-mL bottles; Albon®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs and cats
Sulfadimethoxine Oral Boluses: 2.5 g, 5 g, and 15 g; Albon®; (OTC). 
FDA-approved for use in cattle. Not to be used in calves to be pro -
cessed for veal. No withdrawal period has been established for pre -
ruminating calves. Slaughter withdrawal (at labeled doses) is 7 days 
(cattle); milk withdrawal (at labeled doses) is 60 hours. 
Sulfadimethoxine Soluble Powder: 94.6 g sulfadimethoxine/107 g 
packet (88.4% w/w) (for addition to drinking water); Albon®, generic; 
(OTC). FDA-approved for use in dairy calves, dairy heifers, beef cat-
tle, broiler and replacement chickens only, and meat-producing tur-
keys. Slaughter withdrawal (at labeled doses) is 5 days in poultry (not 
for use in chickens older than 16 weeks or in turkeys older than 24 
weeks) and 7 days in dairy calves, dairy heifers, and beef cattle only 
(withdrawal for preruminating calves has not been established; not 
to be used in calves to be processed for veal). 
Sulfadimethoxine 12.5% Concentrated Solution: 3.8 L (1 gal) con -
tainers (for addition to drinking water): Albon®, generic; (OTC). 
FDA-approved for use in chickens, turkeys, and cattle. Slaughter 
withdrawal (at labeled doses) is 7 days in dairy calves, dairy heifers, 
and beef cattle only (withdrawal for preruminating calves has not 
been established; not to be used in calves to be processed for veal) 
and 5 days in poultry (not for use in chickens older than 16 weeks or 
in turkeys older than 24 weeks).

===== PDF_PAGE_1227 =====
1200    Sulfadimethoxine/Ormetoprim
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Sulfadimethoxine/Ormetoprim
(sul-fa-dye-meth-ox-een/or-meh-toe-prim) Primor ®
Potentiated Sulfonamide Antimicrobial
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Potentiated sulfa similar to sulfa-/trimethoprim but may 
have fewer adverse effects and is labeled for once daily 
 administration
NOTE: The following points apply to sulfa-/trimethoprim and 
may also apply to sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim.
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity to sulfonamides, 
thiazides, or sulfonylurea agents; severe renal or hepatic im-
pairment; and Doberman pinschers.
 ▶ Caution is advised in diminished renal or hepatic function, 
urinary obstruction, and urolithiasis.
 ▶ Adverse effects in dogs include keratoconjunctivitis sicca 
(KCS), hypersensitivity reactions (type 1 or type 3), acute neu-
trophilic hepatitis with icterus, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, 
fever, hemolytic anemia, urticaria, polyarthritis, facial swelling, 
polydipsia, crystalluria, hematuria, polyuria, cholestasis, hypo-
thyroidism, anemia, agranulocytosis, and idiosyncratic hepatic 
necrosis. 
 ▶ Sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim is potentially teratogenic; 
weigh the risks versus the benefits before prescribing.
 ▶ In the United States, extra-label use of sulfonamides is prohib-
ited in lactating dairy cattle.
Uses/Indications
In dogs, sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim is FDA-approved for the 
treatment of skin and soft tissue infections caused by susceptible 
strains of Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli and UTIs caused 
by E coli, Staphylococcus spp, and Proteus mirabilis. Sulfadimethox-
ine/ormetoprim effectively treats superficial pyoderma. Sulfadime -
thoxine/ormetoprim may have fewer adverse effects in dogs as com-
pared with sulfa-/trimethoprim and can be given once daily. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim shares mechanism of action and 
(probably) the bacterial spectrum of activity with sulfa-/trimetho -
prim. Sulfonamides are bacteriostatic agents. When used in combi -
nation with either ormetoprim or trimethoprim, the resulting poten-
tiated sulfonamides are bactericidal. Combining sulfonamides and 
dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors (eg, ormetoprim, trimethoprim) 
results in synergistic antimicrobial effects.1 Potentiated sulfonamides 
sequentially inhibit enzymes in the folic acid pathway, inhibiting 
bacterial thymidine synthesis. The sulfonamide competes with pa -
ra-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) to reduce bacterial dihydrofolic acid 
(DFA) formation, and ormetoprim blocks the conversion of DFA to 
tetrahydrofolic acid by preferentially inhibiting bacterial dihydrofo-
late reductase. 
Potentiated sulfonamides have a fairly broad spectrum of activity. 
Generally susceptible gram-positive bacteria include most strepto -
cocci, many strains of staphylococcus, and Nocardia spp. Although 
many gram-negative organisms of the Enterobacteriaceae family are 
susceptible to potentiated sulfonamides, this does not include Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa. Some protozoa (ie, Pneumocystis jiroveci, Coc-
cidia spp, Toxoplasma spp, Neospora spp) are also inhibited by the 
combination. Potentiated sulfonamides appear to have little activity 
against most atypical bacteria and anaerobes; methicillin-resistant 
staphylococci are usually resistant. Enterococcus infections may ap -
pear to be susceptible to sulfonamide-containing antibiotics in vitro; 
however, they are intrinsically resistant, so sulfonamide-containing 
antibiotics should not be used for these bacteria.
Resistance development is thought to occur more slowly to the 
combination of drugs than to either drug alone. 1 In gram-negative 
organisms, sulfamethoxazole resistance is usually plasmid mediat -
ed, although a point mutation for dihydropteroate synthase also may 
confer resistance.
The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) Antimicrobial Clas-
sification is a Veterinary Critically Important antimicrobial.2
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, cats, swine, and sheep, sulfadimethoxine is reportedly read-
ily absorbed and well distributed. Relative volumes of distribution 
range from 0.17 L/kg in sheep to 0.35 L/kg in cattle and horses. Pa -
rameters in dogs include 33% bioavailability, 75% protein binding, 
and 13.1-hour elimination half-life. 3 Bioavailability was 52% in lla -
mas and ≈100% in camels.4,5
In most species, sulfadimethoxine is acetylated in the liver to 
acetylsulfadimethoxine and excreted unchanged in the kidneys. In 
dogs, the drug is not appreciably metabolized by the liver; renal ex -
cretion is the major route of drug elimination. Sulfadimethoxine’s 
long elimination half-lives are a result of its appreciable reabsorption 
in the renal tubules. Serum half-lives reported in various species are 
9 to 10 hours in llamas, 11.7 hours in camels, 13 hours in swine, 15 
hours in sheep, and 11.3 hours in horses.4-6
Pharmacokinetic data for ormetoprim are not currently available, 
but the manufacturer states that therapeutic levels are maintained 
over 24 hours at recommended doses.7
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
The manufacturer states that sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim should 
not be used in dogs with marked liver parenchymal damage, blood 
dyscrasias, or history of sulfonamide sensitivity.
Avoid use of this antibiotic in dogs that may be sensitive to po -
tential adverse effects (eg, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, hepatopathy, 
hypersensitivity, skin eruptions).8
Doberman pinschers, Samoyeds, and miniature schnauzers ap -
pear to be more susceptible to sulfonamide-induced polysystemic 
immune complex disease 9; use sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim with 
caution in these breeds. 
Sulfonamides (and their metabolites) can precipitate in the urine, 
particularly when given at high dosages for prolonged periods. Sul -
fadimethoxine is less likely to cause formation of sulfonamide crys -
talluria because it has a relatively high solubility at the normal pH 
found in the kidney; however, acidic or highly concentrated urine 
may cause precipitation.
This drug combination should be used with caution in patients 
with pre-existing hepatic or thyroid disease.
Adverse Effects
In dogs, sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim may have adverse effects sim-
ilar to sulfa-/trimethoprim, including keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS; 
which may be irreversible), acute neutrophilic hepatitis with icterus, 
vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, fever, hemolytic anemia, urticaria, poly-
arthritis, facial swelling, polydipsia, polyuria, and cholestasis.7 Acute 
hypersensitivity reactions manifesting as type I (ie, immediate) or type 
III (ie, formation of antigen:antibody complexes) reactions can also be 
seen. Hypersensitivity reactions appear to be more common in large 
breed dogs.9 Doberman pinschers may be more susceptible to this ef-
fect than other breeds. In humans, other hematologic effects (eg, ane-
mia, agranulocytosis) are possible but are rare.10
Long-term therapy (ie, 8 weeks) at recommended doses of sul -
fadimethoxine/ormetoprim (27.5 mg/kg once daily) resulted in el -
evated serum cholesterol, thyroid and liver weights, mild follicular 
thyroid hyperplasia, and enlarged basophilic cells in the pituitary. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1228 =====
Sulfadimethoxine/Ormetoprim   1201
The manufacturer states that the principal treatment-related effect of 
extended or excessive use is hypothyroidism.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Sulfonamides cross the placenta and may reach fetal levels of greater 
than or equal to 50% of those found in maternal serum; teratogenic-
ity (eg, cleft palate, fetal loss) has been reported in some laboratory 
animals given sulfonamides at high doses. 
Sulfonamides are distributed into milk. This drug should be used 
in pregnant animals only when the benefits clearly outweigh the risks. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In experimental studies in dogs, doses greater than 80 mg/kg result-
ed in slight tremors and increased motor activity in some dogs. 11 
Higher doses may result in depression, anorexia, or seizures.
It is suggested that very high oral overdoses be handled by gastric 
decontamination using standard precautions and protocols and by 
treating clinical signs supportively and symptomatically.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
None have been noted for sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim, but the 
potential interactions for sulfa-/trimethoprim (listed below) may 
also apply to this drug combination; refer to Sulfa-/Trimethoprim 
for more information.
 ■ Amantadine : A human patient developed toxic delirium when 
receiving amantadine with sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim.12
 ■ Anesthetic Agents : Concurrent IV administration is contra -
indicated. Ester-type local anesthetics (eg, procaine, tetracaine) 
may locally inhibit sulfonamide effects.13,14
 ■ Angiotensin II-Receptor Blockers  ( ARBs; eg, telmisar-
tan): May increase risk of hyperkalemia when used with potassi -
um-sparing drugs
 ■ Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors  (ACEIs; eg, 
benazepril, enalapril): May increase risk of hyperkalemia when 
used with potassium-sparing drugs
 ■ Antacids : Concurrent administration may decrease sulfon -
amide bioavailability.
 ■ Azathioprine : Increased risk for myelosuppression
 ■ Cyclosporine : May increase the risk for nephrotoxicity
 ■ Detomidine : Concurrent use has resulted in fatal arrhythmias 
in horses.15 
 ■ Digoxin : May increase digoxin levels
 ■ Diuretics, Thiazide : May increase risk for thrombocytopenia
 ■ Hypoglycemic Agents, Oral  (eg, glipizide, metformin ): 
May potentiate hypoglycemic effects
 ■ Methenamine : May form an insoluble precipitate in the urine
 ■ Methotrexate (MTX) : May displace from plasma proteins 
and increase risk for toxic effects; can also interfere with MTX as-
says (competitive protein binding technique, but not when mea -
sured by radioimmunoassay)
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine, promethazine): Concur-
rent administration contraindicated13
 ■ Phenytoin : May increase half-life
 ■ Potassium Supplements : Increased risk of hyperkalemia
 ■ Procainamide : May increase levels of procainamide and its ac-
tive metabolite
 ■ Pyrimethamine : May increase risk for megaloblastic anemia 
and myelosuppression
 ■ Rifampin : May reduce serum concentrations of both trimetho -
prim and sulfonamide
 ■ Spironolactone : May increase risk for hyperkalemia when 
used with potassium-sparing drugs
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants  ( TCAs; eg, amitriptyline, clo -
mipramine): May decrease efficacy
 ■ W arfarin : May prolong prothrombin time and INR
Laboratory Considerations
NOTE: The following points apply to sulfa-/trimethoprim and may 
also apply to sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim.
 ■ When using the Jaffe alkaline picrate reaction assay for creatinine 
determination, sulfa-/trimethoprim may cause an overestimation 
of ≈10%.
 ■ Sulfonamides may give false-positive results for urine glucose de-
terminations when using the Benedict’s method.
Dosages
DOGS:
NOTE: Unless otherwise noted, doses are for combined amounts 
of sulfadimethoxine and ormetoprim. See Monitoring if treat -
ment is expected to be longer than 7 days.
Labeled indications  (skin and soft tissue infections caused by 
susceptible strains of Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia 
coli; UTIs caused by susceptible strains of E coli, Staphylococcus 
spp, and Proteus mirabilis ) (FDA-approved): 55 mg/kg (com -
bined drug) PO on the first day of therapy, then 27.5 mg/kg PO 
once daily, continuing for at least 2 days after remission of clinical 
signs. Not approved for treatment longer than 21 days.7
Isospora spp infections (extra-label): 66 mg/kg (combined drug) 
PO once daily for 23 days16
Superficial bacterial folliculitis  (extra-label): 55 mg/kg PO the 
first day, then 27.5 mg/kg PO once daily. 8 Potentiated sulfon -
amides (ie, sulfa-/trimethoprim, sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim) 
are first-tier drugs only if regional susceptibility of Staphylococcus 
pseudintermedius is known. 
Bacterial cystitis (extra-label): Potentiated sulfonamides (ie, sulfa-/
trimethoprim, sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim) are first-tier drugs 
only if regional pathogen susceptibility patterns are known.17 
a) Uncomplicated UTI: 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. Treatment 
may be as short as 3 days.17,18 
b) Complicated UTI: 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours17
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ Renal function (creatinine, BUN) and potassium 
 ■ If prolonged therapy (ie, greater than 7 days) is anticipated in 
dogs, the following is recommended: 
 ■ Baseline Schirmer tear testing, with periodic reevaluation (eg, in 
5 days, then every 2 to 3 weeks) and owner monitoring for ocular 
discharge8
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC and hepatic profile 
 ■ Thyroid function tests should be considered (baseline and ongo -
ing) particularly in dogs receiving long-term treatment.
Client Information
 ■ Animals must be allowed free access to water and not become 
dehydrated while receiving this medication.
 ■ If dog’s eyes are dry, develop a discharge, or become irritated, con-
tact your veterinarian.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Ormetoprim is a diaminopyrimidine structurally related to tri -

===== PDF_PAGE_1229 =====
1202    Sulfasalazine
methoprim and occurs as a white, odorless, almost tasteless powder. 
Sulfadimethoxine, a long-acting sulfonamide, occurs as an odor-
less or almost odorless, almost tasteless white powder. It is practically 
insoluble in water and slightly soluble in alcohol.
Sulfadimethoxine may also be known as solfadimetossina, sol -
fadimetossipirimidina, sulphadimethoxine, Albon®, Chemiosalfa ®, 
Deltin®, Di-Methox ®, Levosin ®, Risulpir ®, Ritarsulfa ®, SDM ®, Sul -
fadren®, Sulfasol®, Sulfastop®, and Sulfathox®.
Ormetoprim may also be known as NSC-95072, ormetoprima, 
ormétoprime, ormetoprimum, or Ro-5-9754.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise instructed by the manufacturer, store tablets in 
tight, light-resistant containers at room temperature of 15°C to 30°C 
(59°F-86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Sulfadimethoxine/Ormetoprim Tablets (scored)
120’s: 100 mg Sulfadimethoxine, 20 mg Ormetoprim
240’s: 200 mg Sulfadimethoxine, 40 mg Ormetoprim
600’s: 500 mg Sulfadimethoxine, 100 mg Ormetoprim
1200’s: 1000 mg Sulfadimethoxine, 200 mg Ormetoprim;  Primor®; 
(Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs. NADA# 100-929
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Sulfasalazine
(sul-fa-sal-a-zeen) Azulfidine®
Sulfonamide/Salicylate Antibacterial/Immunosuppressive 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Sulfa-analogue that has GI antibacterial and anti-inflammatory 
activity used for inflammatory bowel disease; has also been 
used for vasculitis
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity to sulfasalazine, 
sulfas, or salicylates; intestinal or urinary obstructions; and 
Dobermans.
 ▶ Use with caution in cats and in patients that have liver, renal, 
or hematologic diseases.
 ▶ Adverse effects in dogs include keratoconjunctivitis sicca 
(KCS), anorexia, vomiting, cholestatic jaundice, hemolytic 
anemia, leukopenia, vomiting, decreased sperm counts, and 
allergic dermatitis.
 ▶ Adverse effects in cats include anorexia, vomiting, anemia.
Uses/Indications
Sulfasalazine may be used as adjunctive treatment of inflammato -
ry large bowel (colonic) disease in dogs and cats. It has also been 
suggested for adjunctive use in treating vasculitis in dogs. It is not 
effective for small intestinal inflammation, as colonic bacteria are 
required to cleave the drug into sulfapyridine and 5-aminosalicylic 
acid (5-ASA, mesalamine). In humans, sulfasalazine is also used as 
adjunctive treatment for inflammatory arthropathies.
Pharmacology/Actions
Sulfasalazine is cleaved into sulfapyridine and 5-aminosalicylic acid 
(5-ASA, mesalamine) by colonic bacteria. Although the exact mech-
anism of action for its therapeutic effects in treating colitis in small 
animal species has not been determined, it is believed that mesa -
lamine’s local (not systemic) anti-inflammatory activity, including 
cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase inhibition, provides the main 
therapeutic effect. Its antibacterial (sulfapyridine) and/or immuno -
modulatory activity may contribute to controlling clinical signs and 
course of the disease. In humans, concentrations of both metabolites 
in the colon are higher than by giving them orally as separate agents.
Pharmacokinetics
No pharmacokinetic data for dogs or cats were located. 
In humans, only ≈10 to 33% of an orally administered dose of sul-
fasalazine is absorbed.1 Of the absorbed drug, sulfasalazine is 99.3% 
bound to albumin, and sulfapyridine is 70% bound to albumin. Both 
sulfasalazine and sulfapyridine are widely distributed to the synovial 
fluid and connective tissue. Sulfasalazine reaches high concentra -
tions in the intestinal wall. Some of the absorbed drug is then excret-
ed unchanged in the bile and some is metabolized in the liver. 
Unabsorbed and biliary excreted drug is cleaved into 5-ASA and 
sulfapyridine in the colon by bacterial flora. The sulfapyridine com-
ponent is rapidly absorbed, but only a small percentage of the 5-ASA 
is absorbed. Absorbed sulfapyridine and 5-ASA are hepatically me -
tabolized and then renally excreted. Unabsorbed sulfapyridine and 
5-ASA is excreted in the feces. Elimination half-life is prolonged in 
elderly human patients, but clinical impact has yet to be established. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Sulfasalazine is contraindicated in animals hypersensitive to it, sul -
fonamides, or salicylates. Doberman pinschers, Samoyeds, and min-
iature schnauzers appear to be more susceptible to sulfonamide-in -
duced polysystemic immune complex disease 2; use sulfasalazine 
with caution in these breeds. Alternative medications should be 
considered in these dogs. It is also contraindicated in patients with 
intestinal or urinary obstructions. 
Sulfasalazine should be used with caution in animals with pre-ex-
isting liver, renal, or hematologic diseases. Because cats can be sensi-
tive to salicylates (see Aspirin), use this drug cautiously in this species.
Do not confuse sulfaSALAzine with sulfaDIAzine.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects occur relatively uncommonly in dogs and may in -
clude anorexia, vomiting, cholestatic jaundice, hemolytic anemia, 
leukopenia, hypersensitivity reactions, vomiting, decreased sperm 
counts, and allergic dermatitis. Y ellow or orange discoloration of 
skin and body fluids may occur (harmless but may stain clothing). 
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) has also been reported. 3–5 If de -
creased tear production is noted early, either reducing the dose or 
discontinuing the drug may prevent progression of KCS or increase 
tear production.
Cats can occasionally develop anorexia and vomiting, which may 
be alleviated by use of the enteric-coated tablets. Anemias secondary 
to sulfasalazine are also potentially possible in cats.
Adverse effects in humans are associated with serum sulfapyr -
idine concentrations greater than 50 μg/mL. Blood dyscrasias (eg, 
agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia) and severe dermatologic reactions 
(eg, Stevens-Johnson reaction, drug reaction with eosinophilia and 
systemic symptoms [DRESS]) have been reported in humans receiv-
ing sulfasalazine or other sulfonamides.1
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Sulfonamides cross the placenta. Although sulfasalazine has not 
been proven harmful to use during pregnancy and incidences of 
neonatal kernicterus in infants born to women taking sulfasalazine 
are low, it should only be used when it is clearly indicated. In lab -
oratory animal studies (rats, rabbits), doses of 6 times the normal 
(human) amount caused impairment of fertility in male animals 1; 
this effect is thought to be caused by the sulfapyridine component 

===== PDF_PAGE_1230 =====
Sulfasalazine   1203
and was reversible upon discontinuation of the drug. Folic acid sup-
plementation may be advised for women taking sulfasalazine during 
pregnancy.1 Sulfasalazine has caused oligospermia in humans. 
Sulfonamides, including sulfasalazine, are excreted in milk. In 
human newborns, they compete with bilirubin for binding sites on 
plasma proteins and may cause kernicterus. Use with caution in 
nursing patients.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Little specific information is available regarding overdoses with this 
agent, but because massive overdoses could cause significant salicy-
late and/or sulfonamide toxicity, standard decontamination proto -
cols (empty stomach, cathartics) should be considered. Urine alka -
linization and forced diuresis may also be beneficial in selected cases. 
Dialysis may remove sulfasalazine and its metabolites.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have ex -
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison control 
center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
Sulfasalazine and sulfapyridine are metabolized primarily by acetyl-
ation, along with glucuronidation and hydroxylation pathways. The 
following drug interactions either have been reported or are theoret-
ical in humans or animals receiving sulfasalazine and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Antibacterial Agents : Reduction in GI flora caused by anti-
biotics may reduce bacterial cleavage of sulfasalazine and subse -
quent production of 5-ASA. 
 ■ Cyclosporine : Sulfadiazine has been reported to decrease cy -
closporine concentrations in humans; interaction may apply to 
sulfasalazine. Monitor serum cyclosporine concentrations if us -
ing this combination.6 
 ■ Digoxin : Concomitant use may reduce absorption of digoxin.
 ■ Ferrous Sulfate  or Other Iron Salts : Concomitant use 
may decrease the blood concentrations of sulfasalazine; clinical 
significance is unknown.
 ■ Folic Acid : Concomitant use may reduce oral absorption of fo-
lic acid. 
 ■ Methenamine : In humans, concurrent use may result in the for-
mation of an insoluble precipitate in the urine, and the combina-
tion is considered contraindicated.
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs; eg, 
carprofen, flunixin, meloxicam, robenacoxib ): Concomitant 
use of NSAIDs may increase risk for bleeding. 
 ■ W arfarin : Concomitant use may potentiate the anticoagulant 
effects of warfarin.
Laboratory Interactions
 ■ Sulfasalazine may cause false-positive urinary normetanephrine 
performed by liquid chromatography.
 ■ Sulfasalazine may interfere with ALT, AST, ammonia, thyroxine, 
or glucose tests that use ultraviolet absorbance around wave -
length 340 nm.1
Dosages
NOTE: Unless otherwise noted, assume the following dosages are 
for the standard-release tablets.
DOGS:
Inflammatory large bowel disease (extra-label): 
a) Initial dosages range from 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 
hours, not to exceed a total daily dose of 6 g.7 Anecdotal dosage 
recommendations vary considerably, and no definitive studies 
were located supporting any one dose. After 2 to 4 weeks (lon-
ger if at the low end of the dosing range) most taper off (reduc-
ing dosage every 2 weeks) until eventual drug discontinuation 
while maintaining dietary treatment. Some dogs may require 
long-term therapy. 
b)  As adjunct to dietary modification: 10 – 30 mg/kg (maximum 
dose of 1 g) PO with food every 8 hours for 4 to 6 weeks, then 
reduce dosing interval to every 12 hours. 8 If clinical signs re -
main controlled after 10 to 14 days, then decrease again to 
once-daily dosing.
Adjunctive treatment of vasculitis  (extra-label): 20 – 40 mg/kg 
PO every 8 hours9,10
CATS:
Inflammatory large bowel disease (extra-label): 
a) Use cautiously in cats because of their sensitivity to salicylates. 
Dosages range from 10 – 20 mg/kg PO 1 to 3 times a day (most 
clinicians recommend once daily). Anecdotal dosage recom -
mendations vary somewhat, and no definitive studies were lo-
cated supporting any one dose. Some clinicians state to treat 
no longer than 10 days and other clinicians advise to taper to 
the lowest effective dose. 
b)  As adjunct to dietary modification: 5 – 12.5 mg/kg PO with 
food every 8 hours for 2 to 3 weeks8
HORSES :
Chronic diarrhea  (extra-label): Sulfasalazine (with dietary ad -
justment) 16 mg/kg PO once a day for 5 days, followed by 8 mg/kg  
PO once a day for 10 days.13 NOTE: The product used in this case 
report (Salazopyrin® EN) was a delayed-release product.
FERRETS :
a) 10 – 20 mg/kg PO 2 to 3 times a day11
b) 25 mg (total dose) PO twice daily12 
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy
 ■ Baseline and periodic Schirmer tear tests, especially for breeds 
that are predisposed to developing keratoconjunctivitis sicca 
(KCS)
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ Occasional CBC, liver enzymes are warranted with long-term 
therapy.
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine with food. Dose is often increased until diar -
rhea is controlled and then reduced to the lowest effective dose.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian if your animal begins to have discharge 
from the eye(s) or the eyes become red. 
 ■ Cats may be sensitive to this medicine. Contact your veterinarian 
if you have any concerns about your cat.
 ■ People allergic to sulfa drugs should handle this drug with cau -
tion. 
 ■ Skin or body fluids may become yellow-orange in color while your 
animal is taking this medicine. The fluids may cause staining.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Sulfasalazine is basically a molecule of sulfapyridine linked by a di -
azo bond to the diazonium salt of salicylic acid. It occurs as an odor-
less, bright yellow to brownish-yellow fine powder. Less than 0.1 mg 
is soluble in 1 mL of water and ≈0.34 mg is soluble in 1 mL of alcohol.

===== PDF_PAGE_1231 =====
1204    Tadalafil
Sulfasalazine may also be known as salazosulfapyridine, salic -
ylazosulfapyridine, sulfasalazinum, sulphasalazine, Sulfazine® and 
Azulfidine®.
Storage/Stability
Sulfasalazine tablets (either plain or enteric-coated) should be stored 
protected from light at temperatures less than 40°C (104°F) and pref-
erably at room temperature 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F) in well-closed 
containers. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information is noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE.
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 4 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Sulfasalazine Tablets: 500 mg; Azulfidine®, Sulfazine®, generic; (Rx)
Sulfasalazine Delayed-Release Tablets: 500 mg (enteric coated); Azu-
lfidine® EN-tabs®, Sulfazine EC®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Tadalafil
(ta-dal-a-fil) Cialis®
Phosphodiesterase Type 5 Inhibitor
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for treating pulmonary arterial hypertension and possi-
bly benign prostatic hyperplasia in dogs
 ▶ Limited clinical experience or published data for use in dogs
 ▶ Appears to have a longer duration of action than sildenafil
 ▶ Contraindicated in patients receiving organic nitrates (eg, 
nitroglycerin, isosorbide)
 ▶ Adverse effects not well known for dogs; decreased appetite 
has been noted, as well as inguinal flushing and GI effects
Uses/Indications
Tadalafil is a phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5) inhibitor, related to silde-
nafil, that is used to treat pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) in 
dogs.1–3 
In dogs with PAH, tadalafil added to conventional heart failure 
therapy decreased diastolic pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP), 
mean PAP , and tricuspid regurgitation.1 Both tadalafil and sildenafil 
improved quality of life and activity measures in dogs with moderate 
to severe pulmonary hypertension with various etiologies. 3 Because 
of its longer duration of action, tadalafil has some advantages over 
sildenafil. A study in humans has suggested that tadalafil may be tol-
erated in some patients experiencing sildenafil intolerance.4
Tadalafil reduced biochemical markers of benign prostatic hyper-
plasia (BPH) in dogs with experimentally induced BPH;5 further re-
search is needed to determine the drug’s effect on clinical signs of BPH.
In humans, tadalafil is approved for use in treating pulmonary 
artery hypertension and erectile dysfunction. Offlabel uses include 
treating Raynaud’s phenomenon.
Pharmacology/Actions
Tadalafil is a selective inhibitor of cyclic guanosine monophos -
phate (cGMP)-specific phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5). PDE5 is 
the enzyme responsible for the degradation of cGMP and is found 
(in humans) in the corpus cavernosum smooth muscle, pulmonary 
vascular and visceral smooth muscle, skeletal muscle, platelets, kid -
ney, lung, cerebellum, and pancreas. In patients with PAH, vascular 
endothelium nitric oxide release is impaired with an associated re -
duction of cGMP . PDE5 is the primary phosphodiesterase in the pul-
monary vasculature, and tadalafil’s PDE5 inhibition increases cGMP , 
thereby relaxing pulmonary vascular smooth muscle with resultant 
vasodilation.
Pharmacokinetics
In healthy dogs, peak plasma concentration occurred ≈1.5 hours 
after oral administration, and half-life was 4.2 hours. 6 In the same 
study, tadalafil plasma concentration peaked ≈1.7 hours following 
intranasal administration, and half-life was 5.8 hours.
In humans, after oral administration, maximum plasma concen -
trations occur in ≈4 hours in patients with PAH. Food does not alter 
the rate or extent of absorption. Tadalafil is 94% bound to human 
plasma proteins. Tadalafil is metabolized by CYP3A4 to a catechol 
metabolite that then undergoes methylation and glucuronidation. 
These metabolites are not thought to be active. In PAH patients, the 
mean terminal half-life is 35 hours. Excretion is primarily of the 
drug’s metabolites via fecal routes (61%), with the majority of the 
remainder in the urine (≈36%).
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tadalafil is contraindicated in human patients using any form of or-
ganic nitrate (either regularly or intermittently) and in those with 
serious hypersensitivity to tadalafil. Dosage reductions may be re -
quired in patients with severe hepatic or renal impairment.
Adverse Effects
An adverse effect profile for dogs at suggested doses for PAH has 
not been determined. GI effects are possible, and decreased appe -
tite has been noted. 3 In a 12-month tadalafil chronic toxicity study 
done in dogs, no disseminated arteritis was observed as was seen in 
rodent studies, but 2 dogs exhibited marked decreases in neutrophils 
and moderate decreases in platelets with inflammatory signs when 
dosed at ≈4 to 18 times the equivalent human dose. These effects 
were reversible within 2 weeks after discontinuing the drug. Cutane-
ous flushing of the inguinal region has been reported with sildenafil, 
a related drug, in dogs.
The most common adverse effects of tadalafil reported in humans 
with PAH include dyspepsia, nausea, back pain, myalgia, nasal con-
gestion, flushing, and headache. Rare but serious adverse effects in -
clude optic neuropathy, seizures, hypersensitivity reactions (eg, Ste-
vens-Johnson syndrome, exfoliative dermatitis), and deafness.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Tadalafil animal reproduction studies in rats and mice demonstrated 
no evidence of teratogenicity, embryotoxicity, or fetotoxicity when 
tadalafil was given to pregnant rats or mice at exposures of up to 11 
times (human equivalent dose). 
Tadalafil and/or its metabolites are secreted into the milk in lac -
tating rats at concentrations ≈2.4-fold those found in the plasma. It 
is unlikely to pose much risk to nursing offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Little information is available. Single doses of up to 500 mg have 
been given to healthy men, and multiple daily doses of up to 100 mg 
have been given to men with erectile dysfunction; adverse reactions 
were similar to those seen at lower doses.
It is expected that overdoses in animals would mirror the drug’s 
adverse effect profile; treat supportively.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-

===== PDF_PAGE_1232 =====
Tamsulosin   1205
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving tadalafil and may be of sig -
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Alpha-Adrenergic Blockers  (eg, tamsulosin, prazosin, 
phenothiazines [eg, acepromazine], phenoxybenzamine): May 
increase hypotensive effects
 ■ Amlodipine : Potential to increase hypotensive effects
 ■ Antihypertensive, Hypotensive Drugs : Potentially could 
increase hypotensive effects
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, ketoconazole, itraconazole): May re-
duce tadalafil metabolism and increase AUC
 ■ Cimetidine : May reduce tadalafil metabolism and increase AUC
 ■ Clarithromycin/Erythromycin : May increase tadalafil bio-
availability, reduce tadalafil metabolism, and increase AUC
 ■ Nitrates  (eg, nitroglycerin, isosorbide): Significant potentia -
tion of vasodilatory effects; life-threatening hypotension possible
 ■ Nitroprusside Sodium : Significant potentiation of vasodila -
tory effects; life-threatening hypotension possible
 ■ Phenobarbital : May decrease tadalafil concentrations
 ■ Rifampin : May decrease tadalafil concentrations
 ■ Riv aroxaban : Tadalafil decreased P-glycoprotein mediated ef-
flux of rivaroxaban in an in vitro model; clinical significance re -
mains unclear.7
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ None was noted.
Dosages
DOGS:
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (extra-label):
a) 1-2 mg/kg PO once daily3,8
b) From a case report in a Y orkshire terrier: 1 mg/kg PO every 48 
hours (every other day) was added to the background treat -
ment (furosemide, spironolactone, benazepril, dexametha -
sone, and oxygen). The dog’s condition rapidly improved (less 
than 24 hours), and a 7-day follow-up showed a decrease (up 
to 26 mm Hg) in systolic pulmonary arterial pressure and dis-
appearance of all respiratory and cardiac signs of PAH (cyano-
sis, syncope, and tachypnea).9
Benign prostatic hyperplasia  (extra-label): 5 mg/dog (NOT  
mg/kg) PO once daily5
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: improved exercise capacity, cough, respiratory 
effort; fewer episodes of syncope
 ■ Pulmonary artery pressure, systemic blood pressure
 ■ Adverse effects
Client Information
 ■ May give this medicine with or without food. Be sure to give it 
exactly as prescribed.
 ■ Tadalafil may cause flushing (redness) in the groin area. Lack of 
appetite, vomiting, and diarrhea are also possible.
 ■ This medicine has not been used often in veterinary medicine, so 
it is important to report any other side effects to your veterinarian.
 ■ Do not give with nitroglycerin or isosorbide, as it may cause se -
verely low blood pressure.
 ■ While your animal is taking this medication, it is important to 
return to your veterinarian for important tests. Do not miss these 
important follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tadalafil has a molecular weight of 389.41. It is insoluble in water 
and slightly soluble in ethanol.
Tadalafil may also be known as GF-196960, IC-351, tadalafiili, 
tadalafilo, or tadalafilum. Cialis® and Adcirca® are trade names for 
tadalafil.
Storage/Stability
Store tadalafil tablets at room temperature between 15°C and 30°C 
(59°F-86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
A method of preparing a stable 5 mg/mL oral suspension from tab -
lets has been published. Crush fifteen 20 mg tadalafil tablets to a 
fine powder in a glass mortar. Mix together 30 mL of Ora-Sweet® 
and 30 mL of Ora-Plus®; stir vigorously. Add 30 mL of this solution 
in geometric proportions to the powder and mix to form a smooth 
suspension. Transfer the mixture to a 2-ounce (60 mL) amber plastic 
prescription bottle. Rinse mortar with a quantity of the vehicle suffi-
cient to make a final volume of 60 mL. Label “shake well. ” Suspension 
is stable for 91 days when stored at room temperature in an amber 
plastic prescription bottle.10
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tadalafil Oral Tablets: 2.5 mg, 5 mg, 10 mg, and 20 mg: Cialis®, Ad-
circa® (20 mg only); generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Tamsulosin
(tam-suh-low-sin)  Flomax®
Alpha-1 Adrenergic Antagonist
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Potentially useful as a lower urinary tract (ureteral/urethral) 
relaxant in dogs and cats; limited published clinical experience 
 ▶ Contraindications include use in patients known to be hyper-
sensitive to it.
 ▶ Higher doses could cause hypotension.
 ▶ Do not crush sustained-release pellets in capsules as rapid oral 
absorption may result in hypotension.
Uses/Indications
Tamsulosin is an alpha-1 adrenergic blocking agent that is similar 
to prazosin and phenoxybenzamine but longer-acting. Although ev-
idence for efficacy in animals is limited, tamsulosin could be useful 
to facilitate passage of nephroliths and ureteroliths and for treating 
functional urinary obstruction, benign prostatic hypertrophy, or 
detrusor-urethral dyssynergia in dogs and cats, and postobstructive 
urethral spasm in cats. 
In humans, tamsulosin is labeled for treatment of benign prostatic 
hyperplasia (BPH). It is also used for ureteral relaxation to facilitate 
passage of urinary calculi.
Pharmacology/Actions
Tamsulosin blocks sympathetic nervous stimulation of alpha-1 ad -
renoceptors. It is more selective for the 1A receptor subtype, which 
is the primary alpha-1 adrenoceptor found in the prostate, prostatic 
capsule, prostatic urethra, and bladder neck and is less common in 

===== PDF_PAGE_1233 =====
1206    Tamsulosin
vascular or other smooth muscle. Blockade of these adrenoceptors 
can cause smooth muscles in the bladder neck and prostate to relax 
resulting in improvement in urine flow rate and expulsion of uri -
nary calculi. In conscious male dogs, tamsulosin caused a sustained 
inhibitory effect on phenylephrine-induced prostatic intraurethral 
pressure (IUP) response that was related to higher concentrations in 
the prostate and urethra, rather than in plasma and vascular tissues.1 
Pharmacokinetics
Tamsulosin exhibits significant interspecies variation in its phar -
macokinetics. After oral dosing of a nonsustained release formula -
tion in dogs, tamsulosin bioavailability was ≈30% and peak plasma 
concentrations occurred ≈0.5 hours postdose. Volume of distribu -
tion Vdss was 1.74 L/kg; protein binding was 90%; clearance was  
4 L/hour/kg (estimated unbound clearance: 31 to 41 L/hour/kg), and 
elimination half-life was ≈1.5 hours.2 Tamsulosin concentrations are 
significantly higher and retained longer in prostatic and urethral 
tissues than in plasma. At 6 hours postdose (0.03 mg/kg), prostate/
plasma and urethra/plasma ratios were 10.5 and 6.6 respectively. 1,3 
Therefore despite a relatively fast plasma half-life, once or twice daily 
dosing may be possible in dogs, although pharmacokinetic/pharma-
codynamic studies using the commercially available sustained-re -
lease formulation are required to determine appropriate dosages. In 
dogs, cytochrome CYP3A4 is responsible for metabolism of tamsu -
losin to the M1 and AM-1 metabolites.4 
Pharmacokinetic data for cats were not located. 
In humans, fasted state oral bioavailability is essentially complete 
(more than 90%). Tamsulosin exhibits linear kinetics following sin-
gle and multiple dosing, with achievement of steady-state concentra-
tions by the fifth day of once-a-day dosing. Plasma protein binding 
in humans is significant (98% to 99%). The terminal half-life of tam-
sulosin in humans is ≈6 to 15 hours.2 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tamsulosin is contraindicated in patients known to be hypersensitive 
to it. Some humans with sulfonamide drug allergies have reportedly 
experienced hypersensitivity reactions (skin rash, urticaria, pruritus, 
angioedema, and respiratory symptoms).5 Priapism has been report-
ed in humans; significance for veterinary patients is unknown.
Tamsulosin capsules are manufactured in a sustained-release 
(beads) presentation to avoid rapid absorption and associated hypo-
tensive effects; therefore, they should not be crushed or compounded 
into an oral suspension.
Adverse Effects
The adverse effect profile in animals is not well documented, but 
hypotensive effects are possible. Hypotension may be more likely at 
high doses or in older dogs.6 When tamsulosin was administered to 
anesthetized female beagles at doses from 0.003 – 0.01 mg/kg IV , 
urethral pressures were reduced in a dose-dependent fashion; almost 
no effect on mean arterial blood pressure was seen.7 
In humans, reported adverse effects include headache, dizziness, 
blurred vision, rhinitis, muscle weakness, abnormal ejaculation, de-
creased libido, back pain, diarrhea, and nausea.5 Intraoperative flop-
py iris syndrome and other postoperative ophthalmic adverse effects 
have also been reported in humans receiving tamsulosin undergoing 
cataract surgery; significance for veterinary patients is unknown. 
Administration on an empty stomach improves absorption, but also 
increases the risk for orthostasis.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Teratogenic effects or fetal harm were not observed when tamsulosin 
was administered to pregnant rats and rabbits. Tamsulosin may im-
pair or alter ejaculation in humans and in rats 5; it is presumed this 
effect may also occur in breeding males.
Tamsulosin is present in the milk of lactating rats.5 Use with cau-
tion in nursing veterinary patients. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Moderate toxicity in humans generally occurs at 10 times recom -
mended doses, but severe toxicity is uncommon. If hypotension oc-
curs, it is usually responsive to IV fluid therapy; severe hypotension 
may require vasopressors. Dialysis is unlikely to be of benefit. 
Adverse effects in dogs and cats with a tamsulosin overdose in -
clude lethargy/sedation, tachycardia, vomiting, and hypotension; 
older dogs may be at higher risk for hypotension.6
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
In humans, tamsulosin is a substrate of CYP 2D and 3A enzyme fam-
ilies. The following drug interactions have either been reported or 
are theoretical in humans or animals receiving tamsulosin and may 
be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Alpha-1 Adrenergic Receptor Agonists (eg, phenyleph-
rine): May decrease the effects of each other
 ■ Cimetidine : May increase tamsulosin concentration
 ■ Clarithromycin & Erythromycin : May increase plasma 
concentration of tamsulosin
 ■ Hypotensive Agents (eg, amlodipine, atenolol, enalapril, 
telmisartan): May have additive hypotensive effects
 ■ Ketoconazole : May increase plasma concentration of tamsulosin
 ■ Phosphodiesterase Type 5 (PDE5) Inhibitors (eg, silde-
nafil, tadalafil): May have additive hypotensive effects
 ■ Terbinafine : May increase plasma concentration of tamsulosin
 ■ W arfarin : Drug interaction studies with tamsulosin are incon -
clusive; use together with caution.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No laboratory test interactions reported
Dosages
DOGS:
Ureteral/urethral relaxant (extra-label): 0.01 – 0.2 mg/kg PO 
once daily.8–10 Anecdotally, may increase frequency to every 12 
hours if no effects are seen with once-daily dosing. Safety, effica -
cy, and dosages have not been determined; compounded capsules 
may be required for dosing.
CATS:
Ureteral/urethral relaxant (extra-label): An anecdotal dosage of 
0.004 – 0.006 mg/kg PO once daily has been noted.11 Safety, effica-
cy, and dosages have not been determined; compounded capsules 
are required.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Baseline blood pressure; periodic blood pressure checks if adverse 
effects related to hypotension occur
Client Information
 ■ Do not crush or allow animal to chew beads found inside capsule.
 ■ This medicine may take several days to work at its peak effect.

===== PDF_PAGE_1234 =====
Taurine   1207
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tamsulosin hydrochloride is a white or almost white crystalline 
powder that melts with decomposition at ≈230°C (446°F). It is 
slightly soluble in water or ethanol, sparingly soluble in methanol, 
and practically insoluble in ether.
Tamsulosin may also be known as LY253351, YM-12617-1, 
YM617, Flomax®, Flowmaxtra®, Omexel®, or Omnic®.
Storage/Stability
Do not store tablets above 25°C (77°F); protect from moisture.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Tamsulosin capsules are manufactured in a sustained-release pre -
sentation to avoid rapid absorption and the associated hypotensive 
effects; therefore, they should not be crushed or compounded into 
an oral suspension. Capsule contents are small sustained-release 
beads that could be compounded into smaller sized capsules for use 
in dogs or cats.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tamsulosin HCl Capsules: 0.4 mg; Flomax®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Taurine
(tor-een)
Amino Acid Nutritional
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used primarily for the treatment of taurine deficiency cardio-
myopathies in dogs and cats
 ▶ Because of its low cost, low potential for toxicity, and the 
limitations of testing for taurine deficiency, routine taurine 
supplementation in cats with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) 
is advised.
 ▶ May also be useful for many other conditions (eg, seizures, 
hepatic lipidosis), but little or no supporting data available
Uses/Indications
Taurine has proven beneficial in preventing retinal degeneration and 
the prevention and adjunctive treatment of dilated cardiomyopa -
thy (DCM) in cats caused by taurine deficiency. These conditions 
are rarely seen today when a modern, reputable commercial feline 
diet is fed. Supplementation with taurine (± carnitine) is also used in 
dogs with DCM in susceptible breeds (eg, American cocker spaniels, 
golden retrievers).1 Studies have shown that taurine supplementa -
tion may be useful as adjunctive treatment for DCM in animals even 
if taurine deficiency is not present.2 Because of taurine’s low toxicity, 
some clinicians have also suggested it can be tried for a multitude of 
conditions (eg, seizures, hepatic lipidosis) in humans and animals; 
unfortunately, little scientific evidence exists for these other uses.
Pharmacology/Actions
Taurine is an important amino acid for bile acid conjugation, espe -
cially in dogs and cats. In vivo, taurine is synthesized from methi -
onine. Cysteinesulfinic acid decarboxylase (CSAD) and vitamin B 6 
are involved with this synthesis. Deficiencies of either will depress 
taurine synthesis. Cats are particularly susceptible to taurine defi -
ciency, as they have low CSAD activity and use taurine almost exclu-
sively for bile acid conjugation.
Additionally, taurine is important in the modulation of calcium flux, 
thereby reducing platelet aggregation, stabilizing neuronal membranes, 
and affecting cardiac function. Taurine’s effects on cardiac function in-
clude positive inotropic activity without affecting resting potential and 
modulating ionic currents across the cell membrane. Taurine is import-
ant for normal development of the CNS, and it has a GABA-like effect 
that may make it useful for treating some seizure disorders.
Pharmacokinetics
No specific information was located. Excess taurine is rapidly ex -
creted in the kidneys, but if a deficiency exists, urinary excretion is 
reduced via reabsorption.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Although taurine is safe, it should not be used as a substitute for 
adequate diagnosis.
Adverse Effects
Taurine appears to be well tolerated. Minor GI distress potentially 
could occur after oral dosing.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
No specific information was located, but toxic potential appears to 
be low.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
 ■ None noted
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ To determine actual status of taurine in the body, whole blood 
taurine levels are preferred to plasma levels. Intracellular levels 
of taurine are much higher than in plasma, and hemolysis or col-
lection of the buffy coat will negate the results. However, whole 
blood assays may also yield false-positive results in animals that 
are in a prolonged fasting state or anorectic; false-negative results 
may be obtained after postprandial sampling, a recent dietary 
change, or recent thromboembolism.3 
Dosages
DOGS:
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) (extra-label): 
a) 500 – 1000 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO every 8 to 12 hours for 
dogs weighing less than 25 kg (55.1 lb) and 1 – 2 g/dog (NOT 
g/kg) PO every 8 to 12 hours for dogs weighing more than  
25 kg (55.1 lb)4,5
b) 30 – 100 mg/kg/day PO subjectively improved some echocardio-
graphic left ventricular measurements in English cocker spaniels.6
Adjunctive antiepileptic (extra-label): 22 mg/kg PO twice daily 
may help decrease seizure activity.7
CATS:
Adjunctive therapy for DCM associated with taurine deficien -
cy (extra-label): 250 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 12 hours8 
Adjunctive antiepileptic (extra-label): 100 – 400 mg/cat (NOT 
mg/kg) PO once daily9
Adjunctive treatment of hepatopathies  (extra-label): Anecdot -
ally, 250 – 500 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO twice daily. No clinical 
studies document efficacy, but some in vitro data support use.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy. Clinical improvement in cats with taurine-re -
sponsive dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is usually seen within 
2 weeks; significant echocardiographic improvement may take 4 
weeks or more.3
 ■ Taurine levels: whole blood levels preferable to plasma/serum 

===== PDF_PAGE_1235 =====
1208    Telmisartan
 levels
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is usually tolerated well but may cause vomiting. If 
your animal vomits or acts sick after receiving the medicine on an 
empty stomach, try giving the next dose with food or a small treat. 
If vomiting continues, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is tak-
ing this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits. 
 ■ If using a powder form of this medicine, it can be mixed into your 
animal’s food.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Taurine, an amino acid also known as 2-aminosulphonic acid, has a 
molecular weight of 125. Solubility in 100 mL of water at 20°C (68°F) 
is 8.8 grams.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, store taurine tablets or capsules at room 
temperature. Protect this product from light and moisture.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
The following products are labeled (not FDA-approved drugs) for 
use in animals:
Taurine Tablets: 250 mg; Formula V® Taurine Tablets. Labeled for use 
in cats
Taurine Liquid: 375 mg/4 mL (one pump); Dyna-Taurine®. Labeled 
for use in dogs and cats
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
There are several oral dosage form products available for taurine. 
Technically considered a nutrient they are all OTC and may need 
to be obtained from health food stores. Most dosage forms available 
range from 125 mg to 500 mg.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Telmisartan
(tel-mi-sar-tan)  Semintra®, Micardis®
Angiotensin-II Receptor Blocker (ARB)
Prescriber Highlights 
 ▶ Indicated in cats for control of systemic hypertension and 
for treatment of proteinuria associated with chronic kidney 
disease (CKD)
 ▶ May also be useful in dogs for the adjunctive treatment of 
proteinuria and systemic hypertension secondary to CKD
 ▶ GI effects (vomiting, diarrhea) and lethargy are the most com-
monly reported adverse effects in cats. Hypotension, increases 
in liver enzymes, and anemia are possible but uncommon.
 ▶ Not safe for use during pregnancy
 ▶ Dispense with Client Information Sheet
Uses/Indications 
Telmisartan is used for the adjunctive treatment of systemic hyper -
tension and proteinuria in both dogs and cats.
Telmisartan is approved for control of systemic hypertension in 
cats. In both a United States clinical trial1 as well as a European clini-
cal trial,2 telmisartan significantly reduced mean systolic blood pres-
sure compared to placebo in hypertensive cats. In the United States 
trial, systolic blood pressure at 28 days decreased on average by ≈24 
mm Hg compared to ≈12 mm Hg in the placebo group and this de -
crease persisted over the 6 months of the trial.1 In the European trial, 
telmisartan reduced mean baseline systolic blood pressure by ≈25 
mm Hg compared to an ≈11 mm Hg decrease in the placebo group.2 
In the EU, the drug is approved for the reduction of proteinuria as -
sociated with chronic kidney disease (CKD) in cats. 
An open-label study of telmisartan in 28 dogs with proteinuric 
chronic kidney disease found that telmisartan reduced the urine 
protein-to-creatinine ratio by 65% and the systolic blood pressure 
by 10% compared to placebo. 3 A prospective, randomized, dou -
ble-masked clinical trial in 39 dogs found that telmisartan result -
ed in a greater decrease (-65%) in urine protein-to-creatinine ratio 
compared to enalapril (-35%).4 Finally, in an observational study of 
42 dogs, telmisartan in combination with an angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitor significantly reduced systolic blood pressure and 
urine protein-to-creatinine ratio.5
Telmisartan is being investigated as an adjunctive antiepileptic 
drug in dogs with refractory idiopathic epilepsy.6
Pharmacology/Actions 
Telmisartan is an angiotensin-II receptor blocker (ARB). By selec -
tively blocking the AT1-receptor, aldosterone synthesis and secre -
tion is reduced causing vasodilation and decreased potassium and 
increased sodium excretion. While plasma concentrations of renin 
and angiotensin-II are increased, this does not counteract the blood 
pressure lowering effects of telmisartan. Telmisartan does not inter-
fere with substance P or bradykinin responses. The product label 
(UK) for cats states that, … telmisartan does not affect potassium ex-
cretion, as shown in the clinical field trial in cats.
A study in healthy cats ( n = 6) found that telmisartan 3 mg/kg 
PO, when compared to benazepril 2.5 mg/cat PO, significantly better 
attenuated blood pressure increases secondary to angiotensin I ad -
ministration at 90 minutes and 24 hours.7
Pharmacokinetics 
In cats, telmisartan oral solution bioavailability is ≈33% and peak 
concentrations occur in ≈30 minutes. Food delays the magnitude 
of and time to peak concentration, and also reduces overall absorp -
tion.8,9 Systemic exposure is ≈60% lower in female cats compared to 
male cats.8 Distribution data for cats were not located, but the drug is 
highly lipophilic and, in other species (rats, dogs, humans), is high -
ly bound (greater than 99.5%) to plasma proteins. Absorbed drug 
is primarily metabolized via glucuronidation; the cat genetic defect 
UGT1A6 does not affect glucuronidation. 10 The major metabolite 
is telmisartan-O-acylglucuronide, which is not active. Elimination 
half-life is ≈8 hours.8,9 
In dogs, peak plasma concentrations occur 45 minutes after oral 
administration and the half-life is 5.4 hours.11
In humans, oral bioavailability of telmisartan is dose dependent 
and ranges from 42% (40 mg) to 58% (160 mg). 12 Food slightly re -
duces bioavailability. Absorbed drug is highly protein bound (greater 
than 99.5%) and volume of distribution ≈500 L. It is conjugated via 
glucuronidation to the pharmacologically inactive acylglucuronide. 
Elimination kinetics are bi-exponential and the terminal half-life is 
≈1 day. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Telmisartan is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to 
it. It is not known if cross-reactivity occurs between other ARBs and 
telmisartan. The drug has not been evaluated in patients with systolic 
blood pressure greater than 200 mmHg, with hepatic disease, or less 
than 613 to 9 months old.8
Hypotensive patients should not receive this drug. Patients that 
are volume or electrolyte depleted should not receive this drug until 
blood volume and electrolytes have been replenished and corrected. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1236 =====
Telmisartan   1209
This drug should not be used in pregnant animals. The human  
label has the following black box warning12: Fetal toxicity: When preg-
nancy is detected, discontinue telmisartan as soon as possible. Drugs 
that act directly on the renin-angiotensin system can cause injury and 
even death to the developing fetus. See Reproductive/Nursing Safety.
Telmisartan should be used with caution in patients with moder-
ate to severe hepatic impairment; dose reduction may be warranted.
Adverse Effects 
In FDA field studies in cats, gastrointestinal distress (vomiting, diar-
rhea), lethargy, dehydration and weight loss were the most common-
ly reported side effects.8,9 Hypotension, requiring dosage reduction, 
occurred in 16% to 24% of patients. Non-regenerative anemia oc -
curred in 5% to 15% of patients. 9 Less commonly, increases in liver 
enzyme values, tachycardia, azotemia, and renal insufficiency or fail-
ure have been noted.8,9
Adverse effects in dogs are comparable, with adverse GI signs (eg, 
inappetence, vomiting, diarrhea) being the most common (11% of 
dogs in one study 5).4,5 A greater than 30% increase in serum creat -
inine has been reported in 5% to 25% of dogs. 4,5 Hyperkalemia at  
6.2 mEq/L was noted in one of 42 dogs that was also receiving an 
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor in another study.14
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Telmisartan is not considered safe to use during pregnancy. The EU 
label for the cat product reads: Do not use during pregnancy or lac -
tation. The safety of Semintra® has not been established in breeding, 
pregnant or lactating cats.
Studies in pregnant rats given high doses of ARBs demonstrated 
a variety of fetal abnormalities (renal pelvic cavitation, hydroureter, 
absence of renal papilla). Smaller doses in rabbits caused increased 
maternal death and spontaneous abortion. In humans, the drug is 
considered teratogenic, particularly during the second and third tri-
mesters. If pregnancy is detected in patients receiving telmisartan, 
the drug should be discontinued as soon as possible.
It is not known if telmisartan is excreted into cat or dog milk and 
it is recommended to either halt nursing and use milk replacer or 
discontinue the drug in nursing animals. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 
Limited information is available. Hypotension and tachycardia are 
possible; bradycardia could occur from parasympathetic (vagal) 
stimulation. Patients may present with lethargy, anorexia, trembling, 
and vomiting. Treat supportively. Telmisartan is not removed by he-
modialysis.
In chronic toxicity studies done in cats of up to 5 mg/kg/day (5 
times recommended dose) for 6 months, telmisartan did not cause 
lethality. Hypotension, decreased red blood cell and reticulocyte 
counts, and reduced food intake occurred9; increased BUN and gas-
trointestinal effects are possible.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have ex -
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison control 
center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions 
The following drug interactions either have been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving telmisartan and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Angiotensin Converting Enzyme  Inhibitors  (ACEIs; eg, 
benazepril, enalapril ): Increased risk for adverse effects (eg, 
hypotension, hyperkalemia, renal function changes); increased 
monitoring may be warranted.
 ■ Aspirin : Possible reduced antihypertensive effect of telmisartan 
and increased risk for renal impairment; increased monitoring 
may be warranted.
 ■ Baclofen : Concurrent use may have additive blood pressure 
lower effects.
 ■ Benzodiazepines  (eg, diazepam, lorazepam): Concurrent use 
may increase risk for hypotension.
 ■ Buspirone : Concurrent use may increase risk for hypotension.
 ■ Cabergoline : Concurrent use may increase risk for hypoten -
sion.
 ■ Corticosteroids  (eg, betamethasone, dexamethasone): May 
decrease the antihypertensive effects of ARBs
 ■ Dexmedetomidine : Concurrent use may result in additive ef -
fects on blood pressure and heart rate.
 ■ Diazoxide : Concurrent use may increase risk for hypotension.
 ■ Dichlorphenamide : Concurrent use may increase risk for hy-
potension.
 ■ Digoxin : Concurrent use may increase digoxin levels. Closely 
monitor digoxin levels and therapeutic effects.
 ■ Diphenhydramine : Concurrent use may increase risk for hy -
potension.
 ■ Doxepin : Concurrent use may increase risk for hypotension.
 ■ Insulin : Concurrent use may increase risk for hypoglycemia.
 ■ Heparin, Low Molecular Weight Heparins  (eg, daltepa-
rin, enoxaparin): Concurrent use may increase risk for hyperka-
lemia.
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs  ( NSAIDs; eg, 
carprofen, meloxicam): Possible reduced antihypertensive effects 
of telmisartan and increased risk for renal impairment; increased 
monitoring may be warranted.
 ■ Opioids  (eg, buprenorphine, butorphanol ): Concurrent use 
may increase risk for hypotension.
 ■ Potassium Preparations (including potassium bromide): 
Increased risk for hyperkalemia; increased monitoring of serum 
potassium may be warranted.
 ■ Potassium–Sparing Diuretics  (eg, spironolactone): In -
creased risk for hyperkalemia; increased monitoring of serum 
potassium may be warranted.
 ■ Yohimbine : Concurrent use may decrease the efficacy of ARBs.
Laboratory Considerations 
No specific information noted.
Dosages 
DOGS:
Reduction of proteinuria associated with chronic kidney dis -
ease | CKD  (extra-label): 1 mg/kg PO once daily. 3–5 One study 
escalated the dosage to a maximum of 3 mg/kg PO once daily for 
cases with persistent proteinuria.4 
Systemic hypertension (extra-label): 1 mg/kg PO once daily15
CATS:
Control of systemic hypertension (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
1.5 mg/kg PO twice daily for the first 14 days, then 2 mg/kg PO 
once daily. Reduce dose in 0.5 mg/kg increments to manage hy -
potension; the minimum dose is 0.5 mg/kg PO once daily. May 
be administered either directly into the cat’s mouth or on top of 
a small amount of food (do not mix into food). Cats that vomit 
within 30 minutes of administration may be redosed.8 

===== PDF_PAGE_1237 =====
1210    Terbinafine
Reduction of proteinuria associated with chronic kidney dis -
ease | CKD  (extra-label): Using the oral solution: 1 mg/kg PO 
(directly into mouth or with a small amount of food) once daily.16 
Monitoring 
 ■ Blood pressure, signs of target organ damage (eg, retinal lesions). 
In field studies in cats, dosage reduction for systolic BP less than 
120 mm Hg was allowed.
 ■ Depending on reason for use and patient’s clinical condition: 
baseline and periodic serum chemistry panel (including renal val-
ues, liver enzymes, and electrolytes [especially potassium]), urine 
protein, UPC, volume/hydration status, and body weight
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC17
 ■ Monitor for vomiting, diarrhea, or weight loss after initiating 
therapy.
Client Information
 ■ Dispense with Client Information Sheet 
 ■ This medication is best absorbed when given on an empty stom -
ach but may be given with or without food.
 ■ The most common side effects are vomiting, diarrhea, lack of ap-
petite, low energy level, anemia, dehydration, and low blood pres-
sure (fainting, weakness, inability to exercise).
 ■ This medicine has caused birth defects and should not be used in 
pregnant animals. If a human in the household is pregnant, they 
should be very careful not to ingest the medication and should 
avoid contact with telmisartan (ie, wear disposable gloves when 
administering doses and wash their hands after handling).
Chemistry/Synonyms
Telmisartan [CAS Registry: 144701-48-4; ATCvet code: QC09CA07] 
occurs as a white or slightly yellowish, crystalline powder. It is practi-
cally insoluble in water, slightly soluble in methyl alcohol, sparingly 
soluble in dichloromethane, and dissolves in 1M sodium hydroxide. 
The feline product ( Semintra®) is a clear, colorless to yellowish 
viscous oral solution; excipients include: hydroxyethylcellulose, 
manitol, and benzalkonium chloride. 
Telmisartan may also be known as BIBR 277 SE. Trade names in-
clude Micardis® and Semintra®.
Storage/Stability 
Telmisartan solution for cats may be stored at room temperature (at 
or below 25°C; 77°F) with excursions permitted up to 40°C (104°F) 
with the cap tightly closed. The label states that shelf life is 6 months 
after first opening the bottle. Telmisartan tablets should be stored at 
room temperature (up to 30°C; 86°F); do not remove from blisters 
until immediately before administration.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
The UK label for the cat product states: “In the absence of compati-
bility studies, this veterinary medicinal product must not be mixed 
with other veterinary products.”
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Telmisartan Oral Solution: 10 mg/mL in 35 mL bottle with oral mea-
suring syringe; Semintra®; (Rx). NADA# 141-501.
Telmisartan Oral Solution: 4 mg/mL in 30 mL bottle with oral mea-
suring syringe; Semintra®; (In the UK/EU and Canada: POM-V). 
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Oral Tablets: 20 mg, 40 mg, and 80 mg; Micardis®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Terbinafine
(ter-bih-nah-feen) Lamisil® 
Antifungal
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used primarily for dermatophytosis; may also be useful for 
systemic fungal infections
 ▶ Fewer drug interactions than azole antifungals 
 ▶ Appears to be well tolerated; adverse effects are primarily GI 
related (eg, vomiting, diarrhea)
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with liver or renal disease.
Uses/Indications
Terbinafine may be useful for treating dermatophyte and systemic 
fungal infections (eg, blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomy-
cosis, cryptococcosis, sporotrichosis) in dogs, cats, birds, and other 
species. Terbinafine may also be used for the treatment of Malassezia 
spp dermatitis, and Aspergillus spp and Candida spp infections.
Pharmacology/Actions
Terbinafine is an inhibitor of the synthesis of ergosterol, a compo -
nent of fungal cell membranes. By blocking the enzyme squalene 
monooxygenase (ie, squalene 2,3-epoxidase), terbinafine inhibits the 
conversion of squalene to sterols (especially ergosterol) and causes 
accumulation of squalene. Both of these effects are thought to con -
tribute to its antifungal action. 
Terbinafine has far greater activity (1000 times or more) on fungal 
squalene monooxygenase as compared with the similar human en -
zyme. Unlike azole antifungals, terbinafine’s mechanism for inhibit-
ing ergosterol is not mediated via the cytochrome P450 enzyme sys-
tem and therefore does not alter testosterone or cortisol production 
and has fewer drug interactions. However, terbinafine is a competi-
tive inhibitor of CYP2D6 in humans.
Terbinafine primarily has clinical activity (fungicidal) against der-
matophytes (eg, Microsporum spp, Trichophyton spp). It may only 
be fungistatic against the yeasts (eg, Candida spp). Terbinafine has 
activity against Aspergillus spp, Blastomyces dermatitidis, Coccidioi-
domyces immitis, Histoplasma capsulatum, Sporothrix schenckii, and 
Cryptococcus neoformans . When used by itself, terbinafine is not 
very effective for pythiosis, but it displays synergy when combined 
with other antifungals.1 Terbinafine resistance in Microsporum canis 
has been documented in a cat.2
In an in vivo human experimental model, terbinafine was shown 
to possess anti-inflammatory properties, although the exact mecha-
nism and veterinary clinical significance remains unclear.3 
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, a single-dose study of terbinafine (30 – 35 mg/kg with food) 
showed maximum serum concentrations of ≈3.5 µg/mL and average 
time to maximum concentration of ≈3.5 hours after administration.4 
In greyhounds, the same dose resulted in slightly higher maximum 
serum concentrations (≈4 µg/mL) and a shorter time to maximum 
concentration (≈2 hours). Terbinafine is widely distributed and 
highly protein bound (more than 99%). 5 A half-life of ≈8.6 hours 
was reported for greyhounds.6 Following the 30 – 35 mg/kg PO dose, 
the time above MIC was maintained for ≈18 to 19 hours. 4 After 21 
days of 30 mg/kg PO once-daily dosing, low skin and sebum con -
centrations were seen compared to serum. Maximum concentration 
in the stratum corneum and the sebum barely exceeded Malassezia 
spp MIC90.7
In cats, after a single fasted oral dose of 30 mg/kg, peak concen -
trations (≈3.2 µg/mL) occurred ≈1.3 hours after dosing. Elimination 
half-life was ≈8 to 10 hours.8 Although oral bioavailability was low at 
≈30%, terbinafine appears to achieve high enough concentrations at 

===== PDF_PAGE_1238 =====
Terbinafine   1211
the site of action; cats dosed at 34 – 46 mg/kg PO once daily for 14 
days had terbinafine concentrations in hair that persisted above the 
MIC of most dermatophytes for several weeks.9
In horses, maximum plasma concentration after oral dosing 
was ≈0.3 µg/mL, 6,10 and time to maximum concentration was ≈1.5 
hours. Half-life is ≈8 hours. 6,10 Volume of distribution (Vd/F) was  
≈131 L/kg, and clearance was 187 mL/minute/kg. Because IV terbi -
nafine was not administered, volume of distribution and clearance 
are reported as per fraction of drug available.11 Rectal administration 
resulted in low plasma concentrations compared with oral adminis-
tration.10
In humans, more than 70% of terbinafine given orally is absorbed; 
after first-pass metabolism, bioavailability is ≈40%. Food may in -
crease absorption by up to 20%. Terbinafine is distributed into and 
attains high concentration in hair, nails, skin, and sebum. More than 
99% of drug in plasma is bound to plasma proteins. Drug in the cir-
culation is metabolized in the liver and the effective half-life is ≈36 
hours. Approximately 70% of the drug is renally excreted as metab-
olites, and another 20% is excreted in the feces. 12 Terbinafine clear-
ance is decreased ≈50% in patients with renal impairment or hepatic 
cirrhosis. The drug may persist in adipose tissue and skin for long 
periods of time.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Terbinafine is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to it 
and in patients with active or chronic liver disease.12 Use terbinafine 
with caution in patients with significantly impaired renal function. 
If terbinafine is to be used in veterinary patients with markedly im -
paired liver or renal function, do so with extreme caution; dosage 
adjustments should be considered. Liver failure leading to transplant 
or death has occurred in humans with and without pre-existing liver 
disease.
In humans, loss of taste and smell have been reported. 12 It is un-
known if this effect occurs in animals; use terbinafine with caution in 
working dogs that rely on olfaction.  
Do not confuse LamISIL with LaMICtal or LOMOtil, or terbI -
NAafine with terBUTaline.
Adverse Effects
Because of limited use in veterinary patients, the adverse effect pro-
file is not well defined. In general, terbinafine appears to be well tol-
erated. GI effects (eg, vomiting, inappetence, diarrhea) are possible. 
Reportedly, the oral tablets can have an unpleasant taste and may 
contribute to GI or behavioral adverse effects or dosing avoidance. 
In dogs, excessive panting and elevated liver enzymes have been 
noted.13 Ocular effects have also been reported in 2 dogs including 
periocular swelling, chemosis, and conjunctival erythema. Signs re -
solved within 24 to 36 hours of terbinafine administration, and oph-
thalmological examination after study completion was within nor -
mal limits. No recurrence of ocular effects was seen with follow-up 
administration.4
In a case report in 2 cats, 1 cat developed lethargy.14 Facial pruri-
tus in some treated cats has also been reported.9
In horses, signs of unpleasant taste or oral irritation (eg, lip curl -
ing, pawing at ground, opening/closing mouth, head shaking, exces-
sive tongue movements, nostril flaring) were seen after PO adminis-
tration.6,10 Subclinical fever was reported in 1 horse.10 Signs resolved 
spontaneously, but transient colic could not be ruled out.  
Regurgitation was common in red-tailed hawks.15
In humans, photosensitivity has been reported with terbinafine 
use. Very rarely, liver failure, neutropenia, or serious skin reactions 
(eg, toxic epidermal necrolysis [TEN], Stevens-Johnson syndrome) 
have occurred after terbinafine use. Disturbances or loss of smell 
and taste have also been reported12; whether or how this may impact 
working animals is uncertain.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
It is unknown if terbinafine crosses the placenta. High-dose studies 
in pregnant rabbits and rats have not demonstrated overt fetotoxic-
ity or teratogenicity. Although risk appears low, use with caution in 
pregnant animals. 
The drug enters maternal milk at concentrations 7 times that 
found in plasma; the manufacturer recommends that mothers do 
not nurse while taking this drug. 
Because safety has not been established, this drug should only be 
used when the maternal benefits outweigh the potential fetal risks.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Limited information available; humans have taken doses up to 5 g 
(total dose) without serious effects. Clinical signs are expected to be 
extensions of the drug’s adverse effects. See Adverse Effects.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged to consult with one 
of the 24-hour poison consultation centers that specialize in provid-
ing information specific for veterinary patients. For general infor -
mation related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact 
information for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving terbinafine and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Cimetidine : Inhibits terbinafine metabolism and increases ter -
binafine absorption and exposure10
 ■ Cyclosporine : Terbinafine may increase the elimination of cy-
closporine.
 ■ Fluconazole : Inhibits terbinafine metabolism and increases 
terbinafine exposure
 ■ Rifampin : May increase terbinafine clearance
Because terbinafine is an inhibitor of CYP2D6 in humans, it could 
reduce the metabolism of:
 ■ Antiarrhythmics (eg,  lidocaine, mexiletine, procainamide)
 ■ Beta-Blockers (eg,  metoprolol, propranolol)
 ■ Codeine (blocks the conversion to morphine)
 ■ Dextromethorphan
 ■ Doxorubicin
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors  (MAOIs; eg,  amitraz, sele-
giline)
 ■ Methadone
 ■ Metoclopramide
 ■ Ondanestron
 ■ Selective Serotonin Receptor Inhibitors  ( SSRIs; eg,  flu-
oxetine, sertraline)
 ■ Tamsulosin
 ■ Tramadol
 ■ Trazodone
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants  ( TCAs; eg,  amitriptyline, clo -
mipramine, doxepin)
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ None
Dosages
DOGS:
Systemic mycoses  | blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, 
cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, sporotrichosis  (extra-label):  
30 mg/kg PO every 24 hours. 16–19 Based on a pharmacokinetic 
study, twice-daily dosing may be considered. 4 Use of terbinafine 

===== PDF_PAGE_1239 =====
1212    Terbinafine
as a single agent is not recommended.4
Cryptococcosis (extra-label): From a case report, after primary 
therapy with amphotericin B and fluconazole had failed, a dog 
received terbinafine 30 mg/kg PO once daily. Insufficient data are 
currently available to recommend terbinafine as a first-line agent, 
but in cases where primary therapy has failed to yield a response, 
it may prove beneficial.19
Colonic pythiosis (extra-label): Terbinafine 6 – 12 mg/kg PO 
once daily in combination with itraconazole 5 – 10 mg/kg PO 
once daily.20–24 This combination may be used in conjunction with 
mefenoxam 4 mg/kg PO every 12 hours20–22 or prednisone.23 Ter-
binafine as a single agent is not recommended for treatment of 
pythiosis.4 
Refractory sinonasal aspergillosis (extra-label): For dogs that 
have not responded to conventional topical and systemic thera -
py for sinonasal aspergillosis, terbinafine 30 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours in combination with posaconazole 5 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours and doxycycline 5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours; treatment 
continued for 6 to 18 months. 70% of dogs achieved complete re-
mission and 30% partial remission.25 
Dermatophytosis (extra-label): 30 – 40 mg/kg PO every 24 
hours26; treatment should continue until mycological cure (ie, 2 
negative skin cultures taken 2 weeks apart).
Malassezia  spp dermatitis (extra-label): 30 mg/kg PO once dai -
ly.7 NOTE: Terbinafine was only partially effective, and concen -
tration achieved in the stratum corneum and sebum was only 
slightly higher than Malassezia spp MIC 90. Higher terbinafine 
doses or other drug therapy (eg, ketoconazole, itraconazole) may 
be required. 
CATS:
Systemic mycoses: 
Cryptococcal CNS infections   (extra-label): 10 mg/kg PO once 
daily can rectify the clinical signs though cats with CNS crypto -
coccosis usually require lifelong treatment.27
Sporotrichosis (extra-label): 30 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO once 
daily as an alternative for the treatment of cats that do not tolerate 
itraconazole, in cases that respond poorly, and/or if an azole resis-
tance is suspected. May be used in combination with itraconazole 
5 – 10 mg/kg PO every 24 hours28,29 or posaconazole.30
Dermatophytosis (extra-label):
a) Pulse therapy : 20 mg/kg PO once daily for 7 days, then 21 
days off, followed by 40 mg/kg PO daily for 7 days31 
b) Using terbinafine 250 mg tablets, cats weighing less than 2.8 kg 
(6.1 lb) received ¼ of a tablet (62.5 mg) per dose, cats weighing 
2.8 to 5.5 kg (6.1 to 12.1 lb) received ½ a tablet (125 mg) per 
dose, and cats weighing greater than 5.5 kg (12.1 lb) received 
1 tablet (250 mg) per dose. Administered once daily with food 
for 21 days in combination with twice-weekly lime sulfur 
 rinses32
Sinonasal aspergillosis (extra-label): 15 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours.33 Lower dosages 5 – 10 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours 
also have been reported, 34–36 and are based primarily on author 
experience or case reports.  
BIRDS:
Aspergillosis (extra-label): 
a) Terbinafine 10 – 15 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours in combi -
nation with itraconazole 5 – 10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours37
b) A single oral dose pharmacokinetic study in red-tailed hawks 
concluded that terbinafine 22 mg/kg PO once a day results in 
steady-state trough plasma concentrations above the MIC and 
is recommended as a potential treatment option for aspergil -
losis in raptors; however, additional research is required to de-
termine both treatment efficacy and safety.38 
c) Nebulization therapy: A pharmacokinetic study using neb -
ulized terbinafine (1 mg/mL solution nebulized for 15 min -
utes) in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots concluded that higher 
concentrations of nebulization solutions, nebulization times 
greater than 15 minutes, or more frequent nebulization is 
likely needed to reach clinically relevant systemic terbinafine 
concentrations.39 The relationship between plasma concentra-
tions and lung or air sac concentrations after nebulization of 
terbinafine still needs to be determined and further studies are 
warranted to determine the optimal technique for dissolving 
terbinafine in solution, as well as to determine the best con -
centration of terbinafine and particle size to nebulize. Pharma-
codynamic studies are also necessary to determine therapeutic 
plasma concentrations.
REPTILES :
Antifungal (extra-label): 
a) Nebulization therapy : From a pharmacokinetic study,  
18 mg/reptile (NOT mg/kg) delivered via 30-minute nebuli -
zation into a sealed 10-gallon aquarium achieved therapeutic 
plasma concentrations.40 Terbinafine 2 mg/mL solution was 
prepared by dissolving terbinafine powder, USP in sterile sa -
line. Efficacy would need to be confirmed with clinical studies. 
b) From a case report in an Aldabra tortoise, 3.3 mg/kg PO once 
daily for 15 months was used to treat phaeohyphomycosis of 
the carapace.41
HEDGEHOGS :
Dermatophytosis (extra-label): 100 mg/kg PO twice daily for 28 
days reduced clinical lesions and resulted in ≈99% mycological 
cure rate. The mycological cure rate was significantly better than 
with itraconazole.42
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Baseline liver enzymes; repeat periodically as needed (especially 
if treating long-term) based on clinical signs and development of 
adverse effects.
 ■ Fungal cultures (eg, Dermatophyte Test Media [DTM]) for der -
matophytosis
Client Information
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. 
 ■ This medicine is usually tolerated well. The most common side 
effect is vomiting.
 ■ If your animal vomits after receiving this medicine on an empty 
stomach, try giving it with food. Contact your veterinarian if your 
animal continues to vomit after receiving this medicine.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is tak-
ing this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A synthetic allylamine antifungal, terbinafine HCl occurs as a white 
to off-white, fine, crystalline powder. It is slightly soluble in water 
and soluble in ethanol.
Terbinafine HCl may also be known as Alamil®, Daskil®, Daskyl®, 
DesenexMax®, Finex®, Lamisil®, Micosil®, Terbinex®, Terbisil®, or Ter-
ekol®.
Storage/Stability
Terbinafine tablets should be stored at room temperature (25°C 
[77°F]) in tight containers, with excursions permitted from 15°C to 
30°C (59°F-86°F); protect from light.

===== PDF_PAGE_1240 =====
Terbutaline   1213
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
In a pharmacokinetic study for terbinafine nebulization in parrots, 
one 250 mg tablet was crushed and dissolved into 250 mL sterile 
water to make a 1 mg/mL solution. Before nebulization, the solution 
was agitated before being mixed with a stir bar for 12 hours. Terbi -
nafine concentrations of solutions made with a crushed tablet were 
significantly lower than those made with raw powder, but plasma 
concentrations did not differ significantly.43
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
No oral products are FDA-approved. An otic solution containing 
terbinafine (1.48%), florfenicol (1.66%), and mometasone furoate 
(0.22%) is FDA-approved for treatment of otitis externa in dogs; Cla-
ro®; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Terbinafine HCl Oral Tablets: 250 mg; Lamisil®, generic; (Rx)
A topical cream and a spray (1%) are also available (OTC)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Terbutaline
(ter-byoo-ta-leen) Brethine®
Beta-2-Adrenergic Agonist, Tocolytic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used as a bronchodilator or tocolytic; sometimes used to treat 
bradyarrhythmia or hyperkalemia 
 ▶ Oral administration is not practical in horses due to low bio-
availability.
 ▶ May be used in horses to confirm and quantitate anhidrosis
 ▶ Caution should be used in patients with diabetes, hyperthy-
roidism, hypertension, seizure disorders, or cardiac disease 
(especially with concurrent arrhythmias).
 ▶ Adverse effects include increased heart rate, tremors, CNS ex-
citement (eg, nervousness), and hypotension; after parenteral 
injection in horses, sweating and CNS excitation are possible.
Uses/Indications
Terbutaline is used as a bronchodilating agent in the adjunctive 
treatment of bronchospasm caused by pulmonary disease (including 
tracheobronchitis, collapsing trachea, chronic bronchitis, and asth -
ma) in small animal species. Its use for airway collapse in dogs is 
controversial, as some sources state that terbutaline is not helpful 
for the treatment of airway collapse, 1,2 while others advocate that it 
may be helpful in certain patients. 1,3,4 Terbutaline is primarily used 
as adjunctive therapy in cats with asthma that are already receiving 
corticosteroid therapy. The drug may be used pre-emptively or in -
traoperatively for management of bronchospasm in cats undergoing 
transtracheal wash, bronchoscopy, and bronchoalveolar lavage.5–9
Terbutaline may also be beneficial in the treatment of bradyar -
rhythmias and hyperkalemia in dogs and cats. 
In horses, terbutaline has occasionally been used for its broncho-
dilating effects, but adverse effects, short duration of activity after 
IV administration, and poor oral absorption have limited its use. 
Terbutaline can help diagnose anhidrosis in horses after intradermal 
injection.10
Oral and parenteral terbutaline has been used successfully as a 
tocolytic agent in humans, dogs, and cats for short-term inhibition 
of premature labor.
Pharmacology/Actions
Terbutaline is a sympathomimetic drug that preferentially stimulates 
beta-2-adrenergic receptors found primarily in vascular smooth 
muscle (including bronchial, GI, and uterine tissues) to cause relax-
ation of bronchial smooth muscle cells, reduced airway resistance, 
vasodilation, and tocolysis, as well as to inhibit release of bron -
choconstrictive mediators from mast cells. At recommended doses, 
terbutaline spares the beta-1  receptor found primarily in the heart, 
thus lowering the likelihood for cardiac adverse events; terbutaline’s 
specificity is not as precise at higher doses and some beta-1  activity 
may occur, resulting in tachycardia and increased myocardial con -
tractility. Occasionally, tachycardia may develop at recommended 
doses and can be a result of either direct beta-1 stimulation or a re -
flex response secondary to peripheral vasodilation. Terbutaline also 
promotes intracellular shift of potassium through activation of Na + 
K+ ATPase enzyme system.  
Terbutaline has virtually no alpha-adrenergic activity.
Pharmacokinetics
Studies in dogs found that 16.9% to 46.6% of the IV dose was excret-
ed within 2 to 4 hours and greater than 95% of doses administered 
IV , SC, or PO were excreted within 24 hours.11,12 Peak serum concen-
trations of terbutaline administered SC in dogs occurred within ≈30 
minutes; peak serum concentrations following PO administration 
occurred between 2 to 6 hours.12  
In horses, terbutaline is poorly absorbed after oral administration 
and has a bioavailability less than 1%. 13 Mean residence time is ≈30 
minutes in horses when the drug is given IV; administration via IV 
CRI appears to be necessary to maintain therapeutic serum concen-
trations. 
In humans, only ≈33% to 50% of an oral dose is absorbed; peak 
bronchial effects occur within 2 to 3 hours and activity persists up 
to 8 hours.14 
Terbutaline is well absorbed following SC administration in hu -
mans; onset of action occurs within 15 minutes, peak effects are at 
30 to 60 minutes, and duration of activity is up to 4 hours. Although 
terbutaline is principally excreted unchanged in the urine (60%), it is 
also metabolized in the liver to an inactive sulfate conjugate.15
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Terbutaline is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it and 
should be used with caution in patients with diabetes, hyperthyroid-
ism, hypertension, seizure disorders, glaucoma, or cardiac disease 
(especially with concurrent arrhythmias).
Adverse Effects
Most adverse effects are dose-related and are similar to those of sym-
pathomimetic agents, including increased heart rate, tremors, CNS 
excitement (eg, nervousness), and dizziness. These effects are gener-
ally transient, mild, and do not require discontinuation of therapy. 
Tachycardia, trembling, sweating, and CNS excitation were report -
ed after IV injection in horses. 13 In horses under injectable general 
anesthesia, terbutaline at 2 µg/kg IV (once) did not improve PaO 2 
and was associated with adverse cardiovascular effects (eg, increased 
heart rate, decreased blood pressure).16
Transient hypokalemia has been reported in humans receiving 
beta-adrenergic agents. Hyperglycemia, cardiac arrhythmias, and 
pulmonary edema have been reported in humans.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Terbutaline crosses the placenta. No teratogenic effects were noted 
in pregnant laboratory animals given terbutaline during embryofe -
tal development, but alterations in neonatal behavior and brain de -
velopment have been noted. Increased fetal heart rate and neonatal 
hypoglycemia may occur when terbutaline is administered in late 

===== PDF_PAGE_1241 =====
1214    Terbutaline
pregnancy. Terbutaline has tocolytic effects, but it is recommended 
that use in humans for this effect be limited to 48 to 72 hours due 
to adverse maternal effects. In humans, use of this drug should be 
avoided or minimized during early pregnancy due to the risk for 
asthma and cardiac defects, and prolonged use should be avoided in 
the second and third trimesters.17
Although terbutaline is excreted in milk at concentrations sim -
ilar to those found in maternal plasma, use is only recommended 
when the potential maternal benefit outweighs possible risks for off-
spring.15,17
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Clinical signs of significant overdose after systemic administration 
may include arrhythmias (eg, bradycardia, tachycardia, heart block, 
extrasystoles), hypokalemia, hypertension, fever, muscle tremors, 
vomiting, mydriasis, and CNS stimulation resulting in seizures. 
Recent oral ingestion should be handled like other overdoses (eg, 
gastrointestinal decontamination) if the animal does not have sig -
nificant cardiac or CNS effects. Treatment should be supportive and 
based on clinical presentation. Potassium supplementation may be 
required. If cardiac arrhythmias require treatment, a beta-blocking 
agent (eg, propranolol18) can be used but may precipitate bronchoc-
onstriction.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have experi-
enced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consultation 
centers that specialize in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving terbutaline and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Anesthetics, Inhalation  (eg, isoflurane): Use with inha -
lation anesthetics may predispose the patient to ventricular ar -
rhythmias, particularly in patients with pre-existing cardiac dis -
ease—use cautiously.
 ■ Beta-Adrenergic Receptor Antagonists  (eg, proprano-
lol): May antagonize the actions of terbutaline
 ■ Digoxin : Use with digitalis glycosides may increase the risk for 
cardiac arrhythmias.
 ■ Diuretics ( eg, furosemide, hydrochlorothiazide ): Beta-ago -
nists may increase the risk for hypokalemia.   
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, 
linezolid, selegiline ): May potentiate the vascular effects of ter -
butaline
 ■ Succinylcholine : Concurrent use may result in enhanced 
neuromuscular blockade.
 ■ Sympathomimetics, Other ( eg, phenylpropanolamine): Use 
of terbutaline with other sympathomimetic amines may increase 
the risk for developing adverse cardiovascular effects.
 ■ Theophylline : May result in decreased theophylline concen -
trations. Combination may precipitate cardiac arrhythmias; sud-
den death has occurred in humans.
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants ( eg, amitriptyline, clomipramine): 
May potentiate the vascular effects of terbutaline
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics ( eg, azithromycin, clarithromycin): 
Macrolides induce anhidrosis in foals and may interfere with 
quantitative intradermal terbutaline sweat test (QITST).19 
Dosages
NOTES:
1. Do not confuse mg/kg dosages with mg/dog or mg/cat.
2. Terbutaline should not be administered as an IV bolus; admin-
ister slowly if IV use cannot be avoided.
DOGS:
Bradyarrhythmias (extra-label): 0.2 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 
hours; improvement is usually partial and often temporary.20
Hyperkalemia (extra-label): 0.01 mg/kg IV over 5 to 10 min -
utes21,22
Bronchodilator for small airway collapse/disease (extra-label): 
0.625 - 5 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) every 8 to 12 hours.3,4,23 Efficacy is 
debatable for its use in airway collapse/disease in dogs; however, 
it may be useful in some cases.1,3,4 If used, it is often instituted for 
a 1-to-2-week trial to determine its effectiveness in the individual 
patient, and continued use is based on efficacy as well develop -
ment of unwanted side effects. 
Premature labor as a tocolytic  (extra-label): 0.03 mg/kg PO 
every 8 hours as an initial dose to suppress uterine contractility 
in bitches with historical loss of otherwise normal pregnancies 
preterm. The dose should ideally be titrated to effect using toco -
dynamometry. Terbutaline should be discontinued 48 hours prior 
to the calculated delivery date so normal labor and delivery can 
occur. Exogenous progesterone can be added if myometrial con -
tractility cannot be controlled with tocolytics.24
Nonischemic priapism (extra-label): 1.25 – 5 mg/dog (NOT  
mg/kg) PO every 8 to 12 hours in combination with other con -
servative therapies (eg, lubrication, analgesia) may be beneficial.24
CATS:
Bronchodilator (extra-label):
a) Status asthmaticus: 0.01 mg/kg SC, IM, or slow IV . Can be 
considered for home management (SC or IM only) of acute 
asthma in cats that cannot or will not tolerate use of an albuter-
ol metered-dose inhaler (see Albuterol); positive response (ie, 
decrease of respiratory rate or effort by 50%) occurs in 15 to 30 
minutes.25,26
b) To minimize bronchospasm prior to tracheal wash or bron-
choalveolar lavage (BAL): 0.625 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO (al-
ternatively, 0.01 mg/kg IM or SC if the cat is intolerant of oral 
administration) twice daily administered 12 to 24 hours prior 
to the procedure, with the last dose given 2 to 4 hours before 
anesthesia induction.9 
Bradyarrhythmias (extra-label): 0.625 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO 
every 8 to 12 hours; improvement is usually partial and often tem-
porary.20
Hyperkalemia (extra-label): 0.01 mg/kg slow IV over 5 to 10 
minutes21,22 
Premature labor as a tocolytic  (extra-label): 0.03 mg/kg PO 
every 8 hours as an initial dose to suppress uterine contractility 
in queens with historical loss of otherwise normal pregnancies 
preterm. The dose should ideally be titrated to effect using toco -
dynamometry. Terbutaline should be discontinued 48 hours prior 
to the calculated delivery date so normal labor and delivery can 
occur. Exogenous progesterone can be added if myometrial con -
tractility cannot be controlled with tocolytics.,24
HORSES :
Quantitative intradermal terbutaline sweat test (QITST) to 
identify anhidrosis (extra-label): Prepare eight 0.1 mL intra -
dermal injections of serial 10-fold terbutaline dilutions (0 [con -
trol], 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100, and 1000 mg/L) using 0.9% so -

===== PDF_PAGE_1242 =====
Testosterone   1215
dium chloride; sequentially administer diluted solutions with a 
25-gauge needle at ≈5 cm intervals. Apply preweighed absorbent 
padding over each injection site. After 30 minutes, remove and re-
weigh padding. Anhidrotic horses do not sweat, even at the high-
est concentrations. See Laboratory Considerations.10
BIRDS:
Adjunctive treatment of respiratory distress (extra-label): Ter-
butaline 0.01 mg/kg IM every 6 to 8 hours in combination with 
butorphanol 1 – 2 mg/kg IM every 2 to 3 hours are usually given to 
birds in respiratory distress before placing them in an oxygen-en-
riched incubator. Treatment can be continued via nebulizer.27 
REPTILES :
Bronchodilator (extra-label): 0.01 – 0.02 mg/kg IM28
Monitoring
 ■ Improvement in clinical signs (eg, cough, respiratory rate and ef-
fort); thoracic auscultation
 ■ Cardiac rate and rhythm (if indicated)
 ■ Serum potassium, early in therapy if animal is susceptible to hy -
pokalemia (eg, diuretic therapy)
 ■ Adverse effects, including signs of CNS excitation
Client Information
 ■ This medication can increase heart rate and cause excitement.
 ■ Terbutaline can delay labor in pregnant animals.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian if your animal’s condition deteriorates 
or it becomes acutely ill.
 ■ Overdoses can be serious. Keep this medication out of reach of 
children and animals. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Terbutaline sulfate, a synthetic sympathomimetic amine, occurs as 
a slightly bitter-tasting, white to gray-white crystalline powder that 
may have a faint odor of acetic acid. One gram is soluble in 1.5 mL of 
water or 250 mL of alcohol. The commercially available injection has 
its pH adjusted to 3 to 5 with hydrochloric acid.
Terbutaline may also be known as KWD-2019, terbutaline sul -
phate, or terbutalini sulfas; there are many trade names, including 
Brethine®.
Storage/Stability
Terbutaline should be stored in tight containers at room temperature 
of 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F) and protected from light. Discolored 
solutions should not be used. Unused portions of terbutaline injec -
tion should be discarded.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Terbutaline injection is physically compatible with sodium chlo-
ride solutions, 5% dextrose, aminophylline, doxapram, and regular 
insulin. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Terbutaline Tablets: 2.5 mg and 5 mg; generic; (Rx)
Terbutaline Injection: 1 mg/mL in 1 mL single-dose vials; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Testosterone
(tess-toss-ter-ohn)
Androgenic Hormone
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Principal endogenous androgen used primarily for the 
treatment of testosterone-responsive urinary incontinence in 
neutered male dogs and cats; in bovine medicine, it is used to 
produce an estrus-detector animal.
 ▶ Contraindications include known hypersensitivity to the drug, 
pregnancy, and prostate carcinoma.
 ▶ Use with caution in animals with renal, cardiac, or hepatic 
dysfunction.
 ▶ Adverse effects are uncommon in males; however, perianal 
adenomas, perineal hernias, prostatic disorders, and behavior 
changes possible. Masculinization and aggression may occur 
in females.
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies testosterone as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling.
 ▶ DEA Schedule III (C-III) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
The use of injectable esters of testosterone in veterinary medicine is 
primarily limited to its use in dogs (and perhaps cats) for the treat -
ment of testosterone-responsive urinary incontinence in neutered 
males. Testosterone has been used to treat a rare form of dermatitis 
(exhibited by bilateral alopecia) in neutered male dogs. Testoster -
one products are also used in bovine medicine to produce an estrus- 
detector (teaser) animal in cull cows, heifers, and steers.
The effectiveness of testosterone to increase libido and treat hy -
pogonadism, aspermia, and infertility in domestic animals has been 
disappointing and is generally not recommended. 
Theoretically, topically applied human transdermal products 
could be effective in animals, but no information was located on 
their efficacy or safety. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Testosterone, the principal endogenous androgenic steroid, is re -
sponsible for many secondary sex characteristics of the male, as well 
as the maturation and growth of the male reproductive organs and 
increasing libido.
Testosterone has anabolic activity with resultant increased protein 
anabolism and decreased protein catabolism. Testosterone causes ni-
trogen, sodium, potassium, and phosphorus retention and decreas -
es the urinary excretion of calcium. Nitrogen balance is improved 
only when an adequate intake of both calories and protein occurs. 
By stimulating erythropoietic stimulating factors, testosterone can 
stimulate the production of red blood cells. Large doses of exoge -
nous testosterone can inhibit spermatogenesis through a negative 
feedback mechanism, inhibiting luteinizing hormone (LH).
Testosterone may help maintain the normal urethral muscle tone 
and integrity of the urethral mucosa in male dogs. It may also be 
necessary to prevent some types of dermatoses.
Pharmacokinetics
Orally administered testosterone is rapidly metabolized by the GI 
mucosa and the liver (first-pass effect); very little reaches the system-
ic circulation. The esterified compounds, testosterone enanthate and 
cypionate, are less polar than testosterone and more slowly absorbed 
from lipid tissue after IM injection.1 The duration of action of these 
compounds may persist for 2 to 4 weeks after IM injection. Because 

===== PDF_PAGE_1243 =====
1216    Testosterone
testosterone absorption is dependent upon several factors (volume 
injected, perfusion), the duration of action may be variable.
Testosterone is highly bound to a specific testosterone-estradiol 
globulin (98% in humans).1 The quantity of this globulin determines 
the amount of drug that is in the free or bound form. The free form 
concentration determines the plasma half-life of the hormone.
Testosterone is metabolized in the liver and is, with its metab -
olites, excreted in the urine (≈90%) and feces (≈6%). 1 The plasma 
half-life of testosterone has been reported to be between 10 and 100 
minutes in humans. The plasma half-life of testosterone cypionate 
has been reported to be 8 days.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Testosterone therapy is contraindicated during pregnancy and in pa-
tients with known hypersensitivity to the drug; it should not be used 
in males with prostate carcinoma.1 It should be used with caution in 
patients with renal, cardiac, or hepatic dysfunction.
Testosterone depot formulations are formulated for deep IM in -
jection and should not be given by the IV route.1
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies androgens as hazardous drugs representing 
an occupational hazard to healthcare workers; personal protective 
equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the risk 
for exposure.2 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are reportedly uncommon when injectable testos -
terone products are used in male dogs to treat hormone-responsive 
incontinence; however, perianal adenomas, perineal hernias, pros -
tatic disorders, and behavior changes (aggression) are all possible. In 
bitches, testosterone can cause clitoral hypertrophy, masculinization, 
and aggression. In cats, behavioral changes have been reported. High 
doses or chronic use may result in priapism, oligospermia, or infer -
tility in intact males.
Polycythemia, hepatitis, hepatocellular carcinoma, and reduced 
clotting factors have been reported in humans receiving high doses 
of testosterone.1 Use in pediatric patients may result in early epiph -
yseal closure.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Testosterone use during pregnancy causes virilization of female fe -
tuses. In humans, testosterone is contraindicated during pregnancy.1 
It is not known whether androgens are excreted in the milk; consider 
using milk replacer if using testosterone in nursing patients. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
No specific information was located; refer to Adverse Effects for fur-
ther information.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving testosterone and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, fludrocortisone, 
prednis(ol)one ): Androgens may enhance the edema that can be 
associated with ACTH or adrenal steroid therapy. 
 ■ Cyclosporine : Increased risk for cyclosporine toxicity
 ■ Insulin; Oral Antidiabetic Agents : May decrease serum 
glucose levels
 ■ Propranolol : Testosterone cypionate may increase proprano-
lol clearance.
 ■ W arfarin : May increase anticoagulant effects
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Concentrations of protein-bound iodine (PBI) can be decreased 
in patients receiving testosterone therapy, but the clinical signif -
icance of this is probably not important. Androgen agents can 
decrease amounts of thyroxine-binding globulin and decrease 
total T4 concentrations and increase resin uptake of T3 and T 4. 
Free thyroid hormones are unaltered, and clinically, there is no 
evidence of dysfunction.
 ■ Both creatinine and creatine excretion can be decreased by tes -
tosterone.
 ■ Testosterone can increase the urinary excretion of 17-ketosteroids.
 ■ Androgenic/anabolic steroids may alter blood glucose levels.
 ■ Androgenic/anabolic steroids may suppress clotting factors II, V , 
VII, and X.
Dosages
NOTE: Older references may list dosages using testosterone 
propionate (a shorter-acting injectable form), but commercially 
available products are no longer available in the United States.
DOGS:
Testosterone-responsive urinary incontinence (may be used 
with phenylpropanolamine) in males (extra-label): Testosterone 
cypionate 2.2 mg/kg IM once every 30 to 45 days 3
Estrus control (extra-label): NOTE: Rarely recommended. 
Concerns have been expressed about adverse effects as well as 
the long-term suppression of estrous activity in bitches treated 
with testosterone. Research results disagree as to whether treat -
ment with testosterone interferes with the subsequent ability to 
induce estrus in bitches. 4 Testosterone enanthate (or cypionate)  
0.5 mg/kg IM once every 5 days.5
Reducing mammary gland enlargement seen in pseudopreg -
nancy (extra-label): NOTE: Rarely recommended. Testosterone 
enanthate (or cypionate) 0.5 – 1 mg/kg IM once5
CATTLE:
Producing an estrus-detector (teaser) animal (cull cows, heif -
ers, steers)  (extra-label): Testosterone enanthate 0.5 g IM and 
1.5 g SC (divided into 2 separate locations). After 4 days, attach 
the chin ball marker and put the animal in with the breeding herd. 
To maintain, give 0.5 – 0.75 g SC every 10 to 14 days 6
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ Consider baseline and periodic CBC, serum chemistry profile 
with electrolytes especially with long-term administration or with 
high doses.
Chemistry/Synonyms
The esterified compounds, testosterone cypionate and enanthate, are 
available commercially as injectable (in oil) products.
Testosterone cypionate occurs as an odorless to having a faint 
odor, creamy white or white crystalline powder. It is insoluble in wa-
ter, soluble in vegetable oils, and freely soluble in alcohol. Testoster-
one cypionate has a melting range of 98°C to 104°C (208°F-219°F). It 
may also be known as testosterone cyclopentyl propionate.
Testosterone enanthate occurs as an odorless to having a faint 
odor, creamy white or white crystalline powder. It is soluble in veg -

===== PDF_PAGE_1244 =====
Tetracycline   1217
etable oils and insoluble in water and melts between 34°C and 39°C 
(93°F-102°F).
Storage/Stability
Store the commercially available injectable preparations of testos -
terone cypionate, enanthate, and propionate at room temperature 
(20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]); avoid freezing or exposure to tempera -
tures greater than 40°C (104°F). If exposed to low temperatures, 
a precipitate may form but should redissolve with shaking and re -
warming. If a wet (aqueous) needle or syringe is used to draw up the 
parenteral solutions, cloudy solutions may result, but this will not 
affect the drug’s potency.
Testosterone is a DEA Schedule III (C-III) controlled substance. 
Store it in a substantially constructed and securely locked area. Fol -
low applicable local, state, and federal rules regarding the disposal of 
unused or wasted controlled drugs.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 4 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
No known testosterone products (with the exception of combina -
tions with estradiol as growth promotant implants) that are FDA-ap-
proved for use in veterinary species were located. Testosterone pro-
pionate (200 mg) is available in combination with estradiol benzoate 
(20 mg) as a growth promotant. Trade names include Component 
E-H®; (OTC) and Synovex-H®; (OTC). For use in heifers weighing at 
least 181 kg (400 lb).
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Testosterone Cypionate (in oil) Injection: 100 mg/mL and  
200 mg/mL in 1 mL and 10 mL vials; Depo-Testosterone® generic; 
(Rx, C-III)
Testosterone Enanthate (in oil) Injection: 50 mg, 75 mg, 100mg and 
200 mg in 0.5 mL prefilled syringes, and 200 mg/mL in 5 mL multi-
dose vials; generic; (Rx, C-III)
Testosterone Undecanoate solution for injection: 250 mg/ mL in  
3 mL single-dose vials; Aveed®; (Rx; C-III)
Testosterone Pellets Implant for subcutaneous implantation: 75 mg 
in 1 pellet/vials; Testopel®; (Rx, C-III)
There are also testosterone transdermal patches, topical solutions 
and gels, and oral capsules available.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Tetracycline
(tet-ra-sye-kleen) 
Tetracycline Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Prototype tetracycline antibiotic; many bacteria are now resis-
tant, but may still be useful to treat Mycoplasma spp, Rickettsia, 
spirochetes, and Chlamydia spp. Used with niacinamide to 
help control sterile inflammatory skin conditions in dogs
 ▶ Doxycycline or minocycline are usually preferred antimicrobial 
indications in small animals due to more favorable dosing 
frequency and adverse effect profile.
 ▶ Extreme caution: pregnancy 
 ▶ Caution: renal insufficiency
 ▶ Adverse effects: GI distress, staining of developing teeth and 
bones, photosensitivity; long-term use may cause uroliths. 
Cats: do not tolerate well. Horses: if stressed, diarrhea is pos-
sible (oral use). Ruminants: high oral doses can alter ruminal 
microbiota and cause ruminoreticular stasis
Uses/Indications
Although tetracycline is still used as an antimicrobial, its use has 
largely been supplanted by doxycycline or minocycline in dogs and 
cats, and oxytetracycline in most food animals. It is also used for 
non-antimicrobial effects in combination with niacinamide, which 
may be useful in controlling a variety of sterile inflammatory skin 
conditions in dogs including: discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE), 
sterile granulomatous/pyogranulomatous syndrome, sterile nodular 
panniculitis, cutaneous reactive histiocytosis, cutaneous vesicular 
lupus erythematosus, pemphigus erythematosus, pemphigus foli -
aceus, lupoid onychodystrophy/onychitis, German shepherd dog 
metatarsal fistulae, vasculitis, arteritis of the nasal philtrum, seba -
ceous adenitis, and dermatomyositis. 1 Controlled studies demon -
strating clear efficacy are lacking, but anecdotally this combination 
appears effective in some patients, including up to ⅔ of dogs that are 
treated for DLE. Often used in conjunction with other immunomod-
ulating drugs, especially in the initial treatment phase. Niacinamide/
tetracycline may take 1 to 2 months before efficacy is noted. 
Tetracycline soluble powder is labeled for treatment and control 
of bacterial enteritis and bacterial pneumonia in swine and calves; 
chronic respiratory disease, air sac disease, and infectious synovi -
tis in chickens; and infectious synovitis and enteritis in turkeys that 
are caused by susceptible bacteria. 2 Tetracycline has also been used 
topically in an extra-label manner to treat digital dermatitis in cows.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated tetracy -
cline as a Highly Important antimicrobial for human medicine.3 The 
Office International des Epizooties (OIE) Antimicrobial Classifica -
tion has designated tetracycline as a Veterinary Critically Important 
antimicrobial.4 
Pharmacology/Actions
Tetracyclines generally act as time-dependent antibiotics and inhib-
it protein synthesis by reversibly binding to 30S ribosomal subunits 
of susceptible organisms, thereby preventing binding to those ribo -
somes of aminoacyl transfer-RNA. Tetracyclines are bacteriostatic 
antibiotics at usual doses and may be bactericidal at higher doses or 
against susceptible bacteria. Tetracyclines are believed to reversibly 
bind to 50S ribosomes and additionally alter cytoplasmic membrane 
permeability in susceptible organisms. At high concentrations, tetra-
cyclines can inhibit protein synthesis by mammalian cells.
As a class, the tetracyclines have activity against most Mycoplas-
ma spp, spirochetes (including Borrelia burgdorferi), Chlamydia spp, 
and rickettsia. Against gram-positive bacteria, the tetracyclines have 
activity against some strains of Staphylococcus spp and Streptococcus 

===== PDF_PAGE_1245 =====
1218    Tetracycline
spp, but resistance of these organisms is increasing. Gram-positive 
bacteria that are usually susceptible to tetracyclines include Bacillus 
anthracis, Clostridium perfringens and C tetani, Listeria monocyto-
genes, and Nocardia spp. Gram-negative bacteria against which tet -
racyclines usually have in vitro and in vivo activity include Bordetella 
spp, Brucella spp, Bartonella spp, Haemophilus spp, Pasteurella mul-
tocida, Shigella spp, and Yersinia pestis. Many or most strains of Esch-
erichia coli, Klebsiella spp, Bacteroides spp, Enterobacter spp, Proteus 
spp, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa are resistant to the tetracyclines. 
Hemoglobin at the site of the infection can reduce the antimicrobial 
activity of tetracycline.
Oxytetracycline and tetracycline share nearly identical spectrums 
of activity and patterns of cross-resistance and a tetracycline sus -
ceptibility disk is usually used for in vitro testing for oxytetracycline 
susceptibility.
Tetracyclines have anti-inflammatory and immunomodulating 
effects. They can suppress antibody production and chemotaxis of 
neutrophils; inhibit lipases, collagenases, prostaglandin synthesis; 
and inhibit activation of complement component 3. The clinical rel-
evance of these is largely unknown.
Tetracycline susceptibility cannot be predicted by susceptibility 
to doxycycline or minocycline. If doxycycline or minocycline re -
sistance is present, tetracycline resistance is also present. However, 
doxycycline or minocycline susceptibility can be present in some 
tetracycline-resistant bacteria.
Pharmacokinetics
Both oxytetracycline and tetracycline are readily absorbed after oral 
administration to fasting animals. Bioavailabilities are ≈60% to 80%. 
The presence of food or dairy products can significantly reduce the 
amount of tetracycline absorbed, with reductions of 50% or more 
possible. After IM administration, tetracycline is erratically and 
poorly absorbed with serum concentrations usually lower than those 
attainable with oral therapy.
Tetracyclines, as a class, are widely distributed to the heart, kid -
neys, lungs, muscles, pleural fluid, bronchial secretions, sputum, 
bile, saliva, urine, synovial fluid, ascitic fluid, and aqueous and vitre-
ous humor. Only small quantities of tetracycline and oxytetracycline 
are distributed to the CSF , and therapeutic concentrations may not 
be achievable. Although all tetracyclines distribute to the prostate 
and eye, doxycycline or minocycline penetrate better into these and 
most other tissues. Tetracyclines cross the placenta, enter fetal cir -
culation, and are distributed into milk. The volume of distribution 
of tetracycline is ≈1.2 to 1.3 L/kg in small animals. The amount of 
plasma protein binding is ≈20% to 67% for tetracycline. In cattle, the 
volume of distribution for oxytetracycline is between 1 and 2.5 L/kg. 
Milk to plasma ratios for oxytetracycline and tetracycline are 0.75 
and 1.2 to 1.9, respectively.
Both oxytetracycline and tetracycline are eliminated unchanged 
primarily via glomerular filtration and in the feces. Patients with 
impaired renal function can have prolonged elimination half-lives 
and accumulate the drug with repeated dosing. These drugs are not 
metabolized but are excreted unchanged into the urine as well as into 
the GI tract via both biliary and nonbiliary routes. The elimination 
half-life of tetracycline is ≈5 to 6 hours in dogs and cats.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tetracycline is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it or oth-
er tetracyclines. 
Use with caution in patients with renal insufficiency, as tetra -
cycline can accumulate and lead to liver toxicity. 5 Dose reduction 
is recommended. In humans, tetracycline can cause an increase in 
BUN. In patients with impaired renal function, this can lead to azo-
temia, hyperphosphatemia, and acidosis. Avoid concurrent admin -
istration with other nephrotoxic drugs. Monitoring of serum tetra -
cycline concentrations should be considered if long-term therapy is 
required.
In humans, tetracyclines can cause increased photosensitivity that 
presents as severe sunburns. 5 Limit sun exposure for patients with 
thin or light-colored coats while taking tetracycline.
Adverse Effects
Oxytetracycline and tetracycline given to young animals can cause 
discoloration (yellow, brown, or gray color) of teeth. High doses or 
chronic administration may delay bone growth and healing.
In small animal species, tetracyclines can cause nausea, vomiting, 
anorexia, and diarrhea. Esophageal injuries (esophagitis, ulceration) 
have occurred with administration of capsule and tablet forms of 
tetracyclines; a water bolus after administering solid dosage forms 
is recommended.
Cats do not tolerate oral tetracycline well and may present with 
clinical signs of colic, fever, hair loss, and depression. There are re -
ports that long-term tetracycline use may cause urolith formation in 
dogs. Tetracyclines have caused thyroid hyperpigmentation and in-
duced thyroid hyperplasia in many small animal species. Horses that 
are stressed by surgery, anesthesia, or trauma, may develop severe 
diarrhea after receiving tetracyclines (especially with oral adminis -
tration).
In ruminants, high oral doses can alter ruminal microbiota de -
pression and cause ruminoreticular stasis. Rapid IV injection of 
undiluted propylene glycol-based products can cause intravascular 
hemolysis with resultant hemoglobinuria. Propylene glycol-based 
products have also caused cardiodepressant effects when adminis -
tered to calves. When administered IM, local reactions, yellow stain-
ing, and necrosis may be seen at the injection site.
Tetracycline therapy (especially long-term) may result in over -
growth of non-susceptible bacteria or fungi (superinfections).
Tetracyclines have also been associated with photosensitivity re -
actions and, rarely, hepatotoxicity, formation of anti-nuclear anti -
bodies, or blood dyscrasias. Risk for hepatotoxicity may be increased 
with pre-existing renal or hepatic impairment.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Animal studies indicate that tetracyclines cross the placenta, are 
found in fetal tissues, and can have toxic effects on the developing 
fetus. Because tetracyclines can delay fetal skeletal development and 
discolor deciduous teeth, they should only be used in the last half 
of pregnancy when the benefits outweigh the fetal risks. Oxytetra -
cycline and tetracycline are considered more likely to cause these 
abnormalities than either doxycycline or minocycline. Evidence of 
embryotoxicity has also been noted in animals when given tetracy -
cline during early pregnancy.5
Tetracycline had no effect on fertility when administered in the 
diet to male and female rats at a daily intake of 25 times the hu -
man dose. Tetracyclines are excreted in milk but because much of 
the drug will be bound to calcium in milk, it is unlikely to be of 
significant risk to nursing animals. Short-term use of tetracycline is 
considered compatible with breastfeeding.6
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Tetracyclines are generally well tolerated after acute overdoses. Dogs 
given more than 400 mg/kg/day orally or 100 mg/kg/day IM of oxy-
tetracycline did not demonstrate any toxicity. Oral overdoses would 
most likely be associated with GI disturbances (vomiting, anorexia, 
and/or diarrhea). Should the patient develop severe emesis or di -
arrhea, fluids and electrolytes should be monitored and replaced if 
necessary. Chronic overdoses may lead to drug accumulation and 
nephrotoxicity.
Rapid IV injection of tetracyclines has induced transient collapse 
and cardiac arrhythmias in several species, presumably due to che -
lation with intravascular calcium ions. Overdose quantities of drug 

===== PDF_PAGE_1246 =====
Tetracycline   1219
could exacerbate this effect if given too rapidly IV . If the drug must 
be given rapidly IV (in less than 5 minutes), some clinicians rec -
ommend pretreating the animal with IV calcium gluconate. Rapid 
IV injection of undiluted propylene glycol-based products can cause 
intravascular hemolysis with resultant hemoglobinuria.
High oral doses given to ruminants can alter ruminal microbiota 
and cause ruminoreticular stasis.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving tetracyclines and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Atovaquone : Tetracyclines have caused decreased atovaquone 
concentrations.
 ■ Beta-Lactam or Aminoglycoside Antibiotics : Bacterio -
static drugs, like the tetracyclines, have been historically thought 
to interfere with bactericidal activity of the penicillins, cephalo -
sporins, and aminoglycosides but the clinical significance of this 
interaction is unknown.
 ■ Digoxin : Tetracyclines have increased the bioavailability of di -
goxin in a small percentage of human patients and caused digoxin 
toxicity. These effects may persist for months after discontinua -
tion of the tetracycline.
 ■ Div alent or Triv alent Cations  (eg, oral antacids, saline 
cathartics or other GI products containing aluminum, calcium, 
iron, magnesium, zinc, or bismuth cations): When orally admin-
istered, tetracyclines can chelate divalent or trivalent cations that 
can decrease the absorption of the tetracycline or the other drug 
if it contains these cations; it is recommended that all oral tetracy-
clines be given at least 1 to 2 hours before or after the cation-con-
taining products.
 ■ Methoxyflurane : Fatal nephrotoxicity has occurred in hu -
mans when used with tetracycline.
 ■ Neuromuscular Blocking Agents : Tetracyclines may po -
tentiate neuromuscular blockade.
 ■ Sucralfate : Sucralfate may impair the oral absorption of tetra-
cycline; separate dosing by at least 2 hours to minimize this effect.
 ■ W arfarin : Tetracyclines may depress plasma prothrombin ac -
tivity and patients on anticoagulant therapy may need dosage ad-
justment.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Tetracyclines (not minocycline) may cause falsely elevated values 
of urine catecholamines when using fluorometric methods of de-
termination.
 ■ Tetracyclines can reportedly cause false positive urine glucose re-
sults if using the cupric sulfate method of determination (Bene -
dict’s reagent, Clinitest®), but this may be the result of ascorbic acid 
that is found in some parenteral formulations of tetracyclines. 
Tetracyclines have also reportedly caused false negative results in 
determining urine glucose when using the glucose oxidase meth-
od (Clinistix®, Tes-Tape®).
Dosages
DOGS:
Adjunctive treatment of sterile inflammatory or autoimmune 
diseases (extra-label): Tetracycline is typically used in combina -
tion with niacinamide. Recommended dosages are empirical and 
vary.
• Dogs 10 kg (22 lb) or less: tetracycline 250 mg/dog (NOT  
mg/kg) PO 3 times daily in combination with niacinamide  
250 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO 3 times daily7
• Dogs more than 10 kg (22 lb): tetracycline 500 mg/dog (NOT 
mg/kg) PO 3 times daily in combination with niacinamide  
500 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO 3 times daily7
NOTES:
1. If efficacious, may reduce niacinamide dose to twice-daily ad-
ministration and then taper further over time when possible.
2. Tetracycline may be replaced with doxycycline 5 – 10 mg/kg 
PO every 12 hours OR minocycline 5 – 10 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours.8
3. Some clinicians have used 15 kg (33.1 lb) as the weight cut -
off (ie, dogs 15 kg [33.1 lb] or less receive 250 mg/dog [NOT  
mg/kg]; dogs more than 15 kg [33.1 lb] receive 500 mg/dog 
[NOT mg/kg]).9 Other clinicians have suggested niacinamide 
45 mg/kg PO every 8 hours in combination with tetracycline 
45 mg/kg PO every 8 hours.10
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 22 mg/kg PO every 8 hours 
for 14 to 28 days 
CATS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 15 – 22 mg/kg PO every 8 
hours for 14 to 28 days
FERRETS :
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 25 mg/kg PO 2 to 3 times 
daily11
RABBITS, RODENTS, SMALL MAMMALS :
a) Rabbits: 50 – 100 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours12
b) Chinchillas: 50 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours13
c) Chinchillas, Guinea Pigs, Rats: 20 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. 
Mice: 20 mg/kg PO every 12 hours or 50 – 60 mg/L of drinking 
water, Hamsters: 30 mg/kg PO every 6 hours or 400 mg/L of 
drinking water. Gerbils: 20 mg/kg PO or IM once a day.14
CATTLE:
Susceptible infections in calves  (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
22 mg/kg/day PO in drinking water for up to 5 days. 15 Prepare 
fresh solution once or twice daily.
Digital dermatitis in cow (extra-label): 2 – 25 g applied topical -
ly to affected foot as a paste or powder, with or without bandag -
ing16,17 
SHEEP:
Susceptible infections  (extra-label): using previously available 
FDA-approved product, 11 mg/kg PO twice daily for up to 5 days18 
SWINE:
Susceptible infections (label dosage; FDA-approved): 22 mg/kg/
day PO in drinking water for 3 to 5 days.15 Prepare fresh solution 
once or twice daily.
POUL TRY:
Susceptible infections  (label dosage; FDA-approved): 200 to  
800 mg/gallon drinking water for 7 to 14 days15
BIRDS:
Chlamydiosis; mild respiratory disease (especially flock treat -
ment) (extra-label): 
a) Using tetracycline soluble powder containing 324 g tetracy -
cline/pound, mix ¼ teaspoon of soluble powder per gallon of 
drinking water. Used as an adjunct for psittacosis with other 

===== PDF_PAGE_1247 =====
1220    Theophylline
tetracycline forms. Will not reach therapeutic concentrations 
by itself. Prepare fresh solution twice daily, as potency is rapid-
ly lost.19
b) Using tetracycline soluble powder containing 324 g tetracy -
cline/pound, mix ¼ teaspoon of soluble powder per gallon of 
drinking water and administer for 5 to 10 days. Prepare fresh 
solution 2 to 3 times daily, as potency is rapidly lost. For con -
verting regimen to pelleted feeds, administer oral suspension 
by gavage at 200 – 250 mg/kg once or twice daily until feeds are 
accepted; this is not an adequate therapy for long-term treat -
ment of chlamydiosis (psittacosis).20
Monitoring
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Long-term use or in susceptible patients: periodic renal, hepatic, 
thyroid, and hematologic evaluations
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is best given without food. Avoid giving this med-
icine orally within 1 to 2 hours of milk or other dairy products.
 ■ If gastrointestinal upset occurs, giving with a small amount of 
food may help, but this may also reduce the amount of drug ab -
sorbed.
Chemistry/Synonyms
An antibiotic obtained from Streptomyces aureofaciens or derived 
semisynthetically from oxytetracycline, tetracycline HCl occurs as a 
moderately hygroscopic, yellow, crystalline powder. Approximately 
100 mg/mL is soluble in water and 10 mg/mL soluble in alcohol. 
Tetracycline base has a solubility of ≈0.4 mg per mL of water and 
20 mg per mL of alcohol. Commercially available tetracycline HCl 
for IM injection also contains magnesium chloride, procaine HCl, 
and ascorbic acid.
Tetracycline may also be known as tetracyclini hydrochloridum; 
many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise instructed by the manufacturer, tetracycline oral 
tablets and capsules should be stored in tight, light-resistant contain-
ers at room temperature (15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]). 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tetracycline HCl Soluble Powder (as a water additive): 324 g/lb in 
5 lb containers; FDA-approved for use in swine, cattle, and poultry. 
(OTC at time of writing). Not to be used in pre-ruminating calves 
or calves to be processed for veal. Not for use in turkeys or chickens 
producing eggs for human consumption. Withdrawal times: swine, 
4 days; calves, 5 days; chicken, 4 days. For topical applications, a 
milk withdrawal time of 24 hours is recommended21; however, it has 
been suggested that a more conservative 36-hour withdrawal may 
be needed.22
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tetracycline HCl Capsules: 250 mg and 500 mg; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Theophylline
(thee-off-i-lin)
Phosphodiesterase Inhibitor Bronchodilator
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Bronchodilator with mild diuretic activity used as adjunctive 
therapy in dogs with cough and in cats with asthma.
 ▶ Narrow therapeutic index in humans, but dogs appear to be 
less susceptible to toxic effects at higher plasma concentra-
tions
 ▶ Doses should be calculated using lean body weight in obese 
animals.
 ▶ Many drug interactions are possible; fluoroquinolones (eg, 
enrofloxacin) can increase theophylline concentrations sub-
stantially.
 ▶ Availability can be an issue; check with a reputable com-
pounding pharmacy for availability.
Uses/Indications
Theophyllines (ie, aminophylline, theophylline) are used primarily 
for their bronchodilatory effects, especially in dogs with cough and 
cats with asthma. Theophylline may also be considered when man -
aging sick sinus syndrome and other bradycardias.1 In coughing dogs 
with heart disease and evidence of concurrent tracheal instability or 
chronic small airway disease, clinical improvement may be seen with 
a bronchodilator such as theophylline. Theophylline has also been 
used as a bronchodilator in horses; however, some do not recom -
mend its use in this species due to its narrow therapeutic index.2
Pharmacology/Actions
Theophylline competitively inhibits phosphodiesterase (PDE) III (and 
PDE IV to a lesser extent), thereby increasing amounts of cyclic AMP 
(cAMP) that then increase the release of endogenous epinephrine. The 
elevated concentrations of cAMP may also inhibit the release of hista-
mine and slow reacting substance of anaphylaxis (SRS-A). The myo-
cardial and neuromuscular transmission effects of theophylline may 
be a result of translocating intracellular ionized calcium. Adenosine 
antagonism may contribute to CNS stimulant effects.
Theophylline directly relaxes smooth muscles in the bronchi and 
pulmonary vasculature; smooth muscle relaxant effects also occur 
in the uterus, biliary, and GI tracts. In addition, theophylline may 
induce diuresis, vasodilate arterioles and veins, increase gastric acid 
secretion and corticosteroid activity, improve mucociliary clearance, 
and inhibit mast cell release. Theophylline has weak chronotropic 
and inotropic action, improves diaphragm contractility, stimulates 
the CNS, and can cause respiratory stimulation (centrally mediated). 
Theophylline also has anti-inflammatory effects, including dimin -
ished activity of inflammatory and immune cells, especially eosino -
phils, within the airways.3,4 
Pharmacokinetics
Oral absorption of theophylline from commercial extended-release 
formulations is variable. 5 Bioavailability of compounded modi -
fied-release theophylline products was ≈96% in dogs, and peak 
concentrations were reached 7.1 to 8.9 hours after administration.6,7 
Theophylline is distributed throughout extracellular fluids and body 
tissues. In dogs, only ≈10% is bound to plasma proteins at thera -
peutic serum concentrations. 8 The volume of distribution of the -
ophylline in dogs has been reported to be 0.5 to 0.8 L/kg. 9 After IV 
administration of aminophylline (=7.88 mg/kg theophylline) to grey-
hounds, mean theophylline volume of distribution (steady-state) was  
0.72 L/kg, mean clearance was 0.935 mL/minute/kg, and elimination 
half-life was ≈9 hours.10 Clearance was 1.2 mL/minute/kg in puppies 
1 week of age, and increased with age to peak at 7.1 mL/minute/kg in 

===== PDF_PAGE_1248 =====
Theophylline   1221
puppies 16 weeks of age.11 It has been shown that herbal medicines, 
such as fenugreek and garden cress, can alter theophylline pharma -
cokinetics in beagles. 12 Elimination half-life was 8.7 to 10.5 hours 
following administration of compounded modified-release theoph -
ylline products.6,7 
In cats, bioavailability was 96% (with aminophylline)13 and ≈80% 
with extended-release formulations.14 The volume of distribution in 
cats was reported to be 0.46 L/kg, and protein binding was 12%. 13 
Elimination half-life was ≈8 hours13 but was prolonged to ≈20 hours 
when the drug was administered in the evening (8 to 9 pm).15 Trans-
dermal administration of theophylline (15 mg/kg/day in either PLO 
or Lipoderm®) produced a therapeutic theophylline concentration in 
2 of 7 cats in each formulation, and only 7 of the 56 total measure -
ments were within the therapeutic range.16 
In horses, oral bioavailability of immediate-release and extend -
ed-release formulations were 87% and 97%, respectively. 17 Protein 
binding was ≈13% to 23% 18; volume of distribution was 0.85 to  
1.6 L/kg17–19; and elimination half-life was 12 to 17 hours. 18,19 Phar-
macokinetic values in donkeys were found to be similar to those of 
horses.20
In ruminating calves, oral bioavailability was 93%, volume of dis-
tribution was 0.8 L/kg, and elimination half-life was 6.4 hours. 21 In 
adult camels, protein binding was ≈33%, volume of distribution was 
≈0.8 L/kg, and elimination half-life was ≈11 hours. 22 Oral bioavail-
ability in goats and camels was 90%. 23 In goats, volume of distribu -
tion was 1.4 L/kg and elimination half-life was ≈2 hours.23
Because of the low volume of distribution and theophylline’s low 
lipid solubility, obese patients should be dosed on a lean body weight 
basis. Theophylline is metabolized primarily in the liver (in humans) 
to 3-methylxanthine, which has weak bronchodilator activity. Renal 
clearance contributes only ≈10% to the overall plasma clearance of 
theophylline. In humans, there are wide interpatient variations in 
serum half-lives and resultant serum concentrations. It could be ex-
pected that similar variability exists in veterinary patients, particu -
larly those with concurrent illnesses. Note that the pharmacokinetics 
of long-acting theophylline products vary with the modified (ie, ex-
tended) release mechanism, and duration of effect may vary between 
8 to 24 hours in humans.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Theophylline is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive 
to xanthines (eg, aminophylline, theobromine, caffeine). Use in dogs 
with a history of epileptiform seizures is contraindicated.24
Theophylline should be administered with caution in patients 
with severe cardiac disease, gastric ulcers, hyperthyroidism, renal or 
hepatic disease, severe hypoxia, or hypertension. Theophylline clear-
ance is decreased by ≈50% in patients with hepatic disease or CHF , 
and a 50% reduction in dosage has been suggested for patients in 
hepatic failure.25 Clearance is reduced to a lesser extent by hypothy-
roidism, fever, and sepsis. Because it may cause or worsen pre-ex -
isting arrhythmias, caution and enhanced monitoring are advised 
in patients with cardiac tachyarrhythmias that receive theophylline. 
Neonatal and geriatric patients may have decreased clearances of 
theophylline and be more sensitive to its toxic effects.
In humans, exposure to secondhand smoke may increase theoph-
ylline clearance; whether the same occurs in animals is unknown.
Adverse Effects
Theophylline can produce CNS stimulation and GI irritation af -
ter administration by any route. Most adverse effects are related to 
the serum concentration of the drug and may be indicative of toxic 
blood concentrations; dogs appear to tolerate concentrations that 
may be toxic to humans. 
Dogs and cats can exhibit clinical signs of nausea and vomiting, 
insomnia, increased gastric acid secretion, diarrhea, polyphagia, 
polydipsia, polyuria, dyspnea, tremors, agitation, nervousness, rest-
lessness, and increased activity. In dogs, tachycardia was noted at a 
dose of 40 mg/kg twice daily with corresponding plasma theophyl -
line concentration greater than 30 μg/mL.26 
Adverse effects in horses are generally dose related and may in -
clude nervousness, excitability (with auditory, tactile, or visual stim-
ulation), tremors, diaphoresis, tachycardia, and ataxia.27 
Administration of theophylline with high-fat foods (eg, cheese, 
peanut butter) may increase the rate of absorption of some extend -
ed-release products, increasing the risk for adverse effects and toxic 
concentrations.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Theophylline has been shown to reduce uterine contractions. The -
ophylline crosses the placenta and is distributed into milk (70% of 
serum concentrations). In humans, theophylline is considered com-
patible with nursing. 28 Because safety has not been established in 
animals, this drug should only be used when the maternal benefits 
outweigh the potential risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In humans, clinical signs of toxicity (see Adverse Effects) are usually 
associated with serum drug concentrations greater than 20 μg/mL  
and become more severe as the serum concentration exceeds that 
value. Tachycardia, arrhythmia, and CNS effects (eg, seizures, hy -
perthermia) are considered the most life-threatening aspects of 
toxicity. Hypokalemia and acid-base disturbances may also occur. 
Dogs and cats appear to tolerate serum concentrations greater than  
20 μg/mL. Common clinical signs associated with overdose may in -
clude  tachycardia.
Treatment of theophylline toxicity is supportive. GI decontamina-
tion with activated charcoal, which blocks theophylline absorption, 
can be considered and is more effective in reducing theophylline 
exposure than inducing emesis. Patients with seizures should have 
an adequate airway maintained and be treated with an IV benzo -
diazepine (eg, diazepam, midazolam) as indicated. Patients should 
be continuously monitored for cardiac arrhythmias and tachycardia. 
Hydration status and electrolytes should be monitored and correct-
ed as necessary. Hyperthermia may be treated with phenothiazines29 
and tachycardia treated with propranolol if either condition is con -
sidered life-threatening. Theophylline is removed by hemodialysis, 
which may be an option in cases in which activated charcoal cannot 
be administered.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving aminophylline or the -
ophylline and may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless 
otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but 
weigh the potential risks and perform additional monitoring when 
appropriate.
 ■ Ketamine : Theophylline with ketamine can cause an increased 
incidence of seizures and cardiac arrhythmias.
 ■ Sympathomimetics (eg, beta agonists [eg, albuterol], ephed-
rine, isoproterenol, phenylpropanolamine ): Toxic synergism 
(eg, CNS stimulation, arrhythmias) can occur if theophylline is 
used concurrently with sympathomimetics (especially ephedrine) 
or possibly isoproterenol. Concurrent use with beta-sympathomi-
metics is contraindicated.24 

===== PDF_PAGE_1249 =====
1222    Theophylline
The following drugs can decrease theophylline concentrations:
 ■ Albendazole
 ■ Barbiturates  (eg, phenobarbital): Can induce CYP enzymes 
and increase theophylline metabolism in dogs (not cats)
 ■ Beta-2-Adrenergic Receptor Agonists (eg, albuterol)
 ■ Charcoal
 ■ Herbal Agents (eg, fenugreek, garden cress)12
 ■ Isoniazid : May increase or decrease concentrations
 ■ Isoproterenol
 ■ Ketoconazole
 ■ Loop Diuretics  (eg, furosemide): May increase or decrease 
concentrations
 ■ Phenobarbital
 ■ Phosphate Binders ( eg, aluminum hydroxide, calcium car -
bonate): Can form an insoluble complex in the GI tract and in -
hibit drug absorption; separate administration by 2 hours 
 ■ Rifampin
 ■ Sucralfate : Can form insoluble complex in the GI tract and 
inhibit drug absorption; separate administration by 2 hours
The following drugs can increase theophylline concentrations:
 ■ Allopurinol
 ■ Beta-Adrenergic Receptor Antagonists, Nonselective  
(eg, propranolol): May also antagonize effects of theophylline 
 ■ Calcium Channel Blockers (eg, diltiazem, verapamil)
 ■ Chloramphenicol : Consider reducing the dose of theophyl -
line by 30% to 50% or extending the dosing interval
 ■ Cimetidine
 ■ Corticosteroids ( eg, dexamethasone, prednis[ol]one)
 ■ Estrogen
 ■ Fluconazole
 ■ Fluoroquinolones  (eg, ciprofloxacin, enrofloxacin, marbo-
floxacin): Enrofloxacin reduced theophylline clearance by ≈50% 
in healthy beagles. 30 A similar effect was noted with oflaxacin. 31 
Consider reducing the dose of theophylline by 30% to 50% or 
extending the administration interval. Monitor for toxicity and 
efficacy. Marbofloxacin reduces clearance of theophylline in dogs 
but not with clinical significance; however, in animals with renal 
impairment, marbofloxacin may interfere with theophylline me -
tabolism in a clinically relevant manner.32
 ■ Interferon Alfa
 ■ Macrolides  (eg, clarithromycin, erythromycin)
 ■ Methotrexate
 ■ Mexiletine
 ■ Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs; eg, 
 fluoxetine)
 ■ Thiabendazole
 ■ Thyroid Hormones  (in hypothyroid patients)
Theophylline may decrease the effects of the following drugs:
 ■ Benzodiazepines ( eg, diazepam, midazolam)
 ■ Macrolides ( eg, azithromycin, erythromycin)
 ■ Pancuronium
 ■ Propofol 33
Laboratory Considerations
Theophylline can cause falsely elevated values of serum uric acid  
if measured by the Bittner or colorimetric methods. Values are not 
affected if using the uricase method.
Immunoassays are specific for theophylline. If using a spectro -
photometric method of assay, theophylline serum concentrations 
can be falsely elevated by furosemide, phenylbutazone, probene-
cid, theobromine, caffeine, sulfathiazole, chocolate, or acetamin-
ophen. Cefazolin may interfere with HPLC assays. The Schack and 
Wexler method of determining theophylline concentrations may be 
interfered with by large doses of thiamine.
Dosages
NOTES: 
1. Theophyllines have a relatively low therapeutic index. Deter -
mine doses carefully; doses should be calculated using lean 
body weight in obese animals.
2. Extended-release oral dosage forms are generally used, but 
bioavailability of currently marketed human products can be 
variable in veterinary species; attentive monitoring for adverse 
effects and efficacy is recommended. Contact a pharmacist for 
the current availability of products. See Compatibility/Com-
pounding.
3. Dosage conversions between aminophylline and theophylline 
can be performed using the information found in Chemistry/
Synonyms. 
DOGS:
Bronchodilator for small airway collapse/disease (extra-label): 
a) Extended-release tablets: 10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours initially 
is recommended; titrate dosage to balance efficacy and tolera-
bility. Dosages of 5 – 20 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours can be 
used. Availability of commercial extended-release tablets may 
be problematic. Compounded modified-release theophylline 
products showed pharmacokinetic properties similar to previ-
ously available extended-release theophylline tablets.6,34
b) Immediate-release tablets: 9 mg/kg PO every 8 hours has been 
recommended.35
Bradyarrhythmias (eg, sick sinus syndrome, AV block)  (ex -
tra-label): Using extended-release tablets, 10 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours for sick sinus syndrome, as medical management may im -
prove the clinical situation by reducing the impact of bradycardia 
episodes.36 In one study, 54% of dogs with sinus node dysfunction 
had their clinical signs controlled with pharmacologic treatment; 
however, definitive treatment with recurrent episodes requires 
the placement of a pacemaker. In one case report in a German 
shepherd dog with syncope secondary to transient atrioventric -
ular block with dilated cardiomyopathy and atrial fibrillation, an 
initial dose of 20 mg/kg once daily was used, but the dose was 
decreased to 10 mg/kg/day due to adverse GI effects; no syncope 
occurred after the dose reduction, and GI effects improved.37
CATS:
Bronchodilator (extra-label): 
a) Extended-release tablets: 15 – 25 mg/kg (practically one  
100 mg extended-release tablet/capsule) PO once daily in the 
evening has been suggested.14 Some cats may only require dos-
ing every other day. 
b) Immediate-release tablets: 4.25 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. 
From a pharmacokinetic study using aminophylline13,38
HORSES :
Severe equine asthma (extra label):  Loading dose of 12 mg/kg 
PO, followed by maintenance doses of 5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours
Monitoring
 ■ Therapeutic efficacy and clinical signs of toxicity (eg, excitement, 
tremors, tachycardia, vomiting)
 ■ Consider measuring serum theophylline concentrations for pa -
tients not responding to therapy or that have clinical signs of 
toxicity. Contact the laboratory for specific instructions on sam -
ple collection and handling as well as recommended therapeutic 
ranges. Therapeutic serum concentrations of theophylline in hu-
mans are ≈10 μg/mL. Dogs likely can tolerate higher peak con -

===== PDF_PAGE_1250 =====
Thiamine   1223
centrations. It is reported that sustained-release products peak 4 
to 6 hours after administration in dogs and 8 to 12 hours after 
administration in cats, but variable bioavailability occurs.25 Com-
mercial immediate-release products generally peak 1.5 to 2 hours 
after administration. 
Client Information
 ■ This medicine can be given with or without food but giving with 
some food may prevent stomach upset or vomiting.
 ■ Try to give the medicine in the same manner (ie, with or without 
food) and at the same time each day.
 ■ Do not crush or allow animals to chew extended-release products.
 ■ Report signs of agitation or excitement to your veterinarian.
 ■ Keep out of reach of children and animals; overdose can be seri -
ous.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Theophylline is a naturally occurring xanthine derivative. Amino -
phylline differs from theophylline only by the addition of ethylenedi-
amine to its structure and may have different amounts of molecules 
of water of hydration. 100 mg of hydrous aminophylline contains 
≈79 mg of anhydrous theophylline; 100 mg of anhydrous amino -
phylline contains ≈86 mg anhydrous theophylline. Conversely,  
100 mg of anhydrous theophylline is equal to 116 mg of anhydrous 
aminophylline and 127 mg of hydrous aminophylline.
Theophylline occurs as a bitter, odorless, white crystalline powder 
and has a melting point between 270°C and 274°C (518°F-525°F). It 
is sparingly soluble in alcohol and only slightly soluble in water at a 
pH of 7, but solubility increases with increasing pH.
Theophylline may also be known as anhydrous theophylline, teo-
fillina, or theophyllinum; many trade names are available. 
Storage/Stability
Theophylline oral dosage forms should be stored in tight containers 
at room temperature (15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]). Avoid excessive heat.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist can be consulted for more specific information.
Theophylline for injection is reportedly compatible when mixed 
with chlorpromazine, fluconazole, furosemide, lidocaine, methyl -
prednisolone sodium succinate, and verapamil. 
Theophylline for injection is reportedly incompatible (or data 
conflict) with ascorbic acid injection, ceftazidime, ceftriaxone, and 
phenytoin. 
Modified-release products from some veterinary compounding 
pharmacies and from a 503B outsourcing facility have been validat-
ed for use in dogs. 6,7,34 Transdermal gel formulations prepared with 
pluronic lecithin organogel (PLO) or Lipoderm® applied once daily 
to the inner pinna of a cat’s ears did not achieve therapeutic theoph-
ylline concentration.16
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for further information. 
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Theophylline Extended-Release Capsules and Tablets: 100 mg,  
200 mg, 300 mg, 400 mg, 450 mg, and 600 mg ( NOTE: Different 
products have different claimed release rates that may or may not 
correspond to actual times seen in veterinary patients.); Theo-24®, 
Theochron®, generic; (Rx). Availability of commercial extended-
release products in strengths that are suitable for veterinary patients 
has been problematic. Check with a reputable compounding 
pharmacy for availability.
Theophylline Elixir: 80 mg/15 mL (26.7 mg/5 mL); Elixophyllin®; 
generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Thiamine
Vitamin B1
(thye-a-min) 
Nutritional; B Vitamin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for treatment or prevention of thiamine deficiency 
 ▶ Adverse effects include tenderness or muscle soreness after IM 
injection, as well as hypersensitivity and anaphylactic reac-
tions (rare).
Uses/Indications
Thiamine is indicated in the treatment or prevention of thiamine 
deficiency that may be secondary to either a lack of thiamine in the 
diet or the presence of thiamine-destroying compounds in the diet 
(eg, bracken fern, raw fish, sulfites,1 amprolium, thiaminase-produc-
ing bacteria in ruminants).2 Clinical signs of thiamine deficiency can 
manifest as GI (eg, anorexia, salivation), neuromuscular/CNS (eg, 
ataxia, cervical ventriflexion, seizures, loss of reflexes), ocular (eg, 
nystagmus, anisocoria, blindness), or cardiac (eg, brady- or tachyar-
rhythmias, cardiac hypertrophy) effects. Cats are more susceptible 
to thiamine deficiency than dogs, as their daily requirements are 3 
times higher.3 Evaluation of many cat foods, including canned and 
dry food as well as home-prepared diets, has shown suboptimal con-
centrations of thiamine.4–7  
Thiamine may be supplemented in camelids and other species 
when long-term amprolium is used.8 
Thiamine has also been used in the adjunctive treatment of lead 
poisoning and ethylene glycol toxicity to facilitate the conversion of 
glyoxylate to nontoxic metabolites.9
In animal models (eg, dogs, mice) and humans, thiamine has 
been used as adjunctive therapy for septic shock.10,11
Pharmacology/Actions
Thiamine combines with adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to form thi-
amine diphosphate/thiamine pyrophosphate that is used for carbo -
hydrate metabolism without affecting blood glucose concentrations.
Absence of thiamine results in decreased transketolase activity 
in red blood cells and increased pyruvic acid blood concentrations. 
Without thiamine triphosphate, pyruvic acid is not converted into 
acetyl-CoA and diminished NADH results, with anaerobic glycoly -
sis producing lactic acid. Lactic acid production is further increased 
secondary to pyruvic acid conversion. Lactic acidosis may occur.
Pharmacokinetics
Thiamine is absorbed from the GI tract and is rapidly metabolized 
by the liver. In humans, thiamine is distributed to all tissues with the 
highest concentrations in the liver, brain, kidney, and heart. The ma-
jority of the drug is eliminated as metabolites via the kidney.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Thiamine injection is contraindicated in animals that are hypersensi-
tive to it or to any component of it. Anaphylactic reactions to paren-
teral thiamine have occurred after IM and IV administration.9

===== PDF_PAGE_1251 =====
1224    Thiamine
Adverse Effects
Hypersensitivity reactions have occurred following injection. Rarely, 
a vasovagal anaphylactic response (eg, cardiac arrest or severe brady-
cardia, cardiac arrhythmias, apnea, hypotension, collapse, seizure, or 
protracted neuromuscular weakness) has been observed in a small 
number of cats when thiaminewas administered SC. Some tender -
ness or muscle soreness may result after SC or IM injection. Thia -
mine can be diluted with sterile 0.9% sodium chloride to reduce the 
discomfort associated with SC administration.3 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Thiamine administration to pregnant women has not been shown 
to cause fetal abnormalities; however, the possibility cannot be ruled 
out.9 It is not known whether this drug is excreted in milk, but thia-
mine is considered compatible with breastfeeding in humans.12
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Large overdoses of thiamine in laboratory animals have been asso -
ciated with neuromuscular or ganglionic blockade, but the clinical 
significance is unknown. Transient cardiovascular depression13 and 
respiratory depression may also occur with massive parenteral doses. 
Generally, no treatment should be required with most overdoses as 
excess drug will be excreted in the urine.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
 ■ None noted
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Thiamine may cause false positive serum uric acid  results when 
using the phosphotungstate method of determination or uro -
bilinogen urine spot tests using Ehrlich reagent.
 ■ The Schack and Wexler method of determining theophylline con-
centrations may be interfered with by large doses of thiamine.
Dosages
NOTE: Some references discourage the use of the IV route of 
administration due to risk for adverse hemodynamic effects 3,13,14; 
however, these adverse effects are associated with dosages that 
are much higher than commonly recommended. Adverse cardio-
vascular effects have not been reported with orally administered 
thiamine.14
DOGS/CATS:
Thiamine deficiency (extra-label): The ideal dose of thiamine is 
unknown and dosage recommendations vary widely; however, thi-
amine has a relatively large margin for safety. One dosage recom-
mendation for cats is 50 – 100 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) parenterally 
(eg, SC, IM, slow IV) every 12 to 24 hours for 3 to 5 days, followed 
by PO administration for an additional 2 to 4 weeks. 3,13,14 Until 
further research determines optimal dosing recommendations, this 
recommendation for cats could also be used in dogs.1,3,13,15
Ethylene glycol toxicosis (extra-label): 50 mg/animal (NOT  
mg/kg) slow IV ever 6 hours16
Adjunctive treatment of refeeding syndrome after critical ill -
ness (extra-label): 10 – 100 mg/animal (NOT mg/kg) SC daily 
during the refeeding period17  
HORSES :
Thiamine deficiency (extra-label): 0.5 – 5 mg/kg IV , IM, or PO18; 
100 – 1000 mg/horse (NOT mg/kg) IM, SC, or IV (depending on 
formulation)19 
Adjunctive treatment of perinatal asphyxia syndrome ( eg, hy-
poxic ischemic encephalopathy) in foals (extra-label): 1 g/foal 
(NOT g/kg) in 1 L of fluids IV once a day20  
Part of a parenteral nutrition (PN) formula  (extra-label):  
B complex vitamins (thiamine 12.5 mg/mL; niacinamide  
12.5 mg/mL; pyridoxine 5 mg/mL; d-panthenol 5 mg/mL; riboflavin 
2 mg/mL; cyanocobalamin 5 mg/mL) should be supplied at a rate of 
1 – 2 mL/45 kg (99 lb) daily, diluted in fluids or PN. Vitamin C should 
be supplied at a rate of 20 mg/kg/day enterally whenever possible.21 
CATTLE:
Thiamine deficiency (polioencephalomalacia): 10 mg/kg IV or 
IM every 6 hours for 1 to 3 days, then daily. Prognosis is fair if 
the animals are still standing with some improvement within 24 
hours; if still standing after a week, prognosis is good for a com -
plete recovery.22 
SHEEP & GOATS:
Thiamine deficiency (polioencephalomalacia)  (extra-label):  
10 mg/kg IV initially, then 10 mg/kg IV , IM, or SC every 6 hours 
for the first day. Dosing intervals may be tapered depending on the 
response to treatment; regaining appetite is a positive  indicator.23 
NEW WORLD CAMELIDS :
Prophylaxis when animals treated with amprolium for Eimeria 
macusaniensis for more than 5 days  (extra-label): 10 mg/kg SC 
once a day after the fifth day of amprolium8 
SWINE:
Thiamine deficiency (extra-label): 5 – 100 mg IM, SC, or IV (de-
pending on formulation)19  
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
Client Information
 ■ A reason for thiamine deficiency (eg, diet, plants, raw fish) should 
be found with changes made to prevent recurrence.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A water-soluble B vitamin, thiamine HCl occurs as bitter-tasting, 
white, small hygroscopic crystals, or crystalline powder that has a 
characteristic yeast-like odor. Thiamine HCl is freely soluble in wa -
ter, slightly soluble in alcohol, and has pKas of 4.8 and 9.0. The com-
mercially available injection has a pH of 2.5 to 4.5.
Thiamine HCl may also be known as aneurine hydrochloride, thi-
amin hydrochloride, thiamine chloride, thiamini hydrochloridum, 
thiaminii chloridum, vitamin B1; many trade names available.
Storage/Stability
Thiamine HCl for injection should be protected from light and stored 
at temperatures less than 40°C (104°F) and preferably between 15°C 
and 30°C (59°F-86°F); avoid freezing.
Thiamine HCl is unstable in alkaline or neutral solutions or with 
oxidizing or reducing agents. It is most stable at a pH of 2.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent upon factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information.
Thiamine HCl is reportedly physically compatible with all com-
monly used IV replacement fluids.
Do not mix thiamine with alkaline drugs or alkalinizing agents 
(barbiturates, citrates, carbonates, acetates, copper ions) or oxidiz -
ing/reducing agents (eg, sulfites).

===== PDF_PAGE_1252 =====
Thiopental   1225
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Thiamine HCl for Injection: 500 mg/mL; generic; (Rx). Labeled for 
use in dogs, cats, and horses.
Thiamine HCl as a supplement: Numerous oral vitamin/mineral/nu-
tritional supplement products in tablet, gel, oral drench, chewable, and 
powder formulations; (OTC). Labeled for use in multiple  species.
Thiamine monohydrate supplement: A component in numerous vi-
tamin/mineral formulations; DERM-TABS®; (OTC). Labeled for use 
in dogs. Calf colostrum replacer and supplement; (OTC). Labeled 
for use in calves. Pelleted formulation; Compose® 2X; (OTC). Labeled 
for use in horses.
Thiamine mononitrate: Included as an ingredient in numerous oral 
vitamin/mineral/nutritional supplement/milk replacer products 
in tablet, gel, oral drench, and milk replacer powder formulations; 
(OTC). Labeled for use in multiple species. Also available as a type 
B or type C medicated feed drug that may contain neomycin and 
oxytetracycline; Super Guard Plus ®; (VFD). Also available as Calf 
Solutions® Balansure® medicated with CLARIFLY® larvicide. (VFD) 
Labeled for use in calves for treatment of coccidiosis and contains an 
ionophore and fly control.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Thiamine Tablets: 50 mg, 100 mg, 250 mg, and 500 mg; generic; (OTC)
Thiamine Capsules: 50 mg; generic; (OTC)
Thiamine HCl Injection: 100 mg/mL in 1 mL and 2 mL multi-dose 
vials; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Thiopental
(thye-oh-pen-tal) Pentothal®
Ultra-Short-Acting Thiobarbiturate
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for anesthesia induction or anesthesia for very short 
procedures. Not available in the US or Canada.
 ▶ Absolute contraindications: absence of suitable veins for IV 
administration, history of hypersensitivity reactions to barbi-
turates, status asthmaticus. Relative contraindications: severe 
cardiovascular disease or pre-existing ventricular arrhythmias, 
shock, increased intracranial pressure, myasthenia gravis, asth-
ma, and conditions where hypnotic effects may be prolonged 
(eg, severe hepatic disease, myxedema, severe anemia, ex-
cessive premedication). Greyhounds (and other sighthounds) 
metabolize thiobarbiturates much more slowly than other 
breeds; consider using methohexital instead. Horses: pre-ex-
isting leukopenia; thiopental alone may cause excessive ataxia 
and excitement.
 ▶ Avoid: Extravasation, intracarotid or intra-arterial injections. 
Too rapid IV administration can cause significant vascular 
dilatation and hypoglycemia.
 ▶ Adverse Effects: Dogs: Ventricular bigeminy. Cats: Apnea after 
injection, mild arterial hypotension. Horses: Excitement and 
severe ataxia (if used alone); transient leukopenias, hypergly-
cemia, apnea, moderate tachycardia, mild respiratory acidosis
 ▶ Severe CNS toxicity and tissue damage have occurred in hors-
es receiving intracarotid injections of thiobarbiturates.
 ▶ DEA Schedule IV (C-IV) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Because of its rapid action and short duration, in young, healthy an-
imals, thiopental has been used as an induction agent (rapid IV bo -
lus) for general anesthesia with other anesthetics or as the sole anes-
thetic agent for very short procedures. In sick or debilitated animals, 
thiopental may be used in a more cautious manner (IV , slowly to 
effect). Once widely used, thiopental is no longer available in many 
markets, including in the US and Canada.
Pharmacology/Actions
Because of their high lipid solubility, thiobarbiturates (also known as 
ultra short-acting barbiturates) rapidly enter the CNS and produce 
profound hypnosis and anesthesia. They act directly on the CNS neu-
rons in a manner similar to that of the inhibitory transmitter GABA.
Pharmacokinetics
Following IV injection of therapeutic doses, hypnosis and anesthesia 
occur within 1 minute and usually within 15 to 30 seconds. The drug 
rapidly enters the CNS and then redistributes to muscle and adipose 
tissue in the body. The short duration of action (10 to 30 minutes) 
after IV dosing of thiopental is not due to rapid metabolism, but 
rather to this redistribution out of the CNS and into muscle and fat 
stores. Greyhounds and other sighthounds may exhibit longer re -
covery times than other breeds. This may be due to these breeds’ low 
body fat concentrations and differences in the metabolic handling of 
the thiobarbiturates. Although anesthesia is short, recovery periods 
may require several hours. Prolonged recovery can also be noticed in 
horses1 and bovine youngstock2 when compared to ketamine.
Thiopental is metabolized by the hepatic microsomal system, and 
several metabolites have been isolated. The elimination half-life in 
dogs has been reported as being ≈7 hours and in sheep as 3 to 4 
hours. Little of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine (0.3% 
in humans), so dose adjustments are not necessary for patients with 
chronic renal failure.
Thiopental is highly protein-bound (75%).
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
The following are considered absolute contraindications  to the 
use of thiopental: absence of suitable veins for IV administration, 
history of hypersensitivity reactions to the barbiturates, and status 
asthmaticus. Relative contraindications include severe cardiovas -
cular disease or pre-existing ventricular arrhythmias, shock, hypo -
tension, hypovolemia, increased intracranial pressure, myasthenia 
gravis, asthma, and conditions where hypnotic effects may be pro -
longed (eg, severe hepatic disease, myxedema, severe anemia, exces-
sive premedication). The intracranial pressure (ICP) might increase 
due to respiratory depression and hypoventilation with a consequent 
increase in CO 2. If the patient is ventilated properly, thiopental de -
creases both ICP and cerebral metabolic oxygen consumption rate 
(CMRO2), resulting in a neuroprotective effect. The decrease in 
mean arterial pressure (MAP) causes a decrease in cerebral blood 
flow (CBF), but the decrease in CMRO 2 helps maintain the ratio of 
CBF and CMRO2 unchanged. Although MAP decreases, the cerebral 
perfusion pressure (CPP) remains unchanged due to the decrease 
in ICP (CPP = MAP – ICP). These relative contraindications do not 
preclude the use of thiopental, but dose adjustments and specific 
management of the patient must be considered, and the drug must 
be given cautiously.
Patients with renal dysfunction, acidemia, or hypoproteinemia 
may show increased sensitivity to thiopental.
Because greyhounds (and other sighthounds) metabolize thiobar-
biturates much more slowly than methohexital, many clinicians rec-
ommend using methohexital instead. In horses, thiopental should 
not be used if the patient has pre-existing leukopenia. Some clini -
cians feel that thiopental should not be used alone in the horse as 

===== PDF_PAGE_1253 =====
1226    Thiopental
it may cause excessive ataxia and excitement. In young cattle, it is 
recommended that thiopental be avoided due to slower metabolism 
and long recovery times.
Concentrations of less than 2% in sterile water should not be used 
as they may cause hemolysis. Extravasation and intra-arterial injec -
tions should be avoided because of the high alkalinity of the solution. 
Severe CNS toxicity and tissue damage have occurred in horses re -
ceiving intracarotid injections of thiobarbiturates.
Adverse Effects
In dogs, thiopental has an arrhythmogenic incidence of ≈40%. Ven-
tricular bigeminy is the most common arrhythmia seen; it is usually 
transient and generally responds to additional oxygen. Administra -
tion of catecholamines, xylazine, halothane, and methoxyflurane 
may exacerbate the arrhythmogenic effects of the thiobarbiturates, 
while lidocaine may inhibit it. Cardiac output may also be reduced 
but is probably only clinically significant in patients experiencing 
heart failure. Dose-related apnea and hypotension may be noted.
Cats are susceptible to developing apnea after injection and may 
develop mild arterial hypotension.
Horses can exhibit clinical signs of excitement and severe ataxia 
during the recovery period if the drug is used alone. Horses can de -
velop transient leukopenia and hyperglycemia after administration. 
A period of apnea, moderate tachycardia, and mild respiratory aci -
dosis may also develop after dosing.
Too rapid IV administration can cause significant vascular dila -
tation and hypoglycemia. Repeated administration of thiopental is 
not advised as recovery time can become significantly prolonged. 
Parasympathetic adverse effects (eg, salivation, bradycardia) can be 
managed with the use of anticholinergic agents (atropine, glycopy -
rrolate).
Prolonged recoveries may occur when repeated dosages of thio -
pental are administered.
The high pH of thiopental (10 to 11) can cause significant tissue 
irritation and necrosis if administered perivascularly; administra -
tion through an IV catheter is advised.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Thiopental readily crosses the placental barrier and should be used 
with caution during pregnancy. 
Small amounts of thiopental may appear in milk following ad -
ministration of large doses but are unlikely to be of clinical signifi -
cance in nursing animals.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Treatment of thiobarbiturate overdosage consists of supporting res-
pirations (eg, O2, mechanical ventilation) and giving cardiovascular 
support; do not use catecholamines (eg, epinephrine).
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving thiopental and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Clonidine : IV clonidine prior to induction may reduce thiopen-
tal dosage requirements by up to 37%.3
 ■ CNS Depressants, Other (eg, methocarbamol): May en -
hance respiratory and CNS depressant effects
 ■ Diazoxide : Potential for hypotension
 ■ Epinephrine, Norepinephrine : The ventricular fibrillatory 
effects of epinephrine and norepinephrine may be potentiated 
when used with thiobarbiturates and halothane.
 ■ Ketoprofen : Anesthesia recovery time was prolonged4
 ■ Metoclopramide : Given prior to induction may reduce thio -
pental dosage requirements
 ■ Midazolam : May potentiate hypnotic effects
 ■ Opioids (eg, buprenorphine, fentanyl, morphine, tramadol ): 
Given prior to induction may reduce thiopental dosage require -
ments
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine): May potentiate thiopen-
tal effects; hypotension possible
Dosages
NOTE: Atropine sulfate (or glycopyrrolate) is often administered 
prior to thiobarbiturate anesthesia to prevent parasympathetic ad -
verse effects; however, some clinicians question whether routine ad-
ministration of anticholinergic agents is necessary. Thiobarbiturates 
are administered strictly to effect; listed dosages are guidelines only.
DOGS/CATS:
Labeled dose (No longer marketed in the US): 13.2 – 26.4 mg/kg 
IV depending on the duration of anesthesia required5 
Extra-label doses: 
a) Usually dosed at 12 – 15 mg/kg, with ⅓ of the drug adminis -
tered rapidly and any additional amount administered to ef -
fect. Repeated doses will accumulate, resulting in prolonged 
recoveries; residual effects may last several hours.6
b) Dogs: 15 – 17 mg/kg IV; Cats: 9 – 11 mg/kg IV7
RABBITS, RODENTS, SMALL MAMMALS :
Chemical restraint  (extra-label): Mice: 50 mg/kg IP; Rats:  
40 mg/kg IP; Hamsters/Gerbils: 30 – 40 mg/kg IP; Guinea pigs: 
15 – 30 mg/kg IV; Rabbits: 15 – 30 mg/kg IV8
CATTLE:
General Anesthesia in premedicated cattle (extra-label): Cattle: 
8.1 – 9.9 mg/kg IV; calves: 4.5 mg/kg IV7 
HORSES : 
General Anesthesia in premedicated horses (extra-label):  
5.9 – 12.9 mg/kg IV .7 A dose of thiopental 4 mg/kg IV , after pre-
medication with medetomidine and midazolam, achieved induc-
tion and recovery quality comparable to ketamine 2.5 mg/kg IV; 
however, the recovery was longer when thiopental was used.1
SWINE:
General Anesthesia (extra-label): 5 – 11 mg/kg IV7 
SHEEP:
General Anesthesia (extra-label): 9 – 14 mg/kg IV7
Monitoring
 ■ Level of hypnosis/anesthesia
 ■ Respiratory status; cardiac status (eg, heart rate and rhythm and 
blood pressure)
Client Information
This drug should only be used by professionals familiar with its ef -
fects, and in a setting where adequate respiratory support can be per-
formed.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Thiopental, a thiobarbiturate, occurs as a bitter-tasting, white to off-
white, crystalline powder or a yellow-white hygroscopic powder. It is 
soluble in water (1 g in 1.5 mL) and alcohol. Thiopental has a pKa of 

===== PDF_PAGE_1254 =====
Thyrotropin Alfa    1227
7.6 and is a weak organic acid. Thiopental solutions are very alkaline 
(pH greater than 10).
Thiopental sodium may also be known as thiopentone sodium, 
natrium isopentylaethylthiobarbituricum, penthiobarbital sodique, 
thiomebumalnatrium cum natrii carbonate, thiopentalum natricum, 
thiopentobarbitalum solubile, tiopentol sodico, Anesthal®, Bensulf®, 
Farmotal®, Hipnopento®, Inductal®, Intraval®, Nesdonal®, Pensodital®, 
Pentothal®, Sandothal®, Sodipental®, Thionembutal®, Thiopentax®, Tio-
barbital®, or Trapanal®.
Storage/Stability
When stored in the dry form, thiopental sodium is stable indefinite-
ly. Thiopental should be diluted with only sterile water for injection, 
0.9% sodium chloride or 5% dextrose. Do not use concentrations of 
less than 2% in sterile water as they may cause hemolysis. After re -
constitution, solutions are stable for 3 days at room temperature and 
7 days if refrigerated; however, as no preservative is present, consider 
using it within 24 hours after reconstitution. After 48 hours, there are 
reports of the solution attacking the glass bottle in which it is stored. 
Thiopental may also adsorb to plastic IV tubing and bags. Do not 
administer any solution that has a visible precipitate.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent upon factors, such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information.
Preparation of Solution for Administration : Use only sterile 
water for injection, 0.9% sodium chloride, or 5% dextrose to dilute. 
A 5 g vial diluted with 100 mL will yield a 5% solution, and diluted 
with 200 mL will yield a 2.5% solution. Discard reconstituted solu -
tions after 24 hours.
The following agents have been reported to be physically  com -
patible when mixed with thiopental: aminophylline, chloramphen -
icol sodium succinate, hyaluronidase, hydrocortisone sodium suc -
cinate, neostigmine methylsulfate, oxytocin, pentobarbital sodium, 
phenobarbital sodium, potassium chloride, propofol (1:1 mixture), 
scopolamine HBr, sodium iodide, and tubocurarine chloride (rec -
ommendations conflict with regard to tubocurarine; some clinicians 
recommend not mixing with thiopental).
The following agents have been reported to be physically incom-
patible when mixed with thiopental: lactated Ringer’s solution, ami-
kacin sulfate, atropine sulfate, chlorpromazine, codeine phosphate, 
dimenhydrinate, diphenhydramine, ephedrine sulfate, glycopyrro -
late, hydromorphone, insulin (regular), meperidine, morphine sul -
fate, norepinephrine bitartrate, penicillin G potassium, prochlorper-
azine edisylate, promazine HCl, promethazine HCl, succinylcholine 
chloride, and tetracycline HCl. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
None presently marketed in the United States
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Thiopental remains unavailable in the United States market.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Thyrotropin Alfa 
(thye-roe-troe-pin) Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone, TSH
Hormone
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) test of thyroid 
function
 ▶ Contraindications include adrenocortical insufficiency, hyper-
thyroidism, coronary thrombosis, hypersensitivity to bovine 
thyrotropin. Cannot be used to evaluate thyroid function in 
patients receiving levothyroxine.
 ▶ Adverse effects include hypersensitivity (especially with re-
peated injections).
 ▶ Expense (human product) may be an issue.
Uses/Indications
The labeled indication for the formerly available bovine-source vet-
erinary product Dermathycin® was for the treatment of acanthosis 
nigricans and for temporary supportive therapy in hypothyroidism in 
dogs. However, TSH is used more commonly as a diagnostic agent 
in the TSH stimulation test to diagnose primary hypothyroidism in 
many species. It can also be used for the diagnosis of congenital hy-
pothyroidism. Commercially available TSH is supplied as a recom -
binant human product (rhTSH). While rhTSH enhances radioactive 
iodine uptake in hyperthyroid cats,1 inconsistent results were noted 
when used to evaluate radioactive iodine uptake in dogs with thyroid 
tumors.2
Pharmacology/Actions
Thyrotropin increases iodine uptake by the thyroid gland and in -
creases the production and secretion of thyroid hormones and thy -
roglobulin. With prolonged use, hyperplasia of thyroid cells may 
occur.
Pharmacokinetics
No specific information was located; exogenously administered TSH 
apparently exerts maximal increases in circulating T 4 ≈4 to 8 hours 
after IM or IV administration. In humans, peak TSH concentrations 
occur at ≈10 hours after administration and the elimination half-life 
is ≈25 hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
A previous veterinary drug manufacturer (Coopers) listed adreno -
cortical insufficiency and hyperthyroidism as contraindications to 
TSH use for treatment purposes in dogs. In humans, TSH is contra-
indicated in patients with coronary thrombosis, untreated Addison’s 
disease, or hypersensitivity to bovine thyrotropin.
Levothyroxine supplementation can cause thyroid atrophy and 
should be discontinued before thyroid testing with TSH. After dis -
continuing levothyroxine, a washout period of 6 to 8 weeks before 
performing the TSH stimulation test has been proposed.3
Adverse Effects
Because the commercially available product is derived from human 
sources, hypersensitivity reactions are possible in patients sensitive 
to human proteins, particularly with repeated use. To date, no re -
ports of anaphylaxis in animals receiving rhTSH have been report -
ed. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and fatigue have been reported in 
 humans.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
It is not known whether the drug is excreted in milk, but it is unlikely 
to be clinically significant when used for diagnostic purposes.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.

===== PDF_PAGE_1255 =====
1228    Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone (TRH)
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Chronic administration at high dosages can produce clinical signs of 
hyperthyroidism. Massive overdoses can cause clinical signs resem-
bling thyroid storm. Refer to the levothyroxine monograph for more 
information on treatment.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
No specific drug interactions were reported, but see the information 
regarding levothyroxine (see Contraindications/Precautions/Warn-
ings section). Concurrent use of levothyroxine while using thyrotro-
pin alfa for provocative thyroid testing may skew test results. 
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Prior or concurrent levothyroxine supplementation may skew re-
sults of TSH stimulation testing (see Contraindications/Precau-
tions/Warnings section).
Dosages
DOGS:
TSH stimulation test (extra-label):
a) From two studies where dogs received either 75 μg/dog or  
150 μg/dog (NOT μg/kg) IV of the human recombinant prod-
uct. Blood samples were taken before and 6 hours after rhTSH 
administration for determination of total serum thyroxine 
(T4) concentration. The authors concluded that the TSH-stim-
ulation test with rhTSH is a valuable diagnostic tool to assess 
thyroid function in selected dogs in which a diagnosis of hy -
pothyroidism cannot be based on basal T 4 and canine TSH 
concentrations alone. Using the higher dose of rhTSH resulted 
in a higher discriminatory power with regard to differentiat -
ing between primary hypothyroidism and non-thyroidal dis -
ease and the authors recommend the higher dose (150 μg/dog 
[NOT μg/kg]) of rhTSH for performing a TSH stimulation test 
in a diseased animal or an animal on medication, especially if 
testing cannot be delayed.4,5
b) Using rhTSH: 75 – 150 μg/dog (NOT μg/kg) IV . The higher 
dose of TSH is recommended in dogs with concurrent disease 
and those receiving medication that might suppress thyroid 
function. Measure serum total T 4 at 0 hours (presample) and 
6 hours postdosing. Hypothyroidism is confirmed by a pre- 
and post-total T4 concentration below the reference range for 
basal total T 4 concentration (less than 1.5 μg/dL). Euthyroid -
ism is confirmed by a post total T 4 concentration greater than  
2.5 μg/dL and at least 1.5 times the basal T4 concentration.6
CATS:
TSH stimulation test (extra-label): 
a) 25 μg/cat (NOT μg/kg) IV . Draw pre- and postdosing total T4 
levels. Can be useful for differentiating feline iatrogenic hypo-
thyroidism from non-thyroidal illness.3 
b) Using rhTSH: 25 μg/cat (NOT μg/kg) IV . Measure serum total 
T4 at 0 hours (presample) and 6 hours postdosing.7
BIRDS:  
TSH stimulation test (extra-label): 20 - 200 μg/kg IM. Draw T 4 
sample at baseline (predose) and 4 to 6 hours after dose.8
FERRETS:  
TSH stimulation test  (extra-label): 100 μg/ferret (NOT μg/kg) 
IM. Postlevel (T4) drawn at 4 hours. Authors concluded that the 
results suggested that rhTSH can be used for TSH testing in fer -
rets when administered IM. Based on the results, a euthyroid fer-
ret should have an increase of ≈30% in plasma T4 concentration 4 
hours after rhTSH injection.9
SMALL MAMMALS :
TSH stimulation test (guinea pigs)  (extra-label): 100 μg/guinea 
pig (NOT μg/kg) IM. Postlevel (T4) drawn at 3 to 4 hours. Authors 
concluded that the results suggested that rhTSH can be used for 
TSH testing in guinea pigs when administered IM. Based on the 
results, authors suggest that the thyroxine concentration in a eu -
thyroid guinea pig should at least double 3 to 4 hours after rhTSH 
injection.10
Chemistry/Synonyms
Commercially available thyrotropin (human; rhTSH) is now avail -
able only as a lyophilized powder for reconstitution obtained via 
DNA recombinant technology. Thyrotropin is a highly purified 
preparation of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Thyrotropin is a 
glycoprotein and has a molecular weight of ≈28,000 – 30,000. Thyro-
tropin is measured in International Units (IU), which is abbreviated 
as units in this reference. 7.5 μg of thyrotropin are ≈equivalent to 
0.037 units. The formerly available veterinary product was obtained 
from bovine anterior pituitary glands.
Thyrotropin may also be known as thyroid-stimulating hormone, 
thyrotrophic hormone, thyrotrophin thyrotropin, TSH, Thyrogen®, 
or Tirogen®.
Storage/Stability
Thyrotropin alfa (non-reconstituted) should be stored between 2°C 
and 8°C (36°F-46°F). If necessary, the reconstituted solution can 
be stored up to 24 hours at 2°C to 8°C (36-46°F); avoid microbial 
contamination. However, it is reportedly stable if kept refrigerated 
(2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]).) up to 4 weeks and up to 12 weeks if frozen 
(-20°C [-4°F). Protect from light.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
After reconstitution visually inspect each vial for particulate mat-
ter or discoloration before use. Do not use any vial exhibiting par -
ticulate matter or discoloration. Do not use after the expiration date 
on the vial.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Recombinant (human) Thyrotropin (Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone) 
Powder for Injection, Lyophilized: 1.1 mg per vial; Thyrogen®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone 
(TRH)
(thye-roe-troe-pin ree-lee-seen hor-mohn) 
Hormone
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Most commonly used for diagnosing pituitary pars interme-
dia dysfunction (PPID) in horses. Can also be used for some 
thyroid-related tests.
 ▶ Adverse effects in horses include transient muscle trembling, 
yawning, lip smacking, flehmen, and coughing.
 ▶ In the United States, must be compounded

===== PDF_PAGE_1256 =====
Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone (TRH)    1229
Uses/Indications
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH; protirelin) is most commonly 
used in veterinary medicine as a diagnostic agent (TRH stimulation 
test) for diagnosing pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID) in 
horses. While safe and fast, when measuring cortisol as the mark -
er, false-positive results are relatively common. Combining this test 
with a dexamethasone suppression test can improve diagnostic test 
sensitivity and specificity, but increases testing times and sampling 
requirements.1 Measuring plasma corticotropin (ACTH) instead of 
cortisol after TRH now appears to offer the highest diagnostic sensi-
tivity compared with other tests for PPID and may allow for earlier 
detection.2 Because of seasonal variations in ACTH levels, the TRH 
stimulation test should be performed during winter or spring.3–6
In dogs, the TRH test can potentially be used to differentiate pri-
mary from secondary hypothyroidism. It is not a reliable test to di -
agnose primary hypothyroidism.
TRH or its analogues may improve physical function after acute 
intervertebral disk herniation.
Pharmacology/Actions
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone directly stimulates thyrotropin se -
cretion by the pituitary gland, thereby indirectly stimulating synthe-
sis and secretion of thyroid hormones. 
In horses, thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) can stimulate 
the equine pars intermedia and appears to directly stimulate equine 
melanotropes. In healthy horses, plasma alpha-melanocyte-stimu -
lating hormones can be increased more than 400% after TRH. Nor -
mal horses will have slight increases in ACTH after TRH adminis -
tration, subclinical PPID horses have a moderate increase in ACTH, 
while clinically ill PPID horses have dramatic increases in ACTH 
after TRH. Response to TRH is greater in autumn months than at 
other times of the year.
Pharmacokinetics
No specific information for veterinary species was noted. Onset 
of action after IV administration appears to be within minutes. In 
humans, buccal administration yielded statistically significant in -
creases in thyrotropin concentrations above baseline at 30 and 60 
minutes, although at 30 minutes both the thyrotrophic effect and ad-
verse effects were less in some subjects. Deamidase, peptidase, and 
imidopeptidase enzymes in the CNS and serum metabolize TRH to 
active and inactive metabolites. Elimination half-life is ≈5 minutes.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to it. Use with 
caution in patients with seizure disorders as IV administration has 
rarely caused seizures in humans.
Adverse Effects
Hypersalivation, vomiting and restlessness were noted in healthy 
dogs.7 In horses, IV administration of TRH can cause transient mus-
cle trembling, yawning, lip-smacking, flehmen, and coughing. 
In humans, TRH given by rapid IV injection or intranasally can 
cause nausea, a desire to urinate, flushing, dizziness, and a strange 
taste. Intranasal administration has rarely caused bronchospasm. 
IV administration can cause transient increases in pulse rate, and 
changes in blood pressure; convulsions have rarely occurred. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
It is not known whether TRH is excreted in milk, but it is unlikely to 
be clinically significant when used for diagnostic purposes.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
No specific information was located; determine doses and drug vol-
umes carefully.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving TRH and may be of signif -
icance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone): At high doses, may 
cause decreased thyrotropin response to TRH. Dexamethasone 
suppression test may be performed concurrently with TRH test -
ing in horses.8,9
 ■ Cyproheptadine : May cause decreased thyrotropin response 
to TRH
 ■ Dopamine Blocking Drugs  (eg, domperidone, metoclopra-
mide): May cause increased thyrotropin response to TRH
 ■ Gonadorelin  and  Gonadorelin Analogues : May cause 
increased thyrotropin response to TRH
 ■ Salicylates : May cause decreased thyrotropin response to TRH
 ■ Thyroid Hormones  (eg, levothyroxine): May decrease thyro-
tropin response to TRH
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Contact your laboratory for specific sampling guidelines and 
shipping requirements.
Dosages
DOGS:
Assess pituitary and thyroid gland function:
a. Differentiate primary from secondary hypothyroidism 
(extra-label): Collect a pre-TRH blood sample; administer  
0.2 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) IV of TRH; collect a 4-hour post-
TRH blood sample. Measure pre- and post-TRH serum T 4 
concentrations. NOTE: For measurement of thyrotropin 
(TSH) collect blood samples pre- and 30 minutes post-TRH 
administration.10
b. Differentiate primary hypothyroidism from nonthyroidal 
illness (extra-label): Collect a pre-TRH blood sample; admin-
ister 0.01 mg/kg IV of TRH; collect a 30- minute post-TRH 
blood sample. Measure pre- and post-TRH serum TSH con -
centrations. TSH will be elevated in dogs without thyroidal 
illness.7,11 
CATS:
Assess thyroid gland function for hyperthyroidism (extra- 
label): Collect a pre-TRH blood sample; administer 0.1 mg/kg IV 
of TRH; collect a 4-hour post-TRH blood sample. Measure pre- 
and post-TRH serum T 4 concentrations. Hyperthyroid cats have 
little to no post-TRH elevation in T4.12
HORSES :
Diagnosis of pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID) us-
ing the TRH stimulation test (extra-label):
Using plasma ACTH as the marker: 
Protocol 1: The most accurate results are obtained when diagnos-
tic testing is performed winter or spring. Contact your diagnos -
tic laboratory for specific sample requirements. Collect baseline 
(usually plasma) sample for ACTH analysis. Inject TRH 1 mg 
IV . Collect plasma sample at 10 and/or 30 minutes following 
TRH. A 10-minute and/or a 30-minute post-TRH ACTH level of  
110 nanograms/L and 65 nanograms/L, respectively, 5,13,14 are the 

===== PDF_PAGE_1257 =====
1230    Tiamulin
current diagnostic cut-offs, but these may vary depending on the 
laboratory used.2,3,15 
Protocol 2: An alternative testing procedure is as above, but TRH 
0.5 mg IV is used for ponies and the post-TRH sample is drawn at 
30 minutes. At Auburn University Endocrine Diagnostic Labora-
tory: ACTH concentrations at T = 0, 10, and 30 minutes should all 
be <35 picograms/mL, with even lower concentrations expected 
between December and June. Note: Can also be used to simul -
taneously rule out hypothyroidism by collecting samples for T 3 
and T4 at 0, 2, and 4 hours. Normal horse: A doubling of T4 after 
4 hours and ≈tripling of T 3 after 2 hours is expected. A normal 
horse will have a small increase in ACTH concentration after 30 
minutes (refer to seasonal reference ranges). PPID horse: T3 and 
T4 will increase the same as a normal horse, and the ACTH at T 
= 0 will be elevated, and at 30 minutes ACTH will be marked -
ly elevated. Hypothyroid horse: No marked increase in T 3 or T 4. 
(Resting T3 and T4 concentrations are not very useful.)16
Combined dexamethasone suppression/TRH stimulation test 
using plasma cortisol as the marker : Collect plasma between 
8 AM and 10 AM. Administer dexamethasone 0.04 mg/kg IM. 
Three hours later administer TRH 1 mg IV . Collect plasma 30 
minutes after TRH was given and again 24 hours after the dexa -
methasone dose (21 hours post-TRH). Compared to baseline, a 
plasma cortisol greater than 1 μg/dL at 24 hours post-dexameth -
asone sample or a greater than or equal to 66% increase for the 
3-hour post-TRH sample suggests PPID. NOTE: Some diagnostic 
laboratories prefer to use serum for measurement of cortisol lev -
els. The effect of season on the combined test has not been as -
sessed but would likely result in similar incidence of false-positive 
results as each of the component tests do.9,17
Chemistry/Synonyms
TRH (protirelin) is a synthetic tri-peptide with the same sequence of 
amino acids as the natural hypothalamic neuro-hormone. It occurs 
as a white or yellowish-white hygroscopic powder that is very soluble 
in water and freely soluble in methyl alcohol. 
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone may also be known as Ab -
bott-38579, TRH, thyrotrophin-releasing hormone, lopremone, 
protirelin, thyroliberin, thyrotropin-releasing factor (TRF), Ante-
pan®, or Relefact®.
Storage/Stability
TRH (protirelin) powder should be stored at 2°C to 8°C (36°C-46°C) 
and protected from light and moisture. If using a compounded 
preparation, store as labeled. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
There are no commercially available products marketed in the Unit-
ed States at present, but TRH may be available from compounding 
pharmacies.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Tiamulin
(tye-am-myoo-lin) Denagard®
Diterpine Pleuromutilin Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Antibiotic approved for use in swine; may be used extra-label 
in chickens and turkeys
 ▶ Contraindications include in animals with access to feeds con-
taining polyether ionophores (eg, monensin, lasalocid, narasin, 
or salinomycin) and in swine over 113.4 kg (250 lb).
 ▶ Adverse effects are unlikely.
 ▶ Variable withdrawal times depending on dosage.
Uses/Indications
Tiamulin is FDA-approved for use in swine to treat pneumonia 
caused by susceptible strains of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae and 
swine dysentery caused by Brachyspira hyodysenteriae. Tiamulin has 
demonstrated activity against Brachyspira hampsonii.1 In the UK, tia-
mulin is approved for use in turkeys and chickens for the reduction 
in the severity of disease caused by mycoplasmas; in pigs for dysen -
tery, colitis, and pneumonia; and in rabbits for enterocolitis.2
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated tiamu -
lin as an Important antimicrobial for human medicine. 3 The Office 
International des Epizooties (OIE) Antimicrobial Classification has 
designated tiamulin as a Veterinary Highly Important  antimicrobial.4 
Pharmacology/Actions
Tiamulin is a pleuromutilin antibiotic that is usually bacteriostatic 
but can be bactericidal in high concentrations against susceptible 
organisms. The drug acts by binding to the 50S ribosomal subunit, 
thereby inhibiting bacterial protein synthesis; it has good intracellu-
lar penetration.
Tiamulin has good activity against many gram-positive cocci, 
including most staphylococci and streptococci (not group D strep -
tococci). It also has good activity against Mycoplasma spp and spi -
rochetes. With the exceptions of Haemophilus spp, most isolates of 
Lawsonia intracellularis, and some Escherichia coli and Klebsiella spp 
strains, tiamulin activity is quite poor against gram-negative organ-
isms. Tiamulin does not have apparent efficacy against Histomonas 
meleagridis.
Pharmacokinetics
Tiamulin is well absorbed orally by swine. Approximately 85% of a 
dose is absorbed and peak levels occur between 2 to 4 hours after 
a single oral dose. Tiamulin is apparently well distributed, with the 
highest levels found in the lungs.
Tiamulin is extensively metabolized to over 20 metabolites, with 
some of the metabolites having antibacterial activity. Approximately 
30% of these metabolites are excreted in the urine with the remain -
der excreted in the feces.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tiamulin should not be administered to animals that have access 
to feeds containing polyether ionophores (eg, monensin, lasalocid, 
narasin, salinomycin), as adverse reactions may occur. Do not use 
tiamulin in swine over 113.4 kg (250 lb).
Tiamulin inhalation has been reported to result in QT prolonga -
tion and ventricular tachyarrhythmia in humans; wear appropriate 
protective equipment when handling.5
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Teratogenicity studies done in rodents demonstrated no teratogenic 
effects at doses up to 300 mg/kg. The manufacturer has concluded 
that the drug is not tumorigenic, carcinogenic, teratogenic, or mu -
tagenic.

===== PDF_PAGE_1258 =====
Tiamulin   1231
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects occurring with this drug at usual doses are consid -
ered unlikely. Rarely, redness of the skin, primarily over the ham 
and underline, has been observed in swine. If this occurs, it is rec -
ommended to discontinue the medication, provide clean drinking 
water, and hose down the housing area or move affected animals to 
clean pens.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Oral overdoses in swine may cause transient salivation, vomiting, 
and CNS depression (calming effect). Discontinue drug and treat 
symptomatically and supportively if necessary.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving tiamulin and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Polyether Ionophores (eg, monensin, lasalocid, narasin, 
salinomycin): Tiamulin should not be administered to animals 
that have access to feeds containing polyether ionophores, as ad-
verse reactions may occur.
 ■ Lincosamides, Macrolides (eg, clindamycin, lincomycin, 
erythromycin, tylosin): Although not confirmed with this drug, 
concomitant use with other antibiotics that bind to the 50S ribo -
some could lead to decreased efficacy secondary to competition 
at the site of action.
Dosages
SWINE:
Swine dysentery  (label dosage; FDA-approved): 7.7 mg/kg PO 
daily in drinking water for 5 days. See package directions for di -
lution instructions.6 
Swine pneumonia (label dosage; FDA-approved): 23.1 mg/kg PO 
daily in drinking water for 5 days. See package directions for di -
lution instructions.6 
Medicated premix: See the label for the product.
POUL TRY:
Mycoplasma spp disease in chicken and turkey (extra-label): 
25 mg/kg bodyweight administered in drinking water as 0.025% 
solution for 3 – 5 days (chicken) or for 5 days (turkey)2 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
Client Information
 ■ Prepare fresh medicated water daily.
 ■ Avoid contact with skin or mucous membranes as irritation may 
occur.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A semisynthetic diterpene-class antibiotic derived from pleu -
romulin, tiamulin is available commercially for oral use as the hy -
drogen fumarate salt. It occurs as white to yellow, crystalline powder 
with a faint but characteristic odor. Approximately 60 mg of the drug 
are soluble in 1 mL of water.
Tiamulin may also be known as 81723-hfu, SQ-14055, SQ-22947 
(tiamulin fumarate), or Denagard®.
Storage/Stability
Protect from moisture; store in a dry place  at controlled room tem-
perature (59°F-77°F [15°C-25°C]). In unopened packets, the powder 
is stable up to 5 years. Fresh solutions should be prepared daily when 
using clinically.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information is noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY APPROVED PRODUCTS :
Tiamulin Medicated Premix: 10 g/1 lb in 35 lb bags;  Denagard® 10; 
(OTC). FDA-approved for use in swine not weighing over 113.4 kg 
(250 lb). Slaughter withdrawal period at the 35 g/ton use is 2 days; at 
the 200 g/ton dose it is 7 days. 
Tiamulin Solution as tiamulin hydrogen fumarate in an aqueous 
base; Triamulox® Liquid Concentrate (12.3% solution in 32 oz bot -
tles); Denagard ® Liquid Concentrate (12.5% solution in 1000 mL 
and 5000 mL bottles; (OTC). FDA-approved for use in swine not 
weighing over 113.4 kg (250 lb). Slaughter withdrawal: treatment at  
3.5 mg/lb = 3 days; at 10.5 mg/lb = 7 days. The UK label lists slaugh-
ter withdrawal of 2 days for chicken and 5 days for turkey; there is no 
withdrawal time for eggs laid by chickens.
Tiamulin solution for injection: 162 mg/mL; Vetmulin®; (Not avail-
able in the United States). For treatment and prevention of dysen -
tery in swine in individuals with known exposure; not for herd-level 
treatment. Withdrawal time is 21 days.7
There is also a chlortetracycline/tiamulin premix approved by the 
FDA.
HUMAN APPROVED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 

===== PDF_PAGE_1259 =====
1232    Tigilanol Tiglate
Tigilanol Tiglate
(tih-gil-an-ol tig-late) Stelfonta®
Antineoplastic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ FDA-approved for intratumoral injection for treatment of 
dogs with nonmetastatic cutaneous mast cell tumors (MCTs) 
anywhere on the body and nonmetastatic subcutaneous MCTs 
at or distal to the elbow or the hock 
 ▶ Destruction of the tumor produces a wound at the treatment 
site that typically heals within ≈ 6 weeks.
 ▶ Tigilanol tiglate must be used concomitantly with a corti-
costeroid (eg, prednis(ol)one), an H1-receptor antagonist 
(eg, diphenhydramine), and an H2-receptor antagonist (eg, 
famotidine) to minimize severe systemic reactions caused by 
mast cell degranulation.
 ▶ Has been used in an extra-label manner to treat skin tumors in 
horses; concomitant medications and dosages for horses differ 
from those used in dogs
 ▶ Contraindicated for treatment of subcutaneous MCT above 
the elbow or the hock, of MCT volume exceeding 10 cm3, and 
in dogs with metastatic disease. Total dose must not exceed  
5 mL/dog and 0.25 mL/kg.
 ▶ Do not administer into the tumor margin, beyond the tumor 
periphery, or by any route other than directly in the tumor.
 ▶ Use with extreme caution in MCTs that are ulcerated; use 
cautiously with mucocutaneous MCTs and in animals with 
conditions associated with impaired wound healing.
 ▶ Adverse effects include extensive wound formation, tissue 
sloughing, and cellulitis that occurs at, and may extend from, 
the tumor site. Injection site reactions (eg, pain, swelling, 
erythema, bruising) are common. In dogs, lameness in the 
treated limb and GI effects (eg, hyporexia/anorexia, vomiting, 
diarrhea) may also occur.
 ▶ Handle this drug with extreme caution, as accidental self-in-
jection or needlestick injury may result in severe wound 
formation. Wear appropriate personal protective equipment 
when preparing or administering this drug. Those who are 
pregnant or planning to become pregnant should not handle 
this drug.
 ▶ Provide the manufacturer’s client information sheet to owners 
before the drug is administered. 
Uses/Indications
In dogs with a tumor volume less than 10 cm 3, tigilanol tiglate is 
administered via intratumoral injection to treat nonmetastatic cu -
taneous mast cell tumor (MCTs) located anywhere on the body or 
nonmetastatic subcutaneous MCTs at or distal to the elbow or the 
hock. Intratumoral tigilanol tiglate administration destroys the tu -
mor over ≈1 week, and the resulting wound typically heals within 
≈6 weeks. In a field study, 75% of treated dogs achieved complete 
response in the target tumor 28 days after receiving 1 injection. 1 In 
dogs with an incomplete response, a second injection 1 month later 
resulted in a cumulative complete response rate of ≈87%. Efficacy 
proved higher in tumors of lower cytologic grade when compared 
with tumors of higher grade (ie, 72% vs 38%). 1 At 12 weeks after 
treatment, a complete response was maintained in 93% of dogs. 1 In 
a separate evaluation, 89% of evaluable dogs remained tumor free 
at the treatment site 12 months after treatment, 2 and most cases of 
recurrence were noted within 12 weeks after treatment. 
Tigilanol tiglate must be used in combination with a corticoste -
roid and antihistamines (see Contraindications/Precautions/Warn-
ings and Dosages).3 
Tigilanol tiglate was successfully used intratumorally in 2 horses 
to treat local disease (fibroblastic sarcoid, periocular squamous cell 
carcinoma); tumor response followed a pattern similar to that ob -
served in dogs.4 
Pharmacology/Actions
Tigilanol tiglate disrupts mitochondrial function, resulting in on -
colysis.3,5,6 This effect is immediate, short-lived, and limited to the 
area of injection. In addition, the drug preferentially activates beta 
II (alpha-, beta I-, and gamma-isoforms of protein kinase C [PKC] 
are also activated3,7), producing an acute (2 to 4 days) inflammatory 
response in and around the tumor that restricts tumor blood supply, 
as well as recruiting and activating the cellular immune response (ie, 
neutrophils and macrophages). Activating PKC also increases tumor 
vascular permeability that leads to destruction of the tumor vascula-
ture.3,5,6 Tumor destruction and necrosis are typically seen 4 to 7 days 
after administration.3,5,6 
Tigilanol tiglate does not prevent MCT development in dogs.5,6
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of tigilanol tiglate have been described in 
dogs receiving intratumoral administration. 3,5,6 A relatively small 
amount of the drug is absorbed into systemic circulation. Peak plas-
ma concentration (C max) ranged from 0.356 to 13.8 ng/mL (mean  
5.9 ng/mL), and elimination half-life was 2.85 to 36.87 hours. Tigi -
lanol tiglate exposure (C max and AUClast) demonstrated no relation -
ship with tumor location or total tigilanol tiglate dose.3 The systemic 
exposure of tigilanol tiglate following intratumoral injection is not 
sufficient to treat MCT at other sites or to treat metastatic disease.6 
Although tigilanol tiglate treatment is not administered by the IV 
route, following 0.025 – 0.075 mg/kg IV infusion in dogs, tigilanol 
tiglate Cmax  was 11 – 57 ng/mL,8 and half-life was 0.54 hours.5,6,8
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tigilanol tiglate is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it or 
to propylene glycol, which is present in the commercial formulation. 
Do not inject tigilanol tiglate in MCTs with volume greater than  
10 cm3, or in the margins of a surgically resected MCT 5,6; SC injec-
tion in locations above the elbow or hock may result in severe sys -
temic reactions due to mast cell degranulation and must be avoided.3 
Use tigilanol tiglate with extreme caution in MCTs that are ulcerated 
or have broken skin, as drug leakage from the site could lead to an 
underdose and unintentional drug exposure 5,6; consider applying 
a bandage to the treated area. Use tigilanol tiglate with caution in 
MCTs located in mucocutaneous regions (eg, conjunctiva, lip mar -
gins, vulva, prepuce, anus) and at the extremities (eg, tail, paws) 5,6 
and in patients with conditions associated with impaired wound 
healing (eg, uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism).3 
In completely subcutaneous MCTs, an incision may be needed to 
allow drainage of necrotic tissue.5,6 Safe use of tigilanol tiglate in dogs 
younger than 3.5 years old was not evaluated during United States 
approval studies,3 but European Union authorization provides for 
use in dogs 12 months of age and older.5 
When treating MCT in dogs, an anti-inflammatory dose of a 
corticosteroid must be started 2 days prior to tigilanol tiglate injec -
tion. Both H 1- and H 2-receptor antagonists (eg, diphenhydramine, 
famotidine) must be started the day of tigilanol tiglate injection. See 
Dosages. These concomitant treatments must continue for an addi-
tional 7 days after tigilanol tiglate administration (ie, 10 total days of 
corticosteroid and 8 total days of both antihistamines). Failure to ad-
minister these treatments for the full duration has resulted in death 
due to mast cell degranulation.3
Tigilanol tiglate does not treat metastatic disease, as it is only 
effective at the injection site. 5,6 Tumor necrosis and wound forma -
tion are expected outcomes of tigilanol tiglate administration and 
occur ≈ 4 to 7 days after injection. The size (ie, surface area) of the 

===== PDF_PAGE_1260 =====
Tigilanol Tiglate   1233
resulting wound is increased with larger tumor volume, enlarged re-
gional lymph nodes, and higher cytologic tumor grade.9 Fully healed 
wounds were noted at 4, 6, and 12 weeks after administration in 
≈58%, ≈75%, and ≈97% of dogs, respectively. 3,6,9 NOTE: Histologic 
tumor grading after tigilanol tiglate treatment is unlikely to be ac -
curate following necrosis of the tumor. Cytologic grading prior to 
treatment is recommended.3
Tigilanol tiglate is a skin and eye irritant.10 Wear appropriate per-
sonal protective equipment (eg, gloves, gown, eye protection) when 
preparing and administering tigilanol tiglate. Accidental human 
self-injection of tigilanol tiglate may cause severe wound formation. 
Do not recap needles. In case of accidental self-injection, the man -
ufacturer advises that the area be rinsed with water and to immedi -
ately seek medical attention; give the package insert to the attending 
physician.3 
Sedation of the patient may be necessary to reduce the risk for 
needlestick injury. A Luer-lock syringe must be used to administer 
tigilanol tiglate. If leakage occurs following removal of syringe, rinse 
injection site with saline to wash tigilanol tiglate from skin surface.
As there is little information available regarding the teratogenic 
potential of tigilanol tiglate, the manufacturer recommends those 
who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant avoid preparing 
or administering the drug. 
Tigilanol tiglate is intended only for intratumoral administration. 
Severe systemic reactions may result from inadvertent IV injection.
Tigilanol tiglate dosage is based on tumor volume. Consider us -
ing calipers to measure tumor dimensions8 and instituting practices 
such as redundant drug dosage, volume checking, and special alert 
labels.
Do not confuse Stelfonta® with Stelazine® or Stelara®—or tigilanol 
with tigecycline, timolol, or Tigan®. 
Adverse Effects
Swelling and bruising at the injection site, which may occur as soon 
as 2 hours after administration, on the day of treatment occurs in 
over 90% of treated dogs, whereas pain and heat are noted in ≈50% 
to 70% of dogs ≈24 hours after injection. Treatment site exudate oc-
curs ≈7 days after injection and may be serous, serosanguinous, san-
guineous, seropurulent, or purulent. Wound size following adminis-
tration is frequently, but not always, proportional to the tumor size.6  
The most frequently reported adverse effects following tigilanol 
tiglate injection include (in decreasing order) 3: injection site pain 
(52%), lameness in the treated limb (25%), vomiting (21%), diar -
rhea (21%), hypoalbuminemia (18%), anorexia/hyporexia (12%), 
regional lymph node enlargement (11%), tachycardia (10%), weight 
loss (10%), dermatitis (8%), injection site infection (7%), tachypnea 
(6%), lethargy (5%), and pyrexia (3%). Tachypnea and lethargy were 
transient in a pilot field study.8 Most adverse effects occurred in the 
first 7 days after injection.3
Anemia, neutrophilia, hypoalbuminemia, leukocytosis, monocy-
tosis, and elevated creatine kinase have been documented following 
intratumoral injection.3,6 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safe use of tigilanol tiglate in pregnant, breeding, or lactating dogs 
has not been evaluated.3,6 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Tigilanol tiglate administered IV ( NOTE: not labeled route of ad -
ministration) across a range of doses resulted in retching and vom -
iting during or immediately following the infusion, salivation, trem-
ors, swaying gait, tachypnea, and lateral recumbency.3,5,6 These effects 
were dose-related and considered serious but self-limiting and typ -
ically resolved 1 to 4 hours postinfusion. Tachycardia was observed 
with 0.075 mg/kg IV infusion,3 and seizures and death occurred fol-
lowing 0.225 mg/kg IV infusion.5,6 Infusion site reactions, including 
wound formation, were noted.3 
There is no known antidote for toxic tigilanol tiglate exposure; 
treat clinical signs with supportive therapy.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have ex -
perienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged to consult with the 
drug manufacturer, or if unavailable, contact one of the 24-hour 
poison consultation centers that specialize in providing information 
specific for veterinary patients. For general information related to 
overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poi-
son control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
Antibiotics, sedatives, and analgesics, including opioids, have been 
coprescribed for dogs receiving tigilanol tiglate. 3,6 The following 
drug interactions have either been reported or are theoretical in hu-
mans or animals receiving tigilanol tiglate and may be of significance 
in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not 
necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and per -
form additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Antineoplastic Agents (eg, toceranib, vinblastine): Use of 
other antineoplastic agents 2 months prior to tigilanol tiglate was 
prohibited in field studies.8 Use together cautiously, if at all.
 ■ Immunosuppressive Agents (eg, cyclosporine, lokivetmab, 
oclacitinib): Use of immunosuppressive agents 14 days prior to 
tigilanol tiglate was prohibited in field studies. Use together cau -
tiously.8
 ■ NSAIDs (eg, carprofen, deracoxib, firocoxib, meloxicam ): In 
dogs being treated for MCT, a corticosteroid must be adminis -
tered concomitantly with tigilanol tiglate; therefore, NSAIDs may 
need to be avoided during periods of corticosteroid use. Use of 
NSAIDs 7 days prior to tigilanol tiglate administration was pro -
hibited in field studies.8
Laboratory Considerations 
Histologic tumor grading after tigilanol tiglate treatment is unlike -
ly to be accurate due to tumor necrosis; cytologic grading prior to 
treatment should be considered.3
Dosages
DOGS:
Nonmetastatic cutaneous MCT anywhere on the body or non -
metastatic subcutaneous MCT at or distal to the elbow or hock 
(label dosage; FDA-approved): 0.5 mL/cm 3 of tumor volume in -
jected into (not under) a single MCT3 with maximum tumor vol-
ume of 10 cm3 
Concomitant medications
An anti-inflammatory dose of a corticosteroid must be started 
2 days prior to tigilanol tiglate injection, and histamine H 1- and 
H2-receptor antagonists must be started on the day of tigilanol 
tiglate injection (see Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings). 
The manufacturer’s protocol uses the following dosages:
• Prednis(ol)one 0.5 mg/kg PO twice daily for 7 days (2 full days 
before treatment, the day of treatment, and for 4 days after 
treatment), decreased to 0.5 mg/kg PO once daily for 3 addi -
tional days (10 days total)
• Diphenhydramine 2 mg/kg PO twice daily, beginning the 
morning of the day of treatment and for 7 additional days (8 
days total) 
• Famotidine 0.5 mg/kg PO twice daily beginning the morning 
of the day of treatment and for 7 additional days (8 days total)
Calculating the dose to be administered
1. Tumor volume is calculated as 0.5 × [length (cm) × width (cm) 
× height (cm)]; it is highly recommended to use calipers to 
obtain tumor measurements.8

===== PDF_PAGE_1261 =====
1234    Tigilanol Tiglate
2. Number of mL of tigilanol tiglate to administer = 0.5 mL × 
tumor volume.
3. Confirm that tigilanol tiglate dose does not exceed 0.25 mL/kg.
4. The minimum dose is 0.1 mL,  and the maximum dose is  
5 mL, regardless of body weight, tumor volume, or number of 
tumors. NOTE: In a small dose-finding study, using dosages 
less than what is listed on the label demonstrated lower efficacy 
and a higher rate of adverse effects.11
Administration
1. Shaving the tumor slightly beyond the margins is recommend-
ed, unless doing so requires excessive manipulation of the tu -
mor or causes the dog stress.11
2. Consult the product label for administration technique. A Lu-
er-lock syringe must be used with a 23-gauge needle to inject 
tigilanol tiglate into the tumor with a dispersed (ie, fanning) 
pattern such that the tumor is fully perfused. Do not inject in 
a blood vessel or tumor margins, beyond tumor periphery, or 
deep into the tumor. Avoid manipulation of the tumor prior 
to injection to minimize the risk for mast cell degranulation. 
3. Sedation of the patient may be necessary to decrease risk of 
accidental self-injection.
Dogs with an incomplete response may be given a second dose 
30 days after the first injection. The corticosteroid and antihista -
mines described above are also required for the second treatment. 
Tigilanol tiglate dose for the second treatment must be based on 
the tumor volume calculated at the time of the second treatment.
Nonresectable, nonmetastatic cutaneous MCT or nonmetastat-
ic subcutaneous MCT at or distal to the elbow or hock (extra- 
label): 0.5 mL/cm 3 of tumor volume, following the calculations, 
limits, cautions, and techniques presented in the FDA-approved 
labeled-dosage protocol above, with the following exceptions: 
maximum tumor volume is 8 cm3, maximum dosage is 4 mL/dog 
(not to exceed 0.15 mg/kg), and, if needed, a second dose may be 
repeated 28 days after the first dose. The tumor must be accessible 
for intratumoral injection. More than 1 MCT may be treated per 
dog provided the preceding limits are not exceeded.5,6
HORSES :
Treatment of equine sarcoid or squamous cell carcinoma (extra- 
label): 0.35 mg/cm3 (not mL/ cm3) of tumor volume injected with 
a Luer-lock syringe using a dispersed pattern to fully perfuse the 
lesion.4 Minimum dose of 0.05 – 0.1 mg/horse and maximum dose 
of 0.2 – 2 mg/horse; dose may vary based on lesion location. Stand-
ing sedation and local or regional anesthesia may be used. Surgical 
excision of the sarcoid pedicle was performed to measure and treat 
the tumor base. 
Concomitant medication 
• Immediately following tigilanol tiglate injection, administer 
flunixin 1.1 mg/kg IV . 
• After tigilanol tiglate treatment, administer phenylbutazone 
4.4 mg/kg PO twice daily for 3 days, followed by 2.2 mg/kg PO 
twice daily for the next 7 days if required. 
• For ocular mucocutaneous and peri-orbital lesions, a subpal -
pebral lavage system must be placed at the time of treatment to 
administer an ophthalmic NSAID (eg, ketorolac, 0.1 mL every 
6 hours) and atropine 1% (0.1 mL every 6 hours); a UV-pro -
tecting head veil is required.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy 
 ■ Signs of systemic mast cell degranulation for up to 7 days after 
treatment may include vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia/hyporexia, 
lethargy, urticaria, hypotension, altered breathing, and edema or 
bruising at or away from the MCT treatment site 
 ■ CBC, general chemistry, albumin, creatine kinase
Client Information
 ■ Y our veterinarian will provide an information sheet prior to ad-
ministration of this drug. 
 ■ Tigilanol tiglate will be administered by your veterinarian. Seda -
tion of your dog may be required to allow safe administration of 
the drug.
 ■ At least 3 other medications are used with tigilanol tiglate. It is ab-
solutely essential that these medications are administered exactly 
as prescribed, as death has occurred when these medications were 
not used, or were used improperly (eg, not giving the full 8- or 
10-day treatment).
 ■ Tigilanol tiglate destroys the mast cell tumor. In doing so, a wound 
will form where the drug was administered within a week of ad -
ministration. This is a normal and expected part of treatment.
 ■ Reactions (eg, swelling, redness, heat, pain) at the treatment site 
may begin as soon as 2 hours after injection and may last up to 1 
week or longer. These reactions may be painful; talk to your veter-
inarian if you think your dog may need pain relievers. 
 ■ As the tumor breaks down, the skin at the injection site may dark-
en or break open. A pocket, or wound, with a red and healthy-ap-
pearing border will develop at the site and progressively heal over 
several weeks. In some cases, the size of the wound may exceed 
the size of the original tumor. Antibiotics may be required if an 
infection develops in or around the wound.
 ■ The wound is typically left uncovered. Discharge from the treat -
ment site can be cleaned with warm water when necessary. Wear 
disposable gloves while cleaning. Use of preventive measures (eg, 
Elizabethan collar, bandage) may be needed if your dog is exces -
sively grooming (licking) the treatment site. Other pets should be 
prevented from grooming the treatment site. 
 ■ Wound healing typically occurs 4 to 6 weeks after injection but 
may take longer in some dogs.
 ■ Drinking water should be made accessible to treated dogs.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian if your dog stops eating, develops lame-
ness, has repeated vomiting or diarrhea, has difficulty breathing, 
or shows signs of severe pain, or if the treatment site appears to be 
increasing in size, is irritated, or has extensive swelling, redness, 
or bruising.
 ■ Thoroughly wash any human skin that comes in contact with 
the treatment site, wound discharge, or materials contaminated 
with wound discharge (eg, bedding). Wash soiled items separately 
from other laundry.
 ■ If there are multiple animals in the house, they may need to be 
separated to prevent grooming or trauma to the treated site.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tigilanol tiglate is a phorbol ester with a molecular weight of 563. 
The commercial product is a clear colorless solution that also con -
tains propylene glycol (40% v/v). Tigilanol tiglate is an epoxytigli -
ane isolated from the seed of Fontainea picrosperma, a tree native to 
Australia.7 
Tigilanol tiglate may also be known as EBC-46, phorbol triace -
tate, tigliane, TT, or Stelfonta®.
Storage/Stability
Tigilanol tiglate injection must be stored refrigerated at 2°C to 
8°C (36°F-46°F). Do not freeze. Store in the manufacturer’s carton 
to protect from light. Discard unused portion in accordance with 
routine medical waste.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
None noted

===== PDF_PAGE_1262 =====
Tildipirosin   1235
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Tigilanol Tiglate Injection: 1 mg/mL solution in 2 mL single-use vi-
als; Stelfonta®, (Rx). NADA# 141-541
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Tildipirosin
(til-di-pir-oh-sin) Zuprevo® 
Macrolide Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights 
 ▶ Injectable macrolide antibiotic used as a single SC dose in beef 
and nonlactating dairy cattle
 ▶ Used as a single IM dose in swine (not approved in the United 
States) 
 ▶ Precautions: do not use the cattle product in swine; do not 
administer IV; do not use in chickens or turkeys. 
 ▶ Do not use in automatically powered syringes. In case of hu-
man injection, contact a physician immediately. Use precau-
tions when handling any tildipirosin product.
 ▶ Pain and swelling at the injection site are the most common 
adverse effects.
Uses/Indications 
Tildipirosin is an injectable macrolide antibiotic that is approved by 
the FDA for the treatment of bovine respiratory disease (BRD) as -
sociated with Mannheimia haemolytica, Pasteurella multocida, and 
Histophilus somni in beef and nonlactating dairy cattle and for the 
control of respiratory disease in beef and nonlactating dairy cattle 
at high risk for developing BRD associated with Mannheimia hae-
molytica, Pasteurella multocida, and Histophilus somni. A study in 
heifers comparing metaphylactic antimicrobial administration of 
tildipirosin, tulathromycin, or placebo administered 10 days before 
experimental inoculation with Mannheimia haemolytica concluded 
that tildipirosin-treated animals had less pulmonary damage and 
fewer clinical signs of illness when compared to the other groups.1 
In the EU, tildipirosin is also approved for the treatment of swine 
respiratory disease (SRD) associated with Actinobacillus pleuropneu-
moniae, Pasteurella multocida, Bordetella bronchiseptica,  and Hae-
mophilus parasuis sensitive to tildipirosin.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated tildip -
irosin as a Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobial for 
human medicine.2 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) An-
timicrobial Classification has designated tildipirosin as a Veterinary 
Critically Important antimicrobial.3 
Pharmacology/Actions 
Similar to other macrolides, the antimicrobial activity of tildipirosin 
is due to its binding to the ribosomal 50S subunit of bacterial cells 
and inhibiting bacterial protein synthesis. Tildipirosin is generally 
classified as a time-dependent antibiotic, although it may be concen-
tration-dependent (AUC/MIC ratio) against some isolates of Mann-
heimia haemolytica and Pasteurella multocida. 
Significant increases in MIC of P multocida and M haemolytica  
to tildipirosin can be conveyed by the presence of the erm(42) gene.4 
Macrolides inhibit the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines, 
phospholipase activity, and the release of leukotrienes and have anti-
inflammatory effects on bovine macrophages and neutrophils.5
Pharmacokinetics 
In cattle, after a single 4 mg/kg SC injection, bioavailability was 78%, 
and peak plasma concentrations of 0.7 to 0.8 µg/mL occurred within 
1 hour of dosing. Concentrations of tildipirosin in lung and bronchi-
al fluid far exceed those in plasma. Lung:plasma ratios range from 
28 times at 4 hours to 214 times at 240 hours. Bronchial fluid:plasma 
ratios are 5 times at 4 hours; up to 72 times at 240 hours. The elimi-
nation half-life was ≈9 days in plasma and 10 to 11 days in lung and 
bronchial fluid.6,7 Because of the extensive partitioning of macrolides 
into tissues and because of their multi-fold greater concentrations in 
bronchial fluid relative to that observed in the blood, plasma drug 
concentrations underestimate concentrations at the site of action.
A research publication suggests that upon administration to beef 
cattle and pigs at the recommended dose, colonic tildipirosin activity 
remains at subinhibitory concentrations far below the MICs against 
bovine and porcine foodborne pathogens and commensal bacteria.8
In pigs, after 4 mg/kg IM, peak plasma concentrations occurred 
within 23 minutes. Only ≈30% is bound to porcine plasma proteins. 
The mean terminal half-life was ≈4.4 days. Concentrations in the 
lung peaked about 1 day after dosing, and the lung half-life was ≈7 
days.9,10 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Tildipirosin is contraindicated in animals hypersensitive to it or oth-
er macrolide antibiotics. Tildipirosin is NOT for use in chickens or 
turkeys, and the 18% product must NOT be used in swine. Tildipi -
rosin must NOT be given IV .
Cross-resistance can occur with other macrolides, and use with 
other macrolides or lincosamides is not advised. SC injection in cat-
tle may result in local tissue reactions that can persist beyond the 
slaughter withdrawal period and may result in trim loss of edible 
tissue at slaughter.
Care must be taken to avoid accidental injection in humans, as 
toxicology studies in laboratory animals (including dogs) showed 
cardiovascular effects after IM administration. Do not use automat-
ically powered syringes that do not have an additional protection 
system. In case of human injection, seek medical advice immediately 
and show the package insert or label to the physician. Avoid direct 
contact with skin and eyes. If accidental eye exposure occurs, rinse 
eyes with clean water. If accidental skin exposure occurs, wash the 
skin immediately with soap and water. Wash hands after use. Tildip-
irosin may cause sensitization by skin contact.
Adverse Effects 
In cattle, pain and swelling at injection sites are the most commonly 
reported adverse effects, with pain on palpation persisting for 1 day 
in most treated cattle. Swelling can last at the injection site for up to 
21 days posttreatment, and tissue lesions have been noted at 35 days 
postinjection.7,11 Swelling and inflammation, which may be severe, 
may be seen at the injection site after administration. SC injection 
may result in local tissue reactions, which persist beyond the slaugh-
ter withdrawal period. This may result in trim loss of edible tissue at 
slaughter.
In pigs, swelling at the injection site after IM injection can persist 
for up to 3 days but is not painful upon palpation. Injection site re -
actions resolved completely within 21 days of injection.10 Shock-like 
reactions with fatal outcomes can occur rarely.10
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
The safety of the veterinary medicinal product has not been estab -
lished during pregnancy and lactation; however, no evidence for any 
selective developmental or reproductive effects was noted in any of 
the laboratory studies. 
The product is not labeled for use in lactating dairy cattle.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1263 =====
1236    Tiletamine/Zolazepam
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 
Limited information is available. In cattle, dosages up to 5 times rec-
ommended caused little demonstrable effects other than localized 
tissue reactions.7
Some piglets that were given 3 times (12 mg/kg) and 5 times  
(20 mg/kg) the normal doses IM developed muscle tremors, weak -
ness, or showed subdued activity. One animal developed a shock-like 
syndrome after 20 mg/kg and was euthanized. Mortality was seen at 
dosages of 25 mg/kg or greater.10
Dogs given IM doses of 20 mg/kg caused a slight but significant 
decrease in blood pressure.11,12
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions 
No specific drug interactions were noted, although the EU label 
states: There is cross resistance with other macrolides. Do not admin-
ister with antimicrobials with a similar mode of action such as other 
macrolides or lincosamides.13
Laboratory Considerations 
None were noted.
Dosages 
CATTLE: 
Treatment of bovine respiratory disease (BRD) associated with 
Mannheimia haemolytica, Pasteurella multocida, and Histoph-
ilus somni in beef and nonlactating dairy cattle and for the con-
trol of respiratory disease in beef and nonlactating dairy cattle 
at high risk for developing BRD associated with Mannheimia 
haemolytica, Pasteurella multocida, and Histophilus somni  
(label dose, FDA-approved): 4 mg/kg SC as a single dose in the 
neck. Do not inject more than 10 mL per injection site.7     
SWINE: 
Treatment of swine respiratory disease (SRD) associated with 
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae, Pasteurella multocida, Bor -
detella bronchiseptica, and Haemophilus parasuis  sensitive to 
tildipirosin (extra-label):  NOTE: The 18% cattle product must 
not be used in swine; the swine product (EU) is 40 mg/mL (4%). 
Administer 4 mg/kg IM once only. The injection volume should 
not exceed 5 mL per injection site. Start treatment in the early 
stages of the disease and re-evaluate within 48 hours; if clinical 
signs persist or increase, antibiotic treatment should be changed.10
Monitoring 
Clinical efficacy. The product information for the UK products states: In 
cattle, evaluate the response to treatment within 2 to 3 days after injection. 
If clinical signs of respiratory disease persist or increase, treatment should 
be changed to using another antibiotic.13 In pigs, it is recommended to 
evaluate the response to treatment within 48 hours after injection. If 
clinical signs of respiratory disease persist, increase, or if relapse occurs, 
treatment should be changed to using another antibiotic.10
Client Information
 ■ Understand and follow use restrictions and withdrawal times for 
food animals.
 ■ Humans with a known drug allergy to macrolide antibiotics (eg, 
erythromycin, clarithromycin) should avoid contact with the 
medication. 
 ■ Do not use automatically powered syringes that do not have an 
additional protection system. In case of accidental self-injection, 
seek medical advice immediately and show the package leaflet or 
label to the physician. In case of skin or eye exposure, wash/flush 
with clean water.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tildipirosin (CAS Registry: 328898-40-4; ATCvet code: QJ01FA96) 
is a 16-membered semisynthetic macrolide antimicrobial agent.
The injectable solution is a clear, yellowish solution. Excipients in 
the injectable solution include citric acid monohydrate, propylene 
glycol, and water for injection.
Tildipirosin may also be known as 20, 23-di-piperidynyl-myca -
minosyl-tylonolide, or PMT. The trade name is Zuprevo®.
Storage/Stability 
Store the injectable solution at temperatures at or below 30°C (86°F). 
Do not freeze. The EU label states not to store above 25°C (77°F). The 
maximum storage time after the first puncture is 28 days at or below 
25°C (77°F). Do not puncture 50 mL and 100 mL vial stoppers more 
than 8 times or the 250 mL vial stopper more than 16 times.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted. The EU label states: In the ab -
sence of compatibility studies, this veterinary medicinal product must 
not be mixed with other veterinary medicinal products.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Tildipirosin Injection: 180 mg/mL (18%) in 50 mL, 100 mL, and  
250 mL multidose vials; Zuprevo®; (Rx). FDA-approved (NADA# 
141-334) for use in cattle. Not for use in female dairy cattle 20 months 
of age or older or in pre-ruminating calves. Do not use in calves to be 
processed for veal. Withdrawal time is 21 days. (Withdrawal time in 
EU label is 47 days.)
Tildipirosin 40 mg/mL injection for use in swine is available in EU 
(not available in the US).
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Tiletamine/Zolazepam
(tye-let-a-meen/zoe-laze-a-pam) Telazol®
Injectable Anesthetic/Tranquilizer 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Combination similar to ketamine/diazepam but with a longer 
duration of effect
 ▶ Contraindications include pancreatic disease, New Zealand 
white rabbits, severe cardiac or pulmonary disease, or during 
pregnancy.
 ▶ Use with caution in patients that have renal disease and in 
large exotic cats.
 ▶ Apply ophthalmic lubricant after administration
 ▶ Dosages may need to be reduced in geriatric or debilitated 
animals, or in animals with renal dysfunction.
 ▶ Adverse effects include respiratory depression, pain after IM 
injection, athetoid movements, tachycardia (especially dogs), 
emesis during emergence, excessive salivation and bronchi-
al/tracheal secretions, transient apnea, vocalization, erratic 
and/or prolonged recovery, involuntary muscular twitching, 
hypertonia, cyanosis, cardiac arrest, pulmonary edema, muscle 
rigidity, and either hypertension or hypotension.
 ▶ Monitor body temperature (may cause hypothermia)
 ▶ DEA Schedule III (C-III) controlled substance

===== PDF_PAGE_1264 =====
Tiletamine/Zolazepam   1237
Uses/Indications
In dogs, tiletamine/zolazepam is labeled for induction of anesthe -
sia and for restraint and minor procedures of short duration (≈30 
minutes) that require mild to moderate analgesia. Tiletamine/zolaz-
epam is also labeled for restraint or anesthesia combined with mus-
cle relaxation in cats. Although tiletamine/zolazepam is not FDA-ap-
proved for other species, it has been used in many domestic, exotic, 
and wild species. A potential disadvantage of this product is that it 
is a fixed-ratio combination and the pharmacokinetics of each drug 
can vary significantly among species.
Pharmacology/Actions
Tiletamine is a dissociative anesthetic and zolazepam is a benzodiaz-
epine. The pharmacology of this drug combination is similar to that 
of ketamine combined with diazepam or midazolam. 
In cats, tiletamine can briefly (≈1 minute) decrease blood pres -
sure after IV injections, but this parameter increases above baseline 
after this brief period. 1 In dogs, a persistent tachycardia is followed 
by decreased blood pressure, although cardiac output typically re -
mains unchanged. It can cause apneustic breathing (like ketamine); 
however, normal minute ventilation and pCO 2 is maintained. 2,3 In 
dogs, induction with tiletamine IV had no clinical effects on intra -
ocular pressure.4 The same outcomes were noted when this drug was 
administered IM and intranasal in cats.5 
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, the onset of action following IM injection averages 7.5 min-
utes. The mean duration of surgical anesthesia is ≈27 minutes, with 
recovery times averaging ≈4 hours. The duration of the tiletamine ef-
fect is longer than that of zolazepam, so there is a shorter duration of 
tranquilization and muscle relaxation than there is anesthesia. Less 
than 4% of the drugs are reported to be excreted unchanged in the 
urine in dogs. Reported elimination half-life for tiletamine is 1.25 to 
2.5 hours, and 1.5 hours for zolazepam.
In cats, the onset of action is reported to be within 5 to 12 minutes 
after IM injection. Duration of anesthesia is dose dependent, but is 
usually≈21 to 60 minutes at peak effect, which is reported to be ≈3 
times the duration of ketamine anesthesia. The duration of effect of 
the zolazepam component is longer than that of the tiletamine, so 
there is a greater degree of tranquilization than anesthesia during 
the recovery period. The recovery times vary in length from ≈1 to 5.5 
hours. Reported elimination half-life for tiletamine is 2.5 hours and 
4.5 hours for zolazepam. These differences in half-life result in less 
predictable anesthetic effects when multiple doses are administered. 
In xylazine-sedated horses, tiletamine/zolazepam 1.5 mg/kg 
IV (over 15 seconds) produced the following pharmacokinetic 
data (means reported): For tiletamine and zolazepam: clearance,  
96 mL/minute/kg and 6.7 mL/minute/kg; volume of distribution, 
0.79 L/kg and 0.76 L/kg; terminal half-life, 29 minutes and 235 min-
utes. Tiletamine is cleared much more rapidly than zolazepam. At 
this dose, recumbency lasted for 30 to 43 minutes, and the mean 
time to standing was 39 minutes. The authors judged recoveries to 
be excellent. 
In pigs, higher concentrations of zolazepam were observed in pig 
plasma and it was cleared more slowly compared with tiletamine. 
Apparent clearance was 11 L/hour (zolazepam) versus 134  L/hour 
(tiletamine); and half-life was 2.76 hours (zolazepam) versus 1.97 
hours (tiletamine). Three metabolites of zolazepam and 1 metabolite 
of tiletamine were identified in pig urine, plasma, and microsomal 
incubations.6
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tiletamine/zolazepam should only be used in situations in which suf-
ficient monitoring and patient-support capabilities (eg, intubation, 
ventilation) are available.  Tiletamine/zolazepam is contraindicated 
in animals with pancreatic disease and severe cardiac or pulmonary 
disease. Animals with renal insufficiency may have prolonged dura-
tion of anesthetic action or recovery times.
Because tiletamine/zolazepam may cause hypothermia, suscep -
tible animals (eg, small body surface area, low ambient tempera -
tures) should be monitored carefully and a supplemental heat source 
should be provided if needed. Like ketamine, tiletamine/zolazepam 
does not abolish pinnal, palpebral, pedal, laryngeal, and pharyngeal 
reflexes, and its use (alone) may not be adequate if surgery is to be 
performed on these areas.
It has been reported that this drug is contraindicated in New Zea-
land white rabbits due to renal toxicity. 7 Other breeds seem to be 
unaffected.
Tiletamine/zolazepam is often avoided for use in large, exotic cats, 
as it reportedly can cause seizures, prolonged recovery, permanent 
neurologic abnormalities, or death. Although several clinicians have 
suggested that tiletamine/zolazepam is contraindicated in tigers (Pan-
thera tigris), an evaluation of the literature suggests that although ad-
verse effects can occur, tiletamine/zolazepam is not contraindicated.8 
A study found no major differences in pharmacokinetics between ti-
gers and leopards (Panthera pardus).9 A study evaluating the effects of 
tiletamine/zolazepam in combination with detomidine (TZD) in 9 ti-
gers found it to be effective in immobilizing captive healthy tigers and 
no neurologic and/or important adverse reactions were noted; howev-
er, hypertension and ataxia may be seen during recovery.10
Animals’ eyes remain open after receiving tiletamine/zolazepam; 
they should be protected from injury and an ophthalmic lubricant 
should be applied to prevent excessive drying of the cornea. When 
dissociative anesthetic agents (ie, ketamine, tiletamine) are used, ani-
mals maintain the swallowing reflex, making intubation challenging, 
especially in cats. The use of sedatives before the administration of 
tiletamine/zolazepam may improve the outcome. Topical lidocaine 
(on the arytenoid cartilages) or rocuronium IV (with ventilatory 
support)11 has been used in cats to facilitate tracheal intubation.
The effects of tiletamine (eg, anesthesia with concurrent athetosis, 
muscle rigidity, convulsions) typically outlast the duration of zolaz-
epam effects in dogs, which may cause agitated recoveries. See Ad-
verse Effects.
Dosages may need to be reduced in geriatric or debilitated ani -
mals or animals with renal dysfunction.
Adverse Effects
Respiratory depression is a possibility, especially when higher doses 
are administered. Apnea may occur; observe animal carefully. Pain 
after IM injection (especially in cats) has been noted, which may be a 
result of the low pH of the solution. Athetoid movements (eg, constant 
succession of slow, writhing, involuntary movements of flexion, exten-
sion, pronation) may occur; do not give additional tiletamine/zolaze-
pam in an attempt to diminish these actions. Large doses given SC or 
IM (vs small doses given IV) may result in longer, rougher recoveries. 
Recoveries in dogs can be rougher than those usually seen in cats.
In dogs, tachycardia may be a common effect and last for 30 min-
utes. Insufficient anesthesia after recommended doses has been re -
ported in dogs.
Tiletamine/zolazepam has been implicated in causing nephrosis 
in lagomorphs and prolonged recovery, neurologic signs, and death 
in large cats (specifically in tigers).
Other adverse effects include emesis during emergence, exces -
sive salivation and bronchial/tracheal secretions (if atropine not 
administered beforehand), transient apnea, vocalization, erratic 
and/or prolonged recovery, involuntary muscular twitching, hyper-
tonia, cyanosis, cardiac arrest, pulmonary edema, muscle rigidity, 
seizure activity, and either hypertension or hypotension. 12 Atropine  
0.04 mg/kg IV , IM, or SC can be used concurrently to control hyper-
salivation.

===== PDF_PAGE_1265 =====
1238    Tiletamine/Zolazepam
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Tiletamine/zolazepam crosses the placenta and may cause respiratory 
depression in newborns; use for cesarean sections is contraindicated.12 
The teratogenic potential of the drug is unknown, and it is not rec -
ommended for use during any stage of pregnancy or during lactation.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The manufacturer claims a 2 times margin of safety in dogs, and a 
4.5 times margin of safety in cats. Lethal doses can occur at ≈5 to 
10 times the labeled IM doses. A preliminary study in dogs suggests 
that doxapram 5.5 mg/kg will enhance respirations and arousal af -
ter tiletamine/zolazepam.13 In massive overdoses, it is suggested that 
mechanically assisted ventilation be performed if necessary and oth-
er clinical signs treated supportively. Use of flumazenil to reverse 
zolazepam is not commonly done, as its use will exacerbate the ef -
fects of tiletamine, which cannot be reversed.
High doses of tiletamine have caused acute tubular necrosis in 
New Zealand white rabbits.14,15
Drug Interactions
Little specific information is available presently on drug interactions 
with this product. The following drug interactions either have been 
reported or are theoretical in animals receiving tiletamine/zolaze -
pam and may be of significance. Unless otherwise noted, use togeth-
er is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks 
and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Anesthetics, Inhalational ( eg, isoflurane, sevoflurane ): 
Dose may need to be reduced when used concomitantly with ti -
letamine/zolazepam.
 ■ Barbiturates (eg, phenobarbital): Dose may need to be re -
duced when used concomitantly with tiletamine/zolazepam.
 ■ Chloramphenicol : In cats, anesthesia is prolonged an average 
of ≈30 minutes by chloramphenicol; however, in dogs, chloram -
phenicol apparently has no effect on recovery times.
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine): Can cause increased re -
spiratory and cardiac depression
The following are interactions for the related compounds ketamine 
and midazolam and could apply to tiletamine/zolazepam:
Ketamine:
 ■ Neuromuscular blockers  (eg, succinylcholine, tubocu -
rarine): May cause enhanced or prolonged respiratory depression
 ■ Thyroid hormones : Combination has induced hypertension 
and tachycardia in humans; beta-blockers (eg, propranolol) may 
be of benefit in treating these effects.
Midazolam:
 ■ Anesthetics, Inhalational ( eg, isoflurane, sevoflurane ): 
Midazolam may decrease the dosages required.
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, fluconazole, itraconazole, keto -
conazole): May increase midazolam concentrations
 ■ Calcium Channel Blockers  (eg, diltiazem, verapamil ): 
May increase midazolam concentrations
 ■ Cimetidine : May increase midazolam concentrations
 ■ CNS Depressants, Other : May increase the risk for respira -
tory depression
 ■ Macrolides  (eg, clarithromycin, erythromycin): May increase 
midazolam concentrations
 ■ Opioids : May increase the hypnotic effects of midazolam; hypo-
tension has been reported when used with meperidine.
 ■ Phenobarbital : May decrease peak concentrations and AUC 
of midazolam
 ■ Rifampin : May decrease peak concentrations and AUC of mid -
azolam
Dosages
NOTE: Listed dosages are for the combined amounts of tilet -
amine/zolazepam.
DOGS:
NOTE: The label dosages for dogs is considered to be greater than 
is necessary for most indications. The label indications and dos -
ages are provided below but the use of lower, extra-label dosages 
should be considered.
Restraint for diagnostic purposes (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
6.6 – 9.9 mg/kg IM12 
Minor procedures of short duration (label dosage; FDA-ap -
proved): 9.9 – 13.2 mg/kg IM. 12 If supplemental doses are nec -
essary, give doses less than the initial dose; total dose should not 
exceed 26.4 mg/kg.
Induction of anesthesia (label dosage; FDA-approved):  
2.2 – 4.4 mg/kg IV slowly over 30 to 45 seconds.12 Additional drug 
may be given if the depth of anesthesia is not sufficient 60 seconds 
after administration; total dose of 4.4 mg/kg IV should not be ex-
ceeded. Maintain anesthesia with an inhalant anesthetic.12
Anesthetic induction (extra-label): 3 – 4.5 mg/kg IV followed by 
isoflurane anesthesia16
Aggressive (difficult to handle) dogs (extra-label): 1 – 2 mg/kg 
IM. Use only if there is insufficient sedation from a combination of 
opioid, higher dose medetomidine, and midazolam.17 Anecdotally, 
5 mg/kg IM in combination with an opioid (eg, morphine, hydro-
morphone)
CATS:
NOTE: The label dosages for cats is considered to be greater than 
is necessary for most situations. The label indications and dos -
ages are provided below but the use of lower, extra-label dosages 
should be considered.
Procedures such as dentistry, abscess treatment, foreign body 
removal (label dosage; FDA-approved): 9.7 – 11.9 mg/kg IM 12
Minor procedures of short duration that require mild to mod-
erate levels of analgesia  (eg, lacerations, castration) (label dos -
age; FDA-approved): 10.6 – 12.5 mg/kg IM12
Ovariohysterectomy and onychectomy (label dosage; FDA-ap -
proved): 14.3 – 15.8 mg/kg IM. 12 If supplemental doses are nec -
essary, give doses in increments that are less than the initial dose; 
total dose should not exceed 72 mg/kg. 
Procedures that require relief of mild pain (extra-label):  
2 – 5 mg/kg IV or 5 – 10 mg/kg IM. The tiletamine/zolazepam vial 
can be reconstituted with butorphanol 2.5 mg (using 10 mg/mL 
solution) and dexmedetomidine 2.5 mL (using 0.5 mg/mL solu -
tion) and given IM.18 
Procedures that require relief of moderate to severe pain  (ex-
tra-label): Tiletamine/zolazepam 3 mg/kg IM in combination 
with methadone 0.2 mg/kg and given IM provided superior seda-
tion and similar recovery when compared to acepromazine-meth-
adone combination.19
Sedation of healthy cats prior to blood donation (extra-label): 
5 mg/kg IM20
Oral transmucosal (OTM) administration (extra-label):  
10 – 15 mg/kg OTM effectively restrained healthy cats under ex -
perimental conditions.21
Restraint of aggressive cats: Anecdotally, 3 – 5 mg/kg IM in com-
bination with an opioid (eg, hydromorphone) results in profound 
sedation.

===== PDF_PAGE_1266 =====
Tiletamine/Zolazepam   1239
HORSES : 
Anesthesia (extra-label): Xylazine 1.1 mg/kg IV , 5 minutes prior to 
tiletamine/zolazepam 1.65 – 2.2 mg/kg IV . Recumbency lasted 30 to 
43 minutes, and mean time to stand was 39 minutes. Both induction 
and recovery quality were subjectively evaluated as excellent.22,23
Immobilization (extra-label): Tiletamine/zolazepam  2.4 mg/kg 
IM in combination with detomidine 0.04 mg/kg IM. Time to ster-
nal recumbency was 76 minutes, and time to standing was 118 
minutes.24
RUMINANTS :
Chemical restraint (extra-label): 
Combining tiletamine/zolazepam with ketamine and xyla -
zine (TKX-Ru) for capturing intractable ruminant patients 
and large exotic hoof stock : Reconstitute a 500 mg vial of tilet -
amine/zolazepam with ketamine 250 mg (2.5 mL) and large ani -
mal xylazine 100 mg (1 mL), yielding a final volume of 4 mL. Use  
1.25 – 1.5 mL/110 to 115 kg (242.5 lb to 253.5 lb) body weight for 
smaller-sized ruminant patients, and 1 mL/110 to 115 kg (242.5 
lb to 253.5 lb) body weight for large-sized ruminant patients. Typ-
ically administered via a dart gun or pole syringe. Patients gener-
ally become compliant and recumbent in 5 to 10 minutes.25
Combining tiletamine/zolazepam  with ketamine and deto -
midine (TZDK) in free-range cattle : Prepare solution of tilet -
amine/zolazepam 52.6 mg/mL in combination with detomidine  
4.2 mg/mL and ketamine 52.6 mg/mL. Administer 1 mL/100 kg 
(220.5 lb) body weight (body weight estimated visually) IM26,27
Sheep undergoing surgical procedures (extra-label): 
a) 8 – 12 mg/kg IV28
b) 12 mg/kg IM yields surgical anesthesia lasting 30 minutes28
NEW WORLD CAMELIDS :
Sedative/analgesic with xylazine (extra-label): Tiletamine/zolaz-
epam 2 mg/kg in combination with xylazine 0.2 or 0.4 mg/kg IM 
provided antinociceptive effects for ≈30 to 50 minutes. 29 Tran-
sient hypoxemia can be seen with xylazine administration; how -
ever, this is not clinically relevant in healthy llamas. Tiletamine/
zolazepam alone was deemed suitable only for immobilization for 
non-painful procedures.
Sedative/analgesic with dexmedetomidine (extra-label): In 
adult male alpacas, tiletamine/zolazepam 2 mg/kg IM in combi -
nation with dexmedetomidine 0.01 – 0.02 mg/kg IM significantly 
increased the duration of lateral recumbency, time to standing, 
and response to painful stimuli compared with tiletamine/zolaz -
epam alone.30
SWINE:
Sedative/analgesic in combination with ketamine and xylazine 
(extra-label): Reconstitute a 500 mg vial of tiletamine/zolazepam 
with ketamine 250 mg (2.5 mL) and large animal xylazine 250 mg 
(2.5 mL), yielding a final volume of 5 mL and a concentration of 
50 mg/mL of each drug. For sedation: 0.01 mL/kg IM; for surgical 
anesthesia: 0.02 mL/kg IM. W ARNING: Anecdotally, this combi-
nation has been associated with deaths after recovery.31 
Sedative/analgesic in companion pigs (extra-label): For proce -
dures of short duration (15 to 30 minutes), 2 mg/kg IM; proce -
dures of longer duration (30 to 60 minutes): 3 – 4 mg/kg IM32 
Anesthesia/sedation (extra-label): 
a) A variety of protocols have been used in pigs. The use of tilet-
amine/zolazepam alone is not recommended due to insufficient 
CNS depression and analgesia, rough recovery, paddling, 
vocalization, and hypersalivation. Can be used in combina -
tion with ketamine and xylazine. Combine ketamine 250 mg  
(2.5 mL of 100 mg/mL) with xylazine 250 mg (2.5 mL of  
100 mg/mL) to a vial of tiletamine/zolazepam. Use 1 mL per 35 
to 75 kg IM, depending on sedation required. Use one-half of 
these doses when administering to pot-bellied pigs.33
b) Short-term anesthesia in domestic pigs: Tiletamine/zolazepam 
8 mg/kg IM with methadone 0.2 mg/kg IM in neck muscles 
provided adequate anesthesia for minor procedures lasting 
≈30 minutes but was associated with poor recovery.34
c) A study compared induction and anesthesia of tiletamine/zolaz-
epam/ketamine/xylazine (4.4/2.2/2.2 mg/kg), tiletamine/zolaz-
epam/xylazine (4.4/2.2 mg/kg), tiletamine/zolazepam/xyla -
zine (4.4/4.4 mg/kg), and ketamine/xylazine (2.2/2.2 mg/kg).  
All combinations were administered IM. Both tiletamine/
zolazepam/xylazine combinations were deemed to be superi -
or.35
d) In miniature pigs, tiletamine/zolazepam  3.5 mg/kg IM has 
been combined with xylazine 1.32 mg/kg IM and tramadol  
1.8 mg/kg IM to increase depth and duration of anesthesia. 36 
This combination can be antagonized with atipamezole, fluma-
zenil, and naloxone.37
FERRETS :
Sedative/analgesic (extra-label): Tiletamine/zolazepam 22 mg/kg  
IM.38 Tiletamine/zolazepam 1.5 mg/kg in combination with 
xylazine 1.5 mg/kg IM; may reverse xylazine with yohimbine  
0.05 mg/kg IM. Tiletamine/zolazepam  1.5 mg/kg with xylazine 
1.5 mg/kg and butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg IM; may reverse xylazine 
with yohimbine 0.05 mg/kg IM.39
SMALL MAMMALS :
Chemical restraint in small rodents  (extra-label): 6 – 10 mg/kg 
IM is adequate prior to inhalation anesthesia. Advantages over 
ketamine include better muscle relaxation, small volume of in -
jection, rapid induction time, and a wide margin of safety. Dis -
advantages of this drug combination are increased respiratory 
secretions, variability in recovery times, and short shelf-life after 
reconstitution.40 Not recommended for New Zealand white rab -
bits.41
REPTILES :
NOTE: Significant interspecies and interpatient differences in ef-
fectiveness can be seen.
a) Large snakes: 3 mg/kg IM to facilitate handling and anesthe -
sia. Administer 30 to 45 minutes prior to handling. Sedation 
may persist for up to 48 hours. May also be used in crocodil -
ians at 4 – 8 mg/kg42
b) 3 – 10 mg/kg IM. Lizards and snakes can generally be treated 
with lower end of dosage range and chelonians may require 
high end. If sedation is inadequate, may give incrementally up 
to the maximum dose. Monitor closely for apnea and ventilate 
if required43
c) At lower doses of 4 – 10 mg/kg, sedation may be sufficient for 
some procedures (eg, venipuncture, gastric lavage, intubation 
for inhalation anesthesia). At higher doses of 15 – 40 mg/kg,  
recovery may be greatly prolonged. Starting dose: 7 – 15 mg/kg44
d) Best used for sedation and tranquilization or to facilitate in -
tubation, especially in large boas, crocodilians, and venomous 
species. Author starts with a dose of 5 mg/kg IM and repeats if 
needed. Higher doses of 6 mg/kg are associated with very long 
recovery times, especially in chelonians (72 hours).45
e) Anesthetic induction of chelonians  (extra-label): Aquatic or 
box turtles, 5 mg/kg IM, SC; tortoises, 10 – 20 mg/kg IM in 
brachial muscle; intubation is usually possible 20 minutes after 
administration.46

===== PDF_PAGE_1267 =====
1240    Tilmicosin
Monitoring
 ■ Depth of anesthesia and degree of analgesia
 ■ Ventilation (eg, ETCO 2), pulse oximetry (PaO 2), cardiovascular 
status (eg, heart rate and rhythm, blood pressure)
 ■ Monitor eyes to prevent drying out or injury
 ■ Body temperature 
Client Information
Tiletamine/zolazepam should only be administered by authorized 
veterinary professionals that are familiar with its use. Some manu -
facturers state that women who are pregnant, or are suspected to be 
pregnant, should not handle the product.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tiletamine is an injectable anesthetic agent chemically related to ket-
amine. Zolazepam is a diazepinone minor tranquilizer. The pH of 
the injectable product (after reconstitution) is 2.2 to 2.8.
Tiletamine HCl may also be known as CI-634, CL-399, or CN-
54521-2; zolazepam HCl may also be known as CI-716. 
Tiletamine/zolazepam may also be known as Telazol®, Tilzolan®, 
Tzed®, or Zoletil®.
Storage/Stability
Tiletamine/zolazepam is a schedule III (C-III) controlled substance 
that should be stored in an area that is substantially constructed and 
securely locked. Follow applicable local, state, and federal rules re -
garding disposal of unused or wasted controlled drugs.
Store unreconstituted vials at controlled room temperature 
(20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]). After reconstitution with sterile water for 
injection, solutions may be stored for 7 days at room temperature 
and 56 days if refrigerated. Use only clear solutions; color may vary 
from colorless to light amber.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Reconstitute with 5 mL sterile water.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tiletamine/zolazepam has been designated as a Class 2 substance 
by the Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI). 
Use of this drug may not be allowed in certain animal competitions. 
Check rules and regulations before entering in a competition while 
this medication is being administered. Contact local racing authori-
ties for further guidance. See Appendix.
Tiletamine HCl (equivalent to 250 mg free base) and Zolazepam 
HCl (equivalent to 250 mg free base) as lyophilized powder/vial in 
5 mL vials. When 5 mL of sterile diluent (sterile water) is added, a 
concentration of 50 mg/mL of each drug (100 mg/mL combined) 
is produced; Telazol®, generic; (Rx, C-III). FDA-approved for use in 
cats and dogs. NADA# 106-111
No guidelines for milk or meat withdrawal intervals are available.47
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Tilmicosin
(til-mi-coe-sin) Micotil®, Pulmotil®
Macrolide Antibiotic 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Injectable macrolide antibiotic used in cattle, sheep, and 
sometimes rabbits; oral concentrate used in swine 
 ▶ Fatal to cattle and sheep when the injection is adminis-
tered IV; give by the SC route only. May be fatal if injected by 
any route in swine, horses, or goats. Severe reactions reported 
in camelids
 ▶ Accidental injection can be fatal in humans. Do not use in 
automatically powered syringes. In case of human injection, 
contact a physician immediately. Use precautions when han-
dling any tilmicosin product.
 ▶ Adverse effects include SC injection site edema, lameness, and 
decreased food and water intake; accidental IM injection may 
cause a local tissue reaction, resulting in trim loss.
Uses/Indications
Tilmicosin injection is indicated for the treatment of bovine re -
spiratory disease (BRD) associated with Mannheimia haemolytica, 
Pasteurella multocida, and Histophilus somni, for the treatment of 
ovine respiratory disease associated with M haemolytica, and for the 
treatment of swine respiratory disease (SRD) associated with Mann-
heimia haemolytica. It is also indicated for the control of respirato -
ry disease in cattle at high risk for developing BRD associated with 
Mannheimia haemolytica. For oral use (in drinking water), tilmico -
sin is indicated for the control of swine respiratory disease associated 
with Pasteurella multocida and Haemophilus parasuis in groups of 
swine in buildings where a respiratory disease outbreak is diagnosed. 
It is also used for the control of SRD associated with Mycoplasma 
hyopneumoniae in the presence of porcine reproductive and respira-
tory syndrome virus (PRRSV) in groups of swine in buildings where 
a respiratory disease outbreak is diagnosed. 
In other countries, tilmicosin injection is indicated for use in cat-
tle for the treatment of interdigital necrobacillosis and in sheep for 
the treatment of foot rot or acute ovine mastitis, 1 and the oral con -
centrate is added to drinking water for the treatment and metaphy -
laxis of respiratory disease2 in chickens and turkeys. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated tilm -
icosin as a Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobial for 
human medicine.3 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) An-
timicrobial Classification has designated tilmicosin as a Veterinary 
Critically Important antimicrobial.4 
Pharmacology/Actions
Like other macrolides, tilmicosin has activity primarily against 
gram-positive bacteria, although some gram-negative bacteria are 
affected, and the drug reportedly has some activity against myco -
plasma. Preliminary studies have shown that 95% of studied isolates 
of Pasteurella multocida are sensitive. Bacterial isolates susceptible 
to tilmicosin at concentrations of less than or equal to 8 µg/mL are 
reported as susceptible to tilmicosin. The MIC 90 value reported for 
M. haemolytica and P . multocida in cattle with BRD is 32 µg/mL. 
Oral tilmicosin does not have activity against Cryptosporidium spp 
in goats.5
Pharmacokinetics
Tilmicosin apparently concentrates in lung tissue. A single SC in -
jection of Micotil® 10 mg/kg of body weight dose in cattle resulted 
in peak tilmicosin concentrations within 1 hour and detectable 
concentrations (0.07  µg/mL) in serum beyond 3 days. At 3 days 
postinjection, the lung:serum ratio is ≈60:1. MIC 95 concentrations  

===== PDF_PAGE_1268 =====
Tilmicosin   1241
(3.12 µg/mL) for P . haemolytica persist for a minimum of 3 days after 
a single injection.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Injections in humans can be fatal ; exercise extreme caution when 
handling injectable products. Do not use in automatically powered 
syringes. Never carry a syringe of tilmicosin with a needle attached.1 
Keep needles capped until ready to use; only attach the needle to fill 
the syringe or administer injection; keep syringe and needle sepa -
rate at all other times. Ensure animals are properly restrained before 
attempting to administer. Do not work alone when using tilmicosin 
injectable.1 In case of accidental injection, seek medical attention im-
mediately. Emergency treatment includes applying ice to the injec -
tion site and contacting a physician immediately. Elanco emergency 
medical telephone numbers are 1-800-722-0987 or 1-800-428-4441. 
Avoid contact with eyes.
Do not inject by any route in swine, goats, nonhuman primates, or 
horses as fatalities may result. Do not administer IV to sheep or cattle, 
as deaths of cattle have been observed with a single IV dose of 5 mg/kg. 
There have been anecdotal reports of severe reactions in some camelids.
When using oral concentrate in drinking water, do not use rusty 
containers for medicated water as product integrity may be affect -
ed.2 Oral concentrate must be diluted before administration. Do not 
allow horses or other equines access to water containing tilmicosin.
Adverse Effects
In cattle: injection site swelling and inflammation, lameness, col -
lapse, anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid reactions, decreased food and wa-
ter consumption, and death. 
In sheep: dyspnea and death. Injection lesions are described as 
being generally more severe and occurred at higher frequency rates 
in the animals treated with higher doses of tilmicosin. If adminis -
tered IM, a local tissue reaction may occur, resulting in the trim loss. 
Edema may be noted at the site of SC injection. 
In swine: decreased water consumption has been observed in 
healthy pigs receiving tilmicosin via drinking water. 
In rabbits receiving SC tilmicosin, local swelling and necrosis at 
the injection site, as well as weakness, pallor, tachypnea, and sudden 
death have been observed.6
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safe use in pregnant or lactating animals or animals to be used for 
breeding purposes has not been demonstrated. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The cardiovascular system is apparently the target of toxicity in an -
imals. The primary cardiac effects are increased heart rate (tachy -
cardia) and decreased contractility (negative inotropy). In cattle, 
doses up to 50 mg/kg IM did not cause death, but 150 mg/kg SC 
did cause fatalities, as well as 5 mg/kg IV . Doses as low as 10 mg/kg  
in swine caused increased respiration, emesis, and seizures;  
20  mg/kg IM caused deaths in most animals tested. In monkeys,  
10 mg/kg administered once caused no signs of toxicity, but  
20 mg/kg caused vomiting; 30 mg/kg caused death.
In cases of human injection, contact a physician immediately. The 
manufacturer has emergency telephone numbers to assist in dealing 
with exposure: 1-800-722-0987 or 1-800-428-4441.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
In swine, epinephrine increased the mortality associated with tilmi-
cosin. No other specific information was noted; refer to the Erythro-
mycin monograph for possible interactions.
Dosages
CATTLE:
Treatment of BRD associated with Mannheimia haemolyti -
ca, Pasteurella multocida, and Histophilus somni or control of 
respiratory disease in cattle at high risk for developing BRD 
associated with Mannheimia haemolytica  (FDA-approved):  
10 – 20 mg/kg SC as a single dose. Injection under the skin in the 
neck is suggested. If not accessible, inject under the skin behind 
the shoulders and over the ribs. Do not inject more than 10 mL 
per injection site. If no improvement is noted within 48 hours, the 
diagnosis should be re-evaluated.7 
SHEEP:
Treatment of ovine respiratory disease associated with Mann-
heimia haemolytica (FDA-approved): In sheep greater than 15 kg  
(33 lb), 10 mg/kg SC as a single dose. Injection under the skin 
in the neck is suggested. If not accessible, inject under the skin 
behind the shoulders and over the ribs. Do not inject more than  
10 mL per injection site. If no improvement is noted within 48 
hours, the diagnosis should be re-evaluated.7
SWINE:
Control of SRD associated with Pasteruella multocida and Hae-
mophilus parasuis in groups of swine in buildings where a respi-
ratory disease outbreak is diagnosed (FDA-approved): Using oral 
concentrate, administer it in drinking water at a concentration of 
200 mg tilmicosin per liter of drinking water for 5 consecutive days. 
Replace the water every 24 hours. One 960 mL bottle is sufficient to 
medicate 1200 L (320 gallons) of drinking water for pigs. When us-
ing water medicating pump with a 1:128 inclusion rate, add 1 bottle 
(960 mL) of Pulmotil AC® per 2.5 gallons of stock solution.2
SMALL MAMMALS :
Rabbits:
Pasteurellosis6 (extra-label): 
a) 25 mg/kg SC once8; repeat in 3 days if necessary 
b) 5 mg/kg SC on day 0; if no reaction, give 10 mg/kg SC on days 
7 and 14
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy
 ■ Signs of water refusal or dehydration (medicated drinking water2)
 ■ Cardiovascular status following SC injection
Client Information
 ■ If clients are administering the drug, warn them about the po -
tential toxicity to humans, swine, and horses in case of accidental 
injection.
 ■ Carefully instruct in proper injection techniques.
 ■ Avoid contact with eyes.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tilmicosin phosphate, a semisynthetic macrolide antibiotic, is com-
mercially available in a 300 mg/mL (of tilmicosin base) injection 
with 25% propylene glycol.
Tilmicosin may also be known as EL-870, LY-177370, Micotil®, or 
Pulmotil®.
Storage/Stability
Store the injection at or below room temperature 30°C (86°F). Avoid 
exposure to direct sunlight. The UK label states to discard 28 days 
after the first puncture.

===== PDF_PAGE_1269 =====
1242    Tiludronate
Store the oral liquid at or below 30°C (86°F). Protect from direct 
sunlight. The UK label states to use within 3 months of opening. Dis-
card medicated water after 24 hours. Discard medicated milk replac-
er after 6 hours. Do not freeze; protect from frost.2 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tilmicosin for Subcutaneous Injection: 300 mg/mL in 250 mL mul-
tidose vials; Micotil® 300 Injection; (Rx). FDA-approved (NADA# 
140-929) for use in cattle and sheep. Not FDA-approved for use in 
female dairy cattle 20 months or older. Do not use in lactating ewes if 
milk is to be used for human consumption. Do not use in veal calves. 
Slaughter withdrawal (at labeled doses) is 42 days.
Tilmicosin Phosphate 250 mg/mL Aqueous Concentrate for oral use 
in drinking water in 960 mL bottles; Pulmotil® AC, Tilmovet® AC ; 
(Rx). FDA-approved (NADA# 141-361) for use in swine. Slaughter 
withdrawal is 7 days.
Tilmicosin medicated article is available for incorporation into the 
feed of swine, beef and nonlactating dairy cattle.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Tiludronate
Tiludronic Acid
(til-yoo-droe-nate) Tildren®
Bisphosphonate; Bone Resorption Inhibitor
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used as an IV treatment for navicular syndrome in horses
 ▶ Must be given slowly and evenly as an IV infusion over 90 
minutes
 ▶ Contraindications include horses that are hypersensitive to 
tiludronate or mannitol and horses with a history of renal 
impairment.
 ▶ Use with caution in horses with conditions that cause mineral 
or electrolyte imbalance (eg, HYPP , hypocalcemia) and condi-
tions that may be exacerbated by hypocalcemia (eg, cardiac 
disease).
 ▶ Adverse effects include signs of colic, muscle tremor (hypo-
calcemia), fatigue/lassitude, sweating, injection site effects, 
salivation, and tail hypertonia.
Uses/Indications
Tiludronate (tiludronic acid) is indicated for the control of clini -
cal signs associated with navicular syndrome in horses. 1 It may be 
beneficial in managing lameness isolated to the navicular bone and 
distal tarsal osteoarthritis by decreasing bone resorption and inflam-
mation.2,3 Treatment earlier in the course of the disease apparently 
results in greater efficacy.
Tiludronate appeared to inhibit the radiographic progression of 
osteoarthritis after traumatic injury of the fetlock joint but was asso-
ciated with increased markers of cartilage damage.4
Pharmacology/Actions
Tiludronate, like other bisphosphonates, inhibits osteoclastic bone 
resorption by inhibiting osteoclast function after binding to bone hy-
droxyapatite, thereby helping to regulate bone remodeling.
Pharmacokinetics
After IV injection in horses, the drug is rapidly distributed to the 
bone. Binding is greater to cancellous bone than cortical bone. Plas-
ma protein binding is reported to be ≈85%, and the elimination 
half-life is ≈4 hours. Repeated daily doses do not result in accumu -
lation in plasma. Tiludronate undergoes minimal metabolism. The 
unbound drug is eliminated unchanged in the urine. Approximately 
25% to 50% of a single IV dose is eliminated in the urine over 96 
hours. Quantifiable concentrations of tiludronate in the bone can be 
detected up to 1 year postdose,1 and in the plasma for up to 3 years.5 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tiludronate is contraindicated in horses with known hypersensitiv-
ity to tiludronate disodium or to mannitol. It should not be used in 
horses with impaired renal function or a history of renal disease, as 
conditions causing renal impairment may increase plasma bisphos-
phonate concentrations, resulting in an increased risk for adverse 
reactions. Horses should be well hydrated prior to administration 
because of the potential nephrotoxic effects.1 
Safe use has not been evaluated in horses less than 4 years of age. 
Bisphosphonates affect bone turnover and therefore may affect bone 
growth.1 Increased bone fragility has been observed after high doses 
or a long duration of use.
Tiludronate can affect plasma concentrations of certain miner -
als and electrolytes, including calcium, magnesium, and potassium, 
immediately after treatment and can last up to several hours. Use 
caution when administering tiludronate to horses with conditions 
affecting mineral or electrolyte homeostasis (eg, hyperkalemic peri-
odic paralysis (HYPP), hypocalcemia) and conditions which may be 
exacerbated by hypocalcemia (eg, cardiac disease). 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in horses are most commonly seen during the 
infusion period or within 4 hours of beginning the infusion. Adverse 
effects include signs of abdominal pain or colic (eg, pawing, evidence 
of pawing, getting up and down, pacing, restlessness, rolling, trying 
to roll, looking at or biting at the side, stretching out/straining, kick-
ing at belly/walls, and shifting weight), muscle tremors/fasciculation, 
fatigue/lassitude, and sweating. Colic signs occur in ≈30% to 45% of 
horses and generally resolve without treatment.1 If these signs persist, 
conventional colic treatments (NOT including NSAIDs) are recom-
mended. Muscle tremors may be treated with IV calcium if required. 
Horses with HYPP appear to be at increased risk for adverse effects.1 
Adverse reactions occurring between 4 and 24 hours posttreat -
ment include increased frequency of urination with or without in -
creased drinking, reduced appetite, sore or stiff neck, fever, and un-
complicated colic.
Up to 9% of patients develop local reactions at the injection site 
(eg, phlebitis), particularly after the fourth injection. Other adverse 
effects reported include polydipsia/polyuria, decreased feed intake, 
recumbency, salivation, and tail hypertonia. 
Tiludronate has caused acute renal failure.6 Assess renal function 
and hydration status prior to administration.
The drug may be safely administered to horses within 24 to 36 
hours after bone scintigraphy.7
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Bisphosphonates should not be used in pregnant or lactating mares 
or mares intended for breeding.1 Bisphosphonates have been shown 
to cause fetal developmental abnormalities in laboratory animals. 
The uptake of bisphosphonates into fetal bone may be greater than 
into maternal bone, creating a possible risk for skeletal or other ab -
normalities in the fetus. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1270 =====
Tiludronate   1243
Many drugs, including bisphosphonates, may be excreted in milk 
and may be absorbed by nursing animals.
Studies performed in male and female rats at tiludronate doses as 
high as 75 mg/kg/day demonstrated no effects on fertility. Studies in 
pregnant rabbits given 2 to 5 times the human-recommended dos -
ages showed no skeletal abnormalities. Pregnant mice given 7 times 
the human-recommended dosages showed some adverse effects (eg, 
decreased litter size, malformed paws in 6 fetuses from 1 litter). Rat 
studies have shown decreased litter sizes8 but no teratogenic effects. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Limited information is available. The manufacturer reports that dos-
ing horses 3 times at monthly intervals caused an increased frequen-
cy of adverse effects, particularly signs of colic and muscle tremor. A 
dose-dependent increase in the frequency and severity of hypocalce-
mia and hyperphosphatemia was noted.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving tiludronate and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Aminoglycosides  (eg, amikacin, gentamicin ): Concurrent 
use may increase the risk for nephrotoxicity and hypocalcemia.
 ■ Amphotericin B : Concurrent use with nephrotoxic drugs may 
increase the risk for nephrotoxicity.
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs  ( NSAIDs; eg, 
flunixin): The product label warns that NSAIDs should not be 
used concurrently with tiludronate. Concurrent use may increase 
the risk for renal toxicity and acute renal failure. Acute renal 
failure has been reported in horses concurrently administered 
NSAIDs and tiludronate within a 48-hour period. Additional -
ly, horses concurrently administered both drugs in field studies 
demonstrated statistically significant increases in serum BUN 
and creatinine concentrations but were not always associated with 
clinical signs of renal dysfunction. Appropriate washout periods 
should be observed, and BUN and creatinine should be moni -
tored. If treatment for discomfort is required after tiludronate ad-
ministration, a non-NSAID treatment should be used. 
 ■ Tetracyclines (eg, oxytetracycline): May increase the risk for 
hypocalcemia
Laboratory Considerations
No specific concerns were noted.
Dosages
HORSES :
Control of clinical signs associated with navicular syndrome  
(label dose; FDA-approved): A single dose of 1 mg/kg as an IV 
infusion in 1000 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride. Administer slow -
ly and evenly over 90 minutes (to minimize adverse reactions) 
through a suitable IV catheter inserted into a jugular vein and 
connected to the infusion bag using sterile infusion tubing.1 Max-
imum effect may not occur until 2 months posttreatment. Infu -
sion of the labeled dose diluted in 5000 mL of 0.9% sodium chlo-
ride solution appears to be a common practice. 
Control of clinical signs associated with navicular syndrome 
(extra-label): Ten bolus doses of 0.1 mg/kg IV every 24 hours for 
10 consecutive days.9 Used in horses particularly sensitive to ad -
verse effects of tiludronate
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Serum calcium
 ■ BUN and serum creatinine prior to administration of NSAIDs 
following dosing 
 ■ Adverse effects (particularly within the first 4 hours after dosing)
Client Information
 ■ A veterinary professional should administer this medication.
 ■ Observe the animal for up to 4 hours postadministration for signs 
of hypocalcemia (eg, muscle tremors) or colic. Monitor food and 
water intake, urinary frequency, and body temperature for a few 
days after administration.
 ■ Allow the horse to lie down, as this is an expected behavior after 
the infusion is complete.
 ■ Consult with your veterinarian prior to giving anti-inflammatory 
medications (NSAIDs) following tiludronate administration.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tiludronate disodium is a non-nitrogen-containing bisphospho -
nate that occurs as a white powder with a molecular weight of 380.6. 
Commercially available products contain the disodium salt of tilud-
ronic acid. 120 mg of tiludronate disodium is equivalent to 100 mg 
of tiludronic acid.
Tiludronate disodium or tiludronic acid may also be known as 
ME-3737, SR-41319, acidum tiludronicum, Tildren®, or Skelid®.
Storage/Stability
Store unreconstituted powder at controlled room temperature 20°C 
to 25°C (68°F-77°F). After preparation, either administer the infu -
sion within 2 hours of preparation or store it for up to 24 hours un-
der refrigeration at 2°C to 8°C (36°F-46°F) and protect it from light.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Do not reconstitute or mix this product with calcium-containing 
solutions or other solutions containing divalent cations, such as lac-
tated Ringer’s solution, as it may form complexes with these ions. 
Preparation of the reconstituted solution (20 mg/mL): Use strict 
aseptic technique. Remove 25 mL of solution from a 1-liter bag of 
sterile 0.9% sodium chloride and add to a vial of Tildren®. Shake 
gently until the powder is completely dissolved. This reconstituted 
solution contains 20 mg of tiludronate disodium per mL. After 
reconstitution, further dilution is required before administration.
Preparation of the solution for infusion: Using strict aseptic tech-
nique, withdraw the appropriate volume of the reconstituted solu -
tion based on the horse’s body weight. Inject that volume back into 
the 1-liter bag of sterile 0.9% sodium chloride. Horses greater than 
550 kg (1210 lb) will require a second vial of reconstituted solution. 
Invert the infusion bag several times to mix the solution before infu-
sion. Label the infusion bag to ensure proper use.
After preparation, the infusion should be administered either 
within 2 hours of preparation, or it can be stored for up to 24 hours 
under refrigeration at 2°C to 8°C (36°F-46°F) and protected from 
light.
Administer for infusion through a suitable IV catheter inserted 
into a jugular vein and connected to the infusion bag using sterile 
infusion tubing.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tiludronic Acid: 500 mg (as tiludronate disodium) lyophilized pow-
der for reconstitution per vial; Tildren®; (Rx). FDA-approved for 
horses. NADA #141-420

===== PDF_PAGE_1271 =====
1244    Tinidazole
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Tinidazole
(tye-ni-dah-zole) Tindamax®
Nitroimidazole Antiprotozoal/Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Drug similar to metronidazole, but does not appear to have 
significant advantages over metronidazole or ronidazole
 ▶ Used primarily as an alternative treatment for giardiasis. Po-
tentially useful for treating anaerobic infections (especially in 
the mouth), trichomoniasis, amebiasis, and balantidiasis.
 ▶ Little experience in veterinary medicine. Most likely adverse 
effects are GI-related; like other nitroimidazole agents, neuro-
toxicity is possible.  
Uses/Indications
Little information is presently available on the use of tinidazole in vet-
erinary species. Because of its antiprotozoal effects, it has been used 
as an alternative for treating giardiasis in small animals. Tinidazole 
could have efficacy against amebiasis, trichomoniasis, or balantidiasis, 
but documentation of efficacy is not available. Tinidazole potential-
ly could be useful for treating anaerobic infections in small animals, 
particularly those associated with dental infections.1 Tinidazole has a 
longer duration of action than metronidazole in dogs and cats. 
In a small study done in cats experimentally infected with 
 Tritrichomonas foetus, tinidazole 30 mg/kg PO once daily for 14 days 
decreased fecal shedding of T foetus but failed to eradicate the infec-
tion from 2 of 4 cats. 2 However, results from a pilot study indicated 
that tinidazole 30 mg/kg, formulated in a gastro-resistant capsule 
coated with guar gum, PO once daily for 14 days resolved T foetus 
infections and improved the clinical condition in 5 FIV-positive cats 
and was also effective against concomitant Giardia duodenalis infec-
tion in the 4 affected cats.3
In humans, oral tinidazole is FDA-approved for treating extrain-
testinal and intestinal amebiasis (ie, Entamoeba histolytica), giardi-
asis (ie, Giardia duodenalis and G lamblia), and trichomoniasis (ie, 
Trichomonas vaginalis).
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated tinida -
zole as an Important antimicrobial for human medicine.4
Pharmacology/Actions
Tinidazole is a 5-nitroimidazole similar to metronidazole. It is bacte-
ricidal against susceptible bacteria. Its exact mechanism of action is 
not completely understood, but it is taken up by anaerobic organisms 
where it is reduced to an unidentified polar compound. It is believed 
that this compound is responsible for the drug’s antimicrobial ac -
tivity by disrupting DNA and nucleic acid synthesis in the bacteria.
Tinidazole has activity against many obligate anaerobes and He-
licobacter pylori. It has excellent activity against Porphyromonas spp 
found in canine gingiva.1
Tinidazole is also trichomonacidal and amebicidal. 5 Its mecha -
nism of action for its antiprotozoal activity is not well understood. It 
has therapeutic activity against Entamoeba histolytica, Trichomonas 
spp, and Giardia spp.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs and cats,6 tinidazole is practically completely absorbed after 
oral administration. Apparent volumes of distribution are 0.66 L/kg 
in dogs and 0.54 L/kg in cats. Dogs clear the drug about twice as fast 
as cats; elimination half-lives are ≈4.4 hours in dogs and 8.4 hours 
in cats.
In horses,7 tinidazole is practically completely absorbed after oral 
administration. Apparent volume of distribution is 0.66 L/kg and 
elimination half-life is ≈5.2 hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tinidazole is contraindicated in patients documented to be hyper -
sensitive to it or other 5-nitroimidazoles (eg, metronidazole). In hu-
mans, tinidazole is contraindicated in the first trimester of  pregnancy.
Tinidazole is metabolized by the liver; use with caution in patients 
with hepatic dysfunction. Tinidazole should be used with caution in 
patients with blood dyscrasias. 
As other 5-nitroimidazoles (eg, metronidazole, ronidazole) have 
been associated with neurotoxic signs in dogs and cats and seizures 
have been reported rarely with tinidazole use in humans, use with 
caution in animals susceptible to seizures.
The human labeling for tinidazole carries a black box warning 
stating: Carcinogenicity has been seen in mice and rats treated chron-
ically with another agent in the nitroimidazole class (eg, metronida -
zole). Although such data has not been reported for tinidazole, avoid 
unnecessary use of tinidazole. Reserve its use for the conditions for 
which it is indicated.
Adverse Effects
The adverse effect profiles for dogs, cats, or horses are not well de -
scribed since clinical use of this medication has been limited. GI ef -
fects including vomiting, inappetence, and diarrhea are most likely. 
Giving the medication with food may help alleviate these effects. 
Other 5-nitroimidazoles (eg, metronidazole, ronidazole) have been 
associated with neurotoxic signs in dogs and cats.
Although metronidazole has been shown to significantly decrease 
food intake in chinchillas, equivalent doses of tinidazole did not af -
fect food intake.8
In humans, tinidazole reportedly has fewer side effects than met-
ronidazole.9 GI effects (eg, dysgeusia, nausea, decreased appetite) are 
the most commonly reported adverse effects. Rare adverse effects in 
humans include seizures, transient myelosuppression, and hypersen-
sitivity reactions.5
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
In studies performed on male rats, tinidazole decreased fertility and 
caused testicular histopathology.
Tinidazole crosses the placenta. While studies in mice and rats 
have not demonstrated significant fetal effects, because of its mu -
tagenic potential, it is stated that it should not be used in women 
during the first trimester of pregnancy. If considering use of this 
product in a pregnant animal, weigh the potential benefits of treat -
ment versus the risks.
Tinidazole is distributed into maternal milk at levels approximat-
ing those found in serum. It is suggested that milk replacer be used if 
tinidazole is necessary for treating a nursing dam.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Limited information is available. In studies done in rats and mice, 
the oral LD 50 was greater than 3.6 g/kg for mice and greater than  
2 g/kg for rats. Treatment of acute overdoses of tinidazole is symp -
tomatic and supportive. Gastric lavage or induction of emesis may be 
helpful. Hemodialysis can remove ≈43% of the amount in the body 
(human) in a 6-hour session.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 

===== PDF_PAGE_1272 =====
Tiopronin   1245
theoretical in humans or animals receiving metronidazole (a related 
compound) and may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless 
otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but 
weigh the potential risks and perform additional monitoring when 
appropriate.
 ■ Busulfan : Tinidazole may increase the serum concentration of 
busulfan.
 ■ Cholestyramine : May decrease metronidazole absorption; in-
teraction may apply to tinidazole
 ■ Cimetidine : May decrease the metabolism of tinidazole and in-
crease the likelihood of dose-related side effects occurring
 ■ Cisapride : Tinidazole may increase the serum concentration of 
cisapride; contraindicated in humans.
 ■ Cyclosporine, Tacrolimus  (systemic): Tinidazole may in -
crease the serum concentration of cyclosporine or tacrolimus.
 ■ Ethanol : May induce a disulfiram-like (nausea, vomiting, 
cramps) reaction
 ■ Fluorouracil  (systemic): Tinidazole may increase the serum 
concentration of fluorouracil and increase the risk of toxicity.
 ■ Ketoconazole : May decrease the metabolism of tinidazole and 
increase the likelihood of dose-related side effects occurring 
 ■ Oxytetracycline : Reportedly, may antagonize the therapeutic 
effects of metronidazole; interaction may apply to tinidazole
 ■ Phenobarbital : May increase the metabolism of tinidazole, 
thereby decreasing blood concentration
 ■ Rifampin : May increase the metabolism of tinidazole, thereby 
decreasing blood concentration
 ■ W arfarin : Metronidazole (and potentially tinidazole) may pro-
long the prothrombin time (PT) in patients taking warfarin or 
other coumarin anticoagulants. Avoid concurrent use if possible; 
otherwise, intensify monitoring.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ AST, ALT, LDH, Triglycerides, Hexokinase glucose: Tinidazole, 
like metronidazole, may interfere with enzymatic coupling of the 
assay to oxidation-reduction of nicotinamide adenine. Falsely low 
values, including zero, may result.
Dosages
DOGS:
Giardiasis (extra-label): 44 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for 6 days. 
Potentially useful for treating trichomoniasis, amebiasis, and 
balantidiasis, but efficacy data are lacking for animals. 10 Another 
source lists the same dosage but treats for 3 days.11 
CATS:
Giardiasis (extra-label): 30 mg/kg PO once daily for 7 to 10 
days.12 Another source lists the same dosage but treats for 3 days.11 
Tritrichomonas foetus (extra-label): 30 mg/kg PO once daily for 
14 days decreased detection of T foetus in 50% of experimentally 
infected cats
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy in treating the infection
Client Information
 ■ Give this medication with food.
 ■ Animals should not have access to alcohol when receiving this 
medication.
 ■ If gastrointestinal signs (eg, vomiting, lack of appetite, diarrhea) 
are severe or persist, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian immediately if animal shows signs of 
behavior changes, eyes moving back and forth (nystagmus), con-
vulsions, or if it has difficulty walking, climbing stairs; these could 
be signs that drug toxicity is occurring.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tinidazole occurs as an almost white or pale-yellow crystalline pow-
der. It is practically insoluble in water, soluble in acetone, and spar -
ingly soluble in methyl alcohol.
Tinidazole may also be known as CP-12574 or tinidazolum or ti-
nidatsoli. International trade names include: Estovyn-T®, Fasigyn ®, 
Tindamax®, Tiniba®, Tiniameb®, or Tinidazol®.
Storage/Stability
Store tinidazole tablets at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C 
[68°F-77°F]) protected from light.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
The manufacturer label states an oral suspension can be made 
by pulverizing four 500 mg oral tablets with a mortar and pestle. 
Add ≈10 mL of cherry syrup to the powder and mix until smooth. 
Transfer the suspension to a graduated amber container. Use sev -
eral small rinses of cherry syrup to transfer any remaining drug 
in the mortar to the final suspension for a final volume of 30 mL  
(67 mg/mL). This suspension is stable for 7 days at room tempera -
ture. When this suspension is used, it should be shaken well before 
each  administration.13
Tinidazole reportedly is very bitter tasting. If using compounded 
products, consider using capsules or having a flavored suspension 
prepared.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
As tinidazole is a nitroimidazole, its use is prohibited in animals to 
be used for food.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tinidazole Tablets (scored): 250 mg and 500 mg; Tindamax®, generic; 
(Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Tiopronin
(tye-oh-proe-nin) Thiola®
Antiurolithic (Cystine) 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used in combination with dietary therapy, high fluid intake, 
and urinary alkalinization for prevention and dissolution of 
cystine urolithiasis in dogs
 ▶ Avoid use in cats.
 ▶ Use with caution in animals with agranulocytosis, aplastic 
anemia, thrombocytopenia or other significant hematologic 
abnormality, impaired renal or hepatic function, or sensitivity 
to either tiopronin or penicillamine. 
 ▶ Adverse effects include Coombs-positive regenerative sphero-
cyte anemia, aggressive behavior, proteinuria, thrombocyto-
penia, elevations in liver enzymes, dermatologic effects, and 
myopathy.
 ▶ Cost and availability may be problematic.
Uses/Indications
Tiopronin may be added to the treatment regimen for the prevention 
and dissolution of cystine urolithiasis in dogs when dietary therapy 
(ie, low-protein, low-sodium diet), high fluid intake, and urine alka-
linization are not completely effective.1–5
Pharmacology/Actions
Tiopronin is a chelator that is considered an antiurolithic agent. It 
undergoes thiol-disulfide exchange with cystine (cysteine-cysteine 

===== PDF_PAGE_1273 =====
1246    Tiopronin
disulfide) to form tiopronin-cystine disulfide. This complex is more 
water-soluble and readily excreted thereby preventing cystine calculi 
from forming. Its effects on cystine reduction are dose-related and 
typically begin within the first day of treatment. Given the relatively 
rapid elimination of drug, twice daily dosing is recommended. 
Pharmacokinetics
Tiopronin has a rapid onset of action, and in humans, up to 48% of 
a dose is found in the urine within 4 hours of dosing.6 Tiopronin has 
a relatively short duration of action, and its effect in humans disap -
pears in ≈10 hours. Elimination is primarily via renal routes.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tiopronin is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to it 
or in those patients with obstructive urolithiasis. Tiopronin’s risks vs 
benefits should be considered before using in patients with agranulo-
cytosis, aplastic anemia, thrombocytopenia, or other significant he -
matologic abnormalities. Use with caution in patients with impaired 
renal or hepatic function or sensitivity to penicillamine. In humans, 
it is recommended to start tiopronin at a lower dose in patients with 
history of severe toxicity to penicillamine. 
Avoid use of tiopronin in cats as they reportedly do not tolerate 
the drug well and dissolution of cystine uroliths has not been suc -
cessful.7 
Adverse Effects
There is limited information available on the adverse effect profile 
of tiopronin in dogs. In a retrospective study evaluating tiopronin 
treatment for cystinuria, ≈13% of treated dogs experienced adverse 
events including proteinuria, thrombocytopenia, anemia, increased 
liver enzymes and bile acids, lethargy, dermatologic effects (small 
pustules of the skin, dry crusty nose), aggression, sulfur odor of the 
urine, or myopathy (noted as staggering and difficulty chewing). 3  
Adverse effects manifested between 1 month and 36 months (mean 
of 7.8 months) of therapy and resolved with discontinuation of ther-
apy. Tiopronin has been associated with Coombs-positive regenera-
tive spherocyte anemia in dogs. If this effect occurs, the drug should 
be discontinued and appropriate treatment started as needed (eg, 
corticosteroids, blood component therapy).
If adverse reactions occur, stop treatment for 4 weeks. Check 
blood and urine analysis every 1 to 2 weeks until remission of signs. 
When the adverse reactions disappear, start tiopronin again, gradu-
ally increasing the dose from 10 – 15 mg/kg every 12 hours. If the ad-
verse reactions reappear despite a lowered dose, tiopronin treatment 
has to be abandoned.3 
In cats, GI signs, liver disease, and anemia have been reported.7 
In humans, common adverse effects include dermatologic effects 
(ecchymosis, itching, rashes, mouth ulcers, jaundice) and GI dis -
tress. Less frequently reported adverse effects include allergic reac -
tions (specifically adenopathy), arthralgias, dyspnea, fever, hemato-
logic abnormalities, edema, and nephrotic syndrome.6
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
There is limited information on the reproductive safety of tiopronin. 
No adverse developmental outcomes were noted in rats given up to 4 
times the recommended human dose. 8 Skeletal defects, cleft palates 
and increased resorptions were noted when rats were given 10 times 
the human dose of penicillamine and, therefore, may also be of con-
cern with tiopronin. In humans, tiopronin is contraindicated during 
pregnancy except in severe cases of cystinuria in which the potential 
benefits outweigh possible hazards.
Because tiopronin may be excreted in milk, it is not recommend-
ed for use in nursing animals.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
There is little information available. It is suggested to contact an ani-
mal poison control center for further information in the event of an 
overdose situation.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
Potentially, use of tiopronin with other drugs causing nephrotoxic-
ity, hepatotoxicity, or myelosuppression could cause additive toxic 
effects. Clinical significance is not clear.
Dosages
DOGS:
Prevention and dissolution of cystine urinary calculi  (extra-  
label):  
a) Prevention of uroliths: 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. Increase 
water intake and urine diuresis. Alkalinize urine (pH 6.5 to 
7.0) using potassium citrate. In cases with low cystine excre -
tion and low urolith recurrence rate, tiopronin dose may be 
individually decreased (less than 30 mg/kg) or stopped.2–4 
b) Dissolution of uroliths: Approximately 20 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours. Reevaluation of uroliths with ultrasound or radiogra -
phy every 4th week. After urolith dissolution, give preventive 
dose of tiopronin. If urolith dissolution is not achieved after 2 
to 3 months, surgery is recommended.2–4 
Monitoring
 ■ Re-examination is recommended 1, 3, 6, and 12 months after 
starting treatment, and if well controlled, every 6 to 12 months 
 thereafter.
 ■ Physical examination 
 ■ Ultrasonography/radiography of the urinary tract 
 ■ Urinalyses with sediment using first morning urine samples 
 ■ CBC with platelet count
 ■ Liver enzymes (ALP , ALT)
Client Information
 ■ Clients should be counseled on the importance of adequate com-
pliance with this medicine to maximize efficacy and detailed on 
the clinical signs to watch for regarding adverse effects.
 ■ Give this medicine at the same time each day, at least one hour 
before or two hours after meals.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A sulfhydryl compound related to penicillamine, tiopronin has a 
molecular weight of 163.2. It occurs as a white crystalline powder 
that is freely soluble in water.
Tiopronin may also be known as SF 522, N-(2-Mercaptopropi -
onyl)-glycine (MPG), 2-MPG, thiopronine, Acadione®, Captimer ®, 
Epatiol®, Mucolysin®, Mucosyt®, Sutilan®, Thiola®, Thiosol®, or Tioglis®.
Storage/Stability
Store tablets in tight containers at room temperature 25°C (77°F) 
with excursions permitted to 15°C -30°C (59°F -86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tiopronin Tablets: 100 mg; Thiola®; (Rx)

===== PDF_PAGE_1274 =====
Tobramycin, Systemic   1247
Tiopronin Delayed Release Tablets: 100 mg, 300 mg; Thiola EC®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Tobramycin, Systemic
(toe-bra-mye-sin) Nebcin®
Aminoglycoside Antibiotic
See also Tobramycin Ophthalmic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Parenteral aminoglycoside antibiotic that is active against 
a variety of bacteria, predominantly gram-negative aerobic 
bacilli
 ▶ Because of potential adverse effects, systemic use is usually 
reserved for serious infections; may be less nephrotoxic than 
gentamicin.
 ▶ Adverse effects may include nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity, and 
neuromuscular blockade.
 ▶ Cats may be more sensitive to toxic effects.
 ▶ Risk factors for nephrotoxicity include pre-existing renal 
disease, age (both neonatal and geriatric), fever, sepsis, and 
dehydration.
Uses/Indications
Tobramycin can be useful clinically to treat serious gram-negative 
infections in most species. It is often used in settings where genta -
micin-resistant bacteria are a clinical problem or when amikacin is 
unavailable. The inherent toxicity of the aminoglycosides limits their 
systemic use to serious infections when there is either a document -
ed lack of susceptibility to other less potentially toxic antibiotics or 
when the clinical situation dictates the immediate treatment of a 
presumed gram-negative infection before culture and susceptibility 
results are reported.
Whether tobramycin is less nephrotoxic than either gentamicin 
or amikacin when used clinically is somewhat controversial, but in 
controlled laboratory animal studies, it was less nephrotoxic.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated tobra -
mycin as a Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobial for 
human medicine.1 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) An-
timicrobial Classification has designated tobramycin as a Veterinary 
Critically Important antimicrobial.2 
Pharmacology/Actions
Tobramycin, like the other aminoglycoside antibiotics, acts on sus -
ceptible bacteria, presumably by irreversibly binding to the 30S ribo-
somal subunit, thereby inhibiting protein synthesis. It is considered 
a bactericidal concentration-dependent antibiotic.
Tobramycin’s spectrum of activity includes coverage against many 
aerobic gram-negative and some aerobic gram-positive bacteria, in-
cluding most species of Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp, Proteus spp, 
Pseudomonas spp, Salmonella spp, Enterobacter spp, Serratia spp, 
Shigella spp, Mycoplasma spp, and Staphylococcus spp. Tobramycin 
has more activity against Pseudomonas spp isolates than gentamicin.
The antimicrobial activity of the aminoglycosides is enhanced in 
an alkaline environment, but pus or cellular debris can reduce effi -
cacy. 
The aminoglycoside antibiotics are inactive against fungi, viruses, 
and most anaerobic bacteria.
Pharmacokinetics
Tobramycin, like the other aminoglycosides, is not appreciably ab -
sorbed after oral or intrauterine administration, but it is absorbed 
from topical administration (not skin or urinary bladder) when used 
in irrigations during surgical procedures. Patients receiving oral 
aminoglycosides with hemorrhagic or necrotic enteritis may absorb 
appreciable quantities of the drug. SC injection results in slightly de-
layed peak levels and more variability than after IM injection. Bio -
availability from IM or SC injection is greater than 90%.
The pharmacokinetics of tobramycin in horses have been report-
ed.3–5 In a study where horses were given 4 mg/kg IV ,5 the following 
approximate values were reported (NOTE: First value is a calculated 
value from a microbiologic assay, and the second is from an HPLC 
assay): volume of distribution (steady-state) (Vd), 0.24 to 0.55 L/kg;  
clearance (Cl), 101 to 130 mL/kg/hour; and elimination half-life 
(t1/2), 2.5 to 4 hours. Another study where horses were administered 
4 mg/kg IV , IM, or IV with concurrent IA 3 reported the following 
(means) after IV administration: Vd, 0.18 L/kg; Cl, 1.18 mL/kg/min-
ute; and t 1/2, 4.6 hours. IM mean bioavailability was 81%, but there 
was wide variability (±44%). Concurrent IA administration did ap -
pear to alter IV pharmacokinetics.
A 2008 review article of pharmacokinetic studies of aminogly -
cosides in various mammals showed the following mean values for 
tobramycin: dogs: t1/2, 56 minutes; Vd, 4.1 L/kg; Cl, 53.7 mL/kg/min-
ute; cats: t1/2, 1.5 hours; Vd, 0.8 L/kg; and Cl, 6.3 mL/kg/minute.6
After absorption, aminoglycosides are distributed primarily in 
the extracellular fluid. They are found in ascitic, pleural, pericardi -
al, peritoneal, synovial, and abscess fluids and high levels are found 
in sputum, bronchial secretions, and bile. Aminoglycosides (other 
than streptomycin) are minimally protein-bound (less than 20%) to 
plasma proteins. Aminoglycosides do not readily cross the blood–
brain barrier or penetrate ocular tissue. CSF levels are unpredictable 
and range from 0% to 50% of those found in the serum. Therapeu -
tic levels are found in bone, heart, gallbladder, and lung tissues after 
parenteral dosing. Aminoglycosides tend to accumulate in certain 
tissues, such as the inner ear and kidneys, which may help explain 
their toxicity. 
Elimination of aminoglycosides after parenteral administration 
occurs almost entirely by glomerular filtration. Patients with de -
creased renal function can have significantly prolonged half-lives. In 
humans with normal renal function, elimination rates can be highly 
variable with the aminoglycoside antibiotics.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Aminoglycosides are contraindicated in patients that are hypersensi-
tive to them. Because these drugs are often the only effective agents in 
severe gram-negative infections, there are no other absolute contra-
indications to their use; however, they should be used with extreme 
caution in patients with pre-existing renal disease, with concomitant 
monitoring and dosage interval adjustments made. Other risk fac -
tors for the development of toxicity include age (both neonatal and 
geriatric patients), fever, sepsis, and dehydration.
Because aminoglycosides can cause irreversible ototoxicity, they 
should be used with caution in working dogs (eg, seeing-eye dogs, 
herding, police dogs, and dogs for the hearing impaired). Topical 
preparations for the treatment of otitis externa should only be used 
when an intact tympanic membrane is present.
Aminoglycosides should be used with caution in patients with 
neuromuscular disorders (eg, myasthenia gravis) because of their 
neuromuscular blocking activity.
Aminoglycosides are generally considered contraindicated in rab-
bits and hares, as they adversely affect the GI flora balance in these 
animals.
Adverse Effects
The aminoglycosides possess nephrotoxic and ototoxic effects. The 
nephrotoxic (tubular necrosis) mechanisms of these drugs are not 
completely understood but are likely related to accumulation in the 
renal convoluted tubules, interfering with phospholipid metabolism 

===== PDF_PAGE_1275 =====
1248    Tobramycin, Systemic
in the lysosomes of proximal renal tubular cells, resulting in leakage 
of proteolytic enzymes into the cytoplasm. Nephrotoxicity normally 
manifests by azotemia and decreases in urine specific gravity and 
creatinine clearance. Proteinuria and cells or casts may also be seen 
in the urine. Nephrotoxicity is usually reversible once the drug is dis-
continued. Although tobramycin may be less nephrotoxic than the 
other aminoglycosides, the potential for nephrotoxicity remains, and 
equal caution and monitoring are required.
Ototoxicity (eighth cranial nerve toxicity) from aminoglycosides 
can manifest with either auditory and/or vestibular clinical signs and 
may be irreversible.7 Vestibular clinical signs are more frequent with 
streptomycin, gentamicin, or tobramycin. Auditory clinical signs 
are more frequent with amikacin, neomycin, or kanamycin, but any 
manifestation can occur with any of the drugs. Cats are apparently 
sensitive to the vestibular effects of aminoglycosides.
The aminoglycosides can also cause neuromuscular blockade, 
facial edema, pain or inflammation at the injection site, peripheral 
neuropathy, and hypersensitivity reactions. Rarely GI clinical signs, 
hematologic, and hepatic effects have been reported.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Aminoglycosides cross the placenta, and fetal concentrations range 
from 15% to 50% of those found in maternal serum. Tobramycin can 
concentrate in fetal kidneys and, although rare, cause eighth cranial 
nerve toxicity or nephrotoxicity in fetuses. Total irreversible deafness 
has been reported in some human babies whose mothers received 
tobramycin during pregnancy. Because the drug should only be used 
in serious infections, the benefits of therapy may exceed the potential 
risks. 
Tobramycin is excreted in breast milk, but because of poor oral 
absorption, it is unlikely to have systemic effects on the infant. How-
ever, it could alter gut flora.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
If an inadvertent overdose is administered, hemodialysis is very ef -
fective in reducing serum levels of the drug. Peritoneal dialysis will 
also reduce serum levels but is much less efficacious. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving tobramycin and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Anesthetics, General (eg, alfaxalone, isoflurane, ketamine, 
propofol): Concurrent use could potentiate neuromuscular 
blockade.
 ■ Beta-Lactam Antibiotics  (eg, penicillins, cephalosporins): 
May have synergistic effects against some bacteria; some potential 
for inactivation of aminoglycosides in vitro (do not mix together) 
and in vivo (patients in renal failure). Cephalosporins could cause 
additive nephrotoxicity when used with aminoglycosides, but this 
interaction has only been well documented with cephaloridine 
and cephalothin (both no longer marketed).
 ■ Diuretics, loop  (eg, furosemide, torsemide): Concurrent use 
may increase the risk for nephrotoxicity and/or ototoxicity.
 ■ Diuretics, Osmotic  (eg, mannitol): Concurrent use may in -
crease the nephrotoxic or ototoxic potential of aminoglycosides.
 ■ Nephrotoxic Drugs, Other  (eg, amphotericin B, cisplatin, 
cyclosporine, polymyxin B, vancomycin ): Increased risk for 
nephrotoxicity
 ■ Neuromuscular Blocking Agents (eg, atracurium): Con-
current use could potentiate neuromuscular blockade.
 ■ Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; eg, 
carprofen, meloxicam, robenacoxib): May increase tobramycin 
concentration
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Tobramycin serum concentrations may be falsely decreased if the 
patient is also receiving some beta-lactam antibiotics and the se-
rum is stored prior to analysis. It is recommended that if the assay 
is delayed, samples be frozen and, if possible, drawn at times when 
the beta-lactam antibiotic is at a trough level.
Dosages
NOTE: There is significant interpatient variability with aminogly-
coside pharmacokinetic parameters. To ensure therapeutic levels 
and minimize the risks for toxicity, consider monitoring serum 
levels. See Monitoring.
DOGS & CATS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label): Dogs: 9 – 14 mg/kg IV , IM, 
or SC once daily. Cats: 5 – 8 mg/kg IV , IM, or SC once daily 
HORSES :
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 4 mg/kg IV once daily. IM 
administration will somewhat reduce peak concentration and 
corresponding efficacy against some Enterobacteriaceae.3 
LLAMAS :
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 4 mg/kg IV once a day8 
BIRDS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label):
a) 5 mg/kg IM every 12 hours9
b) 2.5 – 5 mg/kg/day; must be given parenterally10
REPTILES :
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 2.5 mg/kg once daily IM11
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy (cultures, clinical signs associated with infection)
 ■ Gross monitoring of vestibular or auditory toxicity is recom -
mended.
 ■ Tobramycin serum concentration, if possible (see below)
 ■ Nephrotoxicity (see below)
The following recommendations are from the  International Renal 
Interest Society (IRIS) to prevent aminoglycoside-induced acute 
kidney injury (AKI; in dogs and cats). 
Prior to aminoglycoside treatment*: 
 ■ Carefully consider the potential risk factors: dehydration, con -
comitant treatment with furosemide, use of other nephrotoxic 
drugs, arterial hypotension, hypokalemia, previous history of 
AKI, pre-existing chronic kidney disease (CKD). When such 
factors are identified, alternatives to aminoglycoside treatment 
should be considered. 
 ■ Perform urinalysis: measure urine specific gravity, examine for 
glycosuria, proteinuria (UPC), and abnormal sediment. If ab -
normalities are detected, investigate carefully to determine the 
underlying cause before deciding whether to prescribe aminogly-
cosides. 
 ■ Blood tests: determine blood creatinine concentration. Consider 
avoiding the use of aminoglycosides if the blood creatinine con -
centration is at the borderline between stage I and stage II or al -

===== PDF_PAGE_1276 =====
Toceranib    1249
ready in stage II. In borderline cases, further investigations might 
be considered to evaluate renal risk. 
 ■ Imaging: abdominal radiograph and/or ultrasonographic exam -
ination
 ■ Measurement of arterial blood pressure: high-risk hypertension: 
systolic BP greater than 180 mm Hg is indicative of renal damage 
and risk. 
*This list was adapted from IRIS. Preventing Aminoglycoside-induced 
AKI. http://www.iris-kidney.com/education/education/prevention.html.
During the treatment*: 
 ■ Assess the hydration status of the patient (body weight, total plas-
ma protein concentration, and hematocrit) once weekly. 
 ■ If therapeutic drug monitoring is available, ensure the plasma to-
bramycin concentration has decreased to below 1 mg/L (1 µg/mL) 
before the next dose is administered. 
 ■ Carefully re-assess the pretreatment urine and blood variables in-
dicated above
 ■ Repeat these assessments every 3 to 4 days to detect any change. If 
there is any doubt of renal damage, perform the GGT:creatinine 
ratio in the urine (when available in the laboratory); an increase is 
an early indicator of nephrotoxicity. 
 ■ Continue monitoring for 1 week after discontinuing the treat -
ment, as AKI may occur later as aminoglycosides accumulate 
inside proximal tubular cells and persist for long periods after 
dosing. 
 ■ The risk for nephrotoxicity increases with the duration of the 
treatment, as aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity is cumulative. 
 ■ If findings suggest the development of AKI (urine: the presence of 
renal casts in the sediment, glycosuria, low specific gravity; blood: 
azotemia): Immediately stop aminoglycoside therapy. Hospital -
ize the patient and monitor urine production. Nonoliguric AKI 
generally occurs and is reversible. Oliguric AKI has a poor prog -
nosis. Start adequate IV fluid therapy. Monitor BUN, creatinine, 
and electrolytes (hypokalemia is frequent in nonoliguric AKI and 
should be corrected) 
 ■ If AKI is worsening, consider renal substitutive therapy (hemo -
dialysis). After apparent recovery from aminoglycoside-induced 
AKI, some dogs may remain renally impaired.
*This list was adapted from IRIS. Preventing Aminoglycoside-induced 
AKI. http://www.iris-kidney.com/education/education/prevention.html.
Client Information
 ■ Tobramycin must be injected if it is used for treating serious in -
fections. It does not work if it is given by mouth.
 ■ This medicine can damage the nerves, hearing, and kidneys. 
Monitor your animal for symptoms such as vomiting, not eating, 
lethargy, and difficulty walking. 
 ■ Cats may be more likely to have damage to their hearing.
 ■ Give this medicine once daily either in the vein (by your veteri -
narian) or under the skin (subcutaneous).
 ■ This medicine can be used topically (in the eye, ear, on the skin) 
for certain infections.
 ■ While your animal is taking this medication, it is important to 
return to your veterinarian for blood and urine tests.  Do not miss 
these important follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tobramycin, an aminoglycoside derived from Streptomyces tenebrar-
ius, occurs as a white to off-white, hygroscopic powder that is freely 
soluble in water and very slightly soluble in alcohol. The sulfate salt 
is formed during the manufacturing process. The commercial injec-
tion is a clear, colorless solution, and the pH is adjusted to 6 to 8 with 
sulfuric acid and/or sodium hydroxide.
Tobramycin sulfate may also be known as tobramycin sulphate, 
Nebcin®, Nebcine®, Tobra®, or TOBI®.
Storage/Stability
Store tobramycin sulfate for injection at room temperature (15°C 
to 30°C [59°F-86°F]); avoid freezing and temperatures above 40°C 
(104°F). Do not use the product if discolored. After reconstitution, 
keep the solution in a refrigerator and use it within 96 hours. If kept 
at room temperature, use the solution within 24 hours.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Although the manufacturers state that tobramycin should not be 
mixed with other drugs, it is reportedly physically  compatible and 
stable in most commonly used IV solutions (NOT compatible with 
dextrose and alcohol solutions, Polysal®, Polysal® M, or Isolyte® E, M, 
or P) and compatible with the following drugs: aztreonam, bleomy-
cin sulfate, calcium gluconate, cefoxitin sodium, ciprofloxacin lac -
tate, clindamycin phosphate (not in syringes), metronidazole (with 
or without sodium bicarbonate), ranitidine HCl, and verapamil HCl.
The following drugs or solutions are reportedly physically incom-
patible or only compatible in specific situations with tobramycin: 
furosemide and heparin sodium. Compatibility is dependent upon 
factors such as pH, concentration, temperature, and diluent used; 
consult specialized references or a hospital pharmacist for more spe-
cific information.
In vitro inactivation of aminoglycoside antibiotics by beta-lactam 
antibiotics is well documented; see the information in the Drug In-
teractions and Laboratory Consideration sections.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tobramycin Sulfate Solution for Injection: 10 mg/mL in 2 mL vials, 
and 40 mg/mL in 2 mL, 30 mL, and 50 mL vials; generic; (Rx)
Tobramycin Sulfate Powder for Injection: 1.2 g (40 mg/mL after re-
constitution), preservative-free in 30 mL bulk package vial; generic; 
(Rx)
Also available in ophthalmic preparations as well as products (solu-
tion, powder [capsule]) for inhalation.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Toceranib 
(toe-ser-a-nib) Palladia®
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor Antineoplastic
Prescriber Highlights 
 ▶ FDA-approved for grades II or III canine mast cell tumors 
(MCTs) in dogs
 ▶ Discontinue toceranib therapy at least 3 days prior to, and 2 
weeks following, surgery. 
 ▶ Most common adverse effects are diarrhea, decreased/loss of 
appetite, lameness, weight loss, and hematochezia.  
 ▶ Adverse effects can be serious and require treatment delay or 
dose reduction.
 ▶ Monitoring is essential.
 ▶ Toceranib should be handled as a hazardous drug; personal 
protective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly.

===== PDF_PAGE_1277 =====
1250    Toceranib 
Uses/Indications 
Toceranib is indicated for the treatment of Patnaik grade II or III, 
recurrent, cutaneous mast cell tumors (MCTs) with or without re -
gional lymph node involvement in dogs.
Toceranib may prove useful for treating a variety of tumors in 
dogs, including heart-base tumors,1 sarcomas, carcinomas, melano-
mas, multidrug-resistant lymphoma, 2 and multiple myeloma. Toc -
eranib has been investigated in combination with radiation therapy3 
and in combination with other targeted therapies such as calcitriol,4 
carboplatin,5,6 low-dose continuous (metronomic) cyclophospha -
mide alone7 or with piroxicam,8 doxorubicin,9 lomustine,10–12 piroxi-
cam,13 prednisone, and vinblastine.14–16
Preliminary data suggest that toceranib is tolerated in cats at a 
similar dose range and schedule as that recommended for dogs. 17–22 
Early evidence of biological activity against feline MCTs, 17,22 pan -
creatic carcinoma,23,24 and oral squamous cell carcinoma 20 has been 
demonstrated. 
Pharmacology/Actions 
Toceranib is a small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) that 
selectively inhibits the tyrosine kinase activity of several split recep -
tor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), including vascular endothelial growth 
factor receptor-2 (VEGFR2), platelet-derived growth factor recep -
tor-beta (PDGFR-beta), and KIT (stem cell growth factor receptor), 
among others. These kinases are believed to be involved in growth, 
pathologic angiogenesis, and metastatic processes of certain tumors. 
Toceranib competitively inhibits ATP binding in target RTKs, pre -
venting receptor phosphorylation and subsequent downstream sig -
nal transduction. Toceranib can induce cell cycle arrest and apop -
tosis in canine tumor cell lines expressing activating mutations in 
KIT. As canine mast cell tumors (MCTs) universally express KIT and 
a subset possess activating mutations, toceranib administration can 
be associated with objective antitumor activity in a large minority of 
dogs with MCTs. Aberrant KIT localization and/or activation mu -
tation may influence treatment response, although conflicting data 
exist.3,25,26 Toceranib’s activity against VEGFR2 and PDGFR-beta has 
the potential to exert antiangiogenic effects in multiple tumor types. 
Additional information suggests that toceranib administration may 
be associated with a reduction in immunosuppressive regulatory T 
cells in the peripheral blood.7
Pharmacokinetics 
The oral bioavailability of toceranib phosphate in dogs is ≈77%. The 
presence of food does not significantly impact absorption. Binding 
to canine plasma proteins is ≈94%, and the volume of distribution is 
very large (ie, greater than 20 L/kg). The terminal elimination half-
life is 31 hours after oral administration. Although the metabolic fate 
of toceranib has not been completely determined, it appears that the 
drug is metabolized via cytochrome P450 and/or flavin monooxy -
genase to an N-oxide metabolite in the liver.27,28
A study evaluating toceranib peak plasma concentrations after 
administration of lower oral dosages (2.5 – 2.75 mg/kg PO every 
other day) resulted in an average 6- to 8-hour postdose plasma con-
centration ranging from 100 – 120 ng/mL.29 These were significantly 
above the 40 ng/mL concentration that is associated with inhibition 
of KIT phosphorylation, and the adverse event profile was sub -
stantially reduced from the one associated with the label dosage of  
3.25 mg/kg every other day. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Toceranib use has not been evaluated in dogs less than 24 months of 
age or weighing less than 5 kg (11 lb). Because toceranib can cause 
vascular dysfunction leading to edema and thromboembolism (in -
cluding pulmonary emboli) and may impair wound healing, it is rec-
ommended that toceranib be discontinued at least 3 days prior to, 
and 2 weeks following, surgery.
When toceranib is used for the treatment of bulky mast cell tu -
mors (MCTs), significant mast cell degranulation may occur with 
resultant adverse effects; systemic mastocytosis should be ruled out 
prior to starting toceranib.30
Toceranib can cause clinical signs similar to those seen with ag -
gressive MCTs. When these occur, the drug should be stopped and 
the patient re-evaluated. When signs resolve, treatment may be 
re-instituted at a lower dose or reduced frequency. The package in -
sert has specific monitoring requirements with dose adjustment or 
therapy pause guidelines when certain adverse effects (eg, severe di-
arrhea, GI bleeding) occur or when laboratory monitoring indicates 
toxicity. See Monitoring.
Toceranib in combination with lomustine and prednisolone in 
dogs with advanced MCTs caused severe adverse effects in all 10 en-
rolled dogs, including grade 3 and 4 neutropenia (n = 9), GI toxicity 
(n = 5), and hepatotoxicity and pancreatitis ( n = 1 each), requiring 
temporary discontinuation of therapy in 9 dogs, and 4 dogs died or 
were euthanized due to treatment-related adverse effects.12
Toceranib should be handled as a hazardous drug; personal pro -
tective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure.6 Refer to the Occupational Safety and Health Asso-
ciation (OSHA) website  for more information.
Adverse Effects 
The most common adverse effects observed with toceranib in dogs 
include diarrhea, decreased/loss of appetite, lameness, weight loss, 
and hematochezia. Severe diarrhea or GI bleeding requires imme -
diate treatment and necessitates dose interruption or reduction (see 
Monitoring). Other potential adverse effects include vomiting, ane -
mia, thrombocytopenia, lethargy, azotemia, hyperphosphatemia, 
increased ALT, muscle cramping/pain, neutropenia, hypoalbumin -
emia, thromboembolic disease, vasculitis, pancreatitis, nasal depig -
mentation, change in coat or skin color, epistaxis, seizures, and pru-
ritus. Increased systolic blood pressure (SBP) has been noted in dogs 
receiving toceranib, with an average increase of 11 to 16 mm Hg, and 
37% to 45% of dogs developing SBP greater than 160 mm Hg. 31,32 
Proteinuria occurred in 20% to 25% of dogs.31,33 Over a 90-day study 
period, laboratory assessments of thyroid function remained with 
the laboratory reference interval but trended toward reduced thyroid 
dysfunction.34 Case reports describe nephrotic syndrome developed 
in a dog after 328 days of toceranib treatment for a mast cell tumor,35 
as well as secondary lymphoma in another dog after 3 months of 
toceranib treatment for a GI stromal tumor.36  
One source37 suggests starting certain drugs 4 to 7 days prior to 
staring toceranib to reduce the likelihood of toxicity. These drugs 
include antacids (eg, famotidine, omeprazole), H 1 blockers (eg, di -
phenhydramine), prednisone (to reduce tumor inflammation and 
possibly decrease mast cell tumor mediators’ effects), and sucralfate 
(if dog has a positive stool hemoccult). Additionally, in dogs that 
experience hyporexia or vomiting after therapy has begun, admin -
istration of metoclopramide, ondansetron, or maropitant may be 
effective. Loperamide can be given on toceranib dosing days to help 
prevent or lessen diarrhea; other clinicians have found metronida -
zole useful. Another study reported that continuation of prednisone 
after treatment was begun, but only given on days when toceranib is 
not given, was well tolerated.3
In cats that have received toceranib, reported adverse effects in -
clude GI toxicity, myelosuppression, azotemia, hepatopathy, and 
 alopecia.17–21 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Toceranib is a likely teratogen and should not be used in pregnant 
females. It is labeled as contraindicated in breeding, pregnant, or lac-
tating bitches. For sexually intact patients, verify pregnancy status 
prior to administration.

===== PDF_PAGE_1278 =====
Toceranib    1251
Because reproductive/nursing safety has not been established in 
animals, this drug should only be used when the maternal benefits 
outweigh the potential risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 
No acute toxicity data are available, but toceranib has a narrow mar-
gin of safety. For patients that have experienced or are suspected to 
have experienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison 
control center specializing in providing veterinary-specific informa-
tion is recommended. For general information related to overdose 
and toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison con -
trol centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions 
The following drug interactions either have been reported or are the-
oretical in animals receiving toceranib and may be of significance in 
veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not nec-
essarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and perform 
additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Calcitriol : An in vitro study found that calcitriol had syn -
ergistic effects with toceranib against canine C2 mastocytoma 
cells. The authors concluded that calcitriol combination therapies 
might have significant clinical utility in the treatment of canine 
mast cell tumors (MCTs) but refinement of the calcitriol-dosing 
regimen must be carried out.4
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs  ( NSAIDs; eg, 
carprofen, meloxicam): The package insert states to use NSAIDs 
with caution in conjunction with toceranib due to an increased 
risk for GI ulceration or perforation. Although NSAIDs (eg, 
piroxicam) are sometimes used with toceranib as part of metro -
nomic drug protocols,13 it is recommended that they not be given 
on the same day as toceranib as GI toxicity can be exacerbated.37
 ■ CYP3A4 Inhibitors  (eg, clarithromycin, fluconazole, grape-
fruit juice, itraconazole, ketoconazole, verapamil ): May in -
crease toceranib concentrations. This interaction with toceranib 
has not been documented in dogs to date and presently is specu -
lative; however, use caution.
 ■ Other Cytotoxic Antineoplastic Agents (eg, doxorubi-
cin, lomustine, vinblastine ): Potentiation of myelosuppression 
(neutropenia) with toceranib co-administration, necessitating 
reductions in dosage and/or frequency of administration of the 
cytotoxic agent, has been reported.9–11,14 Use in combination with 
caution.
Laboratory Considerations 
 ■ None noted
Dosages 
NOTE: There is a significant amount of ongoing research eval -
uating toceranib for use with other drugs, other species, and for 
extra-label indications and since chemotherapy indications, treat-
ment protocols, monitoring and safety guidelines often change, 
the following dosages should be used only as a general guide. 
Consultation with a veterinary oncologist and referral to current 
veterinary oncology references38–42 are strongly recommended.
DOGS:
NOTE: The label dosage for dogs is considered by most clinicians 
to be greater than is necessary and is associated with more adverse 
effects. The label indications are provided below, but the use of 
lower, extra-label dosages is strongly recommended. 
Patnaik grade II or III, recurrent, cutaneous mast cell tumors 
(MCT s) with or without regional lymph node involvement  
(label dosage; FDA-approved): Initial dose 3.25 mg/kg PO every 
other day (every 48 hours). 30 Dose reductions of 0.5 mg/kg (to a 
minimum dose of 2.2 mg/kg) every other day and dose interrup-
tions (cessation of treatment) for up to 2 weeks may be utilized, if 
needed, to manage adverse reactions. May be administered with 
or without food. Do not split tablets. 
Chemotherapeutic agent (extra-label): Clinical experience with 
toceranib in dogs suggests that 2.4 – 2.75 mg/kg every other day 
is better tolerated than the label dosage, resulting in less toxicity, 
better owner compliance, and fewer drug holidays. 29 Some dogs 
do not tolerate this dosing regimen even at the 2.4 mg/kg dose 
rate. Medical oncologists have found that a Monday/Wednes -
day/Friday schedule of dosing may be better tolerated by some 
dogs. This may be particularly useful when toceranib is combined 
with other drugs such as NSAIDs. When a dog cannot tolerate 
the Monday/Wednesday/Friday schedule, every-third-day dosing 
may be attempted, but this is not ideal and may result in subther-
apeutic drug exposure.37
CATS:
Chemotherapeutic agent (extra-label): A target dosage of  
3.25 mg/kg every other day or Monday/Wednesday/Friday ap -
pears to be tolerated. Practically, each dose equates to 10 mg/cat 
(NOT mg/kg), which results in doses ranging from 2 to 4 mg/kg 
for the average 2.5 to 5 kg (5.5 to 11 lb) cat and is tolerated by the 
majority of cats and is recommended by some clinicians.22
Monitoring 
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC, hematocrit, and serum albumin, cre-
atinine, and phosphate. The manufacturer recommends weekly 
(approximately) veterinary assessment for the first 6 weeks of 
therapy and approximately every 6 weeks thereafter. The package 
insert states: 
 Temporarily discontinue drug if anemia, azotemia, hypoalbu -
minemia, and hyperphosphatemia occur simultaneously. Resume 
treatment at a dose reduction of 0.5 mg/kg after 1 to 2 weeks 
when values have improved and albumin is >2.5 g/dL. Tempo -
rary treatment interruptions may be needed if any one of these 
occurs alone: hematocrit <26%, creatinine ≥2 mg/dL, or albumin  
<1.5 g/dL. Then resume treatment at a dose reduction of 0.5 mg/kg  
once the hematocrit is >30%, the creatinine is <2.0 mg/dL, and the 
albumin is >2.5 g/dL. Temporarily discontinue the use of toceran -
ib if neutrophil count is ≤1000/mL. Resume treatment after 1 to 2 
weeks at a dose reduction of 0.5 mg/kg, when neutrophil count has 
returned to >1000/mL. Further dose reductions may be needed if 
severe neutropenia recurs.30
 ■ Other laboratory tests that have been suggested for monitoring 
(every 6 to 8 weeks) include urinalysis, full chemistry panel, thy -
roid function, and urine protein:creatinine ratio.
 ■ Adverse effects (diarrhea): If 4 or more watery stools/day or di -
arrhea persists for 2 days, stop drug and institute supportive care 
until formed stools recur. When dosing is resumed, decrease dose 
by 0.5 mg/kg.
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, GI bleeding): If fresh blood in stool or mele -
na for more than 2 days, or frank hemorrhage or blood clots in 
stool are noted, stop drug and institute supportive care until reso-
lution of all clinical signs of blood in stool, then decrease dose by  
0.5 mg/kg.
 ■ Blood pressure (every 6 to 8 weeks)31
 ■ Tumor size
Client Information 
 ■ Always provide Client Information Sheet with prescription. In 
addition, it is highly recommended to verbally reiterate some of 
the key points found on the client information sheet.
 ■ This medication may be given with or without food; do not split 
or crush tablets.
 ■ Toceranib is a chemotherapy (anticancer) drug. The drug can be 

===== PDF_PAGE_1279 =====
1252    Tolazoline
hazardous to other animals and people that come in contact with 
it. On the day your animal gets the drug and then for a few days 
afterward, all bodily waste (eg, urine, feces, litter), blood, or vomit 
should only be handled while wearing disposable gloves. Seal the 
waste in a plastic bag, then place both the bag and gloves in with 
the regular trash. 
 ■ Do not wash any items soiled with stool, urine, or vomit from 
your dog with regular laundry.
 ■ Store toceranib out of the reach of children or pets.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Toceranib phosphate is an idolinone with a molecular weight of 
494.46. Toceranib may also be known as PHA-291639, SU-11654, 
UNII-59L7Y0530C, toceranibum, or tocéranib.
Storage/Stability 
Toceranib phosphate tablets should be stored at controlled room 
temperature 20°C-25°C (68°F-77°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Toceranib Phosphate Oral Tablets: 10 mg, 15 mg, and 50 mg; Palla-
dia®; (Rx) NADA # 141-295
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Tolazoline
(toe-laz-oh-leen) Tolazine®
Alpha-Adrenergic Antagonist
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Alpha-adrenergic antagonist used primarily in horses and 
other large animals as a reversal agent for xylazine or other 
alpha-2 agonists
 ▶ Reversal effects may be partial and transitory.
 ▶ Contraindications in horses include stress, debilitation, cardiac 
disease, sympathetic blockage, hypovolemia, shock, hypersen-
sitivity, or coronary artery or cerebrovascular disease.
 ▶ Use caution or avoid use in foals.
 ▶ Adverse effects in horses include transient tachycardia, periph-
eral vasodilation presenting as sweating and injected mucous 
membranes, hyperalgesia of the lips (eg, licking, flipping of 
lips), piloerection, clear lacrimal and nasal discharge, muscle 
fasciculations, and apprehensiveness. 
 ▶ Ruminants and camelids may be more susceptible to the 
adverse effects of tolazoline, especially when given IV or at 
high doses.
 ▶ Availability may be an issue; may be obtained from com-
pounding pharmacies.
Uses/Indications
Tolazoline is FDA-approved and indicated for the reversal of sedative 
and analgesic effects associated with xylazine in horses. Tolazoline 
antagonizes the effects of detomidine more completely, hastens re -
covery, and lasts longer than atipamezole 1; however, effects can be 
transient, and sedative effects may reoccur.2,3
Tolazoline has also been used for reversing the effects of xylazine 
and other alpha-2 agonists (eg, dexmedetomidine, detomidine, me-
detomidine) in horses and in a variety of other species, but fewer 
safety and efficacy data are available. 
Pharmacology/Actions
By directly relaxing vascular smooth muscle, tolazoline has periph -
eral vasodilating effects and decreases total peripheral resistance. 
Tolazoline also is a competitive alpha-1- and alpha-2-adrenergic 
blocking agent, helping explain its mechanism for reversing the 
effects of xylazine. It may stimulate GI secretions and motility via 
parasympathomimetic or histamine type-2 agonist effects.
Tolazoline is rapid-acting (usually within 5 minutes of IV admin-
istration) but may not fully reverse effects on sedation or heart rate 
and rhythm. It has a short duration of action; repeat doses may be 
required.
In horses that received detomidine 0.04 mg/kg sublingually (SL), 
then tolazoline 4 mg/kg IV 1 hour later, tolazoline’s effect on detomi-
dine-induced changes in the chin-to-ground distance was minimal, 
and detomidine-induced changes in heart rate and rhythm only per-
sisted for 15 to 20 minutes.2
After tolazoline doses of 4 mg/kg IV in horses, average heart rate 
decreased beginning 2 minutes postinjection, with heart rate nadir at 
45 minutes. No apparent effect on chin-to-ground distance was not-
ed. PCV significantly increased in all horses throughout the times 
sampled with the maximal change at 15 minutes. Serum glucose 
concentrations increased significantly in all horses at the first time 
point measured through 1.5 hours postinjection.4
Pharmacokinetics
After a single tolazoline 4 mg/kg IV injection in 6 horses, tolazoline 
had a mean volume of distribution (steady-state) of 1.68 L/kg, clear-
ance of 0.757 L/hour/kg, and elimination half-life of 2.08 hours. 4 
In a subsequent study, after horses ( n = 9) were first given detomi -
dine 0.04 mg/kg SL, then tolazoline 4 mg/kg IV 1 hour later; mean 
tolazoline pharmacokinetic values included volume of distribution 
(steady-state) of 1.9 L/kg, clearance of 11.2 mL/minute/kg, and elim-
ination half-life of 3.51 hours. 2 An older preapproval study done in 
ponies reported the elimination half-life of ≈1 hour.5
Animal studies have demonstrated that tolazoline concentrates in 
the liver and kidneys. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
The manufacturer does not recommend use in horses exhibiting 
signs of stress, debilitation, cardiac disease, sympathetic blockage, 
hypovolemia, or shock. Safe use for foals has not been established, 
and some clinicians believe it should not be used in foals, as adverse 
reactions and fatalities have been reported.
Tolazoline should be considered contraindicated in patients 
known to be hypersensitive to it or with coronary artery or cere -
brovascular disease. Humans that have any of the conditions listed 
above should use extra caution when handling the agent.
Adverse Effects
In horses, adverse effects that may occur include transient tachycar-
dia; peripheral vasodilatation presenting as sweating and injected 
mucous membranes of the gingiva and conjunctiva; hyperalgesia 
of the lips (eg, licking, flipping of lips); piloerection; clear lacrimal 
and nasal discharge; muscle fasciculations; and apprehensiveness. 
Adverse effects should diminish with time, and generally disappear 
within 2 hours of dosing. The potential for adverse effects increases 
if tolazoline is given at higher than recommended dosages or if xyla-
zine has not been previously administered.
Ruminants and camelids appear to be more sensitive to tolazo -
line’s effects than horses. In cattle, 1.5 mg/kg IV can cause coughing, 
increased frequency of defecation, and mild increases in breathing 
effort. At higher doses (2 – 10 mg/kg IV), bright red conjunctival 
mucous membranes, coughing, nasal discharge, salivation, labored 
breathing, CNS depression, signs of abdominal pain, straining, head 
pressing, restlessness, and severe diarrhea can be observed. Rapid IV 
injection has been reported to cause significant cardiac stimulation, 

===== PDF_PAGE_1280 =====
Tolazoline   1253
tachycardia, increased cardiac output, vasodilation, and GI distress.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safety during pregnancy in breeding or lactating animals has not 
been established. It is unknown if the drug crosses the placenta or 
enters maternal milk.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In horses given tolazoline alone (no previous xylazine), 5 times the 
recommended doses resulted in GI hypermotility, with resultant flat-
ulence and defecation or attempt to defecate. Some horses exhibited 
mild colic and transient diarrhea. Intraventricular conduction may 
be slowed when horses are overdosed, with a prolongation of the 
QRS-complex noted. Ventricular arrhythmias may occur, resulting 
in death with higher overdoses (5 times the recommended doses). In 
humans, ephedrine (NOT epinephrine or norepinephrine) has been 
recommended to treat serious tolazoline-induced hypotension.
A llama that received 4.3 mg/kg IV and again 45 minutes later (≈5 
times overdose) developed signs of anxiety, hyperesthesia, profuse 
salivation, GI tract hypermotility, diarrhea, convulsions, hypoten -
sion, and tachypnea. Treatment, including IV diazepam, phenyleph-
rine, IV fluids, and oxygen, was successful.6
Tolazoline 8 mg/kg IV has reportedly caused a fatality in a sheep.
Apnea, fasciculations, and muscle tensing were observed in mule 
deer that received dosages of 6.1 – 8.4 mg/kg IV; however, no adverse 
effects were observed in black-tailed deer that received an average 
dosage of 8.1 mg/kg IV .7
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving tolazoline and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Dopamine : Concurrent use may cause severe hypotension.
 ■ Epinephrine, Norepinephrine : If large doses of tolazoline are 
given with either norepinephrine or epinephrine, a paradoxical 
drop in blood pressure can occur, followed by a precipitous in -
crease in blood pressure.
 ■ Ethanol : Accumulation of acetaldehyde can occur if tolazoline 
and alcohol are given simultaneously.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Reversal of xylazine effects  (extra-label): 2 – 4 mg/kg slow 
IV (administration rate should approximate 1 mL/second). 8 
W ARNING: If reversal is warranted, the high concentration  
(100 mg/mL) of the veterinary drug may make accurate dosing 
difficult. Tolazoline is not FDA-approved for use in dogs or cats, 
and the United States manufacturer does not recommend its use.
EQUINE :
Horses: Reversal of xylazine effects  (label dosage; FDA-ap -
proved): 4 mg/kg slow IV; administration rate should approxi -
mate 1 mL/second. 9
Horses: Reversal of xylazine effects (extra-label): 0.5 – 2 mg/kg 
IM (preferred) or slow IV; if administering IV , dividing the dose 
into multiple smaller doses has been suggested.10
Horses: Reversal of low-dose alpha-agonist effects after dental 
procedures (extra-label): Following sedation with 1.1 – 2.2 mg/kg  
IM xylazine, reverse with tolazoline 0.04 mg/kg slow IV; may re -
peat 0.02 mg/kg slow IV 20 to 30 minutes later if needed.11
Donkeys: Reversal of detomidine  (extra-label): Tolazoline  
4 mg/kg IV , given 15 minutes after detomidine 0.04 mg/kg IV , re-
duced the degree and duration of sedation, ataxia, and analgesia.12
RUMINANTS (CATTLE, SHEEP , GOATS):
NOTE: Not FDA-approved for use in cattle, sheep, goats, or other 
food animals
Reversal of alpha-2 agonists (extra-label): 0.5 – 1.5 mg/kg IV . 
Other clinicians have suggested that IV administration of tolazo-
line should be avoided, except in emergency situations, to prevent 
adverse effects such as cardiac asystole.13,14
CAMELIDS :
Reversal of alpha-2 agonists (extra-label):
a) Preferred reversal agent for xylazine is tolazoline 1 – 2 mg/kg 
IM or SC.15–17. IV administration (especially the labeled dose—
4 mg/kg) should be avoided as adverse effects have occurred.6
b) 0.5 – 1.5 mg/kg IV . Today, these lower doses are now recom -
mended for use in all ruminants, including camelids. Other 
clinicians have suggested that IV administration of tolazoline 
should be avoided, except in emergency situations, to prevent 
adverse effects such as cardiac asystole.13
SWINE:
Reversal of alpha-2 agonists (extra-label): 2 – 4 mg/kg IV or  
2 mg/kg IM18,19
DEER:
NOTE: Not FDA-approved for use in food animals
Reversal of xylazine (extra-label): 
a) 2 – 4 mg/kg slow IV; titrate to effect8
b) 2 – 4 mg/kg IV , or 50% of dose given IV , 50% given IM7,20,21
BIRDS:
Reversal of alpha-2-adrenergic agonists  (eg, xylazine, detomi-
dine) (extra-label): 15 mg/kg IV22
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy (ie, reversal of xylazine effects)
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, tachycardia, sweating, mucous membrane in-
jection, lip licking, ocular and nasal discharge, fasciculations, and 
restlessness)
Client Information
 ■ Because of the risks associated with the use of xylazine and rever-
sal by tolazoline, only veterinary professionals should administer 
and monitor these drugs.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tolazoline HCl is an alpha-adrenergic blocking agent that is struc -
turally related to phentolamine. It occurs as a white to off-white, 
crystalline powder possessing a bitter taste and a slight aromatic 
odor. Tolazoline is freely soluble in ethanol or water. The commer -
cially available (human) injection has a pH between 3 and 4.
Tolazoline HCl may also be known as benzazoline hydrochloride, 
phenylmethylimidazoline, tolazolinium chloratum, Priscol®, Prisco-
line®, Tolazine®, or Vaso-Dilatan®.
Storage/Stability
Store commercially available injection products between 15°C and 
30°C (59°F and 86°F) and protected from light. Color change or 
crystallization may occur with refrigeration.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.

===== PDF_PAGE_1281 =====
1254    Tolfenamic Acid
The drug is reportedly physically compatible with the commonly 
used IV solutions.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tolazoline HCl Injection: 100 mg/mL in 100 mL multi-dose vials; 
Tolazine®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in horses; not to be used in 
foodproducing animals. Cattle slaughter withdrawal: 8 days; mild 
discard 2 days. Deer slaughter withdrawal = 30 days. While this 
product is still listed in FDA ’s Green Book of approved animal drugs, 
it may no longer be commercially available in the US. 11
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Tolfenamic Acid
(tole-fen-a-mik) Tolfedine®
Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Agent (NSAID) 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Oral and injectable NSAID approved in various countries for 
dogs, cats, cattle, and swine. No approved products in the 
United States 
 ▶ Relatively safe for short-term use.
 ▶ Contraindicated in patients with active GI bleeding or ulcer-
ation and those that are hypersensitive to it or other drugs in 
its class
 ▶ Use caution in patients with renal or hepatic insufficiency and 
those that are dehydrated, hypovolemic, or hypotensive. 
 ▶ Not recommended prior to surgery due to its effects on plate-
let function
Uses/Indications
Tolfenamic acid is an anti-inflammatory, antipyretic, and analgesic 
agent approved in other countries for use in dogs, cats, cattle, and 
swine.
Tolfenamic acid may be useful for the treatment of acute or chron-
ic pain and/or inflammation in dogs and acute pain/inflammation in 
cats. 
In some countries, tolfenamic acid is approved for the treatment 
of pneumonia and acute mastitis in cattle and metritis mastitis aga -
lactia in swine.1 
Pharmacology/Actions
Tolfenamic acid exhibits pharmacologic actions similar to those of 
aspirin. It is a potent inhibitor of cyclooxygenase, thereby inhibiting 
the release of prostaglandins. It also has direct inhibition of prosta -
glandin receptors. Tolfenamic acid has significant antithromboxane 
activity and is not recommended for use presurgically because of its 
effects on platelet function.
Pharmacokinetics
Tolfenamic acid is absorbed after oral administration. In dogs, peak 
concentrations occur from 2 to 4 hours after dosing. Enterohepatic 
recirculation is increased if given with food. This effect can increase 
the bioavailability but also creates more variability in bioavailabil -
ity than when given to fasted dogs. The volume of distribution in 
dogs is reported to be 1.2 L/kg, and it has an elimination half-life of 
≈6.5 hours. The duration of the anti-inflammatory effect is 24 to 36 
hours. Dogs with experimentally induced renal failure had signifi -
cantly increased clearances of the drug, presumably via increasing 
hepatic metabolism or enterohepatic recycling of tolfenamic acid.2
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tolfenamic acid is contraindicated in animals hypersensitive to it 
or to other drugs in its class (eg, meclofenamic acid). Like other 
NSAIDs, it should not be used in animals with active GI bleeding 
or ulceration. Use with caution in patients with decreased renal or 
hepatic function. Avoid use in dehydrated, hypovolemic, or hypo -
tensive animals.3
Use in animals under 6 weeks of age is not recommended.3
Adverse Effects
Tolfenamic acid is relatively safe when given as recommended in 
dogs and cats. Vomiting and diarrhea have been reported after oral 
use. Experimental studies did not demonstrate significant renal or 
GI toxicity until doses were more than 10 times labeled. Potentially, 
long-term use could cause renal failure, especially in cats. However, 
1 small (n = 7) study, where healthy cats received 4 mg/kg PO once 
daily for 14 days, did not find significant changes in renal scintigra-
phy or biochemical profiles when compared to baseline.4
Because of its anti-thromboxane activity and resultant effects on 
platelet function, tolfenamic acid is not recommended for use pre -
surgically.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
No specific information was located; like other NSAIDs, tolfenamic 
acid should be used with caution in pregnancy.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
No specific information was located. It is suggested that if an acute 
overdose occurs, treatment follows standard overdose procedures 
(empty gut following oral ingestion). Supportive treatment should 
be instituted as necessary, and diazepam IV used to help control sei-
zures. Monitor for GI bleeding. Because tolfenamic acid may cause 
renal effects, monitor electrolyte and fluid balance carefully and 
manage renal failure using established guidelines.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving tolfenamic acid or other 
NSAIDs and may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless 
otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but 
weigh the potential risks and perform additional monitoring when 
appropriate.
 ■ Aspirin : May increase the risk for GI toxicity (eg, ulceration, 
bleeding, vomiting, diarrhea)
 ■ Corticosteroids : As concomitant corticosteroid therapy may 
increase the occurrence of gastric ulceration, avoid the use of 
these drugs when also using tolfenamic acid.
 ■ Digoxin : NSAIDs may increase serum levels.
 ■ Fluconazole : Administration has increased plasma levels of 
celecoxib in humans and potentially could also affect tolfenamic 
acid levels in dogs.

===== PDF_PAGE_1282 =====
Toltrazuril   1255
 ■ Furosemide : NSAIDs may reduce saluretic and diuretic effects; 
may increase the risk for nephrotoxicity.
 ■ Methotrexate : Serious toxicity has occurred when NSAIDs 
have been used concomitantly with methotrexate; use together 
with extreme caution.
 ■ Nephrotoxic Drugs  (eg, aminoglycosides, amphotericin B): 
May enhance the risk for nephrotoxicity
 ■ Nsaids,  Other (eg, meloxicam, flunixin ): May increase the 
risk for GI toxicity (eg, ulceration, bleeding, vomiting, diarrhea)
 ■ W arfarin : Closely monitor patients also receiving drugs that 
are highly bound to plasma proteins (eg, warfarin), as tolfenamic 
acid and its active metabolite are 98% to 99% protein-bound in 
the dog and may displace warfarin from plasma proteins.
Dosages
DOGS: 
NSAID (extra-label):
a) Acute pain: 4 mg/kg once daily SC, IM, or PO for 3 to 5 days. 
Chronic pain: 4 mg/kg, PO once daily for 3 to 5 consecutive 
days per week. The injectable is suggested for the first dose 
only.5 
b) Injectable: 4 mg/kg SC once; if necessary, can repeat 4 mg/kg 
SC once 24 hours after initial injection. Oral: 4 mg/kg PO once 
daily for 3 days; oral treatment may be repeated once a week 
(ie, 3 days of medication followed by 4 days without medica -
tion). Oral and injectable treatments may be combined (ie, 
give initial injection of 4 mg/kg once SC followed 24 hours lat-
er by 4 mg/kg PO once daily for 3 days).6,7
CATS:
Acute pain (extra-label): 4 mg/kg once daily SC, IM, or PO for 3 
to 5 days. The injectable is suggested for the first dose only.5
Anti-inflammatory; Adjunctive treatment of upper respirato -
ry disease in association with antimicrobial therapy (inject -
able) or for treatment of febrile syndromes (oral); (extra-label):  
4 mg/kg SC or PO (with food) once a day for 3 to 5 days. Inject -
able is labeled as a single injection or can be repeated 1 time.6,8
CATTLE:
NOTE: Other countries may have different withdrawal require -
ments; refer to the product label. This drug is not approved in the 
US, and its administration would not be legal unless a veterinari-
an could provide justification for its use.9
Pneumonia (extra-label): 2 mg/kg by IM injection high in the 
neck.7 Treatment may be repeated once only after 48 hours. An -
other course of treatment should not be administered within 28 
days. DO NOT inject cattle other than into muscle tissues high 
on the side of the neck. Meat withdrawal = 10 days (IM); Milk 
withdrawal = 12 hours
Acute mastitis (extra-label): 4 mg/kg as a single IV injection. 7 
Meat withdrawal = 4 days (IV); Milk withdrawal = 12 hours
SWINE:
NOTE: Other countries may have different withdrawal require -
ments; refer to the product label. This drug is not approved in the 
United States, and its administration would not be legal unless a 
veterinarian could provide justification for its use.9
Metritis-mastitis-agalactia (extra-label): 2 mg/kg IM into the 
rump once.7 Another course of treatment should not be adminis-
tered within 21 days. Meat withdrawal = 6 days.8 (Label Informa-
tion; Tolfejec®—Troy Labs, Australia) 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
Client Information
 ■ The weekly dosing regimen (3 to 5 consecutive days per week for 
dogs) is important to follow to minimize the risks for side effects. 
Do not give longer to cats than your veterinarian prescribes. 
 ■ Should give oral medicine with food.
 ■ Vomiting and diarrhea have been reported as side effects in dogs 
and cats.
 ■ Report any changes in appetite, water consumption, or GI distress 
to your veterinarian.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tolfenamic acid, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent in the 
anthranilic acid (fenamate) category, is related chemically to me -
clofenamic acid.
Tolfenamic acid may also be known as acidum tolfenamicum, 
Bifenac®, Clotam®, Clotan®, Fenamic®, Flocur®, Gantil®, Migea®, Pol-
monin®, Purfalox®, Rociclyn®, Tolfamic®, Tolfedine®, Tolfejec®, or Tur-
baund®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, store tolfenamic acid products at room 
temperature. Protect from light. Refer to the injectable product label 
for discard dating following the first vial puncture.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
None in the United States; in New Zealand, Australia, UK, and/or 
Europe: Tolfenamic Acid Tablets: 6 mg, 20 mg, and 60 mg; Tolfenam-
ic Acid Oral Suspension: 20 mg/mL; and Tolfenamic Acid Injection: 
40 mg/mL are available. 
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Toltrazuril
(tole-traz-yoo-ril) Baycox®
Antiprotozoal/Anticoccidial
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Approved in some countries for treating coccidial infections in 
calves, lambs, piglets, and poultry
 ▶ Not commercially available in the United States; must be legal-
ly imported or compounded by a reputable pharmacy
 ▶ May be considered as an alternative for treating coccidiosis 
in companion animals (eg, dogs, cats, and rabbits) and the 
oocyst shedding stage of toxoplasmosis in cats
 ▶ Adverse effect profile not well described, but appears relative-
ly safe
Uses/Indications
Toltrazuril is an antiprotozoal agent that is approved in some coun-
tries to treat Isospora suis in piglets and coccidiosis in lambs ( Eime-
ria crandalis and Eimeria ovinoidalis) and calves ( Eimeria bovis or 
Eimeria zuernii). The drug also may be considered as an alternative 
treatment for coccidiosis in dogs, cats, camelids, birds, rabbits, mice, 
and reptiles. 
Toltrazuril has activity against parasites of the genus Hepatozoon 
spp, but other drugs (eg, imidocarb, primaquine, doxycycline) are 
generally used. Toltrazuril can induce initial excellent clinical re -
sponses in dogs with American canine hepatozoonosis (ACH) but 

===== PDF_PAGE_1283 =====
1256    Toltrazuril
cannot completely eliminate the parasites, and remission is transient 
in most dogs. 1 A combination of toltrazuril and emodepside ( Pro-
cox®) with clindamycin reduced infectivity but did not completely 
clear the organism.2 Toltrazuril has been used for treating the oocyst 
shedding stage of toxoplasmosis in cats.
Although toltrazuril has been used to treat equine protozoal 
myeloencephalitis (EPM) caused by Sarcocystis neurona, the use of 
FDA-approved products (eg, ponazuril, pyrimethamine/sulfadia -
zine) is preferred.
Toltrazuril failed to eradicate Neospora caninum in congenitally 
infected lambs.3
Pharmacology/Actions
Toltrazuril is the parent compound to ponazuril (toltrazuril sulfone). 
Its mechanism of action is not well understood, but it appears to in-
hibit protozoal enzyme systems and cell division and damages intra-
cellular structures. Light and electron microscope studies show that 
toltrazuril is active against all intracellular stages of coccidia, includ-
ing schizonts and micro- and macrogamonts.4 It interferes with the 
division of the protozoal nucleus and the activity of the mitochon -
dria, and damages the wall-forming bodies in the microgametes. 
Toltrazuril produces severe vacuolization of the protozoal endoplas-
mic reticulum in all intracellular development stages. 
Toltrazuril has activity against Hepatozoon spp, Isospora spp, Sar-
cocystis spp, Toxoplasma spp, and all intracellular stages of Coccidia 
spp.
Pharmacokinetics
Toltrazuril is slowly absorbed after oral administration. The highest 
concentrations are found in the liver; it is rapidly metabolized into 
the sulfone derivative (ponazuril). Plasma half-lives are 72 hours in 
calves, 170 hours in lambs, and 51 hours in piglets. There is little en-
terohepatic recirculation. It is primarily excreted in the feces. 
In rabbits, the pharmacokinetics of toltrazuril were compared 
using a compounded toltrazuril formulation to improve solubility 
(prepared by solid dispersion technology using DMSO, PEG 400, 
and PEG 6000 as a carrier for drinking water) with a commercially 
available (in China) 0.5% premix product. With the compounded 
preparation, peak plasma levels were ≈3 times greater, and AUC 
was ≈2 times greater. The authors concluded that using toltrazuril 
prepared with solid dispersion technology could provide better anti-
coccidial activity via the attainment of higher blood concentrations.5
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Toltrazuril should not be used in patients that have had prior hyper-
sensitivity reactions to it or other triazinone (triazine) antiprotozoals 
(eg, ponazuril, diclazuril).
The principal metabolite of toltrazuril (toltrazuril sulfone, 
ponazuril) reportedly persists in the environment, and undiluted 
manure from treated animals can contaminate groundwater. There 
appears to be little risk for significant environmental contamination 
when toltrazuril is used in dogs, cats, or other companion animals 
(eg, pet birds, reptiles).
Do not confuse toltrazuril with toltrazuril sulfone (ponazuril) as 
the dosages differ.
Adverse Effects
Toltrazuril appears to be well tolerated in birds. An adverse effect 
profile in mammals is not well described. Potentially, GI signs could 
occur. Some horses receiving the related drug ponazuril developed 
blisters on their nose and mouth, and others developed a rash or 
hives during field trials.6
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
No reproductive or nursing safety information was located; weigh the 
potential risks versus benefits of use during pregnancy or  lactation.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Doses up to 5 times the label recommendations in calves, lambs, 
and piglets resulted in no adverse hematologic or pathologic effects.4 
Doses of up to 10 times the label recommendations in horses were 
tolerated without significant adverse effects. Five times overdoses in 
poultry have been tolerated without clinical signs noted. Decreased 
water intake has been seen if overdoses are greater than 5 times.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
 ■ None were reported.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No issues were noted.
Dosages
DOGS:
Coccidiosis (extra-label): 10 – 30 mg/kg PO once daily for 1 to 
3 days7,8
CATS:
Enteroepithelial cycle (oocyst shedding) of toxoplasmosis (extra- 
label): 5 – 10 mg/kg PO once daily for 2 days9
Coccidiosis (extra-label): 20 – 30 mg/kg PO once.10 Repeating the 
dose in 10 days improves efficacy. 
CATTLE:
Prevention of clinical signs of coccidiosis and reduction of coc-
cidia shedding in calves on farms with a confirmed history of 
coccidiosis caused by Eimeria bovis or Eimeria zuernii (extra- 
label): 15 mg/kg PO once for each animal. 11 For the treatment of 
a group of animals of the same breed and same or similar age, 
the dosing should be done according to the heaviest animal of 
this group. To obtain maximum benefit, animals should be treat-
ed before the expected onset of clinical signs (ie, in the prepatent 
period). Not for calves weighing greater than 80 kg (176 lb) or in 
fattening units such as veal or beef calves. Not for dairy animals
SHEEP:
Prevention of clinical signs of coccidiosis and reduction of 
coccidian shedding in lambs on farms with a confirmed his -
tory of coccidiosis caused by Eimeria crandallis and Eimeria 
ovinoidalis (extra-label): 20 mg/kg PO as a single dose. 4 To ob-
tain maximum benefit, sheep should be treated in the prepatent 
period before the expected onset of clinical signs. The prepatent 
period of E ovinoidalis is 12 to 15 days, and the prepatent period 
of E crandalis is 15 to 20 days. If animals are to be treated collec -
tively rather than individually, they should be grouped according 
to their body weight and dosed accordingly. In order to maximize 
effectiveness, it is important to time therapy according to individ-
ual farm management and the lifecycle of the organism involved. 
Not for use in dairy sheep
CAMELIDS : 
Coccidiosis caused by Eimeria spp (extra-label): 5 – 20 mg/kg 
PO once daily for up to 3 days. The higher doses and longer cours-
es are for the treatment of individuals; the lower doses may be 
used for control.12 
SWINE:
Preclinical coccidiosis due to Isospora suis in neonatal piglets 

===== PDF_PAGE_1284 =====
Topiramate   1257
(extra-label): 20 mg/kg body weight PO once at 3 to 4 days of 
age.4 Weigh 3 representative litters at 3 days of age to determine 
an average piglet weight. Not for use in suckling or barbecue pigs
BIRDS:
Coccidiosis in chickens and turkey (extra-label): 7 mg/kg per day 
orally in drinking water for 2 consecutive days.13 Consult product 
label for instruction on preparing and administering medication 
via drinking water systems. Do not use in laying birds producing 
eggs for human consumption 
Coccidiosis in raptors  (extra-label): 7 mg/kg PO once daily for 
2 to 3 days14
SMALL MAMMALS :
Coccidiosis (extra-label): 
a) Rabbits: In the study, a single oral dose of toltrazuril  
2.5 mg/kg or 5 mg/kg PO reduced oocyte counts by 98.1% 
and 99.6%, respectively. 15 The authors concluded that there 
appeared to be no advantage to using the higher dose and  
2.5 mg/kg PO once recommended.
b) Mice: Toltrazuril 0.5% 10 – 20 mg/kg PO given for 3 days, 
pause for 5 days, and then repeat once more16
c) Guinea pigs: Coccidiosis, 2.5 – 5 mg/kg PO twice, 5 days 
apart17
REPTILES :
Parasitism in bearded dragons  (extra-label): 5 – 15 mg/kg PO 
once daily for 3 days18
Coccidiosis in tortoises (extra-label): 15 – 20 mg/kg PO every 48 
hours for 3 months reduced mortality.19
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: fecal egg count reduction testing before and up 
to 10 to 14 days after treatment
Client Information
 ■ Used to treat certain types of protozoal infections found in your 
animal’s feces. Not currently available in the United States but 
may be legally imported by your veterinarian.
 ■ This medicine may be given with food or on an empty stomach. If 
your animal vomits or acts sick after getting it on an empty stom-
ach, give it with food or a small treat to see if this helps. If vomit-
ing continues, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ Avoid direct contact with the medication. Wear disposable gloves 
and wash hands after giving medication.
 ■ This medicine appears to be well tolerated by all animals.
 ■ Manure from treated animals contains residual medication that 
can negatively affect groundwater and the growth of certain crops. 
Manure from treated animals must be diluted with 3 times the 
amount of manure from untreated animals before being spread 
onto land.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Related to other antiprotozoals, such as ponazuril, toltrazuril is a tri-
azinone (triazine) antiprotozoal (anticoccidial) agent. The commer-
cially available (in Europe) 2.5% oral solution is an alkaline, clear, 
colorless to yellow-brown solution that also contains triethanol -
amine 30 mg/mL and polyethylene glycol 80.7 mg/mL. Toltrazuril 
has a molecular weight of 425.4.
Toltrazuril may also be known as Bay-Vi-9142, toltrazurilo, tol -
trazurilum, and Baycox®, Cevauril®, Chanox® Multi, Tolracol®,  Zorabel®.
Storage/Stability
Store the 2.5% solution at temperatures at 25°C (77°F) or below. 
Store oral 5% suspensions at temperatures at 30°C (86°F) or below.
Dilutions in drinking water more concentrated than 1:250 (4 mL 
of the 2.5% solution to 1 L of water) may precipitate. After dilution, 
the resulting solution is stable for 24 hours. It is recommended to 
discard medicated drinking water not consumed after 24 hours.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Do not mix toltrazuril solution for drinking water with other med -
ications.11,13
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
None in the United States; in some countries, toltrazuril 2.5%  
(25 mg/mL) solution for dilution in drinking water and/or 5%  
(50 mg/mL) oral suspension are available. Refer to the specific prod-
uct label for withdrawal times or other restrictions for use.
A combination oral suspension for dogs and cats containing tol -
trazuril and emodepside (Procox®) is also available in some markets. 
A combination injection product ( Forceris®) containing toltrazuril 
and iron (as gleptoferrin) for use in piglets also may be available.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Topiramate
(toe-pie-rah-mate) Topamax®
Anticonvulsant
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ May be useful for refractory seizure disorders in dogs, partic-
ularly for partial seizure activity; may be of benefit in treating 
cats, but little information is available.
 ▶ Very short half-life in dogs (2 to 4 hours), but therapeutic 
activity may persist secondary to high affinity for receptors in 
the brain.
 ▶ Adverse effects may include GI distress, sedation, ataxia, inap-
petence, and irritability in dogs; in cats, sedation and inappe-
tence have been noted.
 ▶ Expense may be an issue, but generic products are now avail-
able.
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies topiramate as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Topiramate may be useful for treating refractory seizures in dogs, 
particularly partial seizure activity. It may also be of benefit in treat-
ing cats, but little information is available. A case report of a cat with 
feline idiopathic ulcerative dermatitis treated with topiramate has 
been published.1
Pharmacology/Actions
Although the exact mechanism for its antiseizure action is unknown, 
topiramate possesses three properties that may play a role in its ac -
tivity: Topiramate blocks, in a time-dependent manner, action po -
tentials elicited repetitively by a sustained depolarization of neurons; 
it increases the frequency that GABA activates GABA A receptors; 
and it antagonizes the kainite/AMPA receptors without affecting the 
NMDA receptor subtype. Topiramate’s actions are concentration-de-
pendent; effects can first be seen at 1 micromole and maximize at 
200 micromoles. Topiramate is a weak inhibitor of carbonic anhy -
drase isoenzymes CA-II and CA-IV; it is believed that this effect does 
not contribute significantly to its antiepileptic actions but may influ-
ence the drug’s adverse effect profile.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, topiramate is rapidly absorbed after oral administration, but 

===== PDF_PAGE_1285 =====
1258    Topiramate
absolute bioavailability varies between 30 and 60%. Half-life ranges 
from 2 to 4 hours after multiple doses. 2 Comparatively, the half-life 
in humans is ≈21 hours in adults, but shorter in children. 3 In hu -
mans, the drug is not extensively metabolized and is ≈70% is excret-
ed unchanged in the urine.
No information on sustained-release topiramate product (eg, 24-
hour topiramate sprinkles) pharmacokinetics in dogs or cats was 
located.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Topiramate is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it. 3 In 
humans, topiramate should be used with caution in patients with 
impaired hepatic or renal function.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) 
classifies topiramate as a hazardous drug; personal protective equipment 
(PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the risk for exposure.4 
Adverse Effects
Because this drug has not commonly been used in veterinary pa -
tients, an accurate adverse effect profile is not well described. In 
dogs, the most prevalent adverse effects reported include GI distress, 
sedation, ataxia, inappetence, weight loss and irritability; signs of -
ten subsided or lessened in severity over time.5 In cats, sedation and 
inappetence have been noted. 1 A case of renal tubular acidosis in a 
cat has been reported, which resolved with discontinuation of topi -
ramate and supportive care.6
In humans, the most likely adverse effects include somnolence, 
dizziness, nervousness, confusion, and ataxia. Rarely, acute myopia 
with secondary angle closure glaucoma has been reported. Incidence 
of kidney stones is ≈2 to 4 times higher in patients taking topiramate 
than in the general population. Topiramate can cause a hyperchlo -
remic metabolic acidosis and reduce citrate excretion in the urine, 
thus increasing urine pH, leading to calcium phosphate renal calculi.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Teratogenic effects were noted in mice and rats given topiramate at 
dosages equivalent to those used in humans.3 Topiramate enters ma-
ternal milk; use with caution in nursing patients.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdoses in humans have caused convulsions, drowsiness/lethargy, 
slurred speech, blurred and double vision, impaired mentation, stu-
por, ataxia, metabolic acidosis, hypotension, agitation, and abdom -
inal pain.3
Clinical signs reported in dogs and cats with a topiramate over -
dose include lethargy, ataxia, and vomiting (cats).
Treatment consists of GI decontamination if the ingestion was 
recent, and supportive therapy. Hemodialysis enhances the elimina-
tion of topiramate from the body.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving topiramate and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Amitriptyline : Topiramate may increase amitriptyline concen-
tration.
 ■ Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors (eg, acetazolamide, di -
chlorphenamide): Concurrent use may increase the risk for renal 
calculus formation.
 ■ Cns  Depressant Drugs, Other (eg, acepromazine, cannabi-
diol, gabapentin, trazodone): Other CNS depressant drugs may 
exacerbate the CNS adverse effects of topiramate.
 ■ Furosemide : Concurrent use may increase the risk for 
 hypokalemia.
 ■ Hydrochlorothiazide : Concurrent use may result in in -
creased topiramate exposure and increase the risk for  hypokalemia.
 ■ Methenamine : Topiramate may alter urine pH and decrease the 
efficacy of methenamine 
 ■ Opioids  (eg, buprenorphine, hydrocodone, tramadol ): May 
exacerbate the CNS adverse effects of topiramate 
 ■ Phenobarbital : Concurrent use may decrease topiramate se -
rum concentration.
 ■ Posaconazole : Concurrent use may result in increased topira-
mate plasma concentration and topiramate toxicity.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No specific laboratory interactions or considerations were noted. 
Dosages
DOGS:
Add-on drug (to phenobarbital or bromides)  for refractory 
epilepsy (extra-label): No controlled clinical studies were noted 
that support clinical use or any dosage. Initially, 2 mg/kg PO twice 
daily for 2 weeks, then increase to 5 mg/kg PO twice daily and 
continue for ≈2 months. If seizure frequency is not reduced by at 
least 50% (compared with prior to topiramate) and no adverse ef-
fects occurred, increase dose to 10 mg/kg PO twice daily. Reassess 
again after ≈2 months and if the prior criteria were met, increase 
dose to 10 mg/kg PO 3 times daily. Dogs that were responders 
received dosages within the range of 5 – 10 mg/kg PO twice daily.5
CATS:
Refractory epilepsy  (extra-label): No controlled clinical studies 
were noted that support clinical use or any dosage. Anecdotal -
ly, 12.5 – 25 mg/cat (≈2.4 – 5 mg/kg) PO twice daily has been 
noted. To reduce adverse effects, dose is usually started low and 
increased as tolerated. Inappetence can be dose-limiting. 
Feline idiopathic ulcerative dermatitis  (extra-label): 5 mg/kg 
PO twice daily. From a case report, remission occurred within 4 
weeks and control was maintained for 30 months. Two attempts 
to withdraw topiramate led to relapse within 24 hours.1
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ Plasma concentrations of topiramate are usually not monitored 
in humans, but therapeutic levels are thought to range from 2 to 
25 mg/L.
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine as directed by your veterinarian. Do not skip 
doses. Try to give the medicine at the same time each day.
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. If your animal 
vomits or acts sick after getting it on an empty stomach, give the 
medicine with food or small treat to see if this helps. If vomiting 
continues, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ Do not suddenly stop giving this medicine to your animal or sei-
zures may occur again.
 ■ It is recommended to maintain a seizure diary to help determine 
how well this medicine is working.
 ■ Possible side effects may include gastrointestinal distress (nausea, 
vomiting, loss of appetite) or sedation (sleepiness, lack of energy). 
Report these or any other unexpected changes to your veterinar -
ian right away.

===== PDF_PAGE_1286 =====
Torsemide   1259
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined 
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH). Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the use 
of personal protective equipment when handling this  medicine.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A sulfamate-substituted derivative of D-fructose antiepileptic, topi-
ramate occurs as a white crystalline powder with a bitter taste. Its 
solubility in water is 9.8 mg/mL; it is freely soluble in alcohol.
Topiramate may also be known as McN-4853, RWJ-17021, Epito-
max®, Topamac®, Topamax®, or Topimax®.
Storage/Stability
Topiramate tablets should be stored in tight containers at room tem-
perature (15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]); protect from moisture. Topira -
mate sprinkle capsules should be stored in tight containers at tem -
peratures below 25°C (76°F); protect from moisture.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Topiramate Oral Tablets and Caplets: 25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg, and  
200 mg; Topamax®, Topiragen®, generic; (Rx)
Topiramate Sprinkle Capsules: 15 mg and 25 mg; Topamax® Sprinkle, 
generic; (Rx)
Topiramate Sprinkle Capsules Extended-Release (24-hr for hu -
mans): 25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg, and 200 mg; Qudexy XR®, 
Trokendi® XR, generic; (Rx)
Topiramate Oral Solution: 25 mg/mL in 473 mL bottle; Eprontia®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Torsemide
(tor-se-myde) Demadex®
Loop Diuretic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used as adjunctive treatment of CHF in dogs and cats, espe-
cially in cases that have stopped responding to furosemide
 ▶ ≈10 to 20 times more potent than furosemide with longer 
diuretic action 
 ▶ Contraindicated in patients with anuria, hypersensitivity, dehy-
dration, or serious electrolyte depletion
 ▶ Adverse effects include GI (vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia) and 
renal effects (polyuria, increased renal values, renal insufficien-
cy or failure).
Uses/Indications
Torsemide is a loop diuretic similar to furosemide but is ≈10 to 20 
times more potent, and its diuretic effects can persist for a longer 
period (≈12 hours). Therefore, the starting dose should be 5% to 10% 
of the required furosemide dose, and dosing frequency may be re -
duced.1 It may be a useful adjunctive treatment for congestive heart 
failure (CHF) in dogs and cats, particularly in patients that have be-
come refractory to furosemide. 
The parenteral form of torsemide has been discontinued in the 
US, so use is limited to oral therapy.2
In dogs, torsemide is an option for dogs with myxomatous mitral 
valve disease (MMVD) in stages C and D of heart failure, which are 
no longer responsive to furosemide. 3 A study in dogs with MMVD 
that compared oral furosemide vs oral torsemide (dosed at 10% of 
the furosemide dose divided into twice-daily doses) concluded that 
torsemide is equivalent to furosemide at controlling clinical signs of 
CHF and is likely to achieve greater diuresis vs furosemide. 4 Two 
larger-scale studies have also found that torsemide given every 24 
hours is noninferior to furosemide for MMVD dogs with CHF . 5,6 
In dogs with first-time CHF related to MMVD that were naïve to 
diuretics, torsemide was noninferior to furosemide for reducing 
pulmonary edema and clinical cough scores without worsening of 
dyspnea or exercise intolerance. 6 Torsemide was associated with a 
64% reduction in risk for cardiac death, euthanasia due to worsening 
CHF , or study withdrawal due to worsening CHF . However, adverse 
effects were more frequent in dogs receiving torsemide. Another 
study in dogs with CHF related to MMVD found torsemide to be 
noninferior to furosemide based on clinical improvement or stabili-
zation of CHF .5 Additionally, torsemide was associated with a 2-fold 
reduction in risk for reaching the composite cardiac endpoint (spon-
taneous cardiac death, euthanasia for HF , or CHF class worsening) 
within the first 12 weeks of treatment compared to furosemide.5
A small retrospective study found that torsemide was tolerated in 
cats with spontaneous CHF as first-line and second-line treatments.7 
One pharmacokinetic study in horses concluded that torsemide 
might be a reasonable alternative to furosemide because of good ab-
sorption after oral administration, reasonable half-life, and sustained 
diuretic effect.8 
Pharmacology/Actions
Torsemide, like furosemide, inhibits sodium and chloride reabsorp-
tion in the ascending loop of Henle via interference with the chlo -
ride-binding site of the 1Na+, 1K+, 2Cl- cotransport system. 
Torsemide increases renal excretion of water, sodium, potassium, 
chloride, calcium, magnesium, hydrogen, ammonium, and bicar -
bonate. Torsemide is able to suppress almost total water reabsorption 
in dogs.1 In healthy dogs, diuretic resistance developed after 14 days 
of furosemide but not torsemide.9
In dogs, excretion of potassium is affected much less than sodium 
(20:1); this is ≈2 times the ratio of Na:K excreted than with furose -
mide. The diuretic activity begins within 1 hour of dosing, peaks at 
≈2 hours, and persists for ≈12 hours. In dogs, torsemide appears to 
have differing effects on aldosterone than furosemide. When com -
pared to furosemide, torsemide increases plasma aldosterone levels 
and inhibits the amount of receptor-bound aldosterone; however, 
additional research must be performed to determine the clinical sig-
nificance of these effects.
In cats, torsemide’s effects on potassium excretion appear to be 
similar to that of furosemide. Peak diuresis occurs ≈4 hours postdose 
and persists for 12 hours.10 
Pharmacokinetics
Limited information is available. Oral bioavailability has been re -
ported to be between 80% and 100% in dogs and cats. Plasma protein 
binding in dogs is greater than 98%. ≈60% of the dose is excreted 
unchanged in the urine.11 Elimination half-life in dogs is ≈10 hours 
and is ≈13 hours in cats.1,12 
In horses, 1 study found that torsemide was orally absorbed and 
reached plasma concentrations similar to those reported in dogs, 
rabbits, rats, and humans. A single dose of 6 mg/kg PO resulted in a 
maximum plasma concentration of 10.14 µg/mL ≈3 hours after dos-

===== PDF_PAGE_1287 =====
1260    Torsemide
ing and a half-life of 9.2 hours.8 
In humans, torsemide has high oral bioavailability; patients may 
be switched between IV and PO forms with no change in dose. Bio-
availability in dogs has been reported at 80% to 100%. It is exten -
sively bound to plasma proteins in humans (greater than 99%). The 
major metabolite in humans is the carboxylic acid derivative, which 
is biologically inactive.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Torsemide should not be used in patients with known hypersen -
sitivity to it or other sulfonylureas. Caution in patients with other 
sulfonamide hypersensitivities; cross-reactivity between antibiotic 
sulfonamides and non-antibiotic sulfonamides is theoretically pos -
sible.13 Torsemide should not be used with other loop diuretics, in 
dehydrated or hypovolemic patients, or in anuric patients.11
Use torsemide cautiously in patients with significant hepatic dys-
function, hyperuricemia (may increase serum uric acid), or diabetes 
mellitus (may increase serum glucose). Torsemide can cause exces -
sive diuresis that could potentially cause symptomatic dehydration, 
decreased blood volume and hypotension, and worsening renal func-
tion. Acute renal failure is possible; concomitant use of nephrotoxic 
drugs increases this risk. Symptomatic electrolyte abnormalities are 
possible. Use of torsemide at higher than recommended doses, in pa-
tients with severe renal impairment, or patients with hyponatremia 
may increase the risk for ototoxicity.14
Adverse Effects
Adverse effect profiles for dogs and cats have not been fully estab -
lished because of the limited use of this drug in veterinary medicine. 
In clinical studies, the most common adverse effects seen were GI 
effects (vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia) and renal effects (polyuria, in-
creased renal values, renal insufficiency or failure). 5,6 One study in 
healthy dogs given torsemide daily for 26 weeks reported dose-de -
pendent adverse effects, including dryness of oral mucosa, de -
creased food intake, increased water intake, electrolyte imbalances, 
increased urine pH, decreased urine specific gravity, and increased 
serum aldosterone concentrations.15 In healthy dogs, diuretic resis -
tance developed after 14 days of furosemide but not torsemide, and 
both drugs were associated with increased BUN and plasma creati -
nine concentrations when compared with values before treatment.9
Torsemide can induce fluid and electrolyte abnormalities. Patients 
should be monitored for hydration status and electrolyte imbalances 
(especially potassium, calcium, magnesium, and sodium). Prerenal 
azotemia may result if moderate to severe dehydration occurs. Hy -
ponatremia is probably the greatest concern, but hypocalcemia, hy -
pokalemia, and hypomagnesemia may all occur. Animals with nor -
mal food and water intake are much less likely to develop water and 
electrolyte imbalances than those that do not.
Other potential adverse effects include hematologic effects (eg, 
anemia, leukopenia), weakness, and restlessness. Torsemide, unlike 
furosemide, apparently only rarely causes significant ototoxic effects 
in humans; high doses in laboratory animals have induced ototox -
icity.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
No effects on fertility were noted when female and male rats were 
administered up to 25 mg/kg/day.
No adverse teratogenic effects were seen when pregnant rats and 
rabbits were administered up to 15 times (human dose) and 5 times 
(human dose), respectively. Larger doses increased fetal resorptions, 
decreased average body weight, and delayed fetal ossification. 
It is unknown if torsemide enters milk, but furosemide is distrib-
uted in milk. Clinical significance for nursing offspring is unknown.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In dogs, the oral LD50 is greater than 2 g/kg. Fluid and electrolyte im-
balance is the most likely risk associated with an overdose. Consider 
GI decontamination for very large or quantity unknown ingestions. 
Acute overdoses should generally be managed by observation with 
fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base monitoring; supportive treatment 
should be initiated if required.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving torsemide and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme  Inhibitors  (ACEIs; eg, 
enalapril, benazepril ): Slightly increased risk for hypotension, 
particularly in patients that are volume or sodium depleted sec -
ondary to diuretics
 ■ Aminoglycosides  (eg, gentamicin, amikacin): Other diuretics 
have been associated with increasing the ototoxic or nephrotoxic 
risks of aminoglycosides. It is unknown if torsemide can also have 
these effects and, if so, what the clinical significance may be.
 ■ Amphotericin  B: Loop diuretics may increase the risk for 
nephrotoxicity development.
 ■ Cholestyramine : Concomitant administration may decrease 
torsemide absorption; administer separately.
 ■ Cisplatin : Concomitant use may increase the risk for worsening 
renal function or renal failure.
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, predniso(lo)ne ): In -
creased risk of hypokalemia 
 ■ Digoxin : Can increase the area under the curve of torsemide by 
50% but is unlikely to be of significance clinically; torsemide-in -
duced hypokalemia may increase the potential for digoxin  toxicity.
 ■ Iohexol : Increased risk for nephrotoxicity 
 ■ Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  ( NSAIDs; eg, 
carprofen, flunixin): NSAIDs may reduce the natriuretic effects 
of torsemide. Concomitant use with NSAIDs may increase the 
risk for worsening renal function or renal failure.
 ■ Probenecid : Can reduce the diuretic efficacy of torsemide.
 ■ Salicylates ( eg, aspirin): Torsemide can reduce the excretion 
of salicylates.
Laboratory Considerations
Torsemide can affect serum electrolytes, glucose, uric acid, and 
BUN concentrations.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Diuretic for adjunctive treatment of heart failure (extra-label): 
Initial dose 0.1 – 0.3 mg/kg PO every 24 hours.3,5–7 Torsemide dos-
ages are ≈5% to 10% of furosemide doses, as torsemide is ≈10 to 
20 times more potent than furosemide; if switching from furose -
mide, torsemide dose should be started at 5% to 10% of the total 
daily furosemide dose. 
HORSES :
Diuretic for fluid overload (extra-label): Based on a pharmaco -
kinetic study, 0.5 – 1 mg/kg PO every 12 hours appears to be a 
reasonable starting dose.8

===== PDF_PAGE_1288 =====
Tramadol   1261
Monitoring
 ■ Serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, glucose (if diabetic)
 ■ Hydration status
 ■ Blood pressure, if indicated
 ■ Clinical signs of edema, patient weight, if indicated
Client Information
 ■ While taking this medicine, your animal will drink and urinate 
more often than usual. Be sure your animal always has access to 
freshwater. Y ou may give this medicine with or without food. 
 ■ While your animal is taking this medicine, your veterinarian will 
need to monitor your animal closely. Do not miss these important 
follow-up visits. 
 ■ Contact your veterinarian immediately if you notice excessive 
thirst, weakness, collapse (passing out), head tilt, lack of urina -
tion, or a racing heartbeat.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Torsemide is a lipophilic anilinopyridine sulfonylurea loop diuretic 
that occurs as white to off-white, crystalline powder. It is practically 
insoluble in water and slightly soluble in alcohol.
Torsemide may also be known as torasemide, AC-3525, AC 4464, 
BM-02.015, JDL-464, and Demadex®. International trade names 
include Isemid®, Torem®, and Unat®.
Storage/Stability
Store torsemide tablets below 40°C (104°F); preferably between 15°C 
and 30°C (59°F and 86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE IN THE US.
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Torsemide Oral Tablets: 5 mg, 10 mg, 20 mg, and 100 mg; Demadex®, 
generic; (Rx)
Torsemide Injection: 10 mg/mL; generic; (Rx). NOTE: This product 
has been discontinued.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Tramadol
(tram-ah-doll) Ultram®
Opioid Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Synthetic mu-receptor partial opioid agonist that also inhibits 
the reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine
 ▶ Appears useful as an analgesic in cats, but studies in dogs pro-
vide conflicting evidence of analgesia; may take up to 2 weeks 
for full analgesic activity in chronic pain states
 ▶ It is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it and other 
opioids, and in those with GI obstruction. Use with caution in 
patients with a history of seizures or patients receiving other 
CNS or respiratory depressants.
 ▶ Appears well tolerated in dogs; sedation is the most likely 
adverse effect.
 ▶ Several potential clinically significant drug interactions exist; 
avoid use with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; 
eg, fluoxetine) or monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs; eg, 
selegiline).
 ▶ DEA Schedule IV (C-IV) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Tramadol is used for adjunct treatment of postoperative or chronic 
pain in many species. It is most useful when used in combination 
with NSAIDs or other analgesic drugs (eg, amantadine, gabapentin, 
alpha-2  agonists).1 Tramadol use as an analgesic was widely adopt -
ed in veterinary medicine in part based on its low cost and previ -
ous status as a noncontrolled drug; however, evidence of efficacy is 
conflicting and studies demonstrating tramadol’s efficacy as a sole 
analgesic2–5 are outweighed by studies that cite its limitations.1,6–11 A 
meta-analysis that reviewed the efficacy of tramadol for postopera -
tive pain management in dogs found that tramadol likely results in 
a decreased need for rescue analgesia compared to no treatment or 
placebo, but the certainty of the evidence was determined to be low.12 
Studies of tramadol in dogs with osteoarthritis did not show benefits 
compared to placebo.10,13 Anecdotally, tramadol has also been used 
as an anti-tussive agent; however, evidence of efficacy is lacking.
Tramadol’s efficacy as an analgesic in cats is more robust.14–19 
In horses, tramadol administered as an epidural may also be use-
ful as an analgesic, but no appropriate commercial dosage forms are 
available in the United States; however, studies evaluating the an -
tinociceptive effects in horses after IV administration have found 
that IV tramadol is not an effective analgesic in horses when used 
alone.20,21 Some studies have shown benefits when used in combi -
nation therapy.21,22 In donkeys, tramadol used with lidocaine as an 
epidural has a shorter onset and longer duration of action than when 
lidocaine is used alone.23
Tramadol administered systemically in sheep, camels, and came-
lids has noticeable adverse effects and a lack of efficacy and should 
not be used in those species.24–28
Pharmacology/Actions
Tramadol is a centrally acting partial opioid agonist with primar -
ily mu-receptor activity. It also weakly inhibits the reuptake of se -
rotonin and norepinephrine. Analgesic activity is due to the parent 
compound and its active metabolite, M1 (O-desmethyltramadol 
[ODT]). When compared with tramadol in laboratory animal stud-
ies, M1 was 20 times more potent in binding to mu receptors and was 
6 times more potent as an analgesic. 
Naloxone only partially antagonizes the analgesic effects of trama-
dol; other partial antagonists include yohimbine and ondansetron.

===== PDF_PAGE_1289 =====
1262    Tramadol
Pharmacokinetics
Bioavailability is ≈65% after oral administration of immediate-re -
lease tablets in dogs, but there is significant interpatient variabili -
ty. Rectal bioavailability is ≈10%. The volume of distribution (V D), 
total body clearance, and half-life are 3.8 L/kg, 55 mL/kg/minute, 
and 1.7 hours, respectively.29 Tramadol is extensively metabolized via 
several pathways to at least 20 metabolites. The active M1 metabolite 
is formed by cytochrome P450 2D15 (CYP2D15) but is a minor me-
tabolite in dogs.30,31 M1 has a half-life of ≈2 hours after oral tramadol 
administration.29 Dogs appear to produce substantial quantities of 
the inactive metabolite M2 via CYP2B11. M1 and M2 are further 
metabolized to M5 (N,O-didesmethyltramadol) via CYP2C21 and 
2D15.30,32 Pharmacokinetics of tramadol have been reported for 
young and middle-aged dogs. After IV administration at 4 mg/kg, 
the VD, elimination half-life, and total body clearance were 4.77 ± 
1.07 L/kg, 1.91 ± 0.26 hours, and 29.9 ± 7.3 mL/kg/minute, respec -
tively, in young dogs and 4.73 ± 1.43 L/kg, 2.39 ± 0.97 hours, and 
23.7 ± 5.4 mL/kg/minute, respectively, in middle-aged dogs. Excre -
tion was significantly prolonged in older animals. 33 In greyhounds, 
tramadol’s half-life is slightly shorter (ie, 1.1 hours).34 
After intranasal administration in dogs, tramadol was rapidly 
absorbed into the systemic circulation, becoming detectable after 5 
minutes and reaching maximum concentrations ≈40 minutes after 
administration. Bioavailability was determined to range from 3.3% 
to 20.6%. In general, plasma concentrations were low and variable. 
Tramadol half-life was ≈1 hour. M1 was largely undetectable. Plas -
ma concentrations were low, and because they did not correlate with 
analgesic effect it was hypothesized that tramadol bypassed systemic 
circulation and traveled directly to the CNS. 
A study of 8 cats that received the immediate-release oral tablet 
showed high interpatient variability in absorption (2 cats had inad -
equate data and could not be analyzed). The main metabolite pro -
duced in cats is the active M1 metabolite. The elimination half-life 
for the parent compound was ≈2.25 to 3.5 hours and was 4.5 hours 
for the M1 metabolite. 35 Another study in 6 cats demonstrated the 
following approximate values: 60% oral bioavailability, 2 L/kg vol -
ume of distribution at steady state (VSS), 12 mL/kg/minute clearance, 
and 3.2 hours terminal half-life. The terminal half-life of M1 after 
oral administration was ≈4.8 hours. After transdermal application of 
a compounded tramadol gel, a dose of ≈2.8 mg/kg resulted in unde-
tectable or very low plasma concentrations.36
In adult horses, tramadol had relatively poor oral absorption (≈3% 
to 10%)37,38 and an elimination half-life of ≈1.5 to 2.5 hours after IV 
or IM administration and up to 10 hours when given orally.37–41 The 
M1 active metabolite half-life was ≈4 hours. Oral doses of 10 mg/kg 
yielded concentrations of tramadol and M1 that are believed to be 
therapeutic, whereas lower doses (3 to 6 mg/kg) were inconsistent 
and transient.41–44 M2 appears to be the main metabolite produced by 
horses, with very low and variable M1 concentrations.37,45 In donkeys 
given single IV doses of 2 mg/kg, the half-life of the parent com -
pound was ≈1 hour, and the halflife of the M1 metabolite was ≈8.5 
hours.46
Tramadol has different pharmacokinetics in neonatal and weaned 
foals. After oral administration, higher bioavailability (53% vs 20%), 
shorter time to peak concentration (1 hour vs 1.25 hours), and peak 
levels occurred with neonatal (2 weeks of age) vs weaned (4 months 
of age) foals. The elimination half-life did not significantly differ (≈2 
hours). The active metabolite (M1) remained above the reported 
therapeutic concentration for humans for 3 hours in neonatal foals 
and 8 hours in weaned foals.47 In another study, the elimination half-
life was ≈1.5 hours in foals up to 6 weeks of age.48 
In llamas administered 2 mg/kg IV , tramadol and M1 pharmaco-
kinetics values (approximate means) were: VSS, 4 L/kg and 26.5 L/kg; 
clearance, 1.7 L/kg/hour and 2.03 L/kg/hour; half-life, 2.1 hours and 
10.4 hours. IM (2 mg/kg) bioavailability was high. 49 Data in camels 
were similar to those in llamas. 24 In alpacas, oral bioavailability was 
poor (6% to 19%). 28 After IV administration (3.4 to 4.4 mg/kg), V D 
was 5.50 ± 2.66 L/kg, total body clearance was ≈4.6 L/kg/hour, and 
half-life was ≈0.9 hours. The M1 metabolite was not detected.
The elimination half-life of tramadol in sheep receiving IV trama-
dol (4 and 6 mg/kg) was 0.6 hours and 1.2 hours for M1. 27 Bioavail-
ability in goats given tramadol at 2 mg/kg IV and PO was 37%, and 
the half-life was ≈1 hour (IV) and 2.7 hours (PO). The M1 half-life 
was 2.9 hours after IV administration but was undetectable after oral 
administration.50
In red-tailed hawks given an oral dose of 11 mg/kg, plasma levels 
of tramadol reached or exceeded concentrations associated with an-
algesia in humans for at least 4 hours after administration. The elim-
ination half-lives were 1.3 hours (tramadol) and 1.9 hours (M1). 51 
Single IV doses given to Hispaniolan Amazon parrots resulted in 
half-lives of 1.54 hours (tramadol) and 2.55 hours (M2). Oral bio -
availability was ≈24%.52 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tramadol is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to it 
or other opioids. The combination product containing acetamino -
phen is contraindicated in cats. In humans, the drug is contraindicat-
ed in patients with GI obstruction or paralytic ileus and in children 
younger than 12 or undergoing tonsillectomy or adenoidectomy.
Caution should be used when tramadol is given in conjunction 
with other drugs that can cause CNS or respiratory depression. Be -
cause tramadol has caused seizures in humans, it should be used 
with caution in animals with pre-existing seizure disorders, at in -
creased risk for seizures (eg, head trauma, CNS infections), or re -
ceiving other drugs that may reduce the seizure threshold. Similar to 
other opioidlike compounds, tramadol should be used with caution 
in geriatric or severely debilitated animals and in those with severe 
asthma. Animals with impaired renal or hepatic function may need 
dosage adjustments.
Although the risk for physical dependence is less than that of sev-
eral other opioids, it has been reported in humans. The drug should 
be withdrawn gradually in animals that receive it chronically. Hu -
mans can potentially abuse tramadol, and significant diversion of 
the drug reportedly occurs. Clinicians should be alert to pet owners 
seeking tramadol.
Extended-release tablets, which are not currently recommended 
or used in veterinary patients, should not be broken, crushed, or 
chewed because toxicity could occur.
Care should be taken not to confuse traMADol with traZODone.
Adverse Effects
Tramadol appears to be well tolerated in dogs and appears to have 
fewer adverse effects than methadone or morphine. 53 Tramadol has 
the potential to cause a variety of adverse effects associated with its 
pharmacologic actions, including CNS effects (eg, excessive seda -
tion, agitation, anxiety, tremor, dizziness) or GI effects (inappetence, 
vomiting, constipation, diarrhea). 
Limited information is available on the adverse effects in cats. 
Vomiting, sedation, mydriasis, dysphoria or euphoria, and constipa-
tion have been reported. In a study, neurologic effects (eg, mydriasis, 
dysphoria) were seen in 25% of cats, and the drug was observed to 
be unpalatable to cats.54 Unpalatability may lead to dose avoidance.
In horses, tramadol 5 mg/kg IV caused excitement 20; ataxia and 
muscle spasms were more frequently seen in donkeys after 4 mg/kg 
IV administration.46
In humans receiving tramadol, ≈10% develop pruritus. Injectable 
tramadol may cause respiratory and cardiac depression.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Laboratory animals have experienced embryotoxicity and fetotoxici-

===== PDF_PAGE_1290 =====
Tramadol   1263
ty at doses administered 0.6 to 3.6 times the maximum daily human 
dose. Chronic tramadol administration in pregnant patients may re-
sult in opioid withdrawal in the offspring. Tramadol was embryotox-
ic and fetotoxic in laboratory animals when given at dosages 3 to 15 
times the recommendation. 
Humans receiving long-term opioid therapy have experienced hy-
pogonadism, resulting in an impairment of reproductive functions.
Tramadol and its active M1 metabolite enter maternal milk. This 
drug is not recommended for use while nursing.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Acute oral overdoses can cause signs of CNS depression or serotonin 
syndrome. Clinical signs associated with an overdose in dogs include 
sedation/lethargy, vomiting, tachycardia, vocalizing, ataxia, agita -
tion, or tremor. In cats, mydriasis, hypersalivation, lethargy, ataxia, 
tachycardia, and vomiting have been reported. Signs of serotonin 
syndrome due to overdose (80 mg/kg PO) have been described in 
a cat.55 
Treatment is primarily supportive (eg, maintaining respiration, 
treating seizures with benzodiazepines or barbiturates). Naloxone 
may NOT be useful in tramadol overdoses, as it may only partially 
reverse some of the effects of the drug and may increase the risk for 
seizures. Naloxone did not decrease the drug’s lethality in tramadol 
overdoses given to mice. Cyproheptadine and phenothiazines can be 
used to treat stimulatory signs. Tramadol and the M1 metabolite are 
not removed by dialysis.56
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged to consult with a 
24hour poison consultation center that specializes in providing in -
formation specific for veterinary patients. For general information 
related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact informa-
tion for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
Tramadol is metabolized by CYP2B, CYP2D, and CYP3A enzyme 
families. The following drug interactions have either been reported 
or are theoretical in humans or animals receiving tramadol and may 
be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Amantadine : Concomitant use with tramadol may increase the 
risk for seizures because tramadol at high doses has caused sei -
zures in humans56, and amantadine can lower the seizure thresh-
old57; however, an increased risk for seizures with this drug com-
bination appears unlikely in a clinical setting at recommended 
dosages. Monitor for sedation or other neurologic adverse effects 
if using this combination.
 ■ Amiodarone : May increase tramadol concentrations and de -
crease M1 (active metabolite) concentrations
 ■ Anticholinergic Agents (eg, atropine, glycopyrrolate ): 
Concurrent use may increase the risk for anticholinergic effects 
(eg, constipation, urinary retention).
 ■ Antidepressants, Miscellaneous  (eg, mirtazapine, trazo-
done): Increased risk for serotonin syndrome
 ■ Antihistamines (eg, diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine, pro -
methazine): Increased risk for CNS depression
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, fluconazole, ketoconazole ): Fluco -
nazole inhibits tramadol metabolism to the inactive M2 metab -
olite without inhibiting the formation of the active M1 metabo -
lite. In dogs that were receiving fluconazole and that were given 
tramadol, tramadol and M1 concentrations increased by 31-fold 
and 39-fold, respectively.58 Ketoconazole may increase tramadol 
exposure and risk for toxicity.59
 ■ Benzodiazepines (eg, alprazolam, diazepam): Increased risk 
for respiratory depression
 ■ Cimetidine : May increase tramadol exposure and risk for 
 toxicity59
 ■ CNS Depressants, Miscellaneous (eg, dexmedetomidine, 
gabapentin, levetiracetam, methocarbamol ): Increased risk for 
CNS depression
 ■ Cyproheptadine : May decrease efficacy of tramadol
 ■ Digoxin : In humans, tramadol has been rarely linked to digoxin 
toxicity.
 ■ Erythromycin : May increase tramadol exposure and risk for 
toxicity
 ■ Iohexol : Concurrent use may increase the risk for seizures.
 ■ Ketamine : Increased risk for CNS and respiratory depression
 ■ Metoclopramide : Increased risk for seizures
 ■ Mitotane : May reduce tramadol levels and efficacy
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase  Inhibitors  (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, sele-
giline): Potential for serotonin syndrome; MAOI use within the 
past 14 days or use together should be avoided.
 ■ Ondansetron : In humans, use together may reduce the effec -
tiveness of both drugs.
 ■ Opioid Analgesics  (eg, buprenorphine, butorphanol, meth-
adone): May increase the risk for seizures, serotonin syndrome, 
and CNS and respiratory depression; methadone may inhibit tra-
madol metabolism. 
 ■ Phenobarbital : Increased risk for CNS depression. Tramadol 
may lower the seizure threshold. Phenobarbital may decrease tra-
madol levels.
 ■ Quinidine : May increase tramadol concentrations and decrease 
M1 (active metabolite) concentrations
 ■ Rifampin : May reduce tramadol levels and efficacy
 ■ S-Adenosyl Methionine (SAMe) : Theoretically, concurrent 
use of SAMe with tramadol could cause additive serotonergic ef -
fects.
 ■ Sevoflurane : Pretreatment with tramadol reduced minimum 
alveolar concentration (MAC) values by 22% to 30% in dogs 60,61 
and 40% in cats.62
 ■ Selective-Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors  (SSRIs; eg, flu-
oxetine, paroxetine, sertraline ): Can inhibit the metabolism of 
tramadol to its active metabolites, thereby decreasing its efficacy 
and increasing the risk for toxicity (serotonin syndrome, seizures)
 ■ Terbinafine : May increase tramadol levels and reduce the for -
mation of M1 metabolite due to CYP2D6 inhibition. In humans, 
this effect may persist for weeks after discontinuing terbinafine.
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants  (eg, amitriptyline, clomip -
ramine): Increased risk for seizures and serotonin syndrome; 
amitriptyline may inhibit tramadol metabolism.
 ■ Yohimbine : May antagonize (partial) the pharmacologic effects 
of tramadol
 ■ W arfarin : In humans, increased prothrombin time in patients 
taking tramadol has been reported (relatively rare).
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No specific laboratory interactions or considerations were noted.
Dosages
DOGS:
Analgesic (extra-label): 4 – 10 mg/kg PO every 8 hours; pharma-
cokinetic data suggest administration every 6 hours may be nec -
essary. Tramadol’s efficacy as a single agent appears questionable. 
The long-term efficacy of tramadol may decrease with time.10
CATS:
Analgesic (extra-label): Most recommendations for administra -

===== PDF_PAGE_1291 =====
1264    Tranexamic Acid
tion in cats are 1 – 2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. There is no clear 
dosage for tramadol in cats based on prospective studies. Some 
clinicians suggest that some cats may only need to be dosed every 
24 hours; others suggest doses up to 4 mg/kg. Tramadol has an 
unpleasant taste, and avoidance may be an issue. Neurologic and 
opioid adverse effects can be seen, particularly in geriatric cats at 
doses greater than 2 mg/kg.17 
HORSES :
Analgesic (extra-label): 
a) Based on pharmacokinetic studies and treated patients:  
10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours41–44
b) Chronic laminitis pain:
i. 5 – 10  mg/kg PO every 12 hours, 42,63 although the 5 mg/kg 
dose did not reliably produce analgesia.42
ii. Tramadol 5 mg/kg PO twice daily for 7 days—with ket -
amine 0.6 mg/kg/hour IV CRI over 6 hours each day for the 
first 3 days of treatment.63
BIRDS:
Analgesic (extra-label):
a) Red-tailed hawks : From a pharmacokinetic study, authors 
concluded that an oral dose of 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 
would be a reasonable starting point; additional pharmacody-
namic and repeat dose pharmacokinetic studies are needed.51
b) Hispaniolan Amazon parrots : From pharmacokinetic and 
antinociceptive studies, 30 mg/kg PO every 6 to 8 hours may 
provide clinical analgesia. Further studies are needed to fully 
evaluate the analgesic effects of tramadol in psittacines.52,64,65
SMALL MAMMALS :
Analgesic (extra-label): 
a) Sugar gliders: 2 – 6 mg/kg PO every 12 hours66 
b) Chinchillas, guinea pigs, rodents: 5 – 10 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours67
c) Companion pigs: 4 – 6 mg/kg PO every 12 hours68
REPTILES :
Analgesic (extra-label): 
a) Red-eared slider turtles: 5 – 10 mg/kg PO69 
b) Reptiles/chelonians: 5 – 10 mg/kg PO every 48 to 72 hours. 
Good analgesic efficacy with relatively long duration when ad-
ministered PO in chelonians; less respiratory depression than 
other opioids70
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
Client Information
 ■ Contact your veterinarian if you suspect your animal’s pain is not 
controlled.
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. Putting the 
medicine in a small amount of canned food may hide its bitter 
taste. If your animal vomits or acts sick after receiving this drug 
on an empty stomach, give the medicine with food or a small 
treat. If vomiting continues, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ This medicine may cause changes in alertness or behavior. Use it 
with caution in working or service dogs.
 ■ The combination product with acetaminophen (Ultracet®) should 
NOT be used in cats.
 ■ Tramadol is a controlled substance in the United States. It is 
against the law to give away or sell this medication and to use it 
without a prescription.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tramadol HCl, a  mu-receptor opioid agonist, occurs as a white 
crystalline powder that is freely soluble in water or alcohol and very 
slightly soluble in acetone. Tramadol is not derived from opium, nor 
is it a semisynthetic opioid, but it is entirely synthetically produced.
Tramadol HCl may also be known as CG-315, CG-315E, tramad-
oli hydrochloridum, or U-26225A; many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, store tramadol tablets at a controlled room 
temperature of 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F); excursions are permitted 
between 15°C and 30°C (59°F-86°F). Dispense in tight, light-resistant 
containers. Tramadol is a controlled substance and should be stored 
in an area that is substantially constructed and securely locked, in 
accordance with US Drug Enforcement Administration regulations.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Tramadol suspensions, 5 mg/mL71 and 10 mg/mL,72 made by crush-
ing tramadol tablets and suspending in appropriate vehicles, have 
demonstrated potency and stability for up to 90 days when refriger-
ated or stored at room temperature.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tramadol HCl Oral Tablets (film-coated): 50 mg; Ultram®, generic; 
(Rx); (C-IV)
Tramadol HCl Extended-Release Tablets and Capsule: 100 mg,  
200 mg, and 300 mg; Ultram ER®, Ryzolt®, generic [tablets], ConZ-
ip® [capsules]; (Rx); (C-IV). NOTE: Dogs apparently do not absorb 
these products as well as humans and potentially could overdose if 
they chew on the tablets or capsules.
Tramadol HCl Oral Solution: 5 mg/mL; Qdolo®; (Rx); (C-IV)
Tramadol is also available in a fixed-dose combination of tramadol 
HCl 37.5 mg and acetaminophen 325 mg tablets. United States trade 
name is Ultracet®; (Rx); (C-IV). W ARNING: This combination prod-
uct should not be used in cats.
In several countries outside the United States, tramadol injection is 
available commercially.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Tranexamic Acid
 (tran-ex-am-ik as-id) Cyklokapron®, Lysteda®
Fibrinolysis Inhibitor 
Prescriber Highlights 
 ▶ Used to prevent or reduce bleeding in dogs and cats
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity and in patients with 
a history of, risk for, or active thromboembolic disease.
 ▶ Causes dose-dependent vomiting; may be useful as an emetic
 ▶ Thromboembolic events and visual disturbances have oc-
curred in humans.
 ▶ Inadvertent intrathecal administration is rapidly fatal.

===== PDF_PAGE_1292 =====
Tranexamic Acid   1265
Uses/Indications 
Tranexamic acid is used to prevent and reduce postoperative bleed-
ing and to stop traumatic bleeding in dogs and cats. It may be effec-
tive in controlling hyperfibrinolysis associated with Angiostrongylus 
vasorum infection.1 It has also been used as an emetic in dogs.2
Pharmacology/Actions 
Tranexamic acid reduces bleeding by inhibiting the breakdown of 
fibrin. It reversibly binds to lysine binding sites on plasminogen to 
prevent the binding of plasminogen to fibrin and thus prevents the 
formation of plasmin. Inhibiting plasmin-mediated fibrin dissolu -
tion stabilizes the blood clot matrix. In horses, tranexamic acid is 
≈10 times more potent in vitro than aminocaproic acid; in dogs, it 
is ≈4 times more potent. 3,4 The minimum plasma concentration of 
tranexamic acid required to completely inhibit experimentally in -
duced hyperfibrinolysis is ≈145 µg/mL in dogs 3 and ≈6 µg/mL in 
horses.4
Tranexamic acid is emetogenic in dogs, causing dose-dependent 
vomiting within 2 to 3 minutes of administration. Dogs vomited only 
once or twice, and the emetogenic effect persisted for 4 to 5 minutes.2 
In a larger cohort of dogs, vomiting occurred in 85% of dogs receiv-
ing tranexamic acid. The median time to onset of vomiting was ≈2 
minutes, median duration of emesis was ≈2.5 minutes, and median 
of 2 episodes of emesis.5 Emetogenic effects of tranexamic acid may 
be mediated by NK1 receptors. 2 It can antagonize GABA and gly -
cine receptors, and these actions may contribute to its proconvulsive 
 effect.6 
Pharmacokinetics 
No veterinary pharmacokinetic information was located.
In humans, tranexamic acid is ≈45% bioavailable after oral ad -
ministration, with peak concentrations occurring at 3 hours. 7 Ab-
sorption appears unaffected by food. It is widely distributed with a 
volume of distribution of ≈0.4 L/kg. It passes into aqueous humor, 
breast milk, and crosses the placenta. It does not bind to plasma 
proteins. Tranexamic acid is not appreciably metabolized and is 
excreted unchanged in the urine with a terminal elimination half-
life of ≈2 hours after IV administration 8 and ≈11 hours after oral 
 administration.8
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Tranexamic acid is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensi -
tive to it and in patients with a history of, risk for, or active throm -
boembolic disease. In humans, it is contraindicated in patients with 
subarachnoid hemorrhage as cerebral edema has occurred. 7,8 Pa -
tients with renal impairment require dosage reduction. 
In humans, inadvertent intrathecal administration has resulted in 
seizures and cardiac arrhythmias. 8 Thrombosis and thromboembo-
lism have been reported with IV administration. Tranexamic acid 
should be discontinued if ocular or vision disturbances occur. Pa -
tients treated for upper urinary tract bleeding have developed uret -
eral obstruction caused by clot formation.
Adverse Effects 
Vomiting can occur immediately or within minutes of IV adminis -
tration, is dose dependent, and more likely with rapid IV bolus ad -
ministration.2,9 Administration of maropitant IV 10 minutes before 
treatment with tranexamic acid has been shown to prevent emesis.10 
Tonic-clonic seizures have been reported in dogs.11,12
In humans, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are dose related; mus-
culoskeletal pain, thrombosis, and visual changes, including ocular 
or retinal occlusion, have been reported. 7,8 Hypotension can occur 
when administered IV too rapidly. Anaphylactic reactions have been 
reported, and convulsions have been reported during surgery. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Tranexamic acid crosses the placenta and reaches concentrations 
approximating those found in maternal blood. 7,8 No impairment of 
fertility or evidence of fetal harm was observed in studies with labo-
ratory animals, including doses up to 4 times the maximum human 
oral dose; however, safe use of tranexamic acid during pregnancy has 
not been established. 
Tranexamic acid is distributed into milk; use with caution in lac-
tating patients or consider milk replacer.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 
GI distress, hypotension, myoclonus, and thromboembolic events 
may occur. Retinal changes, including degeneration, have occurred 
in dogs, cats, and rats that received 3 to 40 times the human dose for 
6 days to 1 year.7,8 GI decontamination should not be necessary but 
can be considered in patients that did not vomit. Provide supportive 
and symptomatic treatment. 
Inadvertent intrathecal administration can be rapidly fatal; con -
tact an animal poison control center immediately. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions 
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving tranexamic acid and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Chlorpromazine : May increase risk for bleeding
 ■ Estrogens : Increased risk for thrombotic events with combined 
use
 ■ Thrombolytics (eg, alteplase): Concomitant use may reduce 
efficacy of both agents.
Laboratory Considerations 
 ■ None noted
Dosages 
DOGS:
Adjunctive treatment of bleeding (extra-label): 10 mg/kg IV 
over 2 minutes, followed by 10 mg/kg/hour IV CRI for 3 hours9 
Control of hyperfibrinolysis associated with Angiostrongylus 
vasorum infection (extra-label): 10 – 20 mg/kg IV over 15 to 20 
minutes; repeat 6 to 8 hours later based on thromboelastography 
(TEG) testing1
Induce emesis (extra-label): In one study, 50 mg/kg IV bolus in-
duced vomiting in all dogs (n = 10) without adverse effects; lower 
doses (20 – 40 mg/kg IV) were not uniformly effective to induce 
emesis.2
CATS:
Control of bleeding during surgical carcinoma and sarcoma 
removal (extra-label): 15 mg/kg IV bolus given during anesthetic 
induction reduced surgical blood loss and shortened the activated 
clotting time (ACT) without altering prothrombin time (PT) or 
activated prothrombin time (aPTT).13
Monitoring 
 ■ Thromboelastography (TEG analysis)
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC and platelets as indicated by clinical 
condition

===== PDF_PAGE_1293 =====
1266    Trazodone
 ■ Vision changes or deficits
Client Information
 ■ Humans have rarely experienced changes in vision or vision loss 
with this drug. It is unclear if this occurs in veterinary patients. 
Contact your veterinarian if you are concerned that your animal 
is developing vision problems.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tranexamic acid is a synthetic lysine derivative that occurs as a 
white, crystalline powder. It is freely soluble in water and practically 
insoluble in alcohol. The solution for injection has a pH of 6.5 to 8.
Tranexamic acid is also known as CL-65336, acidum tranexamic-
um, Cyklokapron®, Hexakapron®, and Lysteda®.
Storage/Stability 
Tranexamic acid tablets and injection should be stored at room tem-
perature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]), with excursions permitted be -
tween 15°C-30°C (59°F-86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
According to the manufacturer, tranexamic acid injection is com-
patible with most solutions for infusion, including saline or bal -
anced electrolyte solutions, carbohydrate solutions, amino acid solu-
tions, and Dextran solutions; heparin may be added to tranexamic 
acid injection. Tranexamic acid injection should NOT be mixed with 
blood and is incompatible with penicillins (eg, penicillin G, ampi -
cillin, piperacillin).
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 4 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Tranexamic Acid for Injection: 100 mg/mL in 10 mL ampules and 
single-dose vials; Cyklokapron®, generic; (Rx)
Tranexamic Acid Tablets: 650 mg; Lysteda®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Trazodone
(traz-oh-done) Desyrel®
Serotonin (5-HT2A) Antagonist/Reuptake Inhibitor
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Antidepressant used for adjunctive treatment of behavior dis-
orders (particularly those that are anxiety- or phobia-related) 
and to facilitate postoperative confinement in dogs; also used 
for transport- and examination-related anxiety in cats
 ▶ Commonly used as an anxiolytic prior to veterinary appoint-
ments in dogs and cats
 ▶ Efficacy in facilitating postoperative confinement in dogs has 
been described, although there may be a large placebo effect.
 ▶ Well tolerated after oral administration. IV use of compounded 
formulations in dogs and horses has resulted in aggression 
and excitation.
Uses/Indications
Trazodone may be useful in treating behavior disorders in small 
animals, particularly when it is used as an adjunctive treatment in 
patients that do not adequately respond to conventional therapies. 1 
Trazodone appears to be effective in providing short-term relief of 
anxiety during hospitalization and postoperative confinement after 
orthopedic surgery2,3; however, a placebo-controlled study found no 
difference between postoperative dogs given trazodone and those 
given a placebo to facilitate calmness and ease of confinement.4
Trazodone is commonly used as an anxiolytic prior to veterinary 
appointments5; it is also used to reduce anxiety in high-stress situa -
tions (eg, shelter housing).6
A recent study showed that when trazodone was administered 
before induction of general anesthesia in healthy dogs undergoing 
orthopedic surgery, the hemodynamic and propofol-sparing effects 
of trazodone were comparable to those of acepromazine.7 The use of 
trazodone premedication also demonstrated an isoflurane minimum 
alveolar concentration (MAC)-sparing effect in dogs.8
Trazodone has been used anecdotally to decrease the hyperesthet-
ic effects associated with strychnine toxicity.
Pilot studies in cats suggest trazodone is an effective sedative9,10 or 
anxiolytic and may improve tractability during veterinary examina-
tions.11 Systolic blood pressure was significantly decreased in healthy 
cats undergoing an echocardiogram, with no altered echocardio -
graphic results.10
Trazodone use in horses undergoing stall rest and exhibiting 
adverse behaviors resulted in significant calming in 17 out of 18 
 horses.12
In humans, trazodone is used for treating depression, aggressive 
behavior, alcohol or cocaine withdrawal, panic disorder, migraines, 
and insomnia. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Trazodone is classified as a 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C antagonist/reuptake 
inhibitor (SARI) that primarily potentiates serotonin activity in the 
CNS. In laboratory animals, trazodone is shown to selectively inhib-
it serotonin uptake by brain synaptosomes and potentiate behavior 
changes induced by the serotonin precursor 5-hydroxytryptophan. 
Trazodone can antagonize alpha-1 adrenergic receptors and reduce 
blood pressure. Because trazodone can antagonize 5-HT 2 receptors 
and cause their downregulation, it can augment the efficacy of selec-
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).13 It has fewer anticholin-
ergic effects as compared with tricyclic antidepressants and is among 
the antidepressants with the lowest seizure risk.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, administration of 8 mg/kg IV resulted in a mean volume of 
distribution of 2.53 L/kg, a mean elimination half-life of 169 min -
utes, and a mean plasma total body clearance of 11.15 mL/minute 
per kg.14 Administration of 8 mg/kg PO resulted in bioavailability of 
85% and an elimination half-life of 166 minutes; peak plasma con -
centrations occurred at 445 minutes (mean), but there was wide in -
tersubject variation (± 271 minutes). 
In horses, the oral bioavailability of trazodone powder (4 mg/kg  
mixed into moistened feed) was 63%. 15 Peak concentrations of tra -
zodone and its active metabolite (ie, m-chlorophenylpiperazine 
[m-CPP]) were reached within 1.7 to 2.5 hours and 0.5 to 1.8 hours, 
respectively, following 7.5 or 10 mg/kg. 12,15 Active metabolite ac -
counted for ≈1% to 4% of total drug exposure. 12 The terminal half-
life of trazodone was 7 to 8 hours; the m-CPP half-life was more vari-
able (ie, 4 to 7 hours) 12,15 and concentration-dependent. 12 Half-life 
was prolonged in 2 horses, and the authors suggested genetic poly -
morphism of cytochrome P450 enzymes as a possible explanation.15 
In humans, the oral bioavailability of trazodone (tablets) is ≈65%; 
the presence of food increases absorption (ie, area under the curve 

===== PDF_PAGE_1294 =====
Trazodone   1267
[AUC] is increased) but decreases C max (ie, peak plasma concentra -
tion) and delays Tmax (ie, time of peak concentration).16 Peak plasma 
concentrations occur ≈1 hour after a dose when trazodone is given 
on an empty stomach and after ≈2 hours when given with food. Tra-
zodone is ≈90% to 95% bound to plasma proteins. The volume of 
distribution ranges from 0.47 to 0.84 L/kg. Metabolization is exten -
sive and occurs primarily in the liver. m-CPP is also an active metab-
olite in humans and is formed via oxidative cleavage by CYP3A4 and 
further metabolized to inactive compounds via CYP2D6. Excretion 
is mostly (ie, 70% to 75%) via renal mechanisms, with only a small 
amount (ie, 0.13%) excreted unchanged in the urine. ≈21% of a dose 
is excreted in feces. The elimination half-life of the parent compound 
is ≈7 hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Trazodone is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to it 
or in those receiving, or that have recently used, monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors (MAOIs; see Drug Interactions ). Trazodone should be 
used with caution in patients with severe cardiac disease or hepatic 
or renal impairment. Trazodone may dilate the pupils, which could 
trigger an acute crisis in patients with angle-closure glaucoma.
Do not confuse traZODone with traMADol.
Adverse Effects
Trazodone appears to be well tolerated in most patients. In dogs, 
the most common adverse effects are GI disturbances (eg, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhea, or colitis), ataxia, and sedation.1,3,14 Tachycardia, 
increased anxiety, behavior disinhibition, and aggression have also 
been reported. Trazodone appears to exert qualitatively different 
and less pronounced cardiac conduction effects in dogs than do 
tricyclic antidepressants. Transient priapism in a dog has also been 
reported.7
In pharmacokinetic studies in horses, excitation, tremors, and 
ataxia were observed after trazodone 1.5 mg/kg was given IV (over 
1 minute)15; and sedation occurred following oral administration of 
4 mg/kg15; and oversedation, muscle fasciculations, and transient ar-
rhythmias occurred after oral administration of 7.5 or 10 mg/kg.12,15
Trazodone alone is unlikely to cause serotonin syndrome at clin-
ically used dosages, but it is possible when trazodone is used with 
other serotonergic drugs. The most common clinical signs observed 
with serotonin syndrome in dogs include (in descending order) 
vomiting, diarrhea, seizures, hyperthermia, hyperesthesia, depres -
sion, mydriasis, vocalization, death, blindness, hypersalivation, dys-
pnea, ataxia/paresis, disorientation, hyperreflexia, and coma.17
In humans, the most common adverse effects include lethargy or 
somnolence, blurred vision, confusion, dizziness, dry mouth, ortho-
static hypotension, sweating, and hyponatremia. QT prolongation 
can occur but is much less common in humans treated with trazo -
done than those treated with tricyclic antidepressants. Priapism has 
been reported rarely in men taking trazodone.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Trazodone appears to be relatively safe to use during pregnancy. At 
very high doses (ie, 15 to 50 times the recommended dose) in rats 
and rabbits, some increase in fetal death/resorption rates and con -
genital abnormalities were noted.16 
Trazodone is excreted into human milk at very low concentra -
tions.16
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
No specific information was located regarding trazodone overdoses 
in veterinary patients. Clinical signs associated with an overdose in 
dogs and cats commonly include sedation or lethargy, ataxia, and 
vomiting. In humans, the incidence of serious toxicity from trazo -
done overdose (alone) was low as compared with tricyclic antide -
pressant overdoses; however, in the event of a substantial overdose 
of trazodone, it is recommended to contact an animal poison control 
center for further guidance. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have ex -
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison control 
center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving trazodone and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks 
must be weighed and additional monitoring performed when ap -
propriate.
 ■ Aspirin : Increased risk for GI bleeding; monitoring is needed
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, ketoconazole, fluconazole): May in-
crease trazodone blood concentrations; concurrent use is contra-
indicated in humans.
 ■ Cisapride : Increased risk for QT prolongation. Concurrent use 
is contraindicated in humans, but the incidence of QT prolonga-
tion in dogs and cats is unknown.
 ■ CNS Depressants (eg, alpha-2 agonists  [eg, dexmedetomi-
dine], benzodiazepines, opioids): Use with trazodone may cause 
additive CNS depressant effects.
 ■ Digoxin : Trazodone may increase digoxin concentrations.
 ■ Diuretics (eg, furosemide): May increase risk for hyponatremia
 ■ Fluoroquinolones  (eg, ciprofloxacin): Increased risk for QT 
prolongation
 ■ Hypotensive Drugs (eg, amlodipine, enalapril, telmisartan): 
Trazodone may increase reductions in blood pressure and cause 
hypotension.
 ■ Isoflurane : Premedication with trazodone (8 mg/kg) 2 hours 
prior to induction resulted in a mean MAC reduction of 17%.8
 ■ Linezolid : Increased risk for serotonin syndrome; concomitant 
use is contraindicated in humans.
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics : (eg, erythromycin, clarithromy -
cin): May increase trazodone blood concentrations
 ■ Methylene blue : Increased risk for serotonin syndrome; con -
comitant use is contraindicated in humans.
 ■ Mirtazapine : Increased risk for CNS depression, serotonin 
syndrome, and/or QT prolongation
 ■ Monoamine  Oxidase Inhibitors  (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, sele-
giline): Increased risk for serotonin syndrome; concurrent use is 
contraindicated in humans.
 ■ Metoclopramide : Increased risk for serotonin syndrome
 ■ Ondansetron : Increased risk for QT prolongation
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine): May increase trazodone 
blood concentrations; can cause additive CNS effects
 ■ Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors  ( SSRIs; eg, 
fluoxetine): Increased risk for serotonin syndrome. Trazodone is 
commonly used together with SSRIs, but patients should be ob -
served for signs associated with serotonin syndrome (see Adverse 
Effects). Fluoxetine may also inhibit the metabolization of trazo -
done.
 ■ Tramadol : Increased risk for serotonin syndrome
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants  (eg, amitriptyline, clomipramine): 
Increased risk for serotonin syndrome

===== PDF_PAGE_1295 =====
1268    Trazodone
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ None noted
Dosages
DOGS:
Adjunctive treatment of anxiety-related disorders (extra-label):
a) From a retrospective study of 56 dogs: The initial dose was  
≈2.5 – 5 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours for 3 days to allow 
dogs to become tolerant to the drug and avoid potential GI 
adverse effects.1 The average final dose was ≈7.5 mg/kg/day 
PO, regardless of the dog’s size. Wide interpatient dose vari -
ability existed, with oral doses ranging ≈2 – 19.5 mg/kg/day. 
The maximum individual dose was 300 mg. All dogs had an 
individually tailored behavior management program, and tra-
zodone was added to other behavior-modifying drugs.
Body weight Initial dose (total;  
NOT mg/kg) range
Target dose (total;  
NOT mg/kg)range
<10 kg (22 lb) ≤25 mg every  
8-24 hours
≤50 mg every  
8-24 hours
≥10-20 kg (22-44 lb) 50 mg every  
12-24 hours
100 mg every  
8-24 hours
≥20-40 kg (44-88 lb) 100 mg every  
12-24 hours
200 mg every  
8-24 hours
>40 kg (88 lb) 100 mg every  
12-24 hours
200 – 300 mg  
every 8-24 hours
b) 2 – 10 mg/kg PO up to every 8 hours is recommended for daily 
modification of anxiety when the dog is at home in a low-stress 
situation and when sedation is undesired
c) Trazodone can be given as needed in addition to daily (or rou-
tine) use of another/different serotonergic agent (eg, clomip -
ramine, fluoxetine). It is given ≈1 hour prior to the onset of 
anxiety, with a typical starting dose between 2 and 5 mg/kg 
and adjusting upward as necessary to get control (maximum 
dose, 14 mg/kg/day). 18 Because of the wide interpatient vari -
ability in metabolism of trazodone, test doses are recommend-
ed (when possible) to determine the time to onset of antianx -
iety effect before implementing its use for an expected/known 
anxiety-producing event.
Anxiolytic prior to veterinary visits (extra-label): 
a) As a single agent administered at least 90 minutes prior to 
travel: 5 – 7.5 mg/kg PO5 as needed up to 19.5 mg/kg PO dai-
ly1 in aggressive dogs or those with high fear/anxiety/stress.  
9 – 12 mg/kg PO also has been used. 19 The maximum recom-
mendation is 300 mg/dose.20 NOTE: Sedation may occur at the 
high end of the dose, which may be acceptable and preferred 
with high-anxiety situations (eg, transportation, hospitaliza -
tion). In dogs with high fear/anxiety/stress or aggression, the 
same dose should also be administered the night before travel.
b) In combination with gabapentin: Trazodone 5 mg/kg PO in 
combination with gabapentin 10 mg/kg PO administered 2 
hours prior to veterinary visits21
c) As an adjunct to the Chill Protocol (anecdotal): 
i. Replace gabapentin with trazodone 5 – 10 mg/kg PO and 
administer the evening before the hospital visit and the 
morning of the hospital visit at least 2 hours prior to travel. 
Administer melatonin (small dogs, 0.5 – 1 mg PO; medium 
dogs, 1 – 3 mg PO; large dogs, 5 mg PO) with the morning dose 
of trazodone; administer acepromazine 0.025 – 0.05 mg/kg 
OTM 30 minutes before travel.
ii. Trazodone may be added to the Chill Protocol for dogs that 
do not experience adequate sedation or anxiolysis with the 
original Chill Protocol: Trazodone 5 – 10 mg/kg PO along 
with gabapentin 10 – 20 mg/kg PO administered the eve -
ning before the hospital visit and the morning of the hos -
pital visit at least 2 hours prior to travel. Administer mela -
tonin (small dogs, 0.5 – 1 mg PO; medium dogs, 1 – 3 mg 
PO; large dogs, 5 mg PO) with the morning dose of tra -
zodone and gabapentin; administer acepromazine 0.025 to 
0.05 mg/kg OTM 30 minutes before travel.
Anxiolytic for postsurgical confinement and stress during hos-
pitalization (extra-label):
a) As a single agent during hospitalization : 4 mg/kg PO ev -
ery 12 hours. Doses can be increased to 10 – 12 mg/kg, or 
the frequency of administration can be increased to ev -
ery 8 hours when needed for desired calming and anxiolyt -
ic effects. The amount given did not exceed 300 mg/dose or  
600 mg/24 hours.20
b) In combination with tramadol : Trazodone ≈3.5 mg/kg PO 
every 12 hours in combination with tramadol 4 – 6 mg/kg PO 
every 8 to 12 hours for the first 3 postoperative days (see Drug 
Interactions), then tramadol discontinued, and trazodone in -
creased to ≈7 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for at least 4 weeks.3 A 
separate pharmacokinetic and hemodynamic study concluded 
that trazodone might be most useful in patients after surgery 
following complete recovery from anesthesia. In this study, tra-
zodone doses of 8 mg/kg PO were well tolerated, but because 
of substantial variability in time to maximum plasma concen-
trations, individualized approaches to dose intervals may be 
necessary. At the authors’ institution, trazodone treatment is 
instituted 12 to 24 hours after surgery for anxious patients, and 
clinicians often prescribe trazodone for a treatment duration 
of weeks to months for surgical patients to facilitate cage rest 
and activity restriction, particularly following orthopedic pro-
cedures. Further studies are warranted.14
CATS:
Anxiolytic prior to veterinary visits (extra-label):
a) As a single agent administered at least 90 minutes prior to 
travel: In a placebo-controlled study of 10 client-owned cats 
with a history of signs of anxiety during transport and/or 
veterinary examination, trazodone 50 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) 
PO (equals 10.9 mg/kg based on average body weight [range,  
7.7 – 15.2 mg/kg]) was given 60 to 90 minutes prior to a vet -
erinary visit. No cat in the trazodone group displayed any 
signs of transportation- or examination-related anxiety, and 
stress scores and ease of examination were significantly bet -
ter in cats treated with trazodone as compared with those re -
ceiving a placebo. Vocalization was common in both groups 
prior to transportation to the clinic and became less intense 
after trazodone administration. 11 A higher trazodone dose  
(100 mg/cat [NOT mg/kg] PO, ≈20 – 33 mg/kg) given to pur -
pose-bred cats caused sedation and decreased activity level 2 
hours after administration but did not improve behavioral re-
sponse to physical examination.9
b) In combination with gabapentin: Trazodone 5 mg/kg PO in 
combination with gabapentin 10 mg/kg PO administered 2 
hours prior to veterinary visits21
HORSES :
Facilitation of stall rest and treatment of abnormal behaviors  
(extra-label): 2.5 mg/kg PO once daily to 10 mg/kg PO twice dai-
ly depending on clinical reponse. 22 Duration of treatment lasted 
from 1 to 70 days.

===== PDF_PAGE_1296 =====
Triamcinolone   1269
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy and adverse effects
Client Information
 ■ Trazodone is used in dogs to treat anxiety-related conditions, in-
cluding thunderstorms or firework phobias. The use of a combi -
nation of trazodone with other medications is common to help 
reduce anxiety.
 ■ This medicine is also used when activity restriction (eg, cage rest) 
is needed after surgery. 
 ■ Trazodone may be given with food or on an empty stomach. If the 
animal vomits or acts sick after receiving trazodone on an emp -
ty stomach, give the medicine with a small amount of food or a 
small treat. It is important to contact your veterinarian if vomiting 
continues.
 ■ Full calming effect may take up to 2 weeks of routine use, especial-
ly when trazodone is used alone.
 ■ The most common side effects are sleepiness and decreased activ-
ity. Call your veterinarian if you observe shivering, dilated pupils, 
or agitation.
 ■ Caution is advised when giving trazodone to working/service 
dogs, as they may be unable to perform their duties while on this 
medication.
 ■ With chronic use, withdrawal signs may occur if the daily dose is 
not gradually reduced. Do not discontinue this medicine without 
first speaking with your veterinarian.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Trazodone is a triazolopyridine antidepressant agent. It occurs as 
an odorless, white to off-white crystalline powder and is sparingly 
soluble in water, alcohol, or chloroform. Trazodone tablets contain 
trazodone hydrochloride. 
Trazodone may also be known as AF-1161, trazodona, trazodon, 
or sleepeasy. A common trade name is Desyrel®.
Storage/Stability
Store trazodone between 20°C and 25°C (68°F-77°F); excursions at 
15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F). Keep the medication in an airtight con -
tainer and protect it from light.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Trazodone Oral Tablets: 50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg, and 300 mg; ge -
neric; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Triamcinolone
Triamcinolone Acetonide
(trye-am-sin-oh-lone) Vetalog®
Glucocorticoid
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Oral, parenteral, topical, and inhaled glucocorticoid that is 4 to 
10 times (some say up to 40 times) more potent than hydro-
cortisone; no appreciable mineralocorticoid activity. Common-
ly used for intra-articular injection (especially in horses)
 ▶ Contraindications include systemic fungal infections, viral 
infections, animals with arrested tuberculosis, peptic ulcer, 
corneal ulcer, or hyperadrenocorticism. 
 ▶ Use cautiously in the presence of diabetes, osteoporosis, 
predisposition to thrombophlebitis, hypertension, CHF, renal 
insufficiency, and active tuberculosis. 
 ▶ If using systemically, the goal is to use as little as possible for 
as short a time as possible.
 ▶ Primary adverse effects with sustained use are cushingoid in 
nature (eg, polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, muscle wasting, 
osteoporosis).
 ▶ Many potential drug and laboratory interactions
Uses/Indications
Labeled indications include the treatment of inflammation and re -
lated disorders in dogs, cats, and horses; and management and treat-
ment of acute arthritis, and allergic and dermatologic disorders in 
dogs and cats.1,2
Although glucocorticoids have been used to treat many condi -
tions in humans and animals, triamcinolone has 4 primary uses with 
accompanying dosage ranges: 1) replacement or supplementation 
(eg, relative adrenal insufficiency associated with septic shock) for 
glucocorticoid deficiency secondary to hypoadrenocorticism; 2) an-
ti-inflammatory agent; 3) immunosuppression, and 4) antineoplastic 
agent. High-dose use is not supported for hemorrhagic or hypovo -
lemic shock, head trauma, spinal cord trauma3, or sepsis. In general, 
when administering glucocorticoids, the following principles should 
be followed:
 ■ A specific diagnosis is needed before glucocorticoids are adminis-
tered as they can mask disease.
 ■ A course of treatment should be determined prior to treatment.
 ■ A therapeutic endpoint should be determined prior to treatment.
 ■ The least potent glucocorticoid should be used at the lowest dose 
for a minimal amount of time.
 ■ It is important to understand when glucocorticoid use is inappro-
priate (eg, acute infection, diabetes).4
See Glucocorticoid Agents, General Information.
In working dogs with naturally occurring hip osteoarthritis, in -
tra-articular (IA) injection of triamcinolone with hyaluronic acid 
into the hip joint reduced pain scores for up to 5 months.5
In horses, combining triamcinolone with a local anesthetic (eg, 
mepivacaine) has been shown to not alter the potency or duration of 
action of triamcinolone IA injections and may be useful to both con-
firm the joint causing lameness and to reduce synovitis. 6 In healthy 
horses, IA triamcinolone acetonide diffused directly from the distal 
interphalangeal joint with or without hyaluronic acid and may prove 
to be useful in treating navicular syndrome, but further studies are 
needed.7 However, more lame horses receiving IA triamcinolone in-
jection achieved clinical success 3 weeks after treatment than hors -
es receiving the IA combination of triamcinolone and hyaluronate.8 
Triamcinolone given IM improves lung function in horses with se -
vere equine asthma for up to 28 days.9

===== PDF_PAGE_1297 =====
1270    Triamcinolone
Intralesional injection of triamcinolone into esophageal 10,11 and 
rectal12 strictures has been done in dogs and cats prior to dilation in 
an attempt to prolong the time needed between dilation procedures; 
more studies are needed to make specific recommendations for this 
use.11 
Pharmacology/Actions
Triamcinolone acetonide is considered an intermediate-acting (met-
abolic activity of 24 to 48 hours when given orally) glucocorticoid 
that is ≈4 to 10 times more potent than hydrocortisone. Triamcin -
olone has negligible mineralocorticoid effects. When injected IM, 
duration of activity may persist for 4 to 6 (and sometimes up to 8) 
weeks. A study in cats with allergic pruritus found triamcinolone to 
be ≈7 times more potent than methylprednisolone.13 
Intra-articular injection can reduce articular protein, inflamma -
tory cell infiltration, intimal hyperplasia, and subintimal fibrosis, 
and increase synovial levels of hyaluronan and glycosaminoglycan.
Glucocorticoids have effects on virtually every cell type and sys -
tem in mammals. For more information, refer to Glucocorticoid 
Agents, General Information.
Pharmacokinetics
Like other corticosteroids, plasma concentrations are not a good 
indicator of biologic activity. A pharmacokinetic study to establish 
appropriate withdrawal times in thoroughbred horses after IM or 
intra-articular (IA) injection found: a plasma terminal elimination 
half-life of 11.4 (± 6.53) days for IM and 0.78 (±1) days for IA admin-
istration. Concentrations were below the limit of detection after IM 
injection by days 52 (plasma) and 60 (urine), and after IA injection 
by day 7 (plasma) and day 8 (urine). Triamcinolone acetonide was 
also undetectable in any of the joints sampled following IM admin -
istration and remained above the limit of quantitation for 21 days 
following IA administration.14 
IA administration to horses results in systemic effects, including 
suppression of cortisol for up to 4 days following administration, 15 
and improvement of lung function in horses with severe asthma.9 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Triamcinolone is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensi -
tive to it. Systemic use of glucocorticoids is generally considered 
contraindicated in viral or systemic fungal infections (unless used 
for replacement therapy in hypoadrenocorticism), in animals with 
tuberculosis, chronic nephritis, or hyperadrenocorticism when ad -
ministered IM in patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenia. Sus -
tained-release injectable glucocorticoid use is considered contrain -
dicated for chronic corticosteroid treatment of systemic diseases.
Relative contraindications include the presence of diabetes mel -
litus, osteoporosis, or CHF . Corticosteroids should not be used to 
alleviate inflammation or pain caused by infections. Corticosteroids 
may mask signs of infection (eg, fever). 
Patients that have received corticosteroids chronically should be 
tapered off slowly as endogenous ACTH and corticosteroid function 
may return slowly. If the animal undergoes a stressful event (eg, sur-
gery, trauma, illness) during the tapering process or until normal 
adrenal and pituitary function resume, additional glucocorticoids 
should be administered.
Aseptic preparation of the injection site should precede all in -
tra-articular (IA) injections. Inadvertent administration into adja -
cent soft tissue is the most common reason for inadequate response 
after IA injection. 1 IA injections given to horses with undiag -
nosed asthma may mask clinical signs related to asthma and delay 
 diagnosis.9
Triamcinolone induced rapid death of mesenchymal stem cells 
(MSC) in an in vitro cell culture, 16 and the authors concluded that 
concomitant use of corticosteroids is likely to have a detrimental ef-
fect on cell viability during MSC treatment.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are generally associated with long-term administration 
of these drugs, especially if the drugs are administered at high doses 
or not on an alternate-day regimen. Effects typically manifest as clin-
ical signs of hyperadrenocorticism. Glucocorticoids can delay growth 
when administered to young, growing animals. A list of potential ef-
fects is outlined in Glucocorticoid Agents, General Information.
In dogs, polyuria (PU), polydipsia (PD), and polyphagia (PP) may 
occur during short-term burst therapy and on days when the drug is 
administered during alternate-day maintenance therapy. Other ad -
verse effects in dogs receiving triamcinolone chronically can include 
dull/dry coat, weight gain, panting, vomiting, diarrhea, increased 
liver enzymes, GI ulceration (especially with high parenteral or oral 
dosages), hypercoagulability, hyperlipidemia, activation or worsen -
ing of diabetes mellitus, muscle wasting, and/or behavior changes 
(eg, depression, lethargy, aggression). Discontinuation of the drug 
may be necessary; changing to an alternate steroid may also alleviate 
adverse effects. Adverse effects associated with anti-inflammatory 
treatment are relatively uncommon, with the exception of PU, PD, 
and PP . Adverse effects associated with immunosuppressive dosages 
are more common and potentially more severe.
Glucocorticoids appear to have a greater hyperglycemic effect in 
cats than other species. Occasionally, PU, PD, and PP with weight 
gain, diarrhea, and/or depression will be present. Long-term, high-
dose treatment can lead to cushingoid effects. 
In horses, the potential for dexamethasone or triamcinolone play-
ing a contributory role in the development of laminitis has been a 
traditional concern; however, a large, retrospective observational 
cohort study of horses found that intrasynovial triamcinolone ad -
ministration did not increase the risk of laminitis.17 Also there is no 
evidence that intra-articular corticosteroids cause harm to subchon-
dral bone or promote catastrophic injury.18 Another review article on 
this subject states: 
Although the association of laminitis with elevated serum cortisol 
in pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction suggests that chronic expo -
sure to glucocorticoids may be part of laminitis pathogenesis, review of 
published reports and databases suggests that glucocorticoid-induced 
laminitis is a relatively rare occurrence. . . . Generally, local glucocor-
ticoid administration presents little risk as does systemic treatment 
of recurrent airway obstruction without concurrent disease. Caution 
should be used however in horses that are overweight and/or insulin 
resistant, or have had a recent bout of acute laminitis of alimentary or 
endotoxic origin.19
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Endogenous glucocorticoids are likely necessary for normal fetal 
development. They may be required for adequate surfactant pro -
duction and development of myelin, retinal tissue, the pancreas, and 
mammary tissue.
Glucocorticoids administered to pregnant dogs have resulted in 
congenital abnormalities, including deformed forelegs, phocomelia, 
and anasarca. Additionally, cleft palate has been reported in dogs, 
rabbits, and rodents. Systemic glucocorticoids administered to ani -
mals may induce the first stage of parturition when used during the 
last trimester of pregnancy and may precipitate premature parturi -
tion followed by dystocia, fetal death, retained placenta, and metritis. 
Corticosteroids appear in milk and could suppress growth, inter-
fere with endogenous corticosteroid production, or cause other un -
wanted effects in the nursing offspring. Use with caution in nursing 
dams.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Glucocorticoids, when given short term, are unlikely to cause harm-
ful effects, even in massive doses. If clinical signs occur, use support-
ive treatment if required.

===== PDF_PAGE_1298 =====
Triamcinolone   1271
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are theo-
retical in humans or animals receiving triamcinolone systemically and 
may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, 
use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Amphotericin B : When administered concomitantly with glu-
cocorticoids, may cause hypokalemia
 ■ Anesthetics, Local  (eg, epidural injections ): Combination 
with glucocorticoids in epidurals has caused serious CNS injuries 
and death.
 ■ Anticholinesterase Agents  (eg, pyridostigmine, neostig -
mine): In patients with myasthenia gravis, concomitant gluco -
corticoid and anticholinesterase agent administration may lead 
to profound muscle weakness. If possible, discontinue anticho -
linesterase medication at least 24 hours prior to corticosteroid 
administration.
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole ): May 
decrease the metabolism of glucocorticoids and increase triam -
cinolone blood concentrations; ketoconazole may induce adrenal 
insufficiency when glucocorticoids are withdrawn by inhibiting 
adrenal corticosteroid synthesis.
 ■ Cyclophosphamide : Glucocorticoids may also inhibit the he -
patic metabolism of cyclophosphamide; dosage adjustments may 
be required.
 ■ Cyclosporine : Concomitant administration of glucocorticoids 
and cyclosporine may increase the blood concentrations of each, 
by mutually inhibiting the hepatic metabolism of each other; the 
clinical significance of this interaction is not clear.
 ■ Digoxin : Secondary to hypokalemia, increased risk for  arrhythmias
 ■ Diuretics, Potassium-Depleting  (eg, furosemide, thia -
zides): Administered concomitantly with glucocorticoids may 
cause hypokalemia
 ■ Ephedrine : May increase metabolism of glucocorticoids
 ■ Estrogens  (eg, DES, estriol): The effects of triamcinolone, and 
possibly other glucocorticoids, may be potentiated by concomi -
tant administration with estrogens.
 ■ Insulin : Insulin requirements may increase in patients receiving 
glucocorticoids.
 ■ Isoniazid : Triamcinolone may decrease isoniazid  concentrations. 
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics  (eg, clarithromycin, erythromycin): 
May increase triamcinolone concentrations
 ■ Mitotane : May alter the metabolism of steroids; higher than 
usual doses of steroids may be necessary to treat mitotane-in -
duced adrenal insufficiency
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs  (eg, carprofen, 
flunixin, meloxicam, phenylbutazone ): Administration of ul -
cerogenic drugs with glucocorticoids may increase the risk for GI 
ulceration. 
 ■ Opioids  (eg, morphine): Combination with glucocorticoids in 
epidurals has caused serious CNS injuries and death.
 ■ Phenobarbital : May increase the metabolism of glucocorti -
coids and decrease triamcinolone blood concentrations
 ■ Rifampin : May increase the metabolism of glucocorticoids and 
decrease triamcinolone blood concentration
 ■ Salicylates  (eg, aspirin, bismuth subsalicylate ): Glucocorti-
coids may reduce salicylate blood concentrations.
 ■ V accines, Modified Live : Patients receiving corticosteroids 
at immunosuppressive dosages should generally not receive live 
attenuated-virus vaccines as virus replication may be augmented; 
a diminished immune response may occur after vaccine, toxoid, 
or bacterin administration in patients receiving glucocorticoids.
 ■ W arfarin : Triamcinolone may affect clotting times; monitor.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Glucocorticoids may increase serum cholesterol.
 ■ Glucocorticoids may increase serum and urine glucose  concen-
trations.
 ■ Glucocorticoids may decrease serum potassium.
 ■ Glucocorticoids can suppress the release of thyroid stimulating 
hormone (TSH) and reduce T3 and T4 values. Thyroid gland at -
rophy has been reported after chronic glucocorticoid administra-
tion. Uptake of I131 by the thyroid may be decreased by glucocor-
ticoids.
 ■ Reactions to skin tests may be suppressed by glucocorticoids.
 ■ False negative results of the nitroblue tetrazolium test for sys -
temic bacterial infections may be induced by glucocorticoids.
 ■ Glucocorticoids may cause neutrophilia within 4 to 8 hours after 
dosing with return to baseline within 24 to 48 hours after drug 
discontinuation.
 ■ Glucocorticoids can cause lymphopenia, which can persist for 
weeks after drug discontinuation in dogs.
Dosages
NOTE: When used systemically (PO, IM, or SC), initial doses of 
triamcinolone acetonide can be given at dosages that are ≈7 to 8 
times lower than the prednis(ol)one dosage. For example: If the 
dosage of prednisone for the indication to be treated is 1 mg/kg 
PO, a corresponding dosage of triamcinolone acetonide would be 
≈0.125 mg/kg PO. Triamcinolone has negligible mineralocorti -
coid effects, and its biologic activity may persist for 36 to 48 hours. 
If given on a daily basis, treatment for longer than 1 to 2 weeks 
will suppress the HPA axis and recovery will take longer than 1 
week. Therefore, if triamcinolone is used for longer than a few 
days, when discontinuing, dosage should be tapered off using al -
ternate-day, then every-third-day therapy. 
DOGS/CATS:
Glucocorticoid effects (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
a. Using tablets: 0.11 mg/kg PO initially once daily, may increase 
to 0.22 mg/kg PO once daily if initial response is unsatisfac -
tory. As soon as possible, but not later than 2 weeks, reduce 
dosage gradually to 0.028 – 0.055 mg/kg/day.20 
b. Injectable product: 0.11 – 0.22 mg/kg IM or SC for inflamma-
tory or allergic disorders, and 0.22 mg/kg IM or SC for derma-
tologic disorders.1 Effects generally persist for 7 to 15 days; if 
clinical signs recur, may repeat or institute oral therapy.
c. Intralesional injection: 1.2 – 1.8 mg/lesion (total dose; NOT  
mg/kg) is divided in several injections around the lesion at 0.5 
to 2.5 cm intervals; administer well into the cutis. 1 When in -
jecting, do not exceed 0.6 mg at any one site or a total dose of 
6 mg when treating multiple lesions. May repeat after 3 or 4 
days if indicated. 
d. Intra-articular (IA) and intrasynovial injection: Dose for IA 
or intrasynovial administration is dependent on the size of the 
joint to be treated and on the severity of clinical signs. A single 
injection of 1 – 3 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) IA.1 After 3 to 4 days, 
dose may be repeated, depending on the severity of clinical 
signs and the clinical response. If initial results are inadequate 
or too transient, dose may be increased, but the recommended 
dose should not be exceeded. Routine aseptic preparation of 

===== PDF_PAGE_1299 =====
1272    Triamcinolone
the area should be made prior to all IA injections. A thorough 
understanding of the pertinent anatomic relationships is es -
sential. The inadvertent administration of the corticosteroid 
into the soft tissues surrounding a joint is not harmful but is 
the most common cause of failure to achieve the desired local 
results.
Anti-inflammatory agent (extra-label): 
a) Induction: 0.05 – 0.22 mg/kg PO once daily. Maintenance:  
0.05 – 0.1 mg/kg (or lower if possible) PO every 48 to 72 hours. 
Taper dose slowly if discontinuing.
b) Adjunctive treatment of pruritus in allergic cats : Initial in -
duction dosage was 0.5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO once dai -
ly for cats weighing less than or equal to 5 kg (11 lb), and  
0.75 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO once daily for cats more than  
5 kg (11 lb). Cats that did not achieve remission by day 7 had their 
once-daily induction dose doubled for the next 7 days. Mean 
dosage required for induction of remission was 0.18 mg/kg  
(range 0.09 – 0.26 mg/kg) PO once daily; 94% of treated cats 
achieved remission by the end of the second week. Dosages 
used to achieve remission were then given every other day and 
tapered (from 100% to 25% of induction dose in 25% incre -
ments) to the lowest every other day dosage that maintained 
remission. Mean alternate-day dosages were 0.08 mg/kg.13 
c) Canine hip osteoarthritis: 0.2 mg/kg IA into the affected hip 
joint(s).21 Alternatively, 20 mg/joint (NOT mg/kg) IA. 5 For 
both dosing options, administer IA triamcinolone injection in 
combination with 1 to 2 mL of hyaluronic acid IA. 
Immunosuppressive agent (extra-label):
a) Autoimmune skin diseases : Induction: 0.4 – 0.6 mg/kg PO 
once daily. Maintenance: 0.1 – 0.2 mg/kg PO every 48 to 72 
hours22 
b)  Feline pemphigus foliaceus : Induction: 0.6 – 2 mg/kg PO 
once daily. Maintenance: 0.6 – 1 mg/kg PO every 2 to 7 days. 
Cats receiving triamcinolone had significantly fewer adverse 
effects than cats receiving prednisolone and chlorambucil.23 
Intralesional injection (extra-label):
a) Preventing re-stricture after esophageal dilation:
i. Using an endoscopically directed needle, triamcinolone  
2 – 10 mg (total dose; NOT mg/kg) is divided and injected sub- 
mucosally into each of 4 quadrants (≈0.5 – 2.5 mg/quadrant), 
placed circumferentially around the stricture site before the 
balloon dilation procedure.24–26 
ii. Dilute triamcinolone 40 mg (total dose; NOT mg/kg) 1:1 
with 0.9% sodium chloride and divide solution to inject 
submucosally into 4 quadrants (≈10 mg/quadrant), placed 
circumferentially around the stricture site before the bal -
loon dilation procedure.10
b) Preventing re-stricture after rectal dilation in dogs :  
5 – 10 mg (total dose; NOT mg/kg) divided and injected sub -
mucosally into 4 quadrants, placed circumferentially around 
the stricture site before the balloon dilation procedure27 
c) Preventing re-stricture after rectal dilation in cats : 0.8 mg 
(total dose; NOT mg/kg) was injected submucosally into each 
of 4 quadrants, placed circumferentially around the stricture 
site before the balloon dilation procedure12
d) Mast cell tumors : 1 – 2 mg triamcinolone per cm of tumor 
length based on the longest tumor dimension. Treatment in -
terval varied from weekly doses (20%), one-time doses (40%), 
or clinician’s discretion (40%).28 
e) Ciliary body ablation for chronic glaucoma in dogs : Triam-
cinolone 1 – 2 mg (total dose; NOT mg/kg) in combination 
with gentamicin 30 – 50 mg (total dose; NOT mg/kg) admin -
istered intravitreally29
HORSES : 
Inflammation and related disorders (label dosage; FDA-ap -
proved): 
a) Oral: 0.011 – 0.022 mg/kg PO twice daily30 
b) Injection : 0.022 – 0.044 mg/kg IM or SC; usual dose,  
12 – 20 mg/horse (NOT mg/kg)1
c) Intra-articularly or intrasynovially : 6 – 18 mg/joint (NOT 
mg/kg) IA, depending on the joint size and severity of inflam-
mation. Do not exceed 18 mg/dose. May repeat after 3 or 4 
days if indicated.1
Noninfectious synovitis or/and osteoarthritis (extra-label):  
12 mg/horse (NOT mg/kg) as a single IA injection8
Severe equine asthma exacerbation (extra-label): 40 mg/horse 
(NOT mg/kg) IM improved lung function for 28 days9 
Equine recurrent uveitis  (extra-label): 5 mg/eye (NOT mg/kg) 
injected into the suprachoroidal space for horses that have re -
sponded poorly to other treatments31 
Monitoring
Monitoring of glucocorticoid therapy is dependent on its reason for 
use, dosage, agent used (amount of mineralocorticoid activity), dos-
ing schedule (daily vs alternate-day therapy), route of administra -
tion, duration of therapy, and the animal’s age and condition. The 
following list may not be appropriate or complete for all animals; use 
clinical assessment and judgment should adverse effects be noted:
 ■ Weight, appetite, signs of fluid retention
 ■ Serum and/or urine electrolytes
 ■ Total plasma proteins and albumin
 ■ Blood glucose
 ■ Urine culture
 ■ Growth and development in young animals
Client Information
 ■ Give oral products with food.
 ■ The goal of treatment is to find the lowest dose possible and use it 
for the shortest period of time. Follow your veterinarian’s instruc-
tions on how to give this medicine.
 ■ Many side effects are possible, especially when used long term or 
when given in higher doses. The most common side effects are 
increased appetite, thirst, and need to urinate.
 ■ In dogs, stomach or intestinal ulcers, perforation, or bleeding can 
occur while taking this medicine. Contact your veterinarian right 
away if your animal stops eating or if you notice a high fever, black 
tarry stools, or bloody vomit (will look like coffee grounds).
 ■ Do not stop treatment abruptly without your veterinarian’s guid-
ance, as serious side effects could occur.
 ■ Be sure to tell your veterinarian what other medication (including 
vitamins, supplements, or herbal therapies) you give your animal.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Triamcinolone acetonide, a synthetic glucocorticoid, occurs as a 
slightly odorous, white to cream-colored, crystalline powder with a 
melting point between 290°C and 294°C (554°F-561°F). It is prac -
tically insoluble in water, very soluble in dehydrated alcohol and 
slightly soluble in alcohol. 
The commercially available sterile suspensions have a pH range 
of 5 to 7.5.
Triamcinolone acetonide may also be known as triamcinoloni 
acetonidum; many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Triamcinolone acetonide products should be stored at room tempera-
ture (15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]). The injection should be stored upright 
inside the manufacturer’s carton, protected from light and freezing.

===== PDF_PAGE_1300 =====
Triamterene   1273
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 4 substance. See Appendix for more 
information. Use of this drug may not be allowed in certain animal 
competitions. Check rules and regulations before entering in a com-
petition while this medication is being administered. Contact local 
racing authorities for further guidance.
Triamcinolone Acetonide Tablets: 0.5 mg and 1.5 mg; Vetalog®, ge-
neric; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs and cats
Triamcinolone Acetonide Suspension for Injection: 2 mg/mL in  
25 mL and 100 mL vials; 6 mg/mL in 3 mL, 5 mL and 25 mL vials; 
Vetalog® Parenteral; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs, cats, and 
horses not intended for food
Triamcinolone Acetonide Oral Powder: 15 g of powder contains  
10 mg of triamcinolone acetonide; Vetalog® Oral Powder; (Rx). FDA-
approved for use in horses. Product is listed in the FDA Green Book 
but does not appear to be commercially available.
Triamcinolone is available as a topical spray, and in combination 
with other agents as a topical cream or ointment.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Triamcinolone Acetonide Injection: 10 mg/mL and 40 mg/mL sus -
pension in 1 mL, 5 mL, and 10 mL vials; Kenalog®-10 and -40; (Rx)
Many topical preparations are available, alone and in combination 
with other agents. Oral mucosal paste and inhaled products are also 
FDA-approved. All are Rx.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Triamterene
(trye-am-te-reen) Dyrenium®
Potassium-Sparing Diuretic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ May be considered as an alternative to spironolactone for 
adjunctive treatment of CHF in dogs
 ▶ Rarely used in veterinary medicine; limited clinical experience 
in dogs and cats
 ▶ Contraindications include anuria, severe or progressive renal 
disease, severe hepatic disease, hypersensitivity to triam-
terene, or pre-existing hyperkalemia. Triamterene should not 
be used with other potassium-sparing agents (spironolactone, 
amiloride) or potassium supplements.
 ▶ Most common adverse effect is hyperkalemia; monitoring 
serum potassium is required.
Uses/Indications
Triamterene is a potassium-sparing diuretic that may be considered 
as an alternative to spironolactone for the adjunctive treatment of 
congestive heart failure in dogs; however, there is little experience 
associated with its use in dogs or cats and it is rarely recommended.
Pharmacology/Actions
By exerting a direct effect on the distal renal tubule, triamterene 
inhibits the reabsorption of sodium in exchange for hydrogen and 
potassium ions. It is a relatively weak diuretic since only ≈2% to 3% 
of filtered sodium is resorbed in the terminal portion of the distal 
tubule. Unlike spironolactone, it does not competitively inhibit aldo-
sterone. Triamterene increases renal excretion of sodium, calcium, 
magnesium, and bicarbonate; urine pH may be slightly increased. 
Serum concentrations of potassium and chloride may be increased. 
When used alone, triamterene has little effect on blood pressure. Tri-
amterene can reduce GFR slightly, probably by affecting renal blood 
flow; this effect is reversible when the medication is discontinued.
Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacokinetic data for dogs or cats were not located. In humans, 
triamterene is rapidly absorbed after oral administration and oral 
bioavailability is ≈85%. Onset of diuresis occurs in 2 to 4 hours, 
peaks at ≈6 hours and diuresis can persist up to 12 to 16 hours post-
dose. Triamterene is metabolized in the liver to 6-p-hydroxytriam -
terine and its sulfate conjugate. These metabolites are eliminated in 
the bile/feces and urine; elimination half-life is ≈2 hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Triamterene is contraindicated for human patients (and presumably 
dogs and cats) with anuria, severe or progressive renal disease, severe 
hepatic disease, hypersensitivity to triamterene, pre-existing hyper -
kalemia, or history of triamterene-induced hyperkalemia. Concur -
rent therapy with another potassium-sparing agent (spironolactone, 
amiloride) or potassium supplementation is also contraindicated.
In humans, hyperkalemia from potassium-sparing agents such as 
triamterene is more likely in patients with renal impairment and di-
abetes, and in elderly or severely ill patients.1
Adverse Effects
Because triamterene has been infrequently used in veterinary medi-
cine, an accurate adverse effect profile for small animal species is not 
known. Hyperkalemia is possible and monitoring of electrolytes and 
renal function are necessary. In humans, hyperkalemia rarely occurs 
in patients with normal urine output and potassium intake.
Less common adverse effects reported in humans include head -
ache, dizziness, GI effects (eg, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea), azotemia, 
hyponatremia, and an increased sensitivity to sunlight. Rarely, hy -
persensitivity reactions have occurred in human patients taking tri-
amterene.1 Other rare adverse effects include triamterene-nephroli -
thiasis, liver enzyme abnormalities, agranulocytosis, nephrotoxicity, 
thrombocytopenia, or megaloblastosis.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Studies to determine triamterene’s effects on fertility in human have 
not been performed; however, studies in pregnant rats given triam -
terene at 6 to 20 times the human dose did not show adverse effects 
to the fetuses.1 Triamterene crosses the placental barrier. 
Triamterene is distributed into milk. Although unlikely to pose 
much risk to nursing animals, safety during nursing cannot be 
 assured.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The oral LD50 for triamterene in mice is 380 mg/kg.1 Fluid and elec-
trolyte imbalance is the most likely risk associated with an overdose. 
GI effects or hypotension are also possible. Consider GI decontam -
ination protocols for very large or quantity unknown ingestions. 
Acute overdoses should generally be managed by observation and 
supportive treatment with fluid diuresis as well as electrolyte (espe -
cially serum potassium) and acid-base monitoring.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.

===== PDF_PAGE_1301 =====
1274    Trientine
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving triamterene and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Angiotensin Converting Enzyme  Inhibitors  (ACEIs; eg, 
enalapril, benazepril): Increased risk for hyperkalemia
 ■ Antidiabetic Agents  (eg, insulin, oral hypoglycemic agents 
[eg, glipizide]): Triamterene may increase blood glucose levels.
 ■ Antihypertensive Agents : Possible potentiation of hypoten-
sive effects
 ■ Diuretics, Potassium-sparing  (eg, spironolactone, ami -
loride): Increase risk for hyperkalemia; use of these drugs with 
triamterene in humans is contraindicated.
 ■ Lithium : Triamterene may reduce lithium clearance.
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs ( NSAIDs): Tri-
amterene with NSAIDs (especially indomethacin) may increase 
the risks of nephrotoxicity.
 ■ Potassium Supplements  or High Potassium Foods : In -
creased risk for hyperkalemia
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Quinidine: Triamterene may interfere with fluorescent assay of 
quinidine.
Dosages
DOGS:
Adjunctive treatment of heart failure (extra-label): Anecdotally, 
1 – 2 mg/kg PO twice daily or 2 – 4 mg/kg PO daily. Limited pub-
lished evidence to support use or any dosage; if a potassium-spar-
ing diuretic is used, spironolactone is usually preferred.
Monitoring
 ■ Baseline and periodic serum electrolytes (especially potassium), 
BUN, creatinine
 ■ Hydration status; patient body weight
 ■ Blood pressure, if indicated
 ■ Signs of edema
Client Information
 ■ Give this medication with food to help prevent stomach upset.
 ■ Y our animal’s urine may develop a bluish hue while it is taking 
this medicine. This color change is normal and will go away when 
the medication is stopped.
 ■ Because this medication has not been used very much in dogs or 
cats, report any unusual side effects to your veterinarian.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Triamterene is structurally related to folic acid and occurs as a yellow, 
odorless, crystalline powder. It is practically insoluble in water and 
very slightly soluble in alcohol. At 50°C, it is slightly soluble in water. 
In acidified solutions, triamterene gives off a blue fluorescence.
Triamterene may also be known as NSC-77625, KF-8542, FI-6143, 
triamteren, trimaterenum, triamtereen, or Dyrenium®. International 
trade names include Dytac® and Triteren®. There are many trade 
names for combination products with hydrochlorothiazide.
Storage/Stability
Triamterene capsules should be stored between 15-30°C (59-86°F) in 
tight, light-resistant containers.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 4 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Triamterene Capsules: 50 mg and 100 mg; Dyrenium®; (Rx)
In humans, triamterene is often prescribed as a fixed-dose combina-
tion with hydrochlorothiazide; many preparations are available. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Trientine
(trye-en-teen) Syprine® 
Chelating Agent 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Oral copper chelating agent for copper hepatopathy. Limited 
veterinary experience with this drug
 ▶ Give on an empty stomach, 1 to 2 hours prior to meals
 ▶ Likely fewer adverse effects than penicillamine, but acute 
kidney injury possible
 ▶ More expensive than penicillamine; not readily available 
commercially and may need to be compounded into smaller 
dosages
Uses/Indications
Trientine may be useful for the treatment of copper-associated hepa-
topathy in dogs,1 particularly when dogs cannot tolerate the adverse 
effects (eg, vomiting) associated with penicillamine. 
In humans, trientine is indicated for patients with Wilson disease 
who cannot tolerate penicillamine.
Pharmacology/Actions
Trientine is an effective chelator of copper and increases its elimi -
nation via urinary excretion. It apparently has a greater affinity for 
copper in plasma than penicillamine, but penicillamine has a greater 
affinity for tissue copper.
Pharmacokinetics
No animal data were located. In humans, trientine is poorly absorbed 
and then extensively metabolized, primarily by acetylation. The drug 
and metabolites are excreted in the urine, with an elimination half-
life of ≈2 to 4 hours. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Trientine is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to it. 
Patients receiving trientine should be closely monitored for evidence 
of iron deficiency anemia. 
In case of skin contact, promptly wash the area with water as 
contact dermatitis is possible. Capsules should not be opened or 
chewed.2
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects of trientine in dogs treated for copper hepatotoxicity 
are minimal, but the veterinary experience is limited. Acute kidney 
injury has been reported, particularly when used in dogs with high 
liver copper levels and at higher doses. 
In humans, nausea may occur, especially at the beginning of 
therapy.3 Dystonias, muscle spasms, myasthenia gravis, and iron 
deficiency anemia have been noted after long-term use. Paradoxical 
neurologic deterioration has been reported.4–6

===== PDF_PAGE_1302 =====
Trilostane   1275
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Trientine is a potential teratogen. It was teratogenic in rats that were 
given doses similar to those for humans.2 
It is not known whether this drug is excreted in breast milk. Exer-
cise caution when administering to nursing patients.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Little information is available; a case of a human ingesting 30 g of 
trientine without significant morbidity has been reported.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving trientine and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Iron : Iron and trientine inhibit the absorption of one another; if 
iron therapy is needed, give doses at least 2 hours apart from one 
another.
 ■ Zinc : Because trientine may also chelate zinc or other minerals, 
avoid concomitant therapy (most do not recommend using zinc for 
copper reduction until copper chelation therapy with penicillamine 
or trientine is completed) or separate dosages by at least 2 hours.
Dosages
DOGS:
Chelator for copper hepatotoxicity (extra-label): 5 – 7.5 mg/kg 
PO twice daily.1 Administer 1 to 2 hours prior to meals. Doses up 
to 10 – 15 mg/kg PO twice daily have been suggested.7
Monitoring
 ■ Periodic liver biopsies for quantitative hepatic copper levels and 
response to therapy
 ■ Free and total serum copper
 ■ Baseline and periodic renal and hepatic function tests
 ■ Iron status, anemia
Client Information
 ■ It is best to give this medicine 1 to 2 hours before feeding or giving 
other medications. If your dog vomits after getting it, contact your 
veterinarian to see if giving it with a small amount of food is okay.
 ■ Trientine may cause skin reactions. Administer as whole capsules. 
Wash any area that may come in contact with capsule contents.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Trientine HCl, an oral copper chelator, occurs as a white to pale-yel-
low crystalline powder. It is hygroscopic, freely soluble in water, and 
slightly soluble in alcohol.
Trientine HCl may also be known as MK-0681, TJA-250, 2,2,2-te-
tramine, TETA, trien hydrochloride, triethylenetetramine dihydro -
chloride, trientine hydrochloride, Metalite®, or Syprine®.
Storage/Stability
Store trientine capsules in the refrigerator at 2°C to 8°C (36°F-46°F) 
in tightly closed containers.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Trientine may need to be compounded into smaller capsules to give 
appropriate doses to dogs. 
One sources states: Modification of 2,2,2-tetramine (trientine) to 
2,3,2-tetramine increases potency as a copper-chelating agent. Use 
of 2,3,2-tetramine in affected Bedlington terriers reduced liver cop -
per concentrations significantly after 200 days of treatment at a dose 
of 15 mg/kg body weight. This drug is not commercially available, 
but can be obtained from chemical supply companies in the form of 
N,N’-bis(2-aminoethyl)-1,3-propanediamine and prepared as a salt 
for oral administration.8
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Trientine HCl Oral Capsules: 250 mg; Syprine®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Trilostane
(try-low-stane) Vetoryl®
Adrenal Steroid Synthesis Inhibitor
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Reduces the synthesis of cortisol, aldosterone, and adrenal 
androgens via competitive inhibition of 3-beta hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase
 ▶ May be useful in dogs for the treatment of pituitary-depen-
dent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH), hyperadrenocorticism 
caused by adrenocortical tumors when surgery is not an 
option, and alopecia X; in cats for the treatment of feline PDH; 
and in horses for the treatment of pituitary pars intermedia 
dysfunction (PPID)  
 ▶ Treatment goals often include resolution of clinical signs 
and avoiding oversuppression of the adrenal axis. For safe 
administration, appropriate rechecks with laboratory testing 
are required. Ideally, for each individual patient, the timing of 
trilostane administration and ACTH stimulation testing should 
remain consistent when monitoring therapy.
 ▶ A lower, twice-daily regimen appears to be effective and asso-
ciated with fewer significant adverse effects.
 ▶ Potential adverse effects in dogs include lethargy, inappe-
tence, vomiting, electrolyte abnormalities, and diarrhea; iatro-
genic hypoadrenocorticism and death have been reported.   
 ▶ Give with food for improved bioavailability.
 ▶ Use of licensed product is recommended; use compounded 
products with caution.
 ▶ Do not handle trilostane if pregnant or trying to conceive.
Uses/Indications
Trilostane is approved for the treatment of pituitary-dependent 
hyperadrenocorticism (PDH) and for the treatment of hyperadre -
nocorticism (HAC) associated with adrenocortical tumors (AT) in 
dogs when surgery is not an option. Doses lower than the label-rec-
ommended amounts given twice daily appear to be as effective and 
better tolerated than the labeled dose.1,2 Trilostane may also be useful 
in the treatment of alopecia X.3–5
Trilostane appears to be a viable, well-tolerated medical treatment 
option in cats with HAC. 6–8 Trilostane may be useful for the treat -
ment of pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID) in horses.9
Pharmacology/Actions
Trilostane is a competitive inhibitor of 3-beta hydroxysteroid dehy-
drogenase and reduces synthesis of cortisol, aldosterone, and adrenal 
androgens. Inhibition is reversible and apparently dose dependent. 
In dogs with PDH, cortisol concentrations decreased markedly 

===== PDF_PAGE_1303 =====
1276    Trilostane
2 to 4 hours after trilostane administration. From baseline, signif -
icant increases occurred in endogenous adrenocorticotropic hor -
mone (ACTH) concentrations between hours 3 and 12, significant 
increases in aldosterone concentrations occurred between hours 16 
and 20 (not clinically significant), and significant increases in renin 
activity occurred between hours 6 and 20. Potassium concentrations 
decreased significantly between hours 0.5 and 2 but were not of clin-
ical significance.10 Another study in dogs with PDH assessed the ef -
fects of mitotane and trilostane on aldosterone secretory reserve and 
whether the aldosterone concentration correlates with serum elec -
trolyte concentrations. Aldosterone concentrations in the mitotane- 
and trilostane-treated dogs at 30- and 60-minutes post-ACTH were 
significantly lower than in clinically healthy dogs, and treated dogs 
had a greater decrease in aldosterone secretory reserve at 30 minutes 
than at 60 minutes. No correlation between aldosterone and serum 
electrolyte concentrations was observed.11
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, orally administered trilostane is rapidly but erratically ab -
sorbed, with peak concentrations occurring between 1.5 and 2 hours 
postadministration. Absorption is enhanced when given with food. 
Trilostane is metabolized in the liver to several metabolites, includ -
ing ketotrilostane, which is active. An ex vivo study in canine adrenal 
glands found that ketotrilostane was 4.9 times and 2.4 times more 
potent than trilostane in inhibiting cortisol and corticosterone se -
cretion, respectively.12 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Trilostane is contraindicated in animals hypersensitive to it. The 
manufacturer cautions to not use the drug in patients with primary 
hepatic disease or renal insufficiency. In field studies, treated patients 
had a statistically significant decrease in RBC parameters (ie, hema-
tocrit, hemoglobin, RBC count) as compared with pretreatment val-
ues; however, the posttreatment values remained within the normal 
range. Although this effect is not commonly reported, monitoring 
CBC in dogs with underlying anemia should be considered. 
Hypoadrenocorticism can develop at any dose and at any time 
during therapy and does not appear to be dose dependent,13,14 and al-
though adrenal suppression caused by trilostane is reversible in most 
cases, adrenal necrosis and death have rarely occurred in dogs. 2,14 
Owners should be warned about this life-threatening complica -
tion, counseled on the clinical signs of an Addisonian crisis, and, if 
there is any suspicion of an Addisonian crisis, instructed to discon -
tinue trilostane therapy, administer glucocorticoids, and seek veter-
inary care immediately. Owners should always be provided a small 
supply of predniso(lo)ne or dexamethasone tablets when trilostane 
is prescribed in order to initiate emergency treatment for a possible 
Addisonian crisis. Dexamethasone is the preferred corticosteroid for 
treatment, as it will not interfere with the ACTH stimulation test. 
If prednisone or prednisolone are used, an ACTH stimulation test 
cannot be accurately performed for at least 24 hours after adminis -
tration because of cross-reactivity of these drugs in cortisol assays.
When used to control clinical signs of HAC in dogs with adre -
nal tumors, trilostane does not shrink tumors, and adrenal glands 
may increase in size during treatment. Treatment with trilostane 
may not reduce the risk for HAC-induced pancreatitis. 15 HAC may 
mask signs of osteoarthritis or atopic dermatitis, and signs of these 
conditions may emerge during trilostane treatment as endogenous 
cortisol concentration decreases.
During periods of stress (eg, boarding, surgery), animals treat -
ed with trilostane may require short-term exogenous corticosteroid 
(see Dexamethasone, Prednisolone/Prednisone) supplementation.
Do not handle trilostane if pregnant or trying to conceive. 16 Tri-
lostane has been associated with teratogenic effects and early preg -
nancy loss in laboratory animals.
Adverse Effects
Trilostane appears to be relatively well tolerated in dogs, but dogs 
can develop lethargy, mild electrolyte abnormalities (eg, hyponatre-
mia, hyperkalemia), vomiting, diarrhea, and inappetence during the 
first few days of therapy secondary to steroid withdrawal. 17 These 
effects are usually mild and self-limiting; however, signs cannot be 
attributed to drug intolerance alone and could be indicative of hy -
poadrenocorticism. 
In cats with HAC, adverse effects associated with trilostane 
 therapy have included lethargy, anorexia, and dulled mentation.
No adverse effects were noted in a study of trilostane given to 20 
horses with equine PPID.18
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Trilostane is contraindicated during pregnancy. The drug can sig -
nificantly reduce the synthesis of progesterone in vivo and is associ-
ated with teratogenic effects and early pregnancy loss in laboratory 
animals.16 Safe use has not been evaluated in male dogs intended for 
breeding. 
Because safety has not been established in lactating animals, this 
drug should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the 
potential fetal risks.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Death occurred in 50% of healthy beagles administered 20.1 to  
33.5 mg/kg PO twice daily for 90 days. 16 If clinical signs of hypoad -
renocorticism are present, treatment with corticosteroids, mineralo-
corticoids, and IV fluids may be required; blood pressure, hydration 
status, and electrolyte balance should be monitored. Because the 
drug’s effects are relatively short, monitoring of patients without 
complications should only be required for a few days after ingestion.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving trilostane and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme  Inhibitors  (ACEIs; eg, 
benazepril, enalapril): May increase risk for hyperkalemia
 ■ Ketoconazole : May potentiate the effects of trilostane and lead 
to hypoadrenocorticism
 ■ Mitotane : May potentiate the effects of trilostane and lead to 
hypoadrenocorticism. Wait at least 1 month after discontinuing 
mitotane before initiating trilostane.
 ■ Potassium-Sparing Diuretics  (eg, spironolactone): May in-
crease risk for hyperkalemia
 ■ Potassium Supplements; High potassium foods : May in-
crease risk for hyperkalemia
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ None
Dosages
CAUTION: Hypoadrenocorticism can develop at any dose and at 
any time during therapy and does not appear to be dose depen -
dent. Animals should always be sent home with glucocorticoid 
supplementation in the event of an Addisonian crisis. See Contra-
indications/Precautions/Warnings.

===== PDF_PAGE_1304 =====
Trilostane   1277
DOGS:
CAUTION: The label dosage for dogs is considered by most cli-
nicians to be greater than is necessary for most patients. The 
label dosage is provided below; however, the use of lower, ex -
tra-label dosages (listed below label dosage) is recommended. 
Hyperadrenocorticism (HAC)  (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
Starting dose is 2.2 – 6.7 mg/kg (based on body weight and cap -
sule size) PO once daily with food; after giving this dose for ≈10 
to 14 days, re-examination is required and a 4- to 6-hour post -
administration ACTH stimulation test and serum biochemical 
test (eg, electrolytes, renal and hepatic function) should be per -
formed. If physical examination results are acceptable, adjust the 
dose according to post-ACTH serum cortisol based on Table 1 in 
the package insert.16 Individual dose adjustments and close mon-
itoring are essential. Re-examine and conduct an ACTH stimu -
lation test 10 to 14 days after every dose alteration. Care must be 
taken during dose increases to monitor the dog’s clinical signs 
and serum electrolyte concentrations. Once-daily administration 
is recommended; however, if clinical signs are not controlled for 
the full day, twice-daily dosing may be needed. To switch from a 
once-daily dosing regimen to a twice-daily dose, divide the total 
daily dose into 2 portions given 12 hours apart; it is not neces -
sary for the doses to be equal. If applicable, the larger dose should 
be administered in the morning and the smaller dose in the eve -
ning.16 NOTE: Extra-label use of twice daily doses permits use of 
a lower total daily trilostane dosage that appears equally effective 
and better tolerated.19 See extra-label dosages below.
Hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) (extra-label): 
Twice-daily administration:
a) In dogs weighing less than 5 kg: ≈0.5 – 1 mg/kg (0.78 ±  
0.26 mg/kg) PO every 12 hours for 4 weeks, and then was ad -
justed based on clinical signs and ACTH stimulation testing. 1 
No dogs required more than the manufacturer’s lowest recom-
mended starting dose of 3 mg/kg per day to control disease. 2 
Slow adjustment of the treatment protocol to achieve clinical 
improvement may be needed on a case-by-case basis. There is 
some evidence that as body weight increases, especially in dogs 
weighing more than 30 kg (66 lb), the amount of trilostane 
(mg/kg/dose as well as mg/kg/day dosage) required to control 
clinical signs decreases.5 
b) 0.21 – 1.1 mg/kg PO every 12 hours (mean, 0.86 mg/kg ev -
ery 12 hours). Slow adjustment of the treatment protocol to 
achieve clinical improvement may be needed on a case-by-case 
basis. Most (≈75%) of the dogs in the study did not need more 
than 3 mg/kg per day to control disease throughout the 1-year 
follow-up. Author concluded that the results of the present 
study indicated that trilostane is both potent and effective in 
dogs at doses less than those recommended by the manufac -
turer and that a lower dose administered twice daily should be 
considered as it minimizes the incidence and severity of ad -
verse effects and trilostane’s effects have been shown to last less 
than 12 hours.2
c) Average initial dose of 0.78 – 3.1 mg/kg PO every 12 hours; 
average final dose of 1.43 – 3.75 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. It is 
recommended to start at a dosage of 0.5 – 1 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours, with a maximum initial daily dose of 30 mg/dog (NOT 
mg/kg) for dogs weighing more than 30 kg (66 lb).20
Once-daily administration:
a) ≈2 mg/kg (based on body weight and available capsule sizes) 
PO once daily with food. Titrate dose slowly according to indi-
vidual response, using lowest dose necessary to control clinical 
signs. If signs of HAC are not adequately controlled, increase 
dose by 50% and split into 2 evenly divided doses. Doses of 10 
mg/kg per day or higher may be required in a small number 
of dogs.15
b) Average initial dose of 2.9 – 6.4 mg/kg PO every 24 hours; av-
erage final dose of 2.8 – 19 mg/kg PO every 24 hours20
Alopecia X (extra-label):
a) 3 – 3.6 mg/kg PO twice daily for 4 to 6 months. From a case 
series (n = 3)3; no adverse effects were reported. 
b) In dogs weighing less than 10 kg (22 lb), average trilostane 
dose was 10.85 mg/kg PO per day given either once daily or 
divided and given twice daily for 4 to 8 weeks.4 
c) A study in Pomeranians reported 1 mg/kg PO given twice dai-
ly to be a positive therapeutic option.21
CATS:
Hyperadrenocorticism (extra-label): Average dosages were  
4.3 mg/kg PO once daily or 3.3 mg/kg PO twice daily; dosages 
ranged from 10 – 30 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 12 to 24 
hours to 12 mg/kg PO every 12 hours.6–8,22  
HORSES :
Equine pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction  (PPID; for -
merly known as equine Cushing’s syndrome) (extra-label):  
0.4 – 1 mg/kg (total dose of 120 – 240 mg/horse [NOT mg/kg]) 
PO once daily. 18 NOTE: Trilostane may be beneficial to those 
horses with PPID associated with adrenal gland hyperplasia and 
hypercortisolemia but has no effect on the excessive production of 
other pituitary-derived hormones.23
SMALL MAMMALS :
Hyperadrenocorticism in guinea pigs (extra-label): 2 – 6 mg/kg 
PO every 24 hours24,25 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical effects. Clinical signs may correlate poorly with cortisol 
concentrations or ACTH stimulation test results. 26 Asking care -
givers to keep a daily diary of their animal’s clinical signs can help 
ascertain clinical control over time and help to make informed 
decisions about trilostane dosage adjustments. 
 ■ Adverse effects. Addisonian crisis is a life-threatening adverse ef-
fect of trilostane therapy. Monitor patients closely during therapy 
for this potential complication. Dispense oral dexamethasone at 
the time of discharge for owners to administer in case of an Ad -
disonian crisis. 
 ■ Baseline and periodic (at 30 days, 90 days, and then every 3 
months) history and physical examination16
 ■ Baseline and periodic (at 30 days, 90 days, and then every 3 
months) CBC and serum chemistry profiles with particular atten-
tion paid to electrolytes and renal and liver parameters16
 ■ Urinalysis and (possibly) urine cortisol:creatinine ratio (UCCR). 
Of note, no advantage has been demonstrated in a UCCR evalu -
ation on each re-evaluation, but measurement of urine specific 
gravity, glucose, and protein or checking for evidence of infection 
(ie, urine culture) may be helpful in assessing dogs treated long-
term with trilostane.2
 ■ ACTH stimulation testing is imperative to ensure safe continua -
tion of trilostane therapy. Familiarity with and understanding of 
testing methods are necessary to ensure consistency of results and 
safe continuation of therapy. Ideally, for each individual patient, 
the timing of trilostane administration and ACTH stimulation 
testing should remain consistent when monitoring therapy. Dif -
ferent strategies include:
• For long-term monitoring once an optimum dose has been 
reached, an ACTH stimulation test 4 to 6 hours after trilostane 
administration should be perfomed. 16 Results from 2 studies 
suggest the optimal time point for an ACTH stimulation test is 

===== PDF_PAGE_1305 =====
1278    Trilostane
2 to 4 hours after trilostane administration. 10,27 A post-ACTH 
stimulation test that results in a cortisol of less than 1.45 µg/dL 
(less than 40 nmol/L), with or without electrolyte abnormalities, 
may precede the development of clinical signs of hypoadreno-
corticism.16 Good control is indicated by favorable clinical signs 
as well as post-ACTH serum cortisol of 1.45 – 9.1 µg/dL (40 to  
250 nmol/L). If the ACTH stimulation test result is less than  
1.45 µg/dL (less than 40 nmol/L) and/or if electrolyte imbal -
ances characteristic of hypoadrenocorticism (eg, hyperkale -
mia, hyponatremia) are found, trilostane should be temporar-
ily discontinued until recurrence of clinical signs consistent 
with hyperadrenocorticism and ACTH stimulation test results 
return to normal (1.45 – 9.1 µg/dL or 40 –250 nmol/L). Tri -
lostane may then be re-introduced at a lower dose. One study 
concluded that a baseline cortisol concentration collected 4 to 
6 hours after trilostane administration in dogs with hyperadre-
nocorticism provided clinically useful information about con-
trol of adrenal gland function, 28 but another study concluded 
baseline cortisol, endogenous ACTH, and the cortisol/ACTH 
ratio could not replace the ACTH stimulation test for monitor-
ing trilostane therapy.29 
• A second ACTH stimulation test performed 9 to 12 hours 
post-trilostane administration and ≈6 hours after the first ACTH 
stimulation test may provide additional therapy guidance in 
dogs that are clinically well-regulated and have cortisol less than  
2 µg/dL before and after the first ACTH stimulation test.30
• Cortisol concentration measured pre-trilostane and 3-hours 
post-trilostane administration also may be a useful monitor -
ing method,31 although inconsistencies were noted in pre-tri -
lostane cortisol measurements obtained 1 hour apart.32
• In dogs showing no signs of hypoadrenocorticism, cortisol 
concentrations in the normal range, measured by pre-trilos -
tane cortisol concentration, could provide necessary informa-
tion for management of the case. If the pre-trilostane cortisol 
concentration is low, additional cortisol testing (such as ACTH 
stimulation testing) should be performed to ensure safe con -
tinuation of therapy. Alternatively, if the pre-trilostane cortisol 
concentration is low in dogs showing no signs of hypoadreno-
corticism, the trilostane dose could be decreased.32   
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine exactly as prescribed by your veterinarian. Do 
not stop or give more of the drug unless you first talk to your 
veterinarian.
 ■ Discontinue trilostane and contact your veterinarian immediately 
if any vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, poor/reduced appetite, weak-
ness, or collapse are observed.
 ■ Give each dose with food, unless otherwise directed by your vet -
erinarian. If directed to administer this medicine once daily, give 
it in the morning. 
 ■ If a dose is missed, give the dose at the next scheduled dose ad -
ministration time.
 ■ Wash your hands after handling this medicine. Do not empty 
capsule contents or do not attempt to divide the capsules. Do not 
handle the capsules if you are pregnant or trying to conceive. 
 ■ Report any side effects to your veterinarian. 
 ■ Keep this medicine out of reach of children and animals.
 ■ Trilostane helps manage your animal’s condition but is not a cure. 
Improvements in your animal’s condition occur gradually and 
may be difficult to see on a daily basis.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Trilostane, a synthetic steroid analogue, has a molecular weight of 
329.4 and its chemical name is 4-alpha, 5-alpha-epoxy-17-beta-hy -
droxy-3-oxoandrostane-2-alpha-carbonitrile. It is relatively insolu -
ble in water.
Trilostane may also be known as WIN 24540, trilostaani, Vetoryl®, 
Desopan®, Modrastane®, or Modrenal®.
Storage/Stability
Commercially available trilostane capsules should be stored at room 
temperature (25°C [77°F]), with excursions between 15°C to 30°C 
(59°F-86°F) permitted.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
An evaluation of compounded trilostane capsules obtained from 8 
compounding pharmacies found that 38% of compounded batch -
es were outside the acceptance criteria for content (content ranged 
from 39% to 152% of stated label), and 20% did not meet the estab -
lished criteria for dissolution. Reformulation of the licensed trilos -
tane product into a novel capsule size by a trained pharmacist did not 
affect dissolution characteristics and the target dose was achieved. 
The authors concluded, On the basis of these findings, compounded 
trilostane products should be used with caution as they may jeopardize 
the management of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism and potentially 
impact patient safety.33
Trilostane 5 mg/mL oral suspension in cod liver oil (prepared 
using Vetoryl® capsules) retained potency within 90% to 105% of 
labeled value for 60 days when stored in amber glass vials at room 
temperature. Potency fell below 90% of the labeled value when stored 
in amber plastic bottles at room temperature.34
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Trilostane Oral Capsules: 5 mg, 10 mg, 30 mg, 60 mg, and 120 mg 
packaged in aluminum foil blister cards of 10 capsules; Vetoryl®; 
(Rx). NADA 141-291
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Modrastane® was withdrawn from the United States market in 1994.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 

===== PDF_PAGE_1306 =====
Trimeprazine/Prednisolone   1279
Trimeprazine/Prednisolone
(trye-mep-ra-zeen/pred-niss-oh-lone) Temaril-P®
Phenothiazine Antihistamine, Corticosteroid
See also Prednisolone/Prednisone
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Indicated for relief of pruritus and as an antitussive in dogs
 ▶ Goal of therapy should be to use the lowest dose possible for 
the least amount of time to treat and control patient’s condi-
tion.
 ▶ Relatively contraindicated in animals with systemic fungal 
infection, hypovolemia, shock, tetanus, or strychnine intoxica-
tion
 ▶ Caution is advised in animals with hepatic dysfunction, cardiac 
disease, active bacterial or viral infections, peptic ulcer, corneal 
ulcer, hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing syndrome), diabetes, 
osteoporosis, predisposition to thrombophlebitis, hyperten-
sion, congestive heart failure, renal insufficiency, or general 
debilitation and in very young animals.
 ▶ Primary adverse effects include sedation, significant hypoten-
sion, cardiac rate abnormalities, hypo- or hyperthermia, and 
hyperadrenocorticism with sustained use.
 ▶ Many potential drug and laboratory interactions
Uses/Indications
Trimeprazine/prednisolone is indicated for treatment of pruritic and 
inflammatory conditions (especially if induced by allergic conditions 
such as atopic dermatitis) or as an antitussive.1 There is anecdotal ev-
idence that treatment with trimeprazine/prednisolone combinations 
require less prednisolone to control pruritus.2,3 
Pharmacology/Actions
Trimeprazine has antihistaminic, sedative, antitussive, and antipru-
ritic qualities. The veterinary FDA-approved product contains pred-
nisolone in its formulation, providing additional antipruritic and 
anti-inflammatory effects.
See Glucocorticoid Agents, General Information.
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of trimeprazine have apparently not been 
studied in animals. In humans, peak concentration occurs 3.5 to 4.5 
hours after oral administration in adults and 1 to 2 hours in children. 
Protein binding is 90%. Half-life is ≈5 hours in adults and ≈7 hours 
in children.4,5
See Glucocorticoid Agents, General Information.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Like other phenothiazines, trimeprazine is contraindicated in pa -
tients with a known hypersensitivity to it or other phenothiazines. 
It should not be used for patients in comatose states due to large 
amounts of CNS depressants or for tetanus or strychnine intoxication 
due to its effects on the extrapyramidal system. It is relatively contra-
indicated in patients with hypovolemia, dehydration, or shock, and 
should be used cautiously in animals with CNS depression, hepatic 
dysfunction, cardiac disease, or general debilitation.
Systemic use of glucocorticoids is generally contraindicated in 
animals with systemic fungal infections (with some exceptions such 
as when used for replacement therapy in animals with hypoadreno-
corticism or to help reduce severe inflammation), corneal ulceration, 
or hypersensitivity to the drug. Use with caution in animals with 
concomitant renal disease, as they may be at increased risk for GI 
adverse effects. Animals, particularly cats, at risk for diabetes mel -
litus or with concurrent cardiovascular disease should not receive 
glucocorticoids or should receive them with caution because of the 
potent hyperglycemic effect of these agents. In humans, long-term 
glucocorticoids may increase intraocular pressure and increase the 
risk for cataracts and osteoporosis.
Systemic glucocorticoids suppress adrenal function. The drug 
should be tapered off slowly in animals receiving it chronically, as 
endogenous ACTH and corticosteroid function may return slowly. 
Additional glucocorticoids should be administered to animals un -
dergoing a stressor (eg, surgery, trauma, illness) during the tapering 
process or until normal adrenal and pituitary functions resume.
Adverse Effects
For trimeprazine, possible adverse effects include sedation, depres -
sion, hypothermia, hypotension, and extrapyramidal reactions (eg, 
rigidity, tremors, weakness, restlessness).
For the product containing corticosteroids, additional adverse 
effects include elevated liver enzymes, weight loss, muscle wasting, 
polyuria/polydipsia, vomiting, and diarrhea. Iatrogenic hyperadre -
nocorticism may develop. Worsening of diabetes mellitus, GI ulcer-
ation and immunosuppression are possible, particularly at higher 
dosages.
Additional adverse effects of the combination product include 
sodium retention and potassium loss, negative nitrogen balance, 
suppressed adrenocortical function, delayed wound healing, osteo -
porosis, possible increased susceptibility to and/or exacerbation of 
bacterial infection, sedation, protruding nictitating membrane, and 
blood dyscrasias. 1 In addition, intensification and prolongation of 
the action of sedatives, analgesics, or anesthetics, as well as poten -
tiation of organophosphate toxicity and procaine activity, may be 
noted.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Corticosteroids can induce the first stages of parturition if adminis-
tered during the last trimester of pregnancy.1 Small amounts of both 
trimeprazine and prednisolone are excreted into human milk; use 
with caution in nursing animals or consider milk replacer. Because 
safety has not been established in animals, this drug should only be 
used when the maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to off-
spring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The most likely effects of an overdose include sedation and ataxia. 
Gut decontamination and supportive treatment should be used. It is 
especially advised to contact a veterinary poison center for treatment 
of seizures and/or hypotension that are nonresponsive to crystalloid 
fluid therapy.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving promethazine (a related 
phenothiazine antihistamine) or prednisolone and may be of signif-
icance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Amphotericin  B: May cause hypokalemia when administered 
concomitantly with glucocorticoids
 ■ Antacids, Aluminum-, Calcium-, or Magnesium-Con -
taining : May cause reduced GI absorption of oral phenothiazines
 ■ Anticholinesterase Agents  (eg, neostigmine, pyridostig -
mine): In animals with myasthenia gravis, concomitant glu -
cocorticoid use with these agents may lead to profound muscle 
weakness. If possible, discontinue anticholinesterase medication 

===== PDF_PAGE_1307 =====
1280    Trimeprazine/Prednisolone
at least 24 hours prior to corticosteroid administration.
 ■ Antidiarrheal Mixtures (eg, bismuth subsalicylate mix -
tures, kaolin/pectin): May cause reduced GI absorption of oral 
phenothiazines
 ■ Cholestyramine : May reduce prednisolone absorption
 ■ Cisapride : Increased risk for cardiac arrhythmia when used 
with phenothiazines
 ■ CNS Depressant Agents  (eg, anesthetics, methocarbamol): 
May cause additive CNS depression if used with phenothiazines
 ■ Cyclophosphamide : Glucocorticoids may inhibit the hepatic 
metabolism of cyclophosphamide; dosage adjustments may be 
required.
 ■ Cyclosporine : Concomitant administration with glucocorti -
coids may increase blood concentrations of each by mutually in -
hibiting the hepatic metabolism of each other; the clinical signifi-
cance of this interaction is not clear.
 ■ Digoxin : Secondary to hypokalemia, increased risk for  arrhythmia
 ■ Diuretics, Potassium-Depleting  (eg, furosemide, thia -
zides): May cause hypokalemia when administered concomitant-
ly with glucocorticoids
 ■ Ephedrine : May increase metabolism of glucocorticoids
 ■ Epinephrine : Contraindicated in the treatment of acute hypo -
tension produced by phenothiazine-derivative tranquilizers, as 
further depression of blood pressure can occur
 ■ Estrogens : The effects of hydrocortisone, and possibly other 
glucocorticoids, may be potentiated by concomitant administra -
tion with estrogens.
 ■ Fluoroquinolones (eg, enrofloxacin, marbofloxacin, prado -
floxacin): Concurrent use may increase the risk for tendinitis and 
tendon rupture.
 ■ Insulin : Insulin requirements may increase in patients receiving 
glucocorticoids.
 ■ Ketoconazole : May decrease metabolism of glucocorticoids
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics (eg, clarithromycin, erythromycin): 
May decrease glucocorticoid metabolism
 ■ Metoclopramide : Phenothiazines may potentiate the extrapy-
ramidal effects of metoclopramide.
 ■ Mitotane : May alter the metabolism of steroids; high -
er-than-usual doses of steroids may be necessary to treat mito -
tane-induced adrenal insufficiency.
 ■ Mycophenolate : Prednisolone increased the in vitro unbound 
(active) fraction of mycophenolic acid in dogs.6
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs  (NSAIDs; eg, 
carprofen, meloxicam ): Administration of other ulcerogenic 
drugs with glucocorticoids may increase the risk for gastric ulcers.
 ■ Organophosphate Agents : Phenothiazines should not be 
given within 1 month of deworming with these agents, as their 
effects may be potentiated.
 ■ Opioids  (eg, buprenorphine, morphine, tramadol): May cause 
additive CNS depression 
 ■ Paraquat : Toxicity of the herbicide paraquat may be increased 
by prochlorperazine.
 ■ Phenobarbital : May increase the metabolism of glucocorti -
coids. Additive sedation may occur with phenobarbital.
 ■ Procaine : Activity may be enhanced by phenothiazines.
 ■ Propranolol : Increased concentrations of both drugs are pos-
sible.
 ■ Rifampin : May increase the metabolism of glucocorticoids
 ■ Salicylates  (eg, aspirin, bismuth subsalicylate): Glucocorti -
coids may reduce salicylate blood concentrations.
 ■ Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs; eg, flu-
oxetine, paroxetine): May increase phenothiazine plasma concen-
trations
 ■ V accines : Animals receiving corticosteroids at immunosup -
pressive doses should generally not receive live attenuated virus 
vaccines, as virus replication may be augmented. A diminished 
immune response may occur after vaccine, toxoid, or bacterin ad-
ministration in animals receiving glucocorticoids.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Glucocorticoids may increase serum cholesterol and alkaline 
phosphatase concentrations.
 ■ Glucocorticoids may increase urine glucose concentrations
 ■ Glucocorticoids may decrease serum potassium.
 ■ Glucocorticoids can suppress the release of thyroid stimulating 
hormone (TSH) and reduce T3 and T4 values. Thyroid gland atro-
phy has been reported after chronic glucocorticoid administration. 
Uptake of I131 by the thyroid may be decreased by glucocorticoids.
 ■ Phenothiazine metabolites may darken the urine and cause false 
positive results for amylase, urobilinogen, uroporphyrins, por-
phobilinogens, and 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid.
 ■ Reactions to allergen tests may be suppressed by glucocorticoids 
and/or trimeprazine. The actual effect of trimeprazine with pred-
nisolone on allergen-specific intradermal tests (IDT) and aller -
gen-specific IgE serological (ASIS) tests has not been reported. 7 
A 2- to 4-week withdrawal time prior to IDT or ASIS is recom -
mended.7,8
 ■ False negative results of the nitroblue tetrazolium test for sys -
temic bacterial infections may be induced by glucocorticoids.
Dosages
DOGS:
Antipruritic and antitussive therapy  (label dosage; FDA-ap -
proved): Dosed according to body weight: up to 4.5 kg (10 lb) =  
½ tablet PO twice daily; 4.9 to 9 kg (11 to 20 lb) = 1 tablet PO 
twice daily; 9.5 to 18.1 kg (21 to 40 lb) = 2 tablets PO twice daily; 
over 18.1 kg (40 lb) = 3 tablets PO twice daily. After 4 days, reduce 
dose to ½ of initial dose or to an amount just sufficient to main -
tain remission of clinical signs; adjust as necessary.1
Adjunctive treatment of chronic pruritus  (extra-label):  
1 tablet/5 kg (11 lb) PO every 12 hours for 4 to 7 days, then  
1 tablet/5 kg (11 lb) PO once daily for 4 to 7 days, and finally, 1 tab-
let/5 kg (11 lb) PO every other day. This schedule may be changed 
according to each animal’s needs; however, the goal for long-term 
glucocorticoid therapy is to give the lowest dose possible to main-
tain control while administering the dose every other day or less 
frequently if possible. However, because antihistamines should be 
administered daily for optimal effect, this complicates the use of 
this fixed dose combination product.8
CATS:
Pruritus (extra-label): Anecdotally, trimeprazine 5 mg/prednis -
olone 2 mg has been used at 1 tablet/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO twice 
daily.
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy
 ■ Degree of sedation and anticholinergic effects
 ■ Adverse effects associated with corticosteroids
 ■ Baseline and periodic (eg, every 6 to 12 months) CBC, serum 
chemistry profile, urinalysis, and urine culture (especially for 
geriatric animals) when used long-term8
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine as directed by your veterinarian. This med -

===== PDF_PAGE_1308 =====
Tripelennamine   1281
icine is a combination of an antihistamine and a cortisone-like 
steroid used to reduce itching. It may also be used to treat cough. 
 ■ This medicine can cause drowsiness, muscle tremors, and rigidity 
(stiffness), increased thirst, appetite, and amount of urine pro -
duced. It is important to not limit your animal’s access to water 
to avoid these signs. Instead, make sure your animal has plenty of 
opportunities to eliminate outside to avoid accidents.
 ■ Long-term use of this medicine can cause changes in the hair coat, 
thin skin, poor wound healing, potbellied appearance, muscle 
wasting, and increased chances for infection.
 ■ This medicine is meant to be given for the shortest amount of time 
and at the lowest dose necessary to control your animal’s signs.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian if any of the side effects are worrisome.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Trimeprazine tartrate, a phenothiazine antihistamine related to 
promethazine, occurs as an odorless, white to off-white crystalline 
powder. It deteriorates on exposure to light and air. Approximately  
0.5 gram is soluble in 1 mL water, and 0.05 gram is soluble in 1 mL 
of alcohol. Trimeprazine tartrate may also be known as alimemazine 
tartrate, Panectyl®, Temaril®, or Vanectyl®.
Prednisolone occurs as an odorless, white to practically white 
crystalline powder that is very slightly soluble in water and slightly 
soluble in alcohol. Prednisolone is also known as deltahydrocorti -
sone or metacortandralone. 
Storage/Stability
Store trimeprazine/prednisolone products in a cool, dry place at 
room temperature not above 25°C (77°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
No single-agent trimeprazine products are FDA-approved for veter-
inary medicine.
Trimeprazine 5 mg with Prednisolone 2 mg Tablets; Temaril-P® Tab-
lets; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs. NADA# 012-437
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 4 substance. See Appendix for more 
information. Use of this drug may not be allowed in certain animal 
competitions. Check rules and regulations before entering in a com-
petition while this medication is being administered. Contact local 
racing authorities for further guidance.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Tripelennamine
(tri-pel-ehn-a-meen) Re-Covr®
Antihistamine
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Injectable antihistamine FDA-approved for use in horses and 
cattle
 ▶ IV administration is contraindicated in horses
 ▶ Adverse effects include CNS stimulation (if given IV to horses), 
sedation, depression, ataxia, and GI effects.
Uses/Indications
Tripelennamine is a first-generation antihistamine that is FDA-ap -
proved for use in horses and cattle for treating conditions in which 
antihistaminic therapy may be expected to alleviate some signs of 
disease.1 It has been used as a CNS stimulant in downer cows when 
administered slowly IV .
Pharmacology/Actions
Tripelennamine is a first-generation antihistamine that competitive-
ly inhibits histamine at H 1 receptor sites. It does not inactivate or 
prevent the release of histamine but can prevent histamine’s action 
on the cell. Besides their antihistaminic activity, these agents also 
have varying degrees of anticholinergic and CNS activity (sedation). 
Tripelennamine is considered to have moderate sedative activity 
and minimal anticholinergic activity when compared with other 
first-generation antihistamines.
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of tripelennamine have apparently not been 
thoroughly studied in domestic animals or humans. One study per-
formed on horses and camels showed that after IV administration, 
similar pharmacokinetic profiles were obtained for both species. 2 
Terminal elimination half-lives were around 2-plus hours; volumes 
of distribution steady-state were ≈1.5 to 3 L/kg; protein binding was 
80%, and total body clearance was ≈1 L/hour/kg.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tripelennamine is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensi -
tive to it. IV administration is contraindicated in horses (see Adverse 
Effects).
Do not use tripelennamine in beef calves less than 2 months, 
dairy calves, or veal calves; it should not be used in horses intended 
for human consumption.
In humans, contraindications to tripelennamine included nar -
row-angle glaucoma bladder neck obstruction, pyloroduodenal ob -
struction, and asthma. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects include CNS depression, ataxia, and GI disturbances. 
CNS stimulation (eg, hyperexcitability, nervousness, muscle trem -
ors) lasting up to 20 minutes has been noted in horses after adminis-
tration of label-recommended dosages.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
No information was located. Because safety has not been established 
in animals, this drug should only be used when the maternal benefits 
outweigh the potential fetal risks. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdoses of tripelennamine reportedly can cause CNS excitation, 
seizures, and ataxia. Treat the patient supportively if clinical signs 
are severe. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving tripelennamine and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ CNS Depressants ( eg, detomidine, methocarbamol ): In -
creased sedation can occur if tripelennamine is combined with 
other CNS depressant drugs.
 ■ Heparin : Antihistamines may partially counteract the anticoag-
ulation effects of heparin or warfarin.
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, 

===== PDF_PAGE_1309 =====
1282    Tulathromycin
linezolid, selegiline): Concomitant use is considered contraindi-
cated in humans; veterinary significance is unknown.
 ■ W arfarin : Antihistamines may partially counteract the antico -
agulation effects of heparin or warfarin.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Antihistamines can decrease the wheal and flare response to an-
tigen skin testing. In dogs, the recommended optimal withdraw-
al time of antihistamines prior to intradermal allergy testing is 7 
days (the minimum recommended withdrawal time is 2 days).3
Dosages
NOTE: It is recommended to warm the solution to near body 
temperature before injecting; give IM injections into large muscle 
groups of the hind legs or cervical area.
HORSES :
Antihistamine (label dosage; FDA-approved): 1.1 mg/kg IM ev -
ery 6 to 12 hours as needed. 1 NOTE: Do NOT administer IV to 
horses.
CATTLE:
Antihistamine (label dosage; FDA-approved): 1.1 mg/kg IV or 
IM every 6 to 12 hours as needed. Administer IV if more imme -
diate effect is needed.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tripelennamine HCl, an ethylenediamine-derivative antihista -
mine, occurs as a white, crystalline powder that will slowly darken 
upon exposure to light. It has a melting range of 188°C to 192°C 
(370°F-378°F) and pKas of 3.9 and 9. One gram is soluble in 1 mL of 
water or 6 mL of alcohol.
Tripelennamine HCl may also be known as tripelennaminium 
chloride, Pyribenzamine®, or Re-Covr®.
Storage/Stability
Store the injection at room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]), 
with excursions permitted between 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F). Pro -
tect this product from light and avoid freezing or excessive heat. The 
vial should be punctured a maximum of 30 times.1
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tripelennamine HCl for Injection: 20 mg/mL in 100 mL, 250 mL, 
and 500 mL multiple-dose vials; Re-Covr®; (Rx). FDA-approved for 
use in cattle and horses. Not for use in horses to be used for food 
purposes. Not for use in beef calves less than 2 months, dairy calves, 
or veal calves. Meat withdrawal is 4 days; milk withdrawal is 24 
hours.  
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Tulathromycin
(too-la-throe-mye-sin) Draxxin®
Injectable Macrolide Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Labeled for cattle and swine
 ▶ Single-dose treatment; long tissue half-lives
 ▶ Different withdrawal times in cattle based upon formulation of 
product used
 ▶ Not for lactating dairy cattle or veal calves
 ▶ Local injection site reactions most likely adverse effect
Uses/Indications
In beef and non-lactating dairy cattle, tulathromycin (100 mg/mL 
formulation) is indicated for the treatment of bovine respiratory 
disease (BRD) associated with Mannheimia haemolytica, Pasteurella 
multocida, Histophilus somni (Haemophilus somnus), and Mycoplas-
ma bovis; and for the control of respiratory disease in cattle at high 
risk of developing BRD, associated with Mannheimia haemolytica, 
Pasteurella multocida, Histophilus somni (Haemophilus somnus), and 
Mycoplasma bovis. It is also FDA-approved for the treatment of bo-
vine foot rot (interdigital necrobacillosis) associated with Fusobac-
terium necrophorum and Porphyromonas levii and for the treatment 
of infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (IBK) associated with Mo-
raxella bovis.1 In suckling calves, dairy calves and veal calves, tulath-
romycin (both 100 mg/mL and 25 mg/mL formulations) is indicated 
for the treatment of BRD associated with M haemolytica, P multoci-
da, H somni, and M bovis .1,2 
Tulathromycin (both 100 mg/mL and 25 mg/mL formulations) is 
indicated for the treatment of swine respiratory disease (SRD) asso-
ciated with Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae, Pasteurella multocida, 
Bordetella bronchiseptica, Haemophilus parasuis,  and Mycoplasma 
hyopneumoniae; and for the control of SRD associated with Actino-
bacillus pleuropneumoniae, Pasteurella multocida, and Mycoplasma 
hyopneumoniae in groups of pigs where SRD has been diagnosed.1,2
Tulathromycin may be effective in treating various infections in 
commercial bison, white-tailed deer, small ruminants, and rabbits.
The World Health Organization has designated tulathromycin 
as a Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobial for human 
medicine.3 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) has desig -
nated tulathromycin as a Veterinary Critically Important Antimicro-
bial (VCIA) Agent in bovine and swine species.4
Pharmacology/Actions
Although tulathromycin is a macrolide antibiotic, it is structurally 
unique in that it has three amine groups (tribasic), while erythro -
mycin and azithromycin have one (monobasic) and two (dibasic) 
groups, respectively. The tribasic group of compounds are called tri-
amilide macrolides.
As with other macrolides, tulathromycin is effective against a 
range of gram-positive bacteria, with enhanced activity against-
gram negatives. It is believed that tulathromycin’s tribasic structure 
allows it to better penetrate gram-negative bacteria and its low af -
finity for bacterial efflux pumps may allow the drug to remain and 
accumulate within bacteria.
The mechanism of action of tulathromycin is similar to other 
macrolides. It inhibits protein synthesis by penetrating the cell wall 
and binding to the 50S ribosomal subunits in susceptible bacteria. 
It is considered a bacteriostatic antibiotic although there is the po -
tential for time-dependent bactericidal action, particularly with high 
concentrations. The drug possesses bactericidal activity particularly 
for Mannheimia haemolytica and Pasteurella multocida. A postanti-
biotic effect can be produced; the duration is both drug and patho -
gen dependent.

===== PDF_PAGE_1310 =====
Tulathromycin   1283
Tulathromycin’s efficacy is enhanced by its ability to accumu -
late and persist in pulmonary epithelial lining fluid, macrophages 
and neutrophils. The drug shows notable accumulation and long 
persistence in lung tissue. Neither time-dependent nor concentra -
tion-dependent models may accurately predict or describe the drug’s 
efficacy. The efficacy of some modern macrolides (eg, azithromycin) 
may be more predictive by assessing the total drug exposure to the 
pathogen; the AUC:MIC ratio may be helpful.
Tulathromycin reportedly possesses immunomodulatory effects 
in leukocytes in vitro and anti-inflammatory effects in pigs in exper-
imental models of A pleuropneumoniae infection and nonmicrobi -
al-induced pulmonary inflammation. This suggests that in addition 
to its antimicrobial properties, tulathromycin may dampen severe 
proinflammatory responses and drive resolution of inflammation 
in pigs with microbial pulmonary infections. 5 The accumulation of 
macrolides in anti-inflammatory cells is widely recognized.6
Bacterial isolates susceptible to tulathromycin at concentrations 
of 16 μg/mL or less are reported as susceptible to tulathromycin. The 
MIC90 values reported for M haemolytica and P multocida in cat -
tle with BRD are 2 μg/mL and 1 μg/mL, respectively. To date, resis -
tance development to tulathromycin has not been a major problem; 
however, greater resistance against tulathromycin in M haemolytica 
isolates has been identified from 2013 to 2017 when compared to 
isolates from 2008 to 2012.7
Pharmacokinetics
In feeder calves given 2.5 mg/kg SC (in the neck), tulathromycin is 
rapidly and nearly completely absorbed (bioavailability greater than 
90%). Peak plasma concentrations generally occur within 15 min -
utes after dosing. Volume of distribution is very large (≈11 L/kg) and 
total systemic clearance is ≈170 mL/hour/kg. This extensive volume 
of distribution is largely responsible for the long elimination half-life 
of this compound. In plasma, elimination half-life is ≈2.75 days, but 
in lung tissue it is ≈8.75 days. Tulathromycin is eliminated from the 
body primarily unchanged via biliary excretion with half of the dose 
being eliminated in the feces. Effective concentrations of tulathro -
mycin against pathogens commonly associated with BRD are main-
tained for up to 10 days after administration to cattle.8
In a pharmacokinetic study of 6 healthy adult horses following 
IM administration of tulathromycin at 2.5 mg/kg, half-life was 54.8 
hours, bioavailability was 99.4%, and time to peak concentration was 
0.75 hours. After IV administration of the same dose, half-life was 
59.8 hours and volume of distribution was 16.8 L/kg.9 Tulathromycin 
reaches high concentrations in the pulmonary epithelial lining fluid 
(PELF) and bronchoalveolar lavage cells (BALC) in horses after both 
IM and IV administration of 2.5 mg/kg. 
Following IM administration to feeder pigs at a dosage of  
2.5 mg/kg, tulathromycin is readily and rapidly absorbed (bioavail -
ability 88%) with peak levels occurring in ≈15 minutes. Tulathro -
mycin rapidly distributes into body tissues, and the volume of dis -
tribution is 13 to15 L/kg. Plasma half-life is ≈60 to 90 hours, but 
lung tissue half-life is ≈5.9 days. Tulathromycin is eliminated from 
the body primarily unchanged via the feces and urine. In pigs, two-
thirds of the dose is eliminated in the feces.
Results from a manuscript detailing the administration of a single 
injection of tulathromycin 2.5 mg/kg SC in deer reports similarity 
in maximal serum concentrations between deer and cattle and high 
lung concentrations in deer, suggesting the recommended cattle dos-
age is effective in deer. Tissue concentrations persisted for 56 days 
suggesting a need for longer withdrawal times in deer than cattle.10
The pharmacokinetics of tulathromycin in sheep appear to be 
similar enough to those in goats and cattle to recommend similar 
dosing (2.5 mg/kg SC), assuming that the target pathogens have sim-
ilar inhibitory concentrations.11
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tulathromycin is contraindicated in animals with a prior hypersen-
sitivity reaction to the drug.
Adverse Effects
At labeled dosages, adverse effects appear to be minimal in cattle and 
swine. At therapeutic doses, transient hypersalivation, head shaking, 
and pawing at the ground have been reported. One feeder calf in 
a field study developed transient dyspnea. Injection site reactions 
are most commonly reported and there have been some reports of 
anorexia in cattle to the FDA ’s Adverse Drug Reporting database. 
Subcutaneous or intramuscular injection can cause a transient local 
tissue reaction that may result in trim loss at slaughter.
In foals, self-limiting diarrhea, elevated temperature, and swell -
ing at the injection site have been reported. In horses, significant 
injection site reactions and systemic reactions (sweating, pawing, 
lateral recumbency) have been documented following IM and SC 
 injections.9 
All goats used in a pharmacokinetic study developed injection site 
reactions.12
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
The effects of tulathromycin on reproductive performance, pregnan-
cy and lactation have not been determined.1,2
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In cattle (feeder calves), single SC doses of up to 25 mg/kg caused tran-
sient indications of pain at the injection site, including head shaking 
and pawing at the ground. Injection site swelling, discoloration of the 
subcutaneous tissues at the injection site and corresponding histo -
pathologic changes were seen in animals in all dosage groups.
The SC administration of 12.5 to 15 mg/kg (5 to 6 times the labeled 
dosage) of tulathromycin to feeder calves caused no clinical signs of 
cardiovascular toxicity and no macroscopic tissue lesions. Minimal 
to mild myocardial degeneration was reported in 1 of 6 calves given 
a single dose of 12.5 mg/kg and 2 of 6 calves given 15 mg/kg.
In swine, single IM doses of up to 25 mg/kg caused transient 
indications of pain at the injection site, restlessness, and excessive 
vocalization. Tremors occurred briefly in one animal receiving  
7.5 mg/kg BW .
No systemic treatment for single overdoses should be necessary; 
localized treatment at the injection site (eg, ice pack) to reduce swell-
ing and pain as well as FDA-approved analgesic medications can be 
considered.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have ex -
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison control 
center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
 ■ No drug interactions are noted in the product labels, and none 
could be found in other references for tulathromycin.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ None noted
Dosages
CATTLE:
Susceptible infections, labeled indications  (label dosage; 
FDA-approved): 
a) Using 100 mg/mL product: 2.5 mg/kg (1.1 mL/100 lb) SC as 
a single dose in the neck. 1 Do not inject more than 10 mL per 

===== PDF_PAGE_1311 =====
1284    Tylosin
injection site.
b) Using 25 mg/mL product: 2.5 mg/kg (1 mL/22 lb) SC as a sin -
gle dose in the neck. 2 Do not inject more than 11.5 mL per 
injection site. 
SWINE:
Susceptible infections, labeled indications  (label dosage; 
FDA-approved): 
a) Using 100 mg/mL product: 2.5 mg/kg (0.25 mL/22 lb) IM as 
a single dose in the neck.1 Do not inject more than 2.5 mL per 
injection site. 
b) Using 25 mg/mL product : 2.5 mg/kg (1 mL/22 lb) IM as a 
single dose in the neck. 2 Do not inject more than 4 mL per 
injection site. 
GOATS:
Pneumonia associated with Mannheimia haemolytica, Pasteu-
rella multocida, and Mycoplasma spp. (extra-label): 2.5 mg/kg 
SC; repeat in 7 days if necessary.12,13 Dosage is based on pharma -
cokinetic studies in meat and dairy goats. After a single dose, a 
34-day meat withdrawal interval and a 45-day milk withdrawal 
time are recommended.12–14 
DEER:
Susceptible infections  (extra-label): Authors report using the 
cattle dose at 2.5 mg/kg SC once with the need to have a longer 
withdrawal time compared to cattle.10 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
Client Information
 ■ Follow dosing guidelines exactly. Withdrawal times in cattle differ 
between products.
 ■ Not for female dairy cattle 20 months or older or in poultry
 ■ Cattle are dosed subcutaneously in the neck. Swine are dosed in -
tramuscularly in the neck.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tulathromycin is a semi-synthetic macrolide antibiotic of the sub -
class triamilide. It occurs as white to off-white crystalline powder 
that is readily soluble in water at pH less than 8. At a pH of 7.4 (phys-
iological pH), tulathromycin (a weak base) is ≈50 times more soluble 
in hydrophilic than hydrophobic media.
The commercially available injections contain tulathromycin as 
the free base in an equilibrated mixture of the two isomeric forms 
of tulathromycin in a 9:1 ratio. The injectable vehicle consists of 
50% propylene glycol, monothioglycerol (5 mg/mL); citric and hy -
drochloric acids are added to adjust pH, and it has a relatively low 
viscosity.
Tulathromycin may also be known as tulathromycine, tulathro -
mycinum, CP-472295 (component A), CP-547272 (component B), 
or Draxxin®.
Storage/Stability
Tulathromycin injection should be stored at or below 25°C (77°F); 
some products allow for excursions up to 40°C (104°F). The number 
of times a vial may be punctured varies by vial size and by manu -
facturer, as does the length of time the vial may be used after first 
puncture; consult product labels for specific information. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tulathromycin Injection: 100 mg/mL in 50 mL, 100 mL, 250 mL, 
and 500 mL vials; Draxxin®, generic; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in 
beef and non-lactating cattle, and suckling calves, including dairy 
and veal calves, and swine. Cattle intended for human consumption 
must not be slaughtered within 18 days from the last treatment, and 
the swine withdrawal is 5 days. Do not use in female dairy cattle 20 
months of age or older. NADA# 141-244
Tulathromycin Injection: 25 mg/mL in 50 mL, 100 mL, and 250 mL 
vials; Draxxin® 25; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in suckling calves, 
dairy calves, veal calves and swine. Not for use in ruminating cattle. 
When used as labeled; swine withdrawal = 5 days and calves = 22 
days. NADA# 141-349
Tulathromycin and Ketoprofen Injection: Tulathromycin 100 mg/mL  
and Ketoprofen 120 mg/mL in 50 mL, 100 mL, 250 mL, and 500 mL 
vials; Draxxin® KP; (Rx). FDA approved for use in beef steers, beef 
heifers, beef calves 2 months of age and older, beef bulls, dairy bulls, 
and replacement dairy heifers. Not for use in reproducing animals 
over one year of age, or in dairy or veal calves less than 2 months 
of age. When used as labeled, withdrawal time is 18 days. NADA# 
141-543
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Tylosin
(tye-loe-sin) Tylan®
Macrolide Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Approved for use in cattle, swine, poultry, and honey bees; can 
be used in dogs and cats with diarrhea 
 ▶ Contraindications include animals with a hypersensitivity to 
it or other macrolide antibiotics, and in horses and possibly 
other hindgut fermenters.
 ▶ Adverse effects include pain and local reactions after IM in-
jection and GI upset (eg, anorexia, diarrhea) after PO admin-
istration; may cause severe diarrhea if administered orally to 
ruminants. Swine can experience edema of rectal mucosa and 
mild anal protrusion with pruritus, erythema, and diarrhea.
 ▶ Use in food animals (including honey bees) requires a pre-
scription (soluble powder) or a veterinary feed directive 
(medicated feed). 
Uses/Indications
Oral tylosin is commonly recommended for the adjunctive treat -
ment of acute and chronic diarrhea in dogs, cats, and some small 
mammals. There is good evidence supporting the use of tylosin in 
the treatment of chronic diarrhea in dogs.1–3
Although oral tylosin has been anecdotally used in dogs to treat 
tear staining caused by chronic epiphora, supporting evidence for 
this use is weak, and there are concerns about the use of antimicro -
bials for nonantimicrobial indications. 4 Tylosin has demonstrated 
efficacy in the treatment of canine superficial and deep pyoderma 
caused by Staphylococcus intermedius.5–8 Although tylosin is not 
commonly used as first-line therapy for treatment of pyoderma, it 
may be useful in cases for which resistance occurs.
In beef and nonlactating dairy cattle, tylosin is indicated for the 
treatment of bovine respiratory complex, foot rot, calf diphtheria, 
and metritis. In swine, it is indicated for the treatment of arthri -
tis, pneumonia, erysipelas, and dysentery or enteropathies. Tylosin 
is also used clinically (extra-label) in cattle and swine for the treat -
ment of infections caused by susceptible organisms; however, other 
approved antibiotics are generally preferred for systemic therapy.

===== PDF_PAGE_1312 =====
Tylosin   1285
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated macro -
lides as Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobials for hu-
man medicine.9 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) has 
designated macrolides as Veterinary Critically Important Antimi -
crobial (VCIA) Agents in veterinary species.10
Pharmacology/Actions
Tylosin, a bacteriostatic antibiotic, is thought to have the same 
mechanism of action as erythromycin (ie, binds to 50S ribosome 
and inhibits protein synthesis) and exhibits a similar spectrum of ac-
tivity. Tylosin has activity primarily against gram-positive bacteria, 
including streptococci and staphylococci (eg, Staphylococcus pseud-
intermedius).7 There is some activity against gram-negative bacteria, 
but it is limited. Tylosin has some activity against Campylobacter spp 
but is not a recommended first-line agent for that bacteria. Good ac-
tivity against Mycoplasma spp is present.11 Over 50% of Enterococcus 
faecalis canine isolates from healthy dogs were resistant to tylosin in 
a study.12 Tylosin may increase concentrations of enterococci in the 
jejunum, resulting in probiotic effects (ie, improved microbiota and 
clinical signs). 13,14 Tylosin may also have direct anti-inflammatory 
effects15 and immunomodulatory effects on cell-mediated immunity.
Pharmacokinetics
In mammals, tylosin tartrate is well absorbed from the GI tract, pri-
marily from the intestine. The phosphate salt is not as well absorbed 
after oral administration. Bioavailability after IM injection is ≈70% 
to 95%.16,17 Peak concentration is reached in 1.5 to 2 hours in cows 
and swine17–20 and ≈3 to 4 hours in sheep and goats. 16,21 Similar to 
erythromycin, tylosin is well distributed in the body after systemic 
absorption, with the exception of penetration into the CSF . The vol-
ume of distribution of tylosin is reportedly 1.7 L/kg in small animals 
and 1 – 2.3 L/kg in cattle. 18,22 In lactating dairy cattle, the milk to 
plasma ratio is ≈5.18,20
Tylosin is eliminated in the urine and bile, apparently as un -
changed drug. The elimination half-life of tylosin is reportedly 54 
minutes in dogs, 23 139 minutes in newborn calves, 64 minutes in 
calves 2 months of age or older, and 80 to 97 minutes in cows. 18,24 
The elimination half-life is ≈4.5 hours in swine, sheep, and goats.16,17
In chickens, oral bioavailability of tylosin tartrate is 27%. Peak 
concentration of 0.44 µg/mL is reached ≈1.3 hours after oral admin-
istration. Elimination half-life is 1.34 hours.25 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tylosin is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to it or 
other macrolide antibiotics (eg, erythromycin). Tylosin is contrain -
dicated in horses, as severe and sometimes fatal diarrhea may result; 
the drug should be used with extreme caution, if at all, in other hind-
gut fermenters (eg, rabbits).
Adverse reactions, including shock and death, may result from 
overdose in baby pigs.26,27 Do not attempt injection into pigs weigh-
ing less than 11.4 kg (25 lb) with the 200 mg/mL formulation; in 
these pigs it is recommended to use the 50 mg/mL injection with a 
syringe that can accurately measure 0.1 mL.
Adverse Effects
The most likely adverse effects are pain and local reactions at IM 
injection sites and mild GI upset (eg, anorexia, diarrhea). Tylosin 
may induce severe diarrhea if administered orally to ruminants or by 
any route to horses. In swine, reported adverse effects include edema 
of rectal mucosa and mild anal protrusion with pruritus, erythema, 
and diarrhea.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safety of tylosin in pregnant animals has not been established, but 
other macrolides are considered safe for use during pregnancy. Ty -
losin is excreted into milk at concentration up to 5 times higher than 
is found in serum. 18 Because safety has not been established in ani -
mals, this drug should only be used when the maternal benefits out-
weigh the potential risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Tylosin is relatively safe in most overdose situations. LD 50 in pigs is 
greater than 5 g/kg PO and ≈1 g/kg IM. Dogs have been reported 
to tolerate oral doses of 800 mg/kg. Long-term (ie, 2-year) oral ad -
ministration of up to 400 mg/kg produced no organ toxicity in dogs. 
Shock and death have been reported in piglets overdosed with ty -
losin.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have experi-
enced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consultation 
center that specializes in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving tylosin and may be of signif-
icance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate. Refer to Erythro-
mycin for more information on potential interactions.
 ■ Bentonite : Simultaneous administration of tylosin (in drinking 
water or feed) and bentonite (mixed in feed as a mycotoxin bind-
er) should be avoided, as there is significant reduction in tylosin 
plasma levels and area under the curve (AUC) in chickens.28
 ■ Digoxin : May increase digoxin blood concentrations with resul-
tant toxicity
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Macrolide antibiotics may cause falsely elevated ALT (SGPT) and 
AST (SGOT) values when using colorimetric assays.
 ■ Fluorometric determinations of urinary catecholamines can be 
altered by concomitant macrolide administration.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
NOTES: 
1. Using volumetric containers (eg, teaspoons) to measure ty -
losin soluble powders is not necessarily accurate; however,  
1 level teaspoon (5 mL) of powder contains ≈2.5 – 2.7 g of ty -
losin, and ⅛ level teaspoon contains ≈325 mg of tylosin.
2. Powder is unpalatable.
Antibiotic-responsive diarrhea and adjunctive treatment 
of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in dogs ; (extra-label):  
20 – 25 mg/kg PO once daily has been studied,1–3 while 20 mg/kg  
PO every 8 to 12 hours has also been suggested. 29 Duration is 
poorly defined; 7 days has been used in some studies, but 4 to 6 
weeks has been recommended.30 Diarrhea often reappears within 
weeks after discontinuation (some dogs with tylosin-responsive 
diarrhea remain clinically normal while treatment continues). A 
lower dose of 5 – 15 mg/kg PO once daily has been effective in 
dogs that have relapsed.1–3
Adjunctive treatment of colitis (extra-label): 10 – 15 mg/kg PO 
every 8 hours for 14 to 28 days, then maintain with 5 mg/kg PO 
every 24 hours31 
Campylobacteriosis (extra-label): 11 mg/kg PO every 8 hours32
Clostridium perfringens -associated diarrhea  (extra-label): Al -
though there is little objective information on when and how to 
provide treatment, tylosin 10 – 20 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours 
has been recommended.32
Cryptosporidium spp-associated diarrhea in cats  (extra-label): 

===== PDF_PAGE_1313 =====
1286    Tylosin
10 – 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours will sometimes resolve diarrhea. 
Tylosin can be a GI irritant; if a positive response has been noted 
in the first 7 days of therapy, and if there is no toxicity, continue 
treatment for 1 week after clinical resolution of diarrhea. Some 
cats with Cryptosporidium spp infection (with or without Giardia 
spp coinfection) require several weeks of treatment prior to reso-
lution of diarrhea.33
Canine pyoderma (extra-label): 10 – 20 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours; continue treatment for 7 days after resolution of active le-
sion.6,8
CATTLE:
Susceptible infections in beef and nonlactating dairy cattle  
(label dosage; FDA-approved): 17.6 mg/kg IM once daily. Con -
tinue treatment for 24 hours after clinical signs have resolved, not 
to exceed 5 days. Do not inject more than 10 mL per site. Use the  
50 mg/mL formulation in calves weighing less than 91 kg (200 
lb).26
SWINE:
Susceptible infections (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
a) Injection: 8.8 mg/kg IM twice daily. Continue treatment for 24 
hours after clinical signs have resolved, not to exceed 3 days.26 
Do not inject more than 5 mL per site. Use the 50 mg/mL for-
mulation for piglets weighing less than 11.3 kg (25 lb).27 
b) In drinking water : 250 mg tylosin soluble powder is added 
per gallon of sole source drinking water for 3 to 10 days; sub -
sequent treatment with tylosin medicated feed may be neces -
sary.11
POUL TRY:
Chickens (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
a) Necrotic enteritis: 851 – 1419 mg/gallon of sole source drink-
ing water for 5 days11 
b) Chronic respiratory disease : 2000 mg/gallon of sole source 
drinking water for 3 days; treatment duration of 1 to 5 days 
may be considered based on severity of infection.11
Turkeys (label dosage; FDA-approved): 2000 mg/gallon of sole 
source drinking water for 3 days; treatment duration of 2 to 5 days 
may be considered based on severity of infection.11
Reduction in severity of effects of infectious sinusitis associ -
ated with Mycoplasma gallisepticum : 2000 mg/gallon of sole 
source drinking water for 3 days; treatment duration of 2 to 5 days 
may be considered based on severity of infection.11
FERRETS :
Susceptible enteric infections  (extra-label): 10 mg/kg PO once 
to twice daily34
RABBITS, RODENTS, SMALL MAMMALS :
NOTE: Use with caution in hindgut fermenters. 
Rabbits: 10 mg/kg SC or IM every 12 to 24 hours35 
Gerbils, Hamsters, Rats: 10 mg/kg SC once a day36
HONEY BEES :
Control of American foulbrood  (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
200 mg tylosin mixed in 20 g confectioners/powdered sugar and 
dusted over the top bars of the brood chamber once weekly for 
3 weeks. Apply early in the spring or fall before the main honey 
flow begins.11
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects, including signs of enterocolitis in hindgut fer -
menters
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is most commonly used in dogs and cats to treat di-
arrhea and inflammation of intestines; it may also be used to treat 
respiratory infections in birds (including chickens) and reptiles. 
 ■ Do not give this medicine to horses or ponies.
 ■ Oral doses may be given with or without food. Give this medicine 
with food if stomach upset or vomiting occurs.
 ■ The powder has an extremely bitter taste. The animal may be more 
likely to accept the medication if the powder is placed in an empty 
gelatin capsule.
 ■ Tylosin is usually well tolerated when it is given orally to small an-
imals (ie, dogs and cats). Contact your veterinarian if your animal 
experiences side effects.
 ■ When tylosin is given in drinking water, prepare a fresh solution 
every 3 days. First mix the appropriate amount of tylosin powder 
with 1 gallon of drinking water, then further dilute it according to 
the product label. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tylosin, a macrolide antibiotic composite structurally related to 
erythromycin, is produced from Streptomyces fradiae and may con-
tain tylosin B, C, and D in addition to the main component. It occurs 
as an almost white to buff-colored powder with a pK a of 7.1. It is 
slightly soluble in water and soluble in alcohol. Tylosin is considered 
to be highly lipid soluble. The tartrate salt is soluble in water. The 
injectable form of the drug (as the base) is in a 50% propylene glycol 
solution.
Tylosin may also be known as desmycosin, tilosina, tylosiini, ty -
losinum, tylozin, tylozyna, or Tylan®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise instructed by the manufacturer, injectable tylosin 
should be stored in well-closed containers at 25°C (77°F). Tylosin, 
like erythromycin, is unstable in acidic (pH less than 4) media. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Because converting volume measurements into weights is not very 
accurate for powders, it is recommended to weigh powders when us-
ing them for pharmaceutical purposes. However, if this is not possi-
ble, 1 level teaspoon (5 mL) of commercially available tylosin tartrate 
(Tylan® Soluble) contains ≈2.5 to 2.7 g of tylosin; ⅛ level teaspoon 
contains ≈325 mg of tylosin.
Tylosin tartrate powder added to food can be unpalatable for dogs 
or cats. Placing the proper dose in a gelatin capsule may be more 
preferable than mixing it into food. Another suggestion for dogs or 
cats that absolutely will not eat food with tylosin in it is to melt ≈¼ 
teaspoon of butter, pour into mini ice tray compartments, add the 
appropriate dose of tylosin powder, mix well, and freeze. ( NOTE: 
Stability information for this procedure has not been performed.) 
Alternatively, the medication can be compounded. See Appendix for 
finding a quality assured pharmacy.
It is not recommended to mix tylosin for injection with other 
drugs, as precipitation of tylosin may result.26,27
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
A prescription or veterinary feed directive is required to treat any 
food animals (including honey bees) with tylosin.
Tylosin Injection: 50 mg/mL and 200 mg/mL; Tylan®, generic; 
(OTC). FDA approved for use in nonlactating dairy cattle, beef 
cattle, and swine. Slaughter withdrawal (at labeled doses): cattle = 21 
days; swine = 14 days. Not for use in calves intended to be processed 
for veal, preruminating calves, or female dairy cattle 20 months of 
age or older (including dry cows). 
Tylosin Tartrate Powder: (≈2.5 – 2.7 g/level teaspoon) in 100 g bot -
tles; Tylan® Soluble, generic; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in turkeys 

===== PDF_PAGE_1314 =====
Ursodiol   1287
(not layers), chickens (not layers), swine, and honey bees. Slaughter 
withdrawal swine = 2 days; chickens = 1 day; turkeys = 5 days. Com-
plete honey bee treatments at least 4 weeks prior to the main honey 
flow.
There are many FDA-approved tylosin phosphate products available 
via veterinary feed directive for use in beef cattle, swine, and honey 
bees. Many of these products have other active ingredients included 
in their formulations.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Ursodiol
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA)
(ur-soe-dye-ole) Actigall®, URSO®
Choleretic; Bile Acid; Hepatoprotectant
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Bile acid that may be useful for adjunctive treatment of 
hepatobiliary disease in dogs and cats, particularly cholestat-
ic disorders; may also be effective in treating biliary sludge 
(microlithiasis)
 ▶ Contraindicated in the presence of extrahepatic bile duct 
obstruction or vanishing bile duct syndrome; do not use in 
rabbits and other hindgut fermenters because of bacterial 
metabolism to the hepatotoxic bile acid, lithocholic acid. 
 ▶ Appears to be well tolerated in dogs and cats; should be given 
with food
Uses/Indications
In small animal species, ursodiol may be useful as adjunctive therapy 
for the medical management of acute and chronic cholestatic hepa -
tobiliary disorders by ameliorating the progression of inflammatory 
and degenerative changes associated with these conditions1–7; it may 
also aid in the resolution of biliary sludge accumulation (ie, micro -
lithiasis).8,9 Ursodiol can also be used as part of the medical manage-
ment of gallbladder mucoceles by protecting against hepatobiliary 
epithelial damage that occurs with this condition; however, there is 
no evidence that ursodiol aids in the medical dissolution of mature 
gallbladder mucoceles and surgical correction is indicated in many 
patients.10,11
Although ursodiol is approved to dissolve cholesterol choleliths 
in humans,12 it will not dissolve choleliths in small animal species as 
they are commonly composed of calcium carbonate (dogs) or calci-
um bilirubinate (cats), not cholesterol.
Pharmacology/Actions
Ursodiol is a noncytotoxic bile acid that has several pharmacologic 
actions.13–15 After oral administration, ursodiol decreases intestinal 
absorption of cholesterol and suppresses hepatic synthesis and se -
cretion of cholesterol, and ultimately reduces cholesterol saturation 
in the bile. In veterinary medicine, ursodiol is used for its choler -
etic (increased bile flow) properties. It increases the expression of 
membrane transport proteins on the canalicular membrane of he -
patocytes that are responsible for the movement of bile acids from 
hepatocytes to the bile canaliculi. Secretion of ursodiol into the bile 
ducts stimulates the flow of bicarbonate-rich bile and promotes the 
elimination of toxic bile acids. A process known as cholehepatic 
shunting allows for the recirculation of ursodiol from the cholangio-
cytes back to the hepatocytes. 
Ursodiol has antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and some mild im-
munomodulatory effects. It promotes hepatobiliary cytoprotection 
by replacing the more toxic hydrophobic bile acids (eg, lithocholic 
acid, deoxycholic acid), which accumulate in the bile acid pool with 
cholestatic liver disease. Additionally, it is antiapoptotic through its 
ability to stimulate cell survival pathways; ursodiol also acts as a mo-
lecular chaperone and protects against endoplasmic reticulum-me -
diated hepatobiliary cellular stress caused by toxic bile acids. 
Pharmacokinetics
Ursodiol is well absorbed from the small intestine after oral admin -
istration. In humans, up to 90% of the dose is absorbed from the 
small intestine into the portal circulation. Absorption is improved 
in the presence of food. 12 Once it reaches the liver, it is extracted 
from the portal circulation, conjugated with either taurine or gly -
cine in hepatocytes, then secreted into bile. Ursodiol concentrates 
in the gallbladder, and the concentration in bile plateaus at ≈30% 
to 50% of total bile acid after ≈3 weeks. After biliary secretion into 
the duodenum, the majority of conjugated ursodiol is extracted by 
the apical bile acid transporter in the ileum, deposited into the por -
tal circulation, and transported back to the liver. A small portion of 
conjugated ursodiol in the intestinal tract may be deconjugated by 
bacterial enzymes and either be absorbed there or pass to the colon 
where it may be eliminated or converted to other bile acids (includ-
ing the potentially hepatotoxic bile acid, lithocholic acid), which also 
are eliminated in the feces. In most species, with the exception of 
hindgut fermenters, the amount of this hepatotoxic bile acid gener -
ated is minimal and inconsequential.
The very small quantities of unconjugated ursodiol that enter the 
systemic circulation are bound (70%) to plasma proteins, and less 
than 1% is excreted in the urine. Ursodiol has been detected in the 
serum of dogs and cats following oral administration.3,16
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Ursodiol is contraindicated in rabbits and other hindgut fermenters 
as it is converted into the hepatotoxic bile acid, lithocholic acid. 17 It 
is also contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it or other bile 
acid products and in patients with complete extrahepatic bile duct 
obstruction. Ursodiol should also be used cautiously in dogs and 
cats with histologically confirmed hepatic ductopenic disorders (eg, 
cholangitis, cholangiohepatitis) as it may lead to progressive biliary 
damage. The benefits of using ursodiol should be weighed against its 
risks in patients with complications associated with choleliths (eg, 
biliary obstruction, biliary fistulas, cholecystitis, pancreatitis, chol -
angitis). Ursodiol does not dissolve radiopaque, calcified cholesterol, 
or radiolucent bile pigment choleliths.12
Adverse Effects
Ursodiol appears to be well tolerated in dogs and cats.16,18–20 A study 
in 20 healthy dogs given ursodiol 10 to 15 mg/kg PO daily showed 
no changes in hepatic ultrasound, serum liver enzymes, total biliru-
bin, cholesterol, or triglyceride concentrations after 6 to 8 weeks of 
administration.20 An additional study in 12 healthy dogs at the same 
dose showed no changes in serum bile acids testing and hepatic his-
topathology after 7 days of therapy.19 Two studies in normal cats giv-
en ursodiol showed no changes in CBC, biochemical panel, urinaly-
sis, ultrasound, or hepatic histopathology, but a significant decrease 
in serum cholesterol was noted.16,18 See Laboratory Monitoring.
In humans taking ursodiol, elevated liver enzymes, diarrhea, 
abdominal pain, and other GI effects have rarely been noted. 12 Al-
though hepatotoxicity has not been associated with ursodiol therapy 
in humans, there are some patients with an inability to sulfate litho-
cholic acid (a naturally occurring bile acid and also a metabolite of 
ursodiol). These patients are at risk for increased concentrations of 
lithocholic acid as bile acid sulfation is a mechanism for bile acid 
detoxification. The clinical significance of this information for dogs 
and cats is unclear.

===== PDF_PAGE_1315 =====
1288    Ursodiol
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
No evidence of impaired fertility or fetal harm was found in preg -
nant rabbits or rats given ursodiol 7 times or 22 times, respectively, 
the maximum human labeled dose. 12 It does not cross the placenta 
and has been safely used in the treatment of intrahepatic cholestasis 
of pregnancy in women.21
It is not known whether ursodiol is excreted in breast milk. Be -
cause minimal drug is systemically absorbed, clinical effects on nurs-
ing animals are unlikely.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdoses of ursodiol would most likely cause diarrhea, although 
salivation and vomiting have been noted in dogs. Treatment, if re -
quired, could include supportive therapy, oral administration of an 
aluminum-containing antacid (eg, aluminum hydroxide suspen -
sion), or gastric emptying (if large overdose) with concurrent ad -
ministration of activated charcoal or cholestyramine suspension.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving ursodiol and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Aluminum-containing Antacids : May bind to ursodiol, 
thereby reducing its efficacy
 ■ Cholestyramine : May bind to ursodiol, thereby reducing its 
efficacy
 ■ Cyclosporine : May increase cyclosporine serum concentra -
tions
 ■ Estrogens : May increase hepatic cholesterol secretion and 
counteract ursodiol effects in humans; significance in veterinary 
patients is unknown.
 ■ Fenofibrate : Fibrates increase cholesterol formation and may 
counteract ursodiol effects in humans; significance in veterinary 
patients is unknown.
 ■ Gemfibrozil : Fibrates increase cholesterol formation and may 
counteract ursodiol effects in humans; significance in veterinary 
patients is unknown.
 ■ Taurine : Although not documented, concern has been raised 
that chronic administration of ursodiol in cats may lead to tau -
rine deficiency.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Ursodiol may falsely elevate total serum bile acid test results, al-
though the magnitude of this change may not be clinically rele -
vant.16,19,20 It is recommended to stop ursodiol for a minimum of 2 
to 3 days before performing total serum bile acid testing.
Dosages
DOGS:
Medical treatment of biliary sludge (microlithiasis) and ad -
junctive treatment of acute and chronic nonobstructive choles-
tatic disorders or chronic hepatitis (extra-label): 10 – 15 mg/kg 
PO with food once daily day or divided twice daily22
CATS:
Adjunctive treatment of nonobstructive acute and chronic 
cholestatic disorders (extra-label): 10 – 15 mg/kg PO with food 
once daily day or divided twice daily6
Lymphocytic cholangitis : 15 mg/kg PO with food daily pro -
duced morphologic and immunohistochemical improvements, 
although prednisolone reduced inflammation to a greater extent 
and promoted longer survival.1,2
BIRDS:
Adjunctive treatment of liver disease (extra-label): 10 – 15 mg/kg  
PO once daily23
Monitoring
 ■ Periodic abdominal ultrasonography based on the clinical pre -
sentation of the underlying condition being treated (eg, biliary 
sludge)
 ■ Baseline and periodic (eg, every 3 to 6 months) serum liver chem-
istry panel (eg, ALT, ALP , GGT, total bilirubin)
Client Information
 ■ Ursodiol is used to help animals with liver, pancreas, and/or gall-
bladder problems. 
 ■ This medicine works best when given with food. It also has a bitter 
taste that can often be masked when the medicine is given with 
food. 
 ■ Ursodiol is usually well-tolerated by dogs and cats. Diarrhea is the 
most common side effect. Contact your veterinarian if you have 
any concerns about your animal’s condition.
 ■ Do not give this medicine to rabbits, guinea pigs, rodents, or 
 horses.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Ursodiol, also known as ursodeoxycholic acid, is a naturally occur -
ring bile acid. It occurs as a white or almost white, bitter-tasting crys-
talline powder that is practically insoluble in water and freely soluble 
in alcohol.
Ursodiol may also be known as acidum ursodeoxycholicum, 
UDCA, or ursodesoxycholic acid; many trade names are available, 
including Actigall®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer, store ursodiol at 
room temperature (20°C to 25°C [68°F-77°F]) in tight containers. 
Half tablets maintain acceptable quality for up to 28 days when 
stored in the bottle at room temperature. Because of the bitter taste, 
store the segments separately from whole tablets. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Ursodiol 50 mg/mL oral suspension can be compounded from 
commercially available tablets. Triturate 20 ursodiol 250 mg tablets 
with 50 mL of Ora-Plus® and qs ad to 100 mL with Ora-Sweet®. The 
resulting suspension retains 90% potency for 90 days when stored 
at both 5°C (41°F) or 25°C (77°F). Compounded preparations of 
ursodiol should be protected from light and shaken well before use.24
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Ursodiol Oral Capsules: 300 mg; Actigall®, generic; (Rx)
Ursodiol Oral Tablets: 250 mg and 500 mg; URSO®-250 and -Forte, 
generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb

===== PDF_PAGE_1316 =====
Valacyclovir   1289
Valacyclovir
(val-ay-sye-kloe-veer) Valtrex®
Antiviral
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Potentially useful for treating equine herpes viral infection; 
however, definitive proof is lacking
 ▶ Prodrug of acyclovir with improved oral absorption
 ▶ Should not be used in cats due to lack of efficacy and pro-
found toxicity (ie, nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, myelosup-
pression)
 ▶ Use with caution and consider dose reduction in patients with 
renal insufficiency.
 ▶ Patients must be adequately hydrated during treatment.
 ▶ Appears to be well tolerated in horses, but experience is 
limited
Uses/Indications
Valacyclovir may be effective for treating equine herpesvirus 1 
(EHV-1) infection, although evidence to support this use is limited. 
In horses experimentally exposed to EHV-1, valacyclovir was effec -
tive in reducing viral replication as measured by decreased viral load 
in blood, nasal secretions, and bronchoalveolar fluid; however, viral 
load in the CSF did not differ from placebo.1 Clinical signs improved 
when valacyclovir was given prior to EHV-1 exposure as well when 
given up to 2 days after viral challenge. In ponies experimentally in-
fected with EHV-1 that received valacyclovir 1 hour prior to inocula-
tion, the drug reduced respiratory signs, but not other clinical signs.2 
These findings resemble the experience in humans, where treatment 
is more likely to be successful when initiated early (ie, with the earli-
est symptom or sign of disease).
Valacyclovir treatment was reported in a retrospective study of 
7 naturally occurring cases of EHV-1. 3 Another report of 31 horses 
treated with valacyclovir also found a strong decrease of EHV-1 viral 
load in nasal secretions and blood in all treated horses. 4 Successful 
valacyclovir use was reported in 2 stallions during an outbreak of 
equine coital exanthema5 and in a single case of equine multinodular 
pulmonary fibrosis6; however, valacyclovir failed to reduce viral load 
in 6 horses diagnosed with equine multinodular pulmonary fibrosis, 
and 5 horses were euthanized due to progression of clinical signs.7 
Valacyclovir did not suppress FHV-1 replication in cats.8 
In humans, valacyclovir is used for treatment, suppression, and/
or prevention of herpes and varicella viral infections, and, at high 
doses, for prevention of cytomegalovirus infections in immunocom-
promised patients.
Pharmacology/Actions
As a prodrug, valacyclovir is rapidly and almost completely hydro -
lyzed to the nucleoside analogue acyclovir and L-valine. Viral-spe -
cific thymidine kinase then converts acyclovir to acyclovir mono -
phosphate, which is further phosphorylated to the active acyclovir 
triphosphate. Acyclovir triphosphate is incorporated into the viral 
DNA to cause viral DNA chain termination and thereby inhibits vi-
ral DNA synthesis and replication. Variations in acyclovir sensitivity 
and resistance are likely mediated by differing sensitivity, or outright 
deficiency of, viral thymidine kinase.9,10  
The primary goal of antiherpetic therapy is to decrease viral repli-
cation until the immune system mounts an appropriate response and 
controls active infection.9
In humans, valacyclovir has antiviral activity against herpes labia-
lis, herpes simplex, herpes zoster, varicella zoster, and cytomegalovi-
rus. Resistance of herpes simplex and varicella zoster to acyclovir has 
been reported in humans and can result from changes in thymidine 
kinase or DNA polymerase.11
Pharmacokinetics
In horses, oral absorption of valacyclovir is 8-fold greater than acy -
clovir,12 with bioavailability reported as 26% 12 and up to 50% when 
the drug is administered after intragastric lavage. 13 The effect of 
food on oral absorption is uncertain. The pharmacokinetic profile 
of valacyclovir at 20 mg/kg PO was nearly identical to acyclovir at  
10 mg/kg administered as an IV infusion over 1 hour.12 Peak serum 
concentration was reached ≈50 minutes after administration. 12,13 
Volume of distribution was 9.8 L/kg,12 but penetration into the CSF 
was minimal.10 Protein binding was low at 10% to 20%. 12 Elimina-
tion half-life of unbound acyclovir was 8.8 hours. 12 Following ad -
ministration of valacyclovir 40 mg/kg PO every 8 hours (mixed 
in applesauce), acyclovir serum concentration remained above  
3 μg/mL (the EC 50
12) for 60% of the dosing interval, 10 and concen -
trations from nasal swabs were 50% to 100% of serum concentra -
tion.2 Serum acyclovir concentration (mean peak concentration,  
1.5 μg/mL on day 4) was lower than expected in 6 horses with EHV-5 
that received valacyclovir 30 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for 48 hours, 
then 20 mg/kg every 12 hours for 8 additional days.7
After a single dose of valacyclovir 40 mg/kg was given orally in 
eastern box turtles, peak concentration of 1.9 μg/mL was reached 
13 hours after dosing, and half-life was 15.2 hours. In this species, 
valacyclovir 40 mg/kg PO every 24 hours is predicted to maintain 
concentrations above 0.45 μg/mL.14
In humans, valacyclovir is rapidly absorbed, with peak concentra-
tions reached after 1.5 hours. Bioavailability is ≈55% and is not af -
fected by food. Conversion to acyclovir occurs with first-pass hepatic 
and intestinal metabolism. Acyclovir is widely distributed into most 
tissues, and protein binding is ≈15%. Acyclovir undergoes minimal 
hepatic metabolism and is excreted equally via the kidneys (47%) 
and in the feces (46%). Elimination half-life is ≈3 hours but increases 
to 14 hours in patients with end-stage renal disease. Hepatic impair-
ment does not alter acyclovir pharmacokinetics.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Valacyclovir should not be used in patients that are hypersensitive to 
valacyclovir or acyclovir.11 Valacyclovir should not be used in cats, as 
it has caused significant toxicity (eg, severe myelosuppression, coag-
ulative necrosis of the renal tubular epithelium, centrilobular atro -
phy and hepatic necrosis) in this species.8 
Valacyclovir should be used with caution in patients with renal 
insufficiency, and in those that are geriatric (with or without dimin-
ished renal function), dehydrated, or receiving nephrotoxic drugs, 
as use under these conditions has resulted in acute kidney injury in 
humans11; dosage modification may be considered in patients with 
significant renal impairment. Maintaining hydration in patients re -
ceiving valacyclovir is critical, as the drug may precipitate in—and 
cause damage to—the renal tubules. 11 
Do not confuse valACY clovir with valGANciclovir or  
V ANcomycin.
Adverse Effects
Valacyclovir appeared to be well tolerated in horses enrolled in phar-
macokinetic or experimental studies.
In cats infected with feline herpesvirus 1 (FHV-1), lethargy, de -
hydration, and significant decreases in WBC and neutrophil counts 
were noted 6 to 9 days after initiation of valacyclovir at 60 mg/kg PO 
every 6 hours; histologic changes included bone marrow suppres -
sion, coagulative necrosis in the renal tubules, centrilobular atrophy, 
and hepatic necrosis.8 The drug did not suppress FHV-1 replication.
In humans, GI distress (eg, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain), 
CNS depression, agitation, confusion, seizures, encephalopathy, and 
ophthalmologic, hematologic, and dermatologic conditions have 
also been reported. 11 CNS adverse reactions are more common in 
geriatric patients; however, they have also been reported in adults 

===== PDF_PAGE_1317 =====
1290    Valacyclovir
and pediatric patients with or without reduced renal function. In -
creased liver enzymes and crystal formation in renal tubules has also 
occurred.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Valacyclovir is rapidly metabolized to acyclovir, which is found in 
amniotic fluid and crosses the placenta. No evidence of embryo-fetal 
toxicity or teratogenicity has been observed in animal studies.11
Although valacyclovir is not detected in milk, low levels of the me-
tabolite acyclovir are present in breast milk of women taking valacy-
clovir. This drug should be used with caution in lactating  patients.11
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the po -
tential fetal risks.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Vomiting and diarrhea are the predominant signs of acyclovir tox -
icity; acute kidney injury is theoretically possible with higher doses. 
Acute oral overdose is unlikely to cause significant toxicity. Crys -
talluria and elevated renal values occurred after administration of 
acyclovir at 188.7 mg/kg in a dog. 
GI decontamination can be considered with ingestions of vala -
cyclovir at 150 mg/kg or higher if done within 60 to 90 minutes of 
ingestion. Below 150 mg/kg, GI signs (eg, vomiting, diarrhea) will 
likely predominate. Nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, and myelosup -
pression occurred in cats receiving 240 mg/kg/day.8 Acyclovir is re-
moved via hemodialysis.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving valacyclovir and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients; unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks 
should be weighed and additional monitoring should be performed 
when appropriate:
 ■ Cimetidine : Concurrent use in humans increases acyclovir area 
under the curve (AUC) by 32%, but this effect is considered to be 
clinically insignificant
 ■ Meperidine : Concurrent use may increase risk for CNS stimu -
lation and excitation.
 ■ Mycophenolate : Concurrent valacyclovir and mycophenolate 
may increase serum concentration of each.
 ■ Nephrotoxic Medications  (eg, aminoglycosides, amphoter -
icin  B,  cyclosporine, and  ifosfamide): Concomitant administra -
tion of valacyclovir with nephrotoxic medications may increase 
the potential for  nephrotoxicity. 11 Renal function should be 
 monitored. 
 ■ Probenecid : Concurrent use in humans increases acyclovir 
AUC by 49%, but this effect is considered clinically insignificant.
 ■ Theophylline, Aminophylline : May increase serum concen-
tration of theophylline or theophylline derivatives
 ■ V accines For Viral Encephalomyelitis Infections (eg, 
EEE, VEE, WEE, West Nile virus) : Concurrent valacyclovir 
may diminish vaccine effectiveness.
 ■ Zidovudine : Concurrent use may increase risk for CNS depres-
sion.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No specific laboratory interactions or considerations have been 
noted.
Dosages
HORSES :
Prevention or reduction of clinical signs in horses infected 
with equine herpesvirus 1 (EHV-1) (extra-label): 27 – 30 mg/kg 
PO every 8 hours for 6 doses, followed by 18 – 20 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours for 1 to 2 weeks1,3,10
Equine coital exanthema (ECE) caused by equine herpesvirus 
3 (EHV-3) (extra-label): 27 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for 6 doses, 
followed by 18 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for 10 or 11 days was 
believed to prevent lesions from expanding; stallions returned to 
mating 7 to 9 days after discontinuation of the drug.5
Monitoring
 ■ Viral load in blood and nasal secretions via quantitative PCR15 
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ Baseline and periodic serum renal chemistries (eg, serum BUN 
and creatinine) and urinalysis
 ■ Hydration status
Client Information
 ■ This medicine can be given with or without food. If GI upset (eg, 
diarrhea, lack of an appetite) occurs, give the medicine with a 
small amount of food. Contact your veterinarian if the problem 
continues.
 ■ Be sure your animal has access to fresh drinking water at all times.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Valacyclovir is the L-valine ester of acyclovir. Commercial dosage 
forms contain valacyclovir hydrochloride, which occurs as a white 
to off-white powder with aqueous solubility of 174 mg/mL at 25°C 
(77°F). 1 mg valacyclovir is equal to 1.11 mg valacyclovir HCl.
Valacyclovir may also be known as 256U87; Valtrex®, Shilova®, Va-
clovir®, and Valvir® are examples of the many trade names available 
in different countries.
Storage/Stability
Valacyclovir tablets should be stored at a controlled room tempera-
ture of 15°C to 25°C (59°F-77°F) in a tightly closed container out of 
reach of children and animals.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations. 
A 50 mg/mL oral suspension may be made with caplets, ORA-Plus®, 
and either ORA-Sweet® or ORA-Sweet® SF (similar suspending vehi-
cles may be used). Crush ten 500 mg tablets in a mortar and reduce 
to a fine powder. Sequentially add four 5 mL portions of ORA-Plus® 
(20 mL total) and mix to a uniform paste; transfer to an amber glass 
bottle calibrated to 100 mL, rinse mortar with 10 mL of ORA-Plus® 
3 times, then add quantity of syrup (ORA-Sweet® or ORA-Sweet® SF) 
sufficient to make 100 mL. Label “shake well” and “refrigerate. ” Sta-
ble for 28 days refrigerated between 2°C to 8°C (36°F-46°F).16 If a less 
concentrated suspension is desired, use five 500 mg tablets to make 
25 mg/mL and follow previously described process for 100 mL total 
volume.13  
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Valacyclovir Oral Tablets: 500 mg and 1000 mg; Valtrex®, generic; 
(Rx). Some presentations may be scored.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 

===== PDF_PAGE_1318 =====
Vancomycin   1291
Vancomycin
(van-koe-mye-sin) Vancocin®
Glycopeptide Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ IV antibiotic reserved for life-threatening, multidrug-resistant 
staphylococcal or enterococcal infections. It may also be used 
PO to treat Clostridioides difficile diarrhea. 
 ▶ When used systemically, must be given IV; severe pain and 
tissue injury occur with SC or IM injection.
 ▶ Oral vancomycin is not absorbed systemically and is only use-
ful for treating intraluminal enteric infections.
 ▶ Nephrotoxic drug with limited understanding of optimal 
dosing regimens
 ▶ If decreased renal function, decrease dosage and/or frequency
 ▶ Use in veterinary medicine is controversial because of the 
drug’s importance in human medicine. Veterinary infectious 
disease specialists should be consulted prior to treatment. Use 
should be reserved for infections with confirmed susceptibility 
and for infections that are resistant to first- and second-tier 
options.
Uses/Indications
Because vancomycin is used for severe multidrug-resistant infec -
tions in humans, its use in veterinary medicine should be reserved 
for confirmed infections where culture and susceptibility testing 
demonstrates resistance to all other options (usually methicillin-re -
sistant Staphylococcus spp [eg, MRSA, MRSP] or multidrug-resistant 
Enterococcus spp) and when the infection is considered treatable 
and consultation with an infectious disease expert has concluded 
that vancomycin is a viable and reasonable treatment. 1–3 Empirical 
use should be discouraged. Oral vancomycin may be useful for oral 
treatment of Clostridioides difficile enteric infections, although treat-
ment of this infection is rarely required and other treatment options 
(ie, metronidazole) are available for instances when treatment is in-
dicated. 
Vancomycin may also be useful for local therapy, such as through 
implantation of antimicrobial-impregnated substances (eg, PMMA 
beads, gels),4,5 intra-articular injection, and regional limb perfusion. 
Uses that do not result in appreciable systemic or enteric concen -
trations are not associated with the same concerns of emergence of 
resistance in the patient’s microbiome.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated vanco -
mycin as a Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobial for 
human medicine.6 
Pharmacology/Actions
Vancomycin inhibits cell wall synthesis and bacterial cell membrane 
permeability. It also affects bacterial RNA synthesis. It is only effec -
tive against gram-positive bacteria, including many strains of strep-
tococci, staphylococci, and enterococci. Vancomycin is generally a 
bactericidal, time-dependent antibiotic, but is bacteriostatic against 
enterococci. Vancomycin also has activity against Clostridioides 
(Clostridium) difficile , Rhodococcus equi , Listeria monocytogenes , 
Corynebacterium spp, and Actinomyces spp. Vancomycin and ami -
noglycosides can have synergistic action against susceptible bacte -
ria. Pus and cellular debris may bind to vancomycin and reduce its 
efficacy.
Resistance to vancomycin by certain strains of enterococci and 
staphylococci is an increasing concern in human medicine and po -
tentially in veterinary patients. The global prevalence of vancomy -
cin-resistant enterococci (VRE) in companion animals has been es -
timated to be 14.6%,7 although regional variability exists.8,9
Pharmacokinetics
When given orally, vancomycin is not appreciably absorbed. A single 
dose study in dogs showed a bioavailability of 0.27% to 1.66% after 
oral administration.10 After IV administration, vancomycin is widely 
distributed. Therapeutic concentrations can be found in pleural, as-
citic, pericardial, and synovial fluids. At usual serum concentrations, 
it does not readily distribute into the CSF .
In humans, the elimination half-life of vancomycin in patients 
with normal renal function is ≈4 to 6 hours. 2 Prolonged dosing can 
allow the drug to accumulate. The drug is eliminated primarily via 
glomerular filtration; small amounts are excreted into the bile.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Vancomycin is an important antibiotic for treating multidrug-resis-
tant infections in humans. It should not be used in veterinary pa -
tients when other antibiotics can be used to successfully treat the 
infection. Some clinicians believe that the drug should never be used 
in veterinary patients and its use in animals is banned in some coun-
tries. Nephrotoxicity is a concern.
IV vancomycin can be fatal in rabbits. 
Patients with decreased renal function that require vancomycin 
should have doses reduced or dosing interval extended. Serum peak 
and trough concentrations should be monitored.
Adverse Effects
When given parenterally, nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity are the 
most serious potential adverse effects of vancomycin. In humans, the 
incidence of nephrotoxicity is relatively high in some patient popu -
lations11; however, it is usually reversible. In humans, dermatologic 
reactions and hypersensitivity can occur2; it is unknown if these ef -
fects are issues for veterinary patients. Reversible neutropenia has 
been reported in humans, particularly when the dose is high and 
prolonged.
Do not administer vancomycin IV rapidly or as a bolus; throm -
bophlebitis, severe hypotension, and cardiac arrest (rare) have been 
reported.2 Vancomycin must be given over at least 30 minutes as a 
dilute solution. Do not give vancomycin IM, SC, or IP . Severe tissue 
damage and pain may occur.
Oral therapy may cause adverse GI effects (eg, nausea, inappe -
tence, vomiting, diarrhea).
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Because vancomycin should only be used for serious infections, the 
potential benefits of therapy will probably outweigh the risks in most 
circumstances.
Vancomycin is excreted into milk.2 Because the drug is not appre-
ciably absorbed through the GI tract, it is unlikely to pose significant 
harm to nursing animals, although diarrhea could occur.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
IV overdoses of vancomycin may cause an increased risk for adverse 
effects, particularly ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity. Supportive care 
is advised. Hemodialysis does not appear to remove the drug in sig-
nificant amounts.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving vancomycin and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.

===== PDF_PAGE_1319 =====
1292    Vancomycin
 ■ Aminoglycosides : Vancomycin may increase the risk for 
aminoglycoside-related ototoxicity or nephrotoxicity. Because 
this combination of drugs may be medically required (there is 
evidence of synergy against staphylococci and enterococci), en -
hanced monitoring is suggested.
 ■ Anesthetic Agents : In children, vancomycin used with anes -
thetic agents has caused erythema and a histamine-like flushing.
 ■ Nephrotoxic Drugs, Other (eg, amphotericin B, cisplatin): 
Use with caution with other nephrotoxic drugs.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No specific concerns were noted.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Susceptible gram-positive, systemic, life-threatening infec -
tions (extra-label): 
a) 15 mg/kg IV over 30 to 60 minutes every 6 to 8 hours12
b) 3.5 mg/kg IV and follow with 1.5 mg/kg/hour IV CRI13
Oral treatment of documented Clostridioides difficile infection 
unresponsive to metronidazole (extra-label): 10 – 20 mg/kg PO 
every 6 hours for 5 to 7 days. NOTE: Oral vancomycin is not ap-
preciably systemically absorbed and is only effective for suscepti-
ble enteric infections.
HORSES :
Susceptible gram-positive, systemic, life-threatening infec -
tions (extra-label): Average dosage was 7.5 mg/kg IV over 30 
minutes every 8 hours from a retrospective study in 15 horses. 
The authors recommend that the use of vancomycin in horses be 
limited to cases in which culture and susceptibility results clearly 
indicate that this agent is likely to be effective and in which there 
is no reasonable alternative.14
Susceptible gram-positive, systemic, life-threatening infec -
tions; IV regional limb perfusion (IVRLP) or intraosseous 
regional limb perfusion (IORLP);  (extra-label): Vancomycin 
300 mg diluted in 60 mL 0.9% sodium chloride and infused IV 
(using an IV pump) or IO (administered manually) over 30 min-
utes. IVRLP or IORLP administration maintained their targeted 
trough drug concentration in synovial fluid. The authors conclud-
ed that IVRLP and IOPLP were safe and may be clinically useful 
in horses. IVRLP may be better for distal interphalangeal (DIP) 
joints and IORLP for metacarpophalangeal (MTCP) joints. Mean 
vancomycin concentration in the MTCP joint was 4 µg/mL for 24 
hours after IORLP . 5,15,16
Monitoring
When used parenterally:
 ■ Baseline and periodic serum renal chemistry profile
 ■ Monitoring trough drug concentrations is sometimes used in hu-
man medicine, mainly in patients with decreased renal function, 
advanced age, or other complicating factors. The target is to achieve 
a trough vancomycin concentration between 10 – 15 µg/mL,  
with 15 – 20 µg/mL recommended for serious MRSA infec -
tions.17,18 The low end, or slightly lower, may be appropriate if an 
aminoglycoside is being used concurrently. There is little indica-
tion for routine peak drug concentration monitoring. Whether 
the same concentrations apply to veterinary patients is unknown 
but if drug monitoring is performed, human targets are reason -
able to apply to animals.
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC with prolonged therapy
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is most commonly given in the vein, by your veter-
inarian, while your animal is hospitalized.
 ■ Oral vancomycin may be used for outpatient treatment. Be sure 
to give this medicine as directed by your veterinarian. It may be 
given with a small amount of food.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal closely while 
it is taking this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up 
visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A glycopeptide antibiotic, vancomycin HCl occurs as an odorless, 
tan to brown free-flowing powder. It is freely soluble in water. A 5% 
aqueous solution has a pH of 2.5 to 4.5.
Vancomycin may also be known as vanco, vancomycini, or Van-
cocin®; there are many registered international trade names available.
Storage/Stability
Vancomycin should be stored at room temperature in tight contain-
ers that are protected from light. Once reconstituted (see administra-
tion instructions in the product label or in Dosages), the injectable 
or oral solutions are stable for 14 days if refrigerated. If diluted fur -
ther with 5% dextrose or 0.9% sodium chloride for parenteral ad -
ministration, solutions are stable for 24 hours at room temperature 
and 2 months if refrigerated. Vancomycin solution in 5% dextrose 
should be stored at or below -20°C (-4°F); once thawed they are sta-
ble at room temperature for 72 hours, or 30 days if refrigerated. Do 
not refreeze thawed solutions.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information.
Vancomycin is compatible with 5% dextrose, 0.9% sodium chlo-
ride, and lactated Ringer’s injection. To prepare a parenteral solution 
using vancomycin 500 mg or 1 g powder for injection: Reconstitute 
the 500 mg for injection vial by adding 10 mL of sterile water for 
injection; add 20 mL if using the 1 g vial. Before administering to 
patient, further dilute reconstituted solutions with (at least 100 mL 
for 500 mg; 200 mL for 1 g vial) a compatible diluent (eg, 5% dex -
trose, lactated Ringer’s, 0.9% sodium chloride). Frozen containers 
of vancomycin solution in 5% dextrose should be thawed at room 
temperature (25°C[77°F]) or under refrigeration (5°C[41°F]); do not 
force thaw with hot water bath or by microwave.
Vancomycin injection is reportedly Y-site compatible with the 
following drugs: atropine sulfate, calcium salts, ciprofloxacin, clin -
damycin phosphate, dexamethasone sodium phosphate, diphen -
hydramine hydrochloride, famotidine, gentamicin, ketamine hy -
drochloride, metoclopramide, midazolam, ondansetron, potassium 
chloride, sodium bicarbonate, and tobramycin. 
Vancomycin injection is reportedly incompatible with ampicil -
lin, amphotericin B, cefazolin, ceftazidime, diazepam, furosemide, 
hydrocortisone sodium succinate, pantoprazole, and propofol.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Vancomycin HCl Powder for Injection (IV) Solution: 500 mg,  
750 mg, 1 g, 5 g, and 10 g vials; (some preservative free); generic; 
(Rx)
Vancomycin for IV Injection in dextrose (frozen): 500 mg/100 mL, 
750 mg/150 mL, 1 g/200 mL, 1.25 g/250 mL, 1.5 g/300 mL, and  
2 g/400 mL; generic; (Rx)
Vancomycin HCl Oral Capsules: 125 mg and 250 mg; Vancocin®, 
generic; (Rx). NOTE: Not for systemic infections; not appreciably 
absorbed
Vancomycin Oral Solution: 25 mg/mL in 150 mL and 300 mL bot -

===== PDF_PAGE_1320 =====
Vasopressin   1293
tles, and 50 mg/mL in 80 mL, 150 mL and 300 mL bottles; First- 
Vancomycin®-25, -50; (Rx). NOTE: Not for systemic infections; not 
appreciably absorbed
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Vasopressin
(vay-soe-press-in) Vasostrict®
Hormone; Pressor Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used primarily as a diagnostic agent and for the adjunctive 
treatment of shock syndromes and cardiopulmonary resusci-
tation
 ▶ Contraindications include chronic nephritis until nitrogen 
retention is resolved to reasonable levels, and in patients that 
are hypersensitive to it. Use with caution in patients that have 
vascular disease, seizure disorders, heart failure, or asthma.
 ▶ Adverse effects include nausea, GI pain/cramping, local irrita-
tion at the injection site (including sterile abscesses), extrava-
sation injuries, skin reactions, abdominal pain, hematuria, and, 
rarely, a hypersensitivity (urticarial) reaction.
 ▶ Overdoses can lead to exacerbation of adverse effects, and 
possibly water intoxication.
 ▶ Cost of the drug may be an issue.
Uses/Indications
Vasopressin is used as a diagnostic agent (after a modified water 
deprivation test) and for the adjunctive treatment of shock syn -
dromes and cardiopulmonary resuscitation in small animal species. 
Vasopressin has some potential advantages over epinephrine for 
treatment of ventricular asystole or pulseless electrical activity. Va -
sopressin can act as a vasoconstricting agent even when acidosis is 
present, and it may cause less vasoconstriction of the coronary and 
renal vasculature, thereby increasing myocardial perfusion and re -
ducing myocardial oxygen consumption. Additionally, it does not 
have the arrhythmogenic or chronotropic effects that are associated 
with epinephrine.
Vasopressin has been documented to increase blood pressure in 
dogs with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) and 
sepsis-induced hypotension. A case report in 5 dogs with dopa -
mine-resistant SIRS or sepsis-induced hypotension found, in all cas-
es, that the mean arterial blood pressure increased within 15 minutes 
of adding vasopressin to the treatment regimen. 1 Vasopressin is a 
common second-line agent (after norepinephrine) for the treatment 
of vasodilatory hypotension in both dogs and cats.2
In human medicine, vasopressin has been used to treat acute GI 
hemorrhage and stimulate GI peristalsis. Vasopressin CRI is also be-
ing used for the treatment of hypotensive septic patients that are un-
responsive to conventional vasopressor. Prior to radiographic proce-
dures, it has been used in humans to dispel interfering gas shadows 
or help concentrate contrast media.3,4
Pharmacology/Actions
Vasopressin or antidiuretic hormone (ADH) acts through at least 5 
different receptors (3 subtypes: V1, V2, V3; the oxytocin receptor; 
and the purinergic P2 receptor) to maintain serum osmolality. Via V2 
receptors, vasopressin promotes the renal reabsorption of solutefree 
water in the distal convoluted tubules and collecting duct. ADH in -
creases cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) at the tubule, which 
increases water permeability at the luminal surface, resulting in in -
creased urine osmolality and decreased urine flow. Without vasopres-
sin, urine flow can be increased up to 90% greater than  normal.
At doses above those necessary for antidiuretic activity, vasopres-
sin V1 receptor stimulation and blockade of K+ -sensitive ATP chan-
nels can cause smooth muscle contraction. Capillaries and small 
arterioles are most affected, with resultant decreased blood flow to 
several systems. Hepatic flow may actually be increased, however.
Vasopressin can cause contraction of the smooth muscle of the 
bladder and gall bladder and increase intestinal peristalsis, partic -
ularly of the colon. Vasopressin may decrease gastric secretions and 
increase GI sphincter pressure; gastric acid concentration remains 
unchanged.
Vasopressin possesses minimal oxytocic effects, but at large doses, 
it may stimulate uterine contraction. Vasopressin V3 receptor stimu-
lation causes the release of corticotropin, growth hormone, and fol-
licle-stimulating hormone (FSH).
Pharmacokinetics
Vasopressin is destroyed in the GI tract prior to being absorbed and 
therefore must be administered either intranasally or parenterally. 
After IM or SC administration in dogs, aqueous vasopressin has 
an antidiuretic activity for 2 to 8 hours. Vasopressin is distributed 
throughout the extracellular fluid. The hormone apparently is not 
bound to plasma proteins. Vasopressin is rapidly destroyed in the 
liver and kidneys. The plasma half-life has been reported to be only 
10 to 20 minutes in humans.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
In humans, vasopressin is contraindicated in patients that are hy -
persensitive to it, as well as in patients with chronic nephritis until 
nitrogen retention is resolved to reasonable levels.
Because of its effects on other systems, particularly at high doses, 
vasopressin should be used with caution in patients with vascular 
disease, seizure disorders, heart failure, or asthma.
In humans, IV or IO vasopressin is considered a high alert medi-
cation (medications that require special safeguards to reduce the risk 
for errors). Consider instituting practices such as redundant drug 
dosage and volume checking with special alert labels.
Adverse Effects
Vasopressin adverse effects include local irritation at the injection 
site (extravasation necrosis possible), bronchoconstriction, arrhyth-
mias, skin reactions, platelet aggregation, hyperbilirubinemia, nau -
sea, abdominal pain and cramping, hematuria, and, rarely, a hyper -
sensitivity (urticarial) reaction.5
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Although the drug has minimal effects on uterine contractions at 
usual doses, it should be used with caution in pregnant animals. 
Information on vasopressin levels in maternal milk was not lo -
cated. Because vasopressin is not orally absorbed, adverse effects on 
nursing animals would not be expected. Because safety has not been 
established in animals, this drug should only be used when the ma -
ternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Acute overdoses would likely exacerbate the adverse effects listed 
above. Heart rate and rhythm as well as blood pressure should be 
monitored. Early clinical signs of overdose-induced water intoxi -
cation can include listlessness or depression. More severe intoxica -
tion clinical signs can include coma, seizures, and eventually death. 
Treatment for mild intoxication is stopping vasopressin therapy and 
restricting water access until it has resolved. Severe intoxication may 
require the use of osmotic diuretics (eg, mannitol, urea, dextrose) 
with or without furosemide.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 

===== PDF_PAGE_1321 =====
1294    Vasopressin
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving vasopressin and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
Isoflurane : In horses undergoing isoflurane anesthesia, IV ad-
ministration of vasopressin raised blood pressure and caused mu -
cous membrane ischemia within 1 minute, cardiac arrest within 5 to 
10 minutes of administration in 8 of 10 horses.6
The following drugs may inhibit the antidiuretic activity of vaso -
pressin:
 ■ Ethanol
 ■ Epinephrine  (large doses)
 ■ Heparin
 ■ Norepinephrine  (large doses)
The following drugs may potentiate the antidiuretic effects of vaso-
pressin:
 ■ Cyclophosphamide
 ■ Enalapril
 ■ Fludrocortisone
 ■ Furosemide
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline, clomipramine)
 ■ Vincristine
Dosages
NOTES: 
1. Do not confuse dosages listed as units/kg/minute; units/kg per 
hour, milliunits/kg/minute. 
2. Prior to IV administration, vasopressin should be diluted in 
0.9% sodium chloride or 5% dextrose solutions to a final con-
centration of 0.1 – 1 unit/mL.5
DOGS/CATS:
Diagnostic agent for diabetes insipidus in conjunction with 
a modified water deprivation test  (extra-label): A clear under -
standing of the limitations and risks for this test is required for 
patient safety during the test and to achieve an accurate diagno -
sis. Prior to administration, it is recommended to consult with a 
veterinary internal medicine specialist or refer to a current small 
animal endocrinology text for specific information about the pro-
tocol, precautions, endpoints, and contraindications for this type 
of testing. 
a) 0.2 – 0.4 units/kg (maximum total dose of 5 units/animal 
[NOT units/kg]) IM7
b) Dogs: 2 – 3 units/dog (NOT units/kg) SC8 
c) Cats: 0.55 units/kg SC 8 
Adjunctive treatment during cardiopulmonary resuscitation  
(extra-label): 
a) 0.8 units/kg IV or IO as a substitute for or in combination with 
epinephrine every 3 to 5 minutes may be considered. Vasopres-
sin is administered after every other basic life support cycle. If 
IV or IO access is not possible, intratracheal (IT) administra -
tion can be considered. Dilute in sterile saline or sterile water 
and administer via a catheter longer than the endotracheal 
tube. If giving IT, the dosage has not been fully determined, 
but 1.2 units/kg IT is currently recommended.9
b) With pulseless electrical activity or ventricular asystole, vaso -
pressin may be beneficial for myocardial and cerebral blood 
flow: 0.2 – 0.8 units/kg, IV once8
c) In dogs, 0.4 – 0.8 units/kg IV , followed by 1 – 4 milliunits/kg 
per MINUTE IV CRI10  
Adjunctive treatment of hypotension associated shock (extra-label): 
a) Adjunctive post-CPR treatment: 0.5 – 5 milliunits/kg/ MIN-
UTE (0.03 – 0.3 units/kg/HOUR) IV CRI 9,10 
b) Patients with vasodilatory shock unresponsive to fluid re -
suscitation and catecholamine (dobutamine, dopamine, 
norepinephrine) administration: 0.01 – 0.04 units/ MINUTE 
(NOT units/kg/MINUTE) IV . (NOTE: This dose is not depen-
dent on patient weight.) DO NOT exceed 0.04 units/MINUTE 
(NOT units/ kg/MINUTE), as there is a risk for myocardial 
ischemia. DO NOT use in patients with cardiogenic shock.10,11 
c) Adjunctive treatment of dogs with septic shock or severe 
systemic inflammatory response syndrome  (extra-label): 
The goal is to raise the diastolic pressure to 70 to 90 mm Hg, 
which is usually associated with a mean pressure of 110 to  
140 mm Hg and a systolic of 140 to 180 mm Hg. If norepineph-
rine between 0.5 – 1 µg/kg/ MINUTE IV CRI does not main -
tain the goal, consider adding vasopressin 1 – 4 milliunits/kg/  
MINUTE IV CRI. Infusion is started at the low end of the 
range and titrated upwards in response to need. Supplementa-
tion with low doses of vasopressin can restore catecholamine 
and hemodynamic response.12
d) Hypotension that persists in dogs despite volume re -
suscitation (extralabel): 0.5 – 5 milliunits/kg/ MINUTE  
(0.03 – 0.3 units/kg/ HOUR) IV CRI. Although arterial blood 
pressure may improve, it should be used cautiously, as exces -
sive vasoconstriction (particularly to the splanchnic and renal 
circulation, thereby causing GI and renal ischemia) may occur. 
In the dog, splanchnic vasoconstriction may exacerbate the 
sepsis by promoting the loss of the gut barrier function and 
then bacterial translocation to the bloodstream.13 
HORSES :
Refractory hypotension in critically ill neonatal foals  (extra-  
label): 0.1 – 2.5 milliunits/kg/ MINUTE IV CRI.14 From the retro-
spective study, vasopressin dosages were titrated to the minimum 
infusion rate needed to achieve a mean arterial pressure (MAP) 
greater than 65 mm Hg. All foals also received dobutamine and 
other supportive treatment. Vasopressin use was associated with a 
significant increase in MAP and urinary output, and a significant 
decrease in heart rate. 
Monitoring
 ■ Blood pressure; heart rate and rhythm
 ■ Hydration, body weight; fluid and electrolyte status
 ■ Urine output, specific gravity, and/or osmolality
 ■ Water consumption
Chemistry/Synonyms
Vasopressin, a hypothalamic hormone stored in the posterior pitu -
itary, is a 9-amino acid polypeptide with a disulfide bond. In most 
mammals (including dogs and humans), the natural hormone is ar-
ginine vasopressin, while in swine, the arginine is replaced with ly -
sine. Lysine vasopressin has only about ½ the antidiuretic activity of 
arginine vasopressin. Previously available vasopressin products were 
a combination of arginine or lysine vasopressin derived from natural 
sources or synthetically prepared, while the currently available prod-
uct is synthetic arginine vasopressin. The products are standardized 
by their pressor activity in rats (USP posterior pituitary [pressor] 
units); their antidiuretic activity can be variable. Commercially 
available vasopressin has little, if any, oxytocic activity at usual doses.
Vasopressin occurs as a white to off-white amorphous powder. 
Vasopressin injection is a clear, colorless or practically colorless liq-
uid with a faint, characteristic odor. Vasopressin is soluble in water.

===== PDF_PAGE_1322 =====
Vecuronium   1295
Vasopressin may also be known as ADH, antidiuretic hor -
mone, 8-arginine vasopressin, beta-hypophamine, Neo-Lidocaton®, 
Pitressin®, or Pressyn®.
Storage/Stability
Store vasopressin (aqueous) injection at controlled cold temperatures, 
2°C to 8°C (36°F-46°F), but it may be stored at room temperature for 
up to 12 months or until the manufacturer’s expiry date; avoid freez-
ing. After first use, refrigerate the multiple-dose vial and discard it af-
ter 30 days. Discard the solutions diluted for IV infusion and kept at 
room temperature 18 hours after mixing or 24 hours if refrigerated. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent upon factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information.
Vasopressin is Y-site compatible with aminocaproic acid, 
amiodarone, buprenorphine, butorphanol, calcium gluconate/chlo-
ride, cefazolin, ciprofloxacin, dexamethasone sodium phosphate, 
diltiazem, dobutamine, dopamine, epinephrine, famotidine, fentan-
yl citrate, gentamicin, heparin, hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 in so -
dium chloride, imipenem/cilastatin, lidocaine, magnesium sulfate, 
mannitol, meropenem, metoclopramide, metronidazole, midazol -
am, morphine sulfate, nitroglycerin, norepinephrine, pantoprazole, 
phenylephrine, piperacillin/tazobactam, procainamide, sodium bi -
carbonate, and voriconazole. It is incompatible with ampicillin, di-
azepam, furosemide, insulin (regular), and phenytoin. 
If the aqueous injection is to be administered as an IV or intra-ar-
terial infusion, it should be diluted in either 5% dextrose or 0.9% 
sodium chloride. For infusion use in humans, it is usually diluted to 
a concentration of 0.1 to 1 unit/mL.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Vasopressin Injection: 20 pressor units/mL in 1 mL and 10 mL vials; 
Vasostrict®; (Rx)
Vasopressin Tannate Sterile Suspension in oil is no longer commer-
cially available.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Vecuronium
(vek-yew-roe-nee-um) Norcuron® 
Nondepolarizing Neuromuscular Blocker
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used primarily in dogs and cats as an adjunct to general 
anesthesia to produce muscle relaxation during surgical pro-
cedures or mechanical ventilation and facilitate endotracheal 
intubation
 ▶ Use with caution in animals with severe renal dysfunction, 
myasthenia gravis, or hepatic or biliary disease.
 ▶ Not for use as a single agent; no analgesic or sedative actions
 ▶ High alert drug; ensure appropriate respiratory support, 
reversal agents, and error-reducing safeguards are in place to 
minimize risk of patient harm.
Uses/Indications
Vecuronium is indicated as an adjunct to general anesthesia to pro-
duce muscle relaxation during surgical procedures or mechanical ven-
tilation and facilitate endotracheal intubation. In dogs it has been used 
during general anesthesia to decrease respiratory motion and allow for 
controlled respiratory cycles during radiation therapy of heart base tu-
mors.1 Vecuronium causes very minimal cardiac effects and generally 
does not cause the release of histamine. It has been used topically to 
cause mydriasis in birds to facilitate fundoscopic exam.2
Pharmacology/Actions
Vecuronium is a nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent 
and acts by competitively binding at cholinergic receptor sites on the 
motor end-plate resulting in paralysis of striated muscles. Vecuroni-
um, when compared to pancuronium (on a weight basis), has been 
described as being equipotent to up to 3 times more potent.
The potency of vecuronium as a neuromuscular blocker appears 
to be lower in horses than other species and some horses appear to 
be relatively resistant to its effect.3,4
Pharmacokinetics
The onset of neuromuscular blockade after IV injection is dose-de -
pendent. Dogs given 50 μg/kg IV (also receiving halothane anesthe-
sia) experienced complete paralysis. 5 Duration of effect is ≈20-30 
minutes when given as a bolus. Vecuronium has a shorter duration 
of action than pancuronium (≈⅓ to ½ as long), but similar to that 
of atracurium.
In cats, after injection of vecuronium 0.6 mg/kg IV , the steady 
state volume of distribution was 0.23 L/kg, half-life was 31 minutes, 
and clearance was 11 mL/minute/kg. Vecuronium or its metabolites 
were recovered in the bile (40%), urine (15%), and liver (15%).6
Vecuronium is partially metabolized; it and its metabolites are ex-
creted into the bile and urine. Prolonged recovery times may result 
in patients with significant renal or hepatic disease.
In humans, vecuronium is up to 80% bound to plasma proteins.7 
The half-life ranges from 65 to 75 minutes. Patients with hepatic 
function impairment or cirrhosis exhibited prolonged plasma half-
lives and almost double the recovery time compared to patients with 
normal function.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Vecuronium is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it. Low-
er doses may be necessary in patients with hepatic or biliary disease. 
In patients with myasthenia gravis, neuromuscular blocking agents 
(NMBA) should be administered with caution using doses much 
lower than typical (15%-20% of recommended dose) and with con -
tinuous monitoring of neuromuscular transmission.8
Vecuronium should only be used in patients that are adequate -
ly anesthetized as it has no analgesic or sedative/anesthetic actions. 
Respiratory support (eg, intubation, mechanical ventilation), neuro-
muscular blocker reversal agents, and staff experienced in the use of 
of these agents must be readily available. Inadvertent administration 
of neuromuscular blocking agents to patients for which they were 
not intended may cause significant harm, including death. Neuro -
muscular blocking agents should be sequestered from other med -
ications, and with access limited to those familiar with their use. 9 
Prominent placement of warning labels (eg, “paralyzing agent- caus-
es respiratory arrest, ” “causes respiratory paralysis; patient must be 
ventilated”) on storage containers is highly recommended.
Vecuronium’s duration of action is shorter in dogs with diabetes 
mellitus.10
In horses, vecuronium should be used with caution due to possi-
ble failure to produce complete paralysis and its prolonged action in 
this species.3,11
Adverse Effects
Other than the effects associated with pharmacologic neuromuscu -
lar blockade, vecuronium appears to be well tolerated in the limited 
number of animals studied. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
It is unknown whether vecuronium causes fetal harm or if the drug is 

===== PDF_PAGE_1323 =====
1296    Vecuronium
excreted into maternal milk. Because safety has not been established 
in animals, this drug should only be used when the maternal benefits 
outweigh the potential risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The LD50 reported for mice and rats following IV administration was 
0.051 and 0.2 mg/kg, respectively. Overdoses with neuromuscular 
blocking agents may result in prolonged neuromuscular blockade. 
The primary treatment is maintenance of the patient’s airway, me -
chanical ventilation and oxygenation, and adequate sedation until 
recovery function is assured. Only after evidence of recovery is seen 
should administration of an anticholinesterase drug with an anti -
cholinergic agent be considered. Blood pressure, heart rate, ventila -
tion and oxygenation (end tidal CO 2, SpO2, and blood gas analysis) 
should be monitored during an overdose with any necessary sup -
portive treatment performed.
Reversal of blockade might be accomplished by administering an 
anticholinesterase agent (eg, neostigmine) with an anticholinergic 
agent (eg, atropine, glycopyrrolate). See Neostigmine. A case report 
of the anticholinesterase edrophonium (not currently commercially 
available) failing to reverse prolonged vecuronium-induced neuro -
muscular blockade in a dog has been published. 12 Vecuronium can 
be reversed by the drug sugammadex, a binding agent that is specific 
for vecuronium and rocuronium.13
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving vecuronium and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Medetomidine : May shorten the duration of vecuronium ef -
fect14
 ■ Non-Depolarizing Muscle Relaxant Drugs, Other : 
May have a synergistic effect if used with vecuronium
 ■ Succinylcholine : May speed the onset of action and enhance 
the neuromuscular blocking actions of vecuronium; do not give 
vecuronium until succinylcholine effects have subsided.
The following agents may enhance or prolong the neuromuscular 
blocking activity of vecuronium:
 ■ Aminoglycoside Antibiotics  (eg, gentamicin)
 ■ Anesthetics, General  (eg, isoflurane)
 ■ Antiarrhythmic Agents  (eg, procainamide, quinidine)
 ■ Bacitracin, Polymyxin  B (systemic): Consider therapy mod-
ification.
 ■ Calcium Channel Blockers (eg, amlodipine, diltiazem)
 ■ Cyclosporine  (systemic)
 ■ Lincosamide Antibiotics  (eg, clindamycin)
 ■ Magnesium Salts, Systemic
 ■ Tetracycline Deriv atives (eg, doxycycline, minocycline)
 ■ V ancomycin
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ None noted
Dosages
DOGS:
Neuromuscular relaxation/blockade (extra-label): 
a) 100 μg/kg (0.1 mg/kg) IV 15–17; additional doses of 0.05 mg/kg 
IV can be administered if prolonged blockade is required. 15 
Initial doses of up to 200 μg/kg (0.2 mg/kg) IV have also been 
used to prolong blockade; however, this higher dose will pro -
long the recovery period.15
b) From a study done in female beagles: 25 μg/kg (0.025 mg/kg)  
IV over 5 seconds.  This dose of vecuronium was chosen after 
pilot studies and was expected to produce partial block with -
out causing apnea. In 9 of the 10 dogs, vecuronium at this 
dose produced a twitch reduction of greater than 80%. Signif-
icant residual neuromuscular block could be measured at the 
hind limb with acceleromyography when ventilation sponta -
neously returned.18 In another study, complete paralysis was 
induced at dosages of 50 μg/kg (0.05 mg/kg), suggesting that 
under inhalational anesthesia, the ED90 of vecuronium in dogs 
is likely much lower than the previously reported 90 μg/kg  
(0.09 mg/kg).5 The authors concluded that monitoring sponta-
neous ventilation, including end-tidal CO 2, expired tidal vol -
ume, peak inspiratory flow or minute ventilation, cannot be 
used as a surrogate for objective neuromuscular monitoring, 
and this practice may increase the risk of postoperative resid -
ual paralysis. 
c) If using CRI propofol-fentanyl anesthesia : vecuronium  
0.2 mg/kg/HOUR IV CRI for maintenance19
d) If using isoflurane or sevoflurane with fentanyl IV CRI an -
esthesia: vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg/ HOUR IV CRI for mainte -
nance20
CATS:
Neuromuscular relaxation/blockade (extra-label): 20 – 40 μg/kg 
(0.02 – 0.04 mg/kg) IV21–23
Monitoring
 ■ Degree of neuromuscular blockade; the manufacturer recom -
mends use of a peripheral nerve stimulator to determine drug 
response, the need for additional doses, and to evaluate recovery. 
 ■ Cardiac rate and blood pressure
Client Information
 ■ This drug should only be used by professionals familiar with using 
neuromuscular blocking agents in a supervised setting with ade -
quate ventilatory support.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Structurally similar to pancuronium, vecuronium bromide is a syn-
thetic, nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent. It contains 
the steroid (androstane) nucleus but is devoid of steroid activity. It 
occurs as white to off-white or slightly pink crystals or crystalline 
powder. In aqueous solution, it has a pKa of 8.97, and the commer-
cial injection has a pH of 4 after reconstitution. 9 mg are soluble in  
1 mL of water; 23 mg are soluble in 1 mL of alcohol.
Vecuronium bromide may also be known as Org-NC-45, Cur-
lem®, Norcuron®, Rivecrum®, Vecural®, or Vecuron®.
Storage/Stability
The commercially available powder for injection should be stored at 
controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) and protect-
ed from light. After reconstitution with sterile water for injection, ve-
curonium bromide is stable for 24 hours at 2°C to 8°C (36°F-46°F).5 
As it contains no preservative, unused portions should be discarded 
after reconstitution. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 

===== PDF_PAGE_1324 =====
Verapamil   1297
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Compatible with 0.9% sodium chloride, 5% dextrose in water, 5% 
dextrose in 0.9% sodium chloride, and lactated Ringer’s for dilution.
It should not be mixed in the same IV bag or syringe, or given 
through the same needle with alkaline drugs (eg, barbiturates) or 
solutions (eg, sodium bicarbonate) as precipitation may occur.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Vecuronium Bromide Powder for Injection: 10 mg and 20 mg in  
10 mL and 20 mL vials; generic; (Rx)
Vecuronium Bromide Solution for Injection: 1 mg/mL in 10 mL pre-
filled syringes or 100 mL vials; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Verapamil
(ver-ap-a-mill) Calan®, Verelan®
Calcium Channel Blocker 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for supraventricular tachycardias in dogs and cats 
 ▶ Contraindications include cardiogenic shock or severe CHF 
(unless secondary to a supraventricular tachycardia), hypo-
tension, sick sinus syndrome, second- or third-degree AV 
block, digoxin intoxication, or hypersensitivity to verapamil. 
IV administration is contraindicated within a few hours of IV 
beta-blocker administration.
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with heart failure, hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, hepatic impairment, or renal impairment. 
Use cautiously in patients with atrial fibrillation and Wolff- 
Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome.
 ▶ Verapamil is a P-glycoprotein substrate and should be used 
with caution in dogs with the MDR1 gene mutation (also 
known as ABCB1-1delta).
 ▶ Adverse effects include hypotension, bradycardia, tachycardia, 
exacerbation of CHF, peripheral edema, AV block, pulmonary 
edema, nausea, constipation, dizziness, headache, or fatigue.
 ▶ Many possible drug interactions
Uses/Indications
In dogs and cats, verapamil may be useful for the treatment of su -
praventricular tachycardias and, possibly, treatment of atrial flutter 
or fibrillation. If systolic dysfunction is present, calcium channel 
blockers are often drugs of choice for atrial or AV nodal tachycardia. 
When oral therapy is indicated, most clinicians prefer using dilti -
azem instead of verapamil.
Pharmacology/Actions
Verapamil is a slow-channel calcium (L-type) blocking agent and a 
phenylalkylamine that is classified as a class IV antiarrhythmic drug. 
Verapamil exerts its actions by binding the L-type calcium channels 
and blocking the transmembrane influx of extracellular calcium ions 
across membranes of vascular smooth muscle cells and myocardial 
cells. The result of this blocking is inhibition of the contractile mech-
anisms of vascular, which causes systemic and coronary vasodila -
tion, and inhibition of the contractile mechanisms of cardiac smooth 
muscle. Verapamil has inhibitory effects on the cardiac conduction 
system, and these effects produce its antiarrhythmic properties. 
Electrophysiologic effects include an increased effective refrac -
tory period of the AV node, decreased automaticity, and substan -
tially decreased AV node conduction. On ECG, heart rate and RR 
intervals can be increased or decreased; PR and AH intervals are in-
creased. Verapamil has negative effects on myocardial contractility, 
and it decreases peripheral vascular resistance.
Verapamil is a P-glycoprotein inhibitor, which could increase tox-
icity risk for other substrate drugs but also could be used for ther -
apeutic advantage (eg, overcoming P-glycoprotein-mediated multi-
drug resistance by blocking efflux of some chemotherapy drugs).
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, 90% of an oral dose is absorbed, but because of a high first-
pass effect, bioavailability is only 10% to 23%. The volume of distri-
bution has been reported to be ≈4.5 L/kg in dogs. Serum half-lives of 
1.8 hours and 2.5 hours have been reported in dogs, which appears to 
be significantly faster than in humans. Biotransformation occurs in 
the liver, and like humans, several metabolites are formed, including 
some that have activity. Elimination occurs primarily via the bile/
feces in dogs.
No pharmacokinetic information was located for cats.
In humans, ≈90% of a dose of verapamil is rapidly absorbed af -
ter oral administration, but because of a high first-pass effect, only 
≈20% to 30% is available to the systemic circulation. Patients with 
significant hepatic dysfunction may have considerably higher per -
centages of the drug systemically bioavailable. Food will decrease the 
rate and extent of absorption of the sustained-release tablets, but less 
so with the conventional tablets. Verapamil’s volume of distribution 
is between 4.5 and 7 L/kg; ≈90% of the drug in the serum is bound 
to human plasma proteins. Verapamil crosses the placenta, and milk 
concentrations may approach those in the plasma.
Verapamil is metabolized in the liver to at least 12 separate metab-
olites, with norverapamil being the most predominant. The majority 
of the amounts of these metabolites are excreted into the urine. Only 
3% to 4% is excreted unchanged in the urine. In humans, the half-life 
of the drug is 2 to 8 hours after a single IV dose, but it can increase 
after 1 to 2 days of oral therapy (presumably due to a saturable pro-
cess of the hepatic enzymes). 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Verapamil is contraindicated in patients with cardiogenic shock or 
severe CHF (unless secondary to a supraventricular tachycardia 
amenable to verapamil therapy), hypotension (less than 90 mm Hg 
systolic), sick sinus syndrome, second- or third-degree AV block, di-
goxin intoxication, or hypersensitivity to verapamil.
IV verapamil is contraindicated within a few hours of IV beta-ad-
renergic blocking agents (eg, propranolol), as they both can depress 
myocardial contractility and AV node conduction. The use of this 
combination in patients with wide complex ventricular tachycardia 
(QRS greater than 0.11 seconds) can cause rapid hemodynamic de -
terioration and ventricular fibrillation.
Verapamil should be used with caution in patients with heart fail-
ure, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and hepatic or renal impairment. 
Toxicity may be potentiated in patients with hepatic dysfunction. It 
should be used cautiously in patients with atrial fibrillation that have 
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome, as fatal arrhythmias may 
result; this is considered a contraindication in humans.1
Verapamil should be used with caution in diabetic animals be -
cause it may increase blood glucose in dogs.2,3
Verapamil is a P-glycoprotein inhibitor, which could increase 

===== PDF_PAGE_1325 =====
1298    Verapamil
the risk for toxicity in animals with the MDR1 gene mutation (also 
known as ABCB1-1delta) that are concurrently receiving P-glyco -
protein substrates.
Adverse Effects
Possible adverse effects include hypotension, bradycardia, tachycar-
dia, exacerbation of CHF , peripheral edema, AV block, pulmonary 
edema, nausea, constipation, dizziness, or fatigue.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Verapamil crosses the placenta and can be detected in umbilical vein 
blood at delivery. Oral verapamil in rats with doses 1.5 to 6 times the 
human dose was embryocidal and retarded fetal growth and devel -
opment, likely due to reduced weight gains in dams.1
Verapamil is excreted in milk.1 Consider discontinuing nursing if 
the dam requires verapamil therapy.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Clinical signs of overdose are extensions of verapamil’s adverse ef -
fect profile, and may include lethargy, bradycardia, hypotension, QT 
interval prolongation, hyperglycemia, junctional rhythms, and sec -
ond- or third-degree AV block. 4 Sinus tachycardia is also possible, 
presumably due to carotid sinus reflex stimulation. Other clinical 
signs that may be noted include GI upset, vomiting, hypothermia, 
CNS depression, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, hypokalemia, 
metabolic acidosis, and increased lactate production. Rarely CNS 
stimulation (eg, seizures, agitation, ataxia, tremors) occurs. 
If overdose is secondary to recent oral ingestion (less than 2 hours) 
and the patient is asymptomatic, GI decontamination (eg, emesis, 
activated charcoal ± sorbitol) should be considered. Treatment is 
generally supportive in nature; vigorously monitor cardiac and re -
spiratory functions. IV calcium salts have been suggested to treat the 
negative inotropic clinical signs but may not adequately treat clinical 
signs of heart block. See Calcium, IV (-Borogluconate, -Chloride, 
-Gluconate). The use of fluids and pressor agents (eg,  dopamine, 
norepinephrine) may be utilized to treat hypotensive clinical signs. 
The AV block and/or bradycardia can be treated with isoproterenol, 
norepinephrine, atropine, or cardiac pacing. Patients that develop 
a rapid ventricular rate after verapamil because of antegrade con -
duction in flutter/fibrillation with Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) 
syndrome have been treated with direct current (DC) cardioversion, 
lidocaine, or procainamide. Other therapies may include glucagon, 
insulin/glucose, and IV lipid emulsion.4,5
Because of the potential for severe toxic effects and the potential-
ly complicated management of calcium channel blocker overdoses, 
consultation with a 24-hour poison consultation center specializing 
in providing veterinary-specific information is recommended. For 
general information related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well 
as contact information for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving verapamil and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme  Inhibitors (ACEIs; eg, 
benazepril, enalapril): May cause additive hypotensive effects
 ■ Alpha-Adrenergic Receptor Antagonists ( eg, prazosin): 
May cause additive hypotensive effects
 ■ Beta-Adrenergic Receptor Antagonists  (eg, proprano-
lol): May cause additive negative cardiac inotrope and chrono -
trope effects
 ■ Bupiv acaine/Mepiv acaine : Concurrent use may increase the 
risk for heart block.
 ■ Buspirone : Concurrent use may result in an increased risk for 
enhanced buspirone effects.
 ■ Calcium : Concurrent use may result in reversal of hypotensive 
effects.
 ■ Clonidine : Concurrent use may result in an increased incidence 
of sinus bradycardia.
 ■ Clopidogrel : Concurrent use may result in decreased anti -
platelet effect and increased risk for thrombotic events.
 ■ Cyclosporine : Verapamil may increase levels and risk for tox -
icity.
 ■ Dantrolene : Cardiovascular collapse is reported in animals 
when used with verapamil.
 ■ Digoxin : Verapamil may increase the blood levels of digoxin; 
monitoring of digoxin levels is recommended.
 ■ Diuretics : May cause additive hypotensive effects
 ■ Doxorubicin : Verapamil may increase concentrations.
 ■ Erythromycin, Clarithromycin : May increase verapamil levels
 ■ Fluconazole : Concurrent use may result in increased ver -
apamil exposure and risk for toxicity.
 ■ Fentanyl : Concurrent use may result in increased risk for fen -
tanyl toxicity.
 ■ Hydrocodone : Concurrent use may increase hydrocodone ex-
posure and risk for increased or prolonged opioid effects.
 ■ Ivermectin : In rabbits, concurrent use increased ivermectin 
plasma concentration and AUC, and prolonged elimination half-
life.6 In vitro studies using canine cells demonstrate verapamil in-
hibits P-glycoprotein transport of ivermectin.7,8
 ■ Ketoconazole : Concurrent use may result in increased keto -
conazole and verapamil exposure.
 ■ Midazolam : Concurrent use may result in increased/prolonged 
sedation.
 ■ Morphine : Concurrent use may increase morphine exposure.
 ■ Neuromuscular Blockers ( eg, atracurium): Neuromuscular 
blocking effects of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants may be en -
hanced by verapamil.
 ■ P-Glycoprotein Substrates, Other  (eg, butorphanol, 
loperamide, vincristine): Because verapamil is a P-glycoprotein 
inhibitor, combination could increase the risk for toxicity for ani-
mals with the MDR1 gene mutation (also known as ABCB1-1del-
ta) that are concurrently receiving P-glycoprotein substrates.
 ■ Phenobarbital : May reduce verapamil concentrations
 ■ Quinidine : Additive alpha-adrenergic blocking activity; in -
creased hypotensive effect; verapamil can block quinidine’s AV 
conductive effects and increase quinidine levels.
 ■ Rifampin : May reduce verapamil levels
 ■ Theophylline, Aminophylline : Verapamil may increase se -
rum levels of theophylline and lead to toxicity.
 ■ Vincristine : Calcium channel blockers may increase intracellu-
lar vincristine by inhibiting the drug’s outflow from the cell.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Verapamil may elevate blood glucose in dogs and confuse blood 
glucose determinations.
Dosages
DOGS:
Supraventricular tachycardia (extra-label): Initially, 0.05 mg/kg  
IV given over 1 to 2 minutes while continuously monitoring ECG. 
If not effective, may repeat dose every 5 to 10 minutes until a to -
tal dose of 0.15 mg/kg has been administered. If effective, con -
trol may last only for 30 minutes (or less). For longer control, a  

===== PDF_PAGE_1326 =====
Verapamil   1299
2 – 10 µg/kg/minute IV CRI can be administered.9,10
CATS:
Supraventricular tachycardia (extra-label): Initially, 0.025 mg/kg  
IV given over 1 to 2 minutes while continuously monitoring ECG. 
If not effective, may repeat every 5 to 10 minutes until a total dose 
of 0.15 mg/kg has been administered. If effective, control may last 
only for 30 minutes (or less). For longer control, a 2 – 10 µg/kg per 
minute IV CRI can be administered.11
HORSES : 
Controlling ventricular rate in atrial fibrillation  (extra-label): 
0.025 – 0.05 mg/kg IV every 30 minutes, not to exceed a total dose 
of 0.2 mg/kg12
SMALL MAMMALS :
a) Hamsters: 0.25 – 0.5 mg/hamster (NOT mg/kg) SC13
b) Rabbits: 8 – 16 mg/kg PO daily in combination with  
0.5 – 2 mg/kg SC once daily13,14
Monitoring
 ■ Heart rate and rhythm; blood pressure
 ■ Clinical signs of toxicity (see Adverse Effects)
 ■ Blood pressure, particularly during acute IV therapy
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is used in dogs and cats to treat heart rhythm 
 problems.
 ■ This medicine is not commonly used in animals, so side effects 
are not well known. Possible side effects include swelling of the 
limbs, too fast or too slow heartbeats, gastrointestinal effects (eg, 
vomiting, constipation), and drowsiness/tiredness/lack of energy. 
Contact your veterinarian if you have any concerns about your 
animal.
 ■ It is very important that your animal receives each dose. If you 
miss a dose, give it when you remember, but it if it close to the 
time for the next dose, skip the dose you missed and give it at 
the next scheduled time. After that, return to the regular dosing 
schedule.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is tak-
ing this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Verapamil HCl is a calcium channel blocking agent that occurs as a 
bitter-tasting, nearly white, crystalline powder. It is soluble in water, 
and the injectable product has a pH of 4 to 6.5.
Verapamil HCl tablets should be stored at room temperature 
(15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]); the injectable product should be stored 
at room temperature (15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]) and protected from 
light and freezing.
Verapamil may also be known as CP-16533-1, D-365, iproveratril 
hydrochloride, or verapamili hydrochloridum; many trade names 
are available.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Verapamil HCl for injection is physically compatible when mixed 
with all commonly used IV solutions. However, a crystalline precip-
itate may form if verapamil is added to an infusion line with 0.45% 
sodium chloride with sodium bicarbonate running. Verapamil is 
reported to be physically compatible with the following drugs: ami-
kacin sulfate, aminophylline, ampicillin sodium, ascorbic acid, atro-
pine sulfate, calcium chloride/gluconate, cefazolin sodium, cefotax -
ime sodium, cefoxitin sodium, chloramphenicol sodium succinate, 
cimetidine HCl, clindamycin phosphate, dexamethasone sodium 
phosphate, diazepam, digoxin, dobutamine HCl (slight discolor -
ation due to dobutamine oxidation), dopamine HCl, epinephrine 
HCl, furosemide, gentamicin sulfate, heparin sodium, hydrocorti -
sone sodium phosphate, hydromorphone HCl, insulin, isoprotere -
nol, lidocaine HCl, magnesium sulfate, mannitol, meperidine HCl, 
methylprednisolone sodium succinate, metoclopramide HCl, mor -
phine sulfate, multivitamin infusion, nitroglycerin, norepineph -
rine bitartrate, oxytocin, pancuronium Br, penicillin G potassium/
sodium, pentobarbital sodium, phenobarbital sodium, phentol -
amine mesylate, phenytoin sodium, potassium chloride/phosphate, 
procainamide HCl, propranolol HCl, protamine sulfate, quinidine 
gluconate, sodium bicarbonate, sodium nitroprusside, tobramycin 
sulfate, vasopressin, and vitamin B complex with C.
The following drugs have been reported to be physically  incom-
patible with verapamil: albumin injection, amphotericin B, hydrala-
zine HCl, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 4 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Verapamil HCl Tablets: 40 mg, 80 mg, and 120 mg; Calan®, generic; 
(Rx)
Verapamil HCl Sustained-Release Tablets: 120 mg, 180 mg, and  
240 mg; Calan® SR, generic; (Rx); Tablets may be split in ½ without 
altering sustainedrelease characteristics.
Verapamil HCl Extended-Release Capsules: 100 mg, 120 mg,  
180 mg, 200 mg, 240 mg, 300 mg, and 360 mg; Verelan®, Verelan® 
PM, generic; (Rx). Capsules may be opened, and contents sprinkled 
on soft food, but capsule contents should not be crushed or chewed.
Verapamil HCl for Injection: 2.5 mg/mL in 2 mL and 4 mL vials, 
ampules, and syringes; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 

===== PDF_PAGE_1327 =====
1300    Verdinexor
Verdinexor
(ver-dih-nex-or) Laverdia®-CA1
Antineoplastic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Conditionally approved oral treatment for dogs with lympho-
ma and must therefore only be used as labeled  
 ▶ Must be administered immediately after feeding a small meal 
 ▶ Contraindications include dogs with a hypersensitivity to 
the drug, or those that are pregnant, nursing, or intended for 
breeding. Dogs weighing less than 9 kg (19.8 lb) may not be 
accurately dosed or undergo dose adjustments. 
 ▶ Adverse effects include anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, weight 
loss, lethargy, polydipsia, polyuria, elevated liver enzymes, and 
thrombocytopenia.
 ▶ Disposable chemotherapy-resistant gloves should be used 
when handling verdinexor and the treated dog’s bodily fluids 
and waste. Disposable chemotherapy-resistant gloves should 
also be worn when handling the dog’s toys and food and 
water bowl. This medicine can affect male and female fertility. 
Women who are pregnant, may become pregnant, or breast-
feeding should not handle the drug. 
 ▶ Include the Client Information Sheet (CIS) when dispensing 
the drug. The CIS states that unused tablets are to be returned 
to the veterinarian for disposal.
Uses/Indications
Verdinexor is conditionally approved (pending a full demonstration 
of effectiveness) by the FDA for the treatment of lymphoma in dogs. 
In a field study, a complete response (CR) or partial response (PR) 
occurred in 20 of 58 dogs with T-cell or B-cell lymphoma (34.5%, CR 
= 1, PR = 19). 1 In dogs with lymphoma the median time to tumor 
progression (TTP) was 29.5 days (range, 7 to 244 days), 2 but TTP 
was 43 days in naïve lymphoma patients compared to 24 days for 
relapsed patients.3 Clinical benefit (ie, CR, PR, or stable disease) was 
also demonstrated in 64% of dogs with non-Hodgkin lymphoma in a 
separate study.4 In both studies,3,4 concurrent corticosteroid use was 
allowable but was not part of the designed study protocol. 
As a conditionally approved drug, it is a violation of US federal 
law to use this product other than as directed on the label.
Pharmacology/Actions
Verdinexor is a selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE) that re -
versibly inhibits chromosome region maintenance 1 (CRM1, also 
known as exportin-1 [XPO1]). CRM1 is an export protein respon -
sible for transporting macromolecules, including RNA, tumor sup -
pressor proteins (TSP; eg, p53, RB1), and growth regulatory proteins 
(GRP; eg, p21) from the cell nucleus into the cytoplasm.5–7 Inhibition 
of CRM1 by verdinexor prevents the export of TSP and GRP , and 
the resulting restoration of TRP and GRP within the nucleus renders 
the cell susceptible to apoptosis. 4,8 As CRM1 is overexpressed and/
or mutated in cancer patients, 7–9 verdinexor exerts its activity pref -
erentially in cancer cells or in cells with genomic damage. 10,11 In ad-
dition to lymphomas, verdinexor has demonstrated biologic activity 
against cell lines for canine mammary carcinoma,12 mast cell tumor,4 
melanoma,9 osteosarcoma,4 and transitional cell carcinoma.12
As a class, SINEs block thrombopoietin signaling and reversible 
thrombocytopenia is a common adverse effect.13
Verdinexor has demonstrated antiviral activity, 14,15 including 
against eastern and western equine encephalitis.16
Pharmacokinetics
The oral bioavailability of verdinexor in recently fed dogs is 3-fold to 
5-fold greater than in fasted dogs. 1 In healthy and recently fed dogs 
receiving a single oral verdinexor dose, the time to peak plasma con-
centration is ≈1 to 4 hours after administration, and plasma half-life 
was ≈2 to 6 hours.1 In dogs with lymphoma, at steady-state the mean 
peak verdinexor concentration of 278 ng/mL occurred ≈5 hours af -
ter administration, mean AUC was 1971 ng·t/mL, and half-life was 
≈5 hours. 3 Verdinexor is thought to be metabolized by glutathione 
conjugation.2
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Verdinexor is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it. Do 
not use the drug in dogs that are pregnant, lactating, or intended for 
breeding.2 
Dogs weighing less than 9 kg (19.8 lb) may not be accurately dosed 
or undergo dose adjustments.2 Dogs weighing 9 to 9.6 kg (19.8-21.1 
lb) cannot undergo dosage increase from 1.25 mg/kg to 1.5 mg/kg. 
Verdinexor has not been evaluated in dogs younger than 7 months of 
age; with diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular, hepatic or renal disease; 
with concurrent serious infections or malignancy; or with clinically 
relevant hypercalcemia.
Oral absorption is dramatically increased when verdinexor is ad-
ministered with food.1 Because anorexia may be a dose-limiting ad-
verse effect,4 appetite stimulants appropriate for dogs and low-dose 
corticosteroids may be needed to maintain the dog’s appetite during 
the course of therapy.3,4
Verdinexor has a narrow margin of safety. See Overdose/Acute 
Toxicity.
Verdinexor is an antineoplastic agent, and disposable chemother-
apy-resistant gloves are to be used when handling. Pregnant women, 
women who may become pregnant, and nursing women should not 
handle or administer verdinexor, or come in contact with the treated 
dog’s waste or bodily fluids.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are dose-related. 4 All dogs in a field study of dogs 
with lymphoma experienced at least one adverse effect. 2 Common 
adverse effects included anorexia (45% to 74%), vomiting (26% to 
59%), diarrhea (12% to 52%), weight loss (31% to 48%), and lethar -
gy (17% to 41%). 1,3 Polydipsia (33%) and polyuria (31%) have also 
been observed, 1 although concurrent corticosteroid use was com -
mon. Other adverse effects seen in more than or equal to 10% of 
dogs in the field trial included fever, weakness, generalized pain, and 
cough/dyspnea. Hematological toxicity reported in a field study in -
cluded thrombocytopenia (31%), lymphopenia (29%), neutrophilia 
(26%), anemia (22%), leukopenia (21%), and neutropenia (16%).1 In 
the dogs with thrombocytopenia, 2 experienced bruising and 1 had 
epistaxis.2
Changes in serum chemistry values included elevated liver en -
zymes including ALP (48%), ALT (36%), and AST (10%); increased 
BUN (26%); hypercalcemia (17%); hypochloremia (14%); hyper -
phosphatemia (12%); and hypoproteinemia (10%). Prolonged par -
tial thromboplastin time has also been noted. 1 A protein-losing ne-
phropathy was reported in one dog.23
Hematuria, UTI, low urine specific gravity, and proteinuria were 
abnormalities noted on urinalysis.2
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Verdinexor is contraindicated in dogs that are pregnant, lactating, 
or intended for breeding. The drug is embryotoxic and teratogenic 
in rats.2 Reduced male and female fertility has been documented in 
animal studies and in humans. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In dogs given 1 – 1.75 mg/kg orally 3 times per week, in addition to 
the drug’s typical adverse effects, other clinical signs included thin 
body condition, excessive shedding, loss of skin elasticity, lacrima -
tion, slight depression, and slight decrease of forelimb strength.2 Re-

===== PDF_PAGE_1328 =====
Verdinexor   1301
duced lymphocytes, eosinophils, and monocytes were observed as 
was increased fibrinogen, albumin, and BUN.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged to consult with one of 
the 24-hour poison consultation centers that specialize in providing 
information specific for veterinary patients. For general information 
related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact informa-
tion for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The effects of concurrent drugs on verdinexor metabolism have not 
been studied. The product label states that verdinexor was admin -
istered concomitantly with other drugs such as corticosteroids (eg, 
predniso(lo)ne), proton pump inhibitors (eg, omeprazole), hista -
mine H2 receptor antagonists (eg, famotidine), antibiotics, antiemet-
ics (eg, ondansetron), GI motility modifiers (eg, loperamide, meto -
clopramide), and opioids (eg, morphine).1 
 ■ Chemotherapy, Other : Safe and effective use of verdinexor 
with other chemotherapeutic agents has not been evaluated.2
 ■ V accines : Verdinexor may diminish the response to vaccines.
The product label cautions that concurrent administration of 
verdinexor with drugs that undergo glutathione conjugation (eg, ac-
etaminophen) should be minimized. Possible substrates of glutathi-
one S-transferase include:
 ■ Acetaminophen (metabolite)
 ■ Anthracyclines (eg, doxorubicin, mitoxantrone)
 ■ Busulfan
 ■ Cisplatin
 ■ Cyclophosphamide
 ■ Spinosad
 ■ Thiotepa
Laboratory Considerations
None noted
Dosages
DOGS:
Lymphoma (label dosage; conditionally approved by FDA):  
1.25 mg/kg PO immediately after feeding twice per week with at 
least 72 hours between doses (eg, Monday and Thursday, or Tues-
day and Friday) 
• If tolerated after 2 weeks, increase dosage to 1.5 mg/kg PO 
twice per week with at least 72 hours between doses. 
• To manage adverse effects, dosage may be reduced by incre -
ments of 0.25 mg/kg; dosage interruptions may also be consid-
ered. Minimum dosage is 1 mg/kg PO twice per week with at 
least 72 hours between doses. 
• See product label for dosing tables with the necessary com -
binations of tablet strengths for 1 mg/kg, 1.25 mg/kg, and  
1.5 mg/kg dosages.2
Monitoring
 ■ Although the exact schedule for recheck appointments and blood 
work testing has not been determined, the phase II study per -
formed rechecks weekly during the first 28 days, then every other 
week.3
 ■ Baseline and periodic physical examinations and blood work (eg, 
CBC, serum chemistry [including liver enzymes, albumin, total 
protein]) are recommended as needed based on the patient’s re -
sponse to therapy (especially after starting therapy or increasing 
the dose) and occurrence of any adverse effects.  
 ■ Baseline and periodic (as clinically indicated) urinalysis, urine 
culture, and urine protein:creatinine (UPC) ratio 
 ■ Appetite, food intake, body weight
 ■ Tumor dimensions, response to therapy
Client Information
 ■ Verdinexor is an antineoplastic (anticancer) medicine. This med-
icine can be hazardous to other animals and people that come in 
contact with it. On the day of verdinexor treatment, and for 3 days 
afterward: 
• Chemotherapy-resistant gloves are to be worn (check with 
your veterinarian to ensure you have the appropriate gloves): 
 ■ when handling or administering verdinexor (this is partic-
ularly important with broken tablets, or if your dog spits 
out verdinexor tablet(s)) 
 ■ to prevent contact with your dog’s feces, urine, saliva, and 
vomit
 ■ when handling your dog’s food and water dishes or toys
• Clean wastes or bodily fluids using disposable absorptive ma -
terials (eg, paper towels) and discard in a securely sealed plas-
tic bag. 
• Wash any items that come in contact with your dog’s feces, 
urine, saliva, or vomit separately from normal household laun-
dry.
 ■ Children, as well as women who are nursing, pregnant, or at -
tempting to become pregnant, should not handle verdinexor tab-
lets, or the dog’s waste or bodily fluids (saliva, vomit, urine). This 
medicine can also affect male fertility.
 ■ Do not eat, drink, or smoke while handling this medicine.
 ■ Do not store this medicine near food, in or near a food prepara -
tion area, or with medications intended for use in humans. 
 ■ Wash skin with soap and water in case of accidental contact with 
verdinexor tablets, or with your dog’s feces, urine, saliva, or vomit 
within 3 days after verdinexor administration.
 ■ With accidental eye exposure, rinse eyes with a large amount of 
tap water for 10 minutes while holding back the eyelid. Remove 
contact lenses. Seek medical advice immediately and show pack -
age insert or label to the physician. 
 ■ Seek medical attention in case of accidental human ingestion of 
verdinexor, or with significant exposure to your dog’s feces, urine, 
vomit, or saliva on the day of treatment or for 3 days afterward.
 ■ Do not crush or split tablets. Administer your dog’s dose promptly 
after the tablets are removed from the bottle. 
 ■ Administer immediately after feeding. Ensure your dog consumes 
the entire dose. Placing tablets in your dog’s food bowl is not rec-
ommended.
 ■ There must be at least 72 hours separating each verdinexor dose. 
If you miss a dose, do not make up the dose, but give the next 
regularly scheduled dose. 
 ■ The most frequent side effects include reduced or loss of appe -
tite, weight loss, vomiting, diarrhea, low energy level (weakness). 
Contact your veterinarian if you notice your dog refusing to eat 
for longer than 1 day, has repeated vomiting or diarrhea, has a low 
energy level, or any other changes that concern you.
 ■ Overdoses can be very serious; administer each dose exactly as 
prescribed.
 ■ Keep verdinexor tablets out of reach of children and animals. 
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to perform examinations and blood 
work on your dog while it is taking this medicine. Do not miss 
these important follow-up visits.
 ■ Do not throw unused verdinexor tablet in the trash. Unused 
verdinexor tablets should be returned to your veterinarian for 
disposal. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Verdinexor occurs as a crystalline solid. It is soluble in DMSO and 

===== PDF_PAGE_1329 =====
1302    Vinblastine
sparingly soluble in ethanol.17 It has an oil:water partition coefficient 
of 4.1.18
Verdinexor may also be known as KPT-335 or Laverdia®-CA1.
Storage/Stability
Store verdinexor tablets at room temperature between 20°C to 25°C 
(68°F-77°F). Store out of reach of children and pets. Do not store 
verdinexor tablets near other drugs, food, or in a food preparation 
area. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No information available
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Verdinexor Coated Tablets: 2.5 mg, 10 mg, and 50 mg in 50-count 
bottles; Laverdia®-CA1, (Rx). Conditional Approval Application 
Number 141-526. Extra-label use of conditionally approved drugs is 
not permitted by FDA. 
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Vinblastine
(vin-blas-teen) Velban®
Antineoplastic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Vinca alkaloid antineoplastic used for a variety of tumors in 
dogs and cats
 ▶ Contraindications include pre-existing leukopenia or granu-
locytopenia (unless a result of the disease being treated) or 
active bacterial infection; reduce dose if hepatic insufficiency. 
Use it with caution in herding breeds (eg, collies) that may 
have the MDR1 mutation (also known as ABCB1-1delta).
 ▶ Adverse effects include nausea/vomiting (less than with 
vincristine), myelosuppression (more so than with vincristine); 
it may also cause constipation, alopecia, stomatitis, ileus, 
inappropriate ADH secretion, jaw and muscle pain, and loss of 
deep tendon reflexes. 
 ▶ Cats can develop neurotoxicity, causing constipation or par-
alytic ileus and aggravating hyporexia; cats can also develop 
reversible axon swelling and paranodal demyelination.
 ▶ Extravasation can cause significant tissue irritation and cellu-
litis.
 ▶ Many drug interactions
 ▶ Hazardous drug; use appropriate precautions and wear gloves 
and protective clothing when preparing or administering. 
Potential teratogen
Uses/Indications
Vinblastine may be used in the treatment of lymphomas, carcino -
mas, and mast cell tumors in small animal species. It may be more 
effective than vincristine in the treatment of canine mast cell tumors. 
The combination of vinblastine and toceranib for the treatment of 
canine mast cell tumors was evaluated in a phase I trial. Although an 
objective response rate of 71% was noted, vinblastine dosing required 
a 50% reduction due to dose-limiting toxicity when compared to sin-
gle-agent use. The use of this combination is not supported based on 
current drug combination paradigms.1
A prospective clinical trial in cats (n = 40) to compare vincristine 
and vinblastine response rates, outcomes, and toxicity in a COP-
based protocol for lymphoma found that both arms had similar 
response rates, progression-free survival (PFS) times, and lympho -
ma-specific survival (LSS) times, but vincristine-treated cats had a 
higher incidence of GI adverse effects.2
Vinblastine has been evaluated in a retrospective analysis for re -
sponse in relapsed canine lymphoma. The approximate response rate 
was 25% and was short in duration, with a median of 29.5 days.3
A prospective clinical trial in dogs ( n = 28) using vinblastine to 
treat bladder transitional cell carcinoma found that 36% had a partial 
response, 50% had stable disease, and 14% had disease progression. 
The majority of dogs (27 of 28) did not have clinically relevant ad -
verse effects, but 61% required dosage reduction (from the initial 3 
mg/m2 IV every 2 weeks) due to neutropenia. The authors concluded 
vinblastine could be considered another treatment option. 2 Anoth-
er study found that, when used in combination with piroxicam in 
dogs with urethral carcinoma, piroxicam enhanced the activity of 
vinblastine and extended the progression-free survival. However, 
overall survival was significantly longer in dogs receiving vinblas -
tine monotherapy.4 There was no added survival benefit found when 
combining vinblastine with toceranib.5
Pharmacology/Actions
Vinblastine binds to microtubular proteins (tubulin) in the mitotic 
spindle, thereby preventing cell division during metaphase. It also 
interferes with amino acid metabolism by inhibiting glutamic acid 
utilization and preventing purine synthesis, citric acid cycle, and 
urea formation. 
Pharmacokinetics
After IV administration, vinblastine is rapidly distributed to tissues. 
In humans, ≈75% is bound to tissue proteins, and the drug does not 
appreciably enter the CNS. Vinblastine is extensively metabolized by 
the liver and is primarily excreted in the bile/feces; lesser amounts 
are eliminated in the urine. CYP3A12 is the major cytochrome P450 
isoform responsible for the metabolism of vinblastine in dogs.6
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Vinblastine is contraindicated in patients with pre-existing leukope-
nia or granulocytopenia (unless a result of the disease being treated) 
or active bacterial infection. Doses of vinblastine should be reduced 
in patients with hepatic disease. In humans, a 50% reduction in dose 
is recommended when transaminases are 2 to 3 times the upper limit 
of normal.7 
Because vinblastine is potentially neurotoxic as well as a substrate 
of P-glycoprotein, it should be used with caution in herding breeds 
(eg, collies) that may have MDR1 mutation (also known as ABCB1- 
1delta) causing nonfunctional proteins. Myelosuppression and GI 
toxicity (anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea) are more likely to occur at 
standard dosages in dogs with the MDR1 mutation. To reduce the 
likelihood of severe toxicity in these dogs (mutant/normal or mu -
tant/mutant), the Veterinary Clinical Pharmacology Laboratory at 
Washington State University recommends reducing the dose by 25% 
to 30% and carefully monitoring these patients.8
Vinblastine is for IV use only and may be fatal if given by other 
routes.9
Do not confuse vinBLAStine with vinCRIStine; consider using 
“tall man lettering” when writing orders.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies vinblastine as a hazardous drug 10; wash hands 
after handling and use personal protective equipment (PPE) accord-
ingly to minimize the risk for exposure. 
Adverse Effects
Vinblastine can cause GI toxicity, including nausea and vomiting, 
which generally lasts less than 24 hours. Vinblastine is reported to 
cause less GI toxicity than vincristine. 2 It can be myelosuppressive 
at usual dosages (nadir at 4 to 9 days after treatment; recovery at 7 

===== PDF_PAGE_1330 =====
Vinblastine   1303
to 14 days). Vinblastine is considered more myelosuppressive than 
vincristine. Neutropenia is generally the doselimiting toxicity in 
dogs and humans.9,11 At high doses, vinblastine may cause peripheral 
neurotoxic effects similar to those seen with vincristine. Addition -
ally, vinblastine may cause constipation, alopecia, stomatitis, ileus, 
inappropriate ADH secretion, jaw and muscle pain, and loss of deep 
tendon reflexes.
Cats can develop neurotoxicity that can be associated with con -
stipation or paralytic ileus, thereby aggravating anorexia. They may 
develop reversible axon swelling and paranodal demyelination.
Other adverse effects in humans include hypertension, ototoxici-
ty, and acute shortness of breath or severe bronchospasm.9
Vinblastine is considered a vesicant, and extravasation may cause 
significant tissue irritation and cellulitis. If clinical signs of extrava -
sation are noted, discontinue infusion immediately at that site and 
apply moderate heat to the area to help disperse the drug. Injections 
of hyaluronidase have also been suggested to help diffuse the drug. 
Ice is not recommended for vinca alkaloid extravasation as it has 
been shown to significantly increase skin ulceration. 12 Topical di -
methyl sulfoxide (DMSO) has also been recommended by some to 
treat the area involved.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Little is known about the effects of vinblastine on developing fetuses, 
but it is believed that the drug possesses some teratogenic and em -
bryotoxic properties. It may also cause aspermia in males.
It is not known whether vinblastine is excreted in milk, but be -
cause of the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing off -
spring, the use of milk replacer is recommended if the dam requires 
vinblastine. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The LD50 in mice and rats following IV administration is 15 mg/mL 
and 2 mg/mL, respectively. In dogs, the lethal dose for vinblastine 
has been reported as 0.2 mg/kg. In addition to the exacerbations of 
the expected adverse effects, neurotoxicities similar to those associ -
ated with vincristine may also be noted.
In a cat that received 4 times the recommended IV dose, the fol -
lowing clinical signs were noted: within hours depression and in -
ability to jump; Days 1 to 11 anorexia; Days 2 to 6 neutropenia with 
a fever on Day 4; Days 2 to 10 thrombocytopenia and anemia; Days 
4 to 10 vomiting and diarrhea, and on Days 3 to 10 syndrome of 
inappropriate ADH (SIADH). Aggressive therapeutic interventions 
supporting the patient resulted in recovery.13 
In humans, cardiovascular and hematologic monitoring is per -
formed after an overdose. Treatment can include anticonvulsants 
and the prevention of ileus. Additionally, an attempt is made to pre-
vent the effects associated with the syndrome of inappropriate antid-
iuretic hormone (SIADH) with fluid restriction and loop diuretics to 
maintain serum osmolality.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving vinblastine and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Ototoxic Drugs (eg, cisplatin, carboplatin): May cause addi -
tive risk for ototoxicity
 ■ Immunosuppressive Drugs  (eg, azathioprine, cyclophospha -
mide, corticosteroids): Use with other immunosuppressant drugs 
may increase the risk for infection.
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics  (except azithromycin): Macrolide 
antibiotics may increase the serum concentration of vinblastine; 
consider therapy modification.
 ■ Myelosuppressive Agents  (eg, antineoplastics, immunosup-
pressants, iron chelators): Concurrent use with other bone mar -
row depressant medications may result in additive myelosuppres-
sion; avoid combination when possible.
 ■ V accines  (live and inactivated): Vinblastine may diminish vac -
cine efficacy and enhance adverse effects of vaccines.
Caution is advised if using other drugs that can inhibit P-glycopro-
tein, particularly in those dogs at risk for MDR1 genetic mutation 
(eg, collies, Australian shepherds, shelties, long-haired whippets, 
“white feet” breeds), unless tested homozygous normal for the gene 
locus. Drugs and drug classes involved include:
 ■ Amiodarone
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, ketoconazole, itraconazole)
 ■ Carvedilol
 ■ Cyclosporine
 ■ Diltiazem
 ■ Erythromycin; Clarithromycin
 ■ Quinidine
 ■ Spironolactone
 ■ Tamoxifen
 ■ Verapamil
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Vinblastine may significantly increase both blood and urine con-
centrations of uric acid (potentially significant for Dalmatians).
Dosages
NOTE: Because of the potential toxicity of this drug to patients, 
veterinary personnel, and clients, and since chemotherapy indica-
tions, treatment protocols, and monitoring and safety guidelines 
often change, the following dosages should be used only as a gen-
eral guide. Consultation with a veterinary oncologist and referral 
to current veterinary oncology references14–18 are strongly recom-
mended.
DOGS/CATS:
Antineoplastic agent (extra-label): Depending on the protocol 
and the disease treated, vinblastine doses are usually 1.5 – 3 mg/m2  
(NOT mg/kg) IV every 1 to 2 weeks, often in combination with 
other chemotherapy drugs (eg, cyclophosphamide and prednis -
olone in dogs). 19,20 One small observational study found that for 
mast cell tumors in dogs, a higher dose of 3 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) 
resulted in a lower rate of recurrence than a lower 2 mg/m2 (NOT 
mg/kg) dose.21
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy
 ■ Baseline and periodic complete blood counts with platelets 
 ■ Baseline and periodic liver enzymes prior to therapy and repeated 
as necessary
Client Information
 ■ Vinblastine is a chemotherapy (anticancer) medicine. The medi-
cine can be hazardous to other animals and people that come in 
contact with it. On the day your animal gets the medicine and 
then for a few days afterward, handle all bodily waste (urine, feces, 
litter), blood, or vomit only while wearing chemotherapy-resis -

===== PDF_PAGE_1331 =====
1304    Vincristine
tant gloves. Seal the waste in a plastic bag and then place both the 
bag and gloves in with the regular trash. Those who are pregnant, 
attempting to conceive, or nursing should not clean up the ani -
mal’s waste.
 ■ Do not wash any items soiled with waste, vomit, or saliva from 
your dog with other laundry. Take precautions in handling the 
dog’s toys, food bowl, and water bowl; wash separately from other 
items.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to perform regular monitoring, in -
cluding blood tests and/or radiographs, to be sure this drug is not 
causing toxic effects to your animal. Do not miss these important 
follow up visits.
 ■ Observe your dog for lack of appetite, vomiting, or diarrhea. If 
these signs are severe, or if you notice difficulty breathing or signs 
of infection, contact your veterinarian immediately.
 ■ Bone marrow suppression can occur. The greatest effects on bone 
marrow usually occur within a week after treatment. Y our veter-
inarian will do blood tests to watch for this, but if you see bleed -
ing, bruising, fever (indicating an infection), or if your animal 
becomes tired easily, contact your veterinarian right away. Do not 
miss important follow-up visits with your veterinarian.
 ■ Cats can develop nerve toxicity from vinblastine, resulting in se -
vere constipation and loss of appetite.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Vinblastine sulfate, a vinca alkaloid, is isolated from the plant Catha-
ranthus roseus (vinca rosea Linn ) and occurs as a white or slightly 
yellow hygroscopic, amorphous, or crystalline powder that is freely 
soluble in water. The commercially available injection has a pH of 3 
to 5.5.
Vinblastine may also be known as 29060-LE, NSC-49842, sulfato 
de vimblastina, vinblastini sulfas, vincaleukoblastine sulphate, VBL, 
Alkaban®, Blastovin®, Cellblastin®, Cytoblastin®, Ifabla®, Lemblastine®, 
Periblastine®, Serovin®, Solblastin®, Velban®, Velbe®, Velsar®, or Xinto-
prost®.
Storage/Stability
Store intact vials between 2°C to 8°C (36°F-46°F) and protect them 
from light. Dispose of any unused product or waste materials in ac -
cordance with proper procedures for cytotoxic drugs.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent upon factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information.
Vinblastine sulfate is reportedly compatible with 0.9% sodium 
chloride, lactated Ringer’s, or 5% dextrose in water for dilution. It 
is also reportedly physically compatible with the following IV solu-
tions and drugs: 5% dextrose with bleomycin sulfate and compatible 
in syringes or at Y-sites with bleomycin sulfate, cisplatin, cyclophos-
phamide, droperidol, fluorouracil, leucovorin calcium, methotrexate 
sodium, metoclopramide HCl, mitomycin, and vincristine sulfate.
Vinblastine sulfate compatibility information conflicts or is de-
pendent on diluent or concentration factors with doxorubicin HCl 
and heparin sodium (in syringes).
Vinblastine sulfate is reportedly physically incompatible with fu-
rosemide and cefepime.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Vinblastine Sulfate Injection: 1 mg/mL in 10 mL and 25 mL vials; 
generic; (Rx)
Vinblastine Powder for Injection: 10 mg in vials; Velban®, generic; 
(Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Vincristine
(vin-kris-teen) Oncovin®, Vincasar PFS
Antineoplastic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Vinca alkaloid antineoplastic used for a variety of tumors 
(primarily lymphoid, hematopoietic neoplasms, and heman-
giosarcoma) in dogs and cats 
 ▶ Used for the treatment of immune-mediated thrombocytope-
nia and induces thrombocytosis when given at low doses
 ▶ Contraindications include patients with pre-existing leukope-
nia or granulocytopenia (unless as a result of the disease being 
treated) or active bacterial infection; reduce dose if hepatic 
disease is present. 
 ▶ Use with caution in dogs that may have the MDR1 genetic 
mutation.
 ▶ Less myelosuppressive than vinblastine but may cause more 
peripheral neurotoxic effects; neuropathic clinical signs can 
include proprioceptive deficits, spinal hyporeflexia, or paralytic 
ileus with resulting constipation.
 ▶ Cats can develop neurotoxicity causing constipation or 
paralytic ileus, aggravating anorexia; vinblastine may be 
 substituted.
 ▶ Potentially teratogenic and embryotoxic. The National Insti-
tute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) classifies 
vincristine as a hazardous drug; use appropriate precautions 
when handling. Advise clients to use caution when handling 
animal waste.
 ▶ For IV use only. Vesicant, avoid extravasation
Uses/Indications
Vincristine is used as an antineoplastic primarily in combination 
drug protocols in the treatment of lymphoid hematopoietic neo -
plasms (CHOP) and hemangiosarcoma (V AC) in dogs and cats. In 
dogs, the drug may be used as a single agent in the therapy of trans-
missible venereal neoplasms.
A prospective clinical trial in cats (n = 40) to compare vincristine 
and vinblastine response rates, outcomes, and toxicities in a COP-
based protocol for lymphoma, found that both arms had similar 
response rates, progression-free survival (PFS) times, and lympho -
ma-specific survival (LSS) times, but vincristine-treated cats had 
a higher incidence of GI adverse effects. 1 As a result, vinblastine is 
most commonly substituted for vincristine in cats. 
Because vincristine can induce thrombocytosis (at low doses) and 
has some immunosuppressant activity, it may also be employed in 
the treatment of immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (ITP). A pro-
spective, randomized study in dogs (n = 20) comparing the effect of 
hIVIG versus vincristine on platelet recovery in dogs with ITP found 
no significant differences in groups in platelet recovery time, hospi-
talization time, or survival at discharge or 6 months or 1 year after 
entry into the study. The authors concluded that because of lower 
cost and ease of administration, vincristine should be considered for 
first-line adjunctive treatment for the acute management of canine 
ITP .2 
Pharmacology/Actions
By binding to beta-tubulin, vincristine blocks microtubule forma -
tion and prevents mitotic spindle formation; arresting cell division is 
thus arrested in metaphase. It also interferes with amino acid metab-
olism by inhibiting glutamic acid utilization and preventing purine 
synthesis, citric acid cycle, and urea formation. Tumor resistance to 

===== PDF_PAGE_1332 =====
Vincristine   1305
one vinca alkaloid does not imply resistance to another.
Vincristine can induce thrombocytosis (mechanism unknown) 
and has some immunosuppressant activity.
Pharmacokinetics
After IV administration, vincristine is rapidly distributed to tissues. 
In humans, ≈75% is bound to tissue proteins, and the drug does not 
appreciably enter the CNS. Vincristine is extensively metabolized 
by the liver and primarily excreted in the bile and/or feces; lesser 
amounts are eliminated in the urine. In dogs, the pharmacokinetics 
are reportedly biphasic with a volume of distribution of 0.66 L/kg  
and elimination half-life of ≈48 minutes.3 Vincristine residue was de-
tected in urine for 3 days after administration to dogs.4
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Vincristine is contraindicated in patients with pre-existing leukope-
nia or granulocytopenia (unless as a result of the disease being treat-
ed) or active bacterial infection and should be used with caution in 
patients with hepatic diseases, biliary obstruction (hepatic, posthe -
patic), leukopenia, infection, or pre-existing neuromuscular disease.
Doses of vincristine should be reduced in patients with hepatic 
disease and/or biliary obstruction (hepatic, posthepatic).  Complete 
avoidance or an empirical 50% reduction in dose should be consid -
ered if serum bilirubin concentrations are greater than 2 mg/dL.
Because vincristine is a substrate of P-glycoprotein, it should be 
used with caution in dogs (eg, Australian shepherds, collies) that 
may have the MDR1 genetic mutation. 5 Bone marrow suppression 
(eg, decreased blood cell counts, particularly neutrophils) and GI 
toxicity (eg, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea) are more likely to occur at 
normal doses in dogs with either the homozygous (mutant/mutant) 
or heterozygous (normal/mutant) MDR1 mutation. To reduce the 
likelihood of severe toxicity in these dogs (mutant/normal or mu -
tant/mutant), the Veterinary Clinical Pharmacology Laboratory at 
Washington State University recommends reducing the dose by 25% 
to 30% and carefully monitoring these patients.5 
Border collies, unrelated to their MDR1 status, appear to be more 
susceptible to developing vincristine-associated myelosuppression.6
Do not confuse vinBLAStine with vinCRIStine; writing part of 
the drug’s name using tall man lettering on prescriptions/orders may 
reduce the risk of errors.
In humans, it is recommended to use 0.9% sodium chloride to di-
lute vincristine into a flexible sterile container to prevent inadvertent 
administration by any route other than IV . IV administration should 
be done over 5 to 10 minutes.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies vincristine as a hazardous drug; personal protec-
tive equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure.7 
Adverse Effects
Although structurally related to and having a similar mechanism of 
action as vinblastine, vincristine has a different adverse effect profile. 
Vincristine is much less myelosuppressive (causing mild leukopenia) 
at usual doses but may cause more peripheral neurotoxicity. Neu -
ropathic clinical signs may include proprioceptive deficits, spinal 
hyporeflexia, or paralytic ileus with resulting constipation. In hu -
mans, vincristine commonly causes mild sensory impairment and 
peripheral paresthesias. These additional neurotoxic effects may also 
occur in animals; additional caution should be exercised in patients 
with a predisposing neuropathic disorder (ie, degenerative myelopa-
thy). Cats can develop neurotoxicity associated with constipation or 
paralytic ileus, thereby aggravating anorexia8; they may also develop 
reversible axon swelling and paranodal demyelination.9
In addition, in small animals, vincristine may cause vomiting, di-
arrhea, anorexia, impaired platelet aggregation, increased liver en -
zyme activity, inappropriate ADH secretion, jaw pain, alopecia, sto-
matitis, or seizures. Compared with other chemotherapy treatments, 
GI effects are considered frequent but mild. 10 Many dogs receiving 
chemotherapy will have minor hair coat changes (eg, shagginess, loss 
of luster). Breeds with continuously growing hair coats (eg, poodles, 
terriers, Afghan hounds, old English sheepdogs) are more likely to 
experience significant alopecia.
A case report of a cat developing pulmonary edema attributed to 
vincristine administration has been published.11
In dogs, vincristine can cause erythrocyte dysplasia, although this 
effect is deemed clinically insignificant.12 
Vincristine is a vesicant, and extravasation may cause localized 
tissue irritation and cellulitis. Administer IV following a single, clean 
venipuncture attempt through an IV catheter (indwelling or butter-
fly). If clinical signs of extravasation are noted, discontinue infusion 
immediately at that site and apply moderate, dry heat to the area to 
help disperse the drug and promote vascular absorption. Injections 
of hyaluronidase have also been suggested to help diffuse the drug. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
For sexually intact patients, verify pregnancy status prior to ad -
ministration. Vincristine is teratogenic and embryotoxic (including 
malformations; embryo resorption and death) when given at recom-
mended dosages in laboratory animals.13 It may also cause aspermia 
in males. 
It is not known whether this drug is excreted in milk. Because of 
the potential for serious adverse effects in nursing offspring, the use 
of milk replacer is recommended if the dam requires vincristine.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Following IV administration, the LD 50 in mice and rats is 3 mg/kg 
and 1 mg/kg, respectively. 
In dogs, the maximum tolerated vincristine dose is reported to 
be 0.06 mg/kg every 7 days for 6 weeks. Animals receiving this dose 
showed signs of mild anemia, leukopenia, increased liver enzyme ac-
tivity, and neuronal shrinkage in the peripheral nervous system and 
CNS. Megaesophagus and hemorrhagic diarrhea occurred in 1 dog 
following accidental overdose.14
If the overdose is acute (≈6 hours), plasmapheresis may be con -
sidered.15 Other treatment considerations include activated charcoal 
and cholestyramine (which sequesters intestinal secretion of many 
acidic drugs and increases their rate of elimination). For subsequent 
GI signs, a metoclopramide CRI and use of other prokinetic agents 
(eg, cisapride, erythromycin) may be useful to prevent severe ileus. 
For severe myelosuppression, filgrastim (G-CSF) may be started pro-
phylactically along with broad-spectrum antibiotics. 
In humans, multiple products have been used to reduce neuro -
toxicity, including rescue with folinic acid (leucovorin) 18 mg every 
3 hours 16 times and pyridoxine 50 mg IV or PO every 8 hours 16; 
glutamic acid (glutamine) 500 mg PO 3 times daily for 1 month was 
reported to decrease vincristine neurotoxicity with no additional ad-
verse effects.17
In cats, the lethal dose of vincristine is reportedly 0.1 mg/kg. 
Cats receiving toxic doses showed weight loss, seizures, leukopenia, 
and general debilitation. A cat receiving vincristine 5 mg/m 2 (NOT  
mg/kg; 10 times the recommended dose) died 72 hours following the 
overdose despite intensive treatment with calcium folinate.14
In humans, cardiovascular and hematologic monitoring are per -
formed after an overdose. Treatment can include anticonvulsants 
and prevention of ileus. In addition, an attempt should be made to 
prevent the effects associated with syndrome of inappropriate antid-
iuretic hormone (SIADH) by using fluid restriction and loop diuret-
ics to maintain serum osmolality. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 

===== PDF_PAGE_1333 =====
1306    Vincristine
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving vincristine and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Asparaginase : Additive neurotoxicity and myelosuppression 
may occur; effects are less common when asparaginase is admin-
istered after vincristine or when doses are separated by 24 hours.
 ■ Cholestyramine : Pretreatment with cholestyramine blocks 
enterohepatic vincristine reuptake and enhances vincristine fecal 
excretion in dogs. No data are available regarding its use for treat-
ment of vincristine overdose.
 ■ Immunosuppressive Drugs  (eg, azathioprine, corticoste -
roids, cyclophosphamide): Use with other immunosuppressant 
drugs may increase the risk for infection.
 ■ Mitomycin : In humans who have previously or simultaneously 
received mitomycin-C with vinca alkaloids, severe bronchospasm 
has occurred.
 ■ Myelosuppressive Agents (eg, antineoplastics, iron chela -
tors): Concurrent use with other bone marrow depressant medi-
cations may result in additive myelosuppression; avoid combina-
tion when possible.
 ■ V accines  (live and inactivated): Vincristine may diminish vac -
cine efficacy and enhance adverse effects of vaccines.
Caution is advised if using vincristine with drugs that can inhibit 
P-glycoprotein, which may increase intracellular vincristine concen-
tration, particularly in those dogs at risk for MDR1 genetic mutation 
(eg, collies, Australian shepherds, Shetland sheepdogs, long-haired 
whippets, “white feet” breeds), unless they are negative (normal/
normal) for the mutation. Drugs and drug classes involved include:
 ■ Amiodarone
 ■ Azole Antifungals (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole)
 ■ Carvedilol
 ■ Cyclosporine
 ■ Diltiazem
 ■ Macrolide antibiotics  (eg, erythromycin, clarithromycin 
but NOT azithromycin)
 ■ Quinidine
 ■ Spironolactone
 ■ Tamoxifen
 ■ Verapamil
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Vincristine may significantly increase both blood and urine con-
centrations of uric acid.
Dosages
NOTES:
1. Because of the potential toxicity of this drug to patients, vet -
erinary staff, and pet owners, and because chemotherapy in -
dications, treatment protocols, monitoring, and safety guide -
lines often change, the following dosages should be used only 
as a general guide. Consultation with a veterinary oncologist 
and referral to current veterinary oncology references 18-22 are 
strongly recommended.
2. Do NOT confuse mg/kg with mg/m2 dosages.
DOGS:
Neoplastic diseases (extra-label): Usually used in combination 
protocols with other drugs; consultation with a veterinary oncol-
ogist is encouraged before use; see NOTES. Vincristine is usually 
administered at 0.5 – 0.75 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) IV every 1 to 2 
weeks. 
Transmissible venereal tumor (extra-label)
a) Vincristine is used as sole therapy, usually at 0.5 mg/m2 (NOT 
mg/kg; maximum dose 1 mg) IV once weekly for 4 to 6 weeks.
b) Vincristine 0.025 mg/kg IV weekly. Can be used in combina -
tion with intratumoral interferon alpha-2α.23 
c) Vincristine 0.025 mg/kg IV every other week, alternating with 
L-asparaginase 5000 units/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) SC every other 
week for an 8-week treatment period that includes a total of 4 
doses of each drug24
Adjunctive treatment of immune-mediated thrombocytope -
nia (extra-label): In a study, dogs received vincristine 0.02 mg/kg  
IV bolus once. Dogs also received glucocorticoids (usually pred -
nisone 1.5 – 2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours) and doxycycline until 
results of serologic testing were negative for tick-borne disease. 
In dogs that did not have an increase in platelet count 7 days af -
ter treatment, azathioprine 2 mg/kg PO once daily was added.  
NOTE: At this dose of vincristine, clinically significant myelosup-
pression has not been described.2
CATS:
Neoplastic diseases (extra-label): Consultation with a veterinary 
oncologist is encouraged before use; see NOTES. Vincristine is 
usually administered at 0.5 – 0.75 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) IV ev -
ery 1 to 3 weeks. Intraperitoneal (IP) vincristine administration 
was considered a safe and effective alternative route of adminis -
tration.25
HORSES :
Neoplastic diseases (extra-label): Consultation with a veterinary 
oncologist is encouraged before use; see NOTES. Usual dosages 
are 0.5 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg; usually 2.5 – 3 mg total dose per 
horse) IV weekly. 
Adjunctive therapy for generalized lymphoma as part of the 
CAP protocol (extra-label): The following are starting dosages; 
total doses can be increased by 20% to 30% without the expec -
tation of complications. Cytarabine (cytosine arabinoside) at an 
average dose of 1 – 1.2 g (total dose) SC or IM once every 1 to 2 
weeks; cyclophosphamide 1 g (total dose) IV every 2 weeks (alter-
nating with cytarabine); and prednisolone 1 mg/kg PO every oth-
er day. Vincristine 2.5 mg (total dose) IV is added on the weeks 
when cytarabine is administered if there is no response. 
• With remission, the starting doses are maintained for 2 to 3 
months, then the horse is switched to a maintenance protocol. 
The first cycle of maintenance therapy increases the treatment 
interval for each drug by 1 week (except prednisolone, which 
is kept at the same frequency but with a reducing dose). If the 
horse is still in remission 2 to 3 months after the first cycle, 
the second cycle is started by adding an additional week to the 
treatment intervals of each drug.26
FERRETS
Neoplastic disease (extra-label): 0.12 mg/kg IV once weekly for 
3 weeks, then every 3 weeks as part of a modified COP protocol27
Monitoring
 ■ Verify pregnancy status prior to administration.
 ■ Physical and neurologic examinations
 ■ Baseline and periodic (prior to each treatment) CBC, and serum 
liver profile
 ■ Adverse effects: development of peripheral motor and/or sensory 
deficits, fever, constipation, icterus

===== PDF_PAGE_1334 =====
Vinorelbine   1307
Client Information
 ■ Vincristine is a chemotherapy (anticancer) drug. The drug can be 
hazardous to other animals and humans that come into contact 
with it. On the day your animal receives the drug and then for a 
minimum of 3 days afterward, all bodily waste (eg, urine, feces), 
litter, blood, and vomit should only be handled while wearing dis-
posable gloves. Seal the waste in a plastic bag, then place both 
the bag and gloves in the regular trash. Those who are pregnant, 
attempting to conceive, or nursing should not clean up the ani -
mal’s waste. 
 ■ In the interest of safety to other animals and humans, do not take 
your dog to a dog park or allow your animal to urinate and defe -
cate in public places until your veterinarian tells you that it is okay 
to do so.
 ■ Bone marrow suppression can occur. The greatest effects on bone 
marrow usually occur within a few weeks after treatment. Y our 
veterinarian will need to do blood tests to watch for this problem. 
Do not miss these important follow up visits.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to do periodic examinations and 
blood tests on your animal after it receives this medication. Do 
not miss these important follow-up visits.
 ■ Y our animal should not receive vaccines containing live (or mod-
ified live) viruses while receiving this medication.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian right away if you see bleeding, bruising, 
or fever (indicating an infection) or if your animal becomes tired 
easily.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian right away if you notice pain, redness, 
or swelling in the area where the injection was given.
 ■ Vincristine can cause serious neurologic toxicity that can result in 
weakness, severe constipation, and loss of appetite.
 ■ Y our animal should not participate in animal competitions while 
on this drug. Exposure to other animals may put your animal at 
serious risk of infections during chemotherapy treatment. Talk with 
your veterinarian about when itis safe to return to these events.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Vincristine sulfate, commonly referred to as a vinca alkaloid, is iso -
lated from the plant Catharanthus roseus (Vinca rosea Linn) and oc-
curs as a white or slightly yellow, hygroscopic, amorphous, or crys -
talline powder that is freely soluble in water and slightly soluble in 
alcohol. The commercially available injection has a pH of 3 to 5.5. 
Vincristine sulfate has pKas of 5 and 7.4.
Vincristine sulfate may also be known as leurocristine sulfate, 
VCR, LCR compound 37231, leurocristine sulphate, NSC-67574, 
22-oxovincaleukoblastine sulphate, sulfato de vincristina, vincristini 
sulfas, and Oncovin®; many other trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Intact vials should be stored upright between 2°C to 8°C (36°F-46°F) 
and protected from light. Diluted solutions are stable for 7 days at 
refrigerated temperatures or 2 days at room temperature.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatible with normal saline or dextrose 5% in water for dilution. 
Vincristine sulfate is reportedly physically compatible with bleomy-
cin sulfate, cytarabine, fluorouracil, and methotrexate sodium and 
in syringes or at Y-sites with bleomycin sulfate, cisplatin, cyclophos-
phamide, doxorubicin HCl, droperidol, fluorouracil, heparin sodi -
um, leucovorin calcium, methotrexate sodium, metoclopramide 
HCl, mitomycin, and vinblastine sulfate.
Vincristine sulfate is reportedly physically incompatible with fu-
rosemide. 
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Vincristine Sulfate Injection: 1 mg/mL in 1 mL, 2 mL, and 5 mL vials; 
Vincasar® PFS, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Vinorelbine
(vin-or-el-been) Navelbine®
Antineoplastic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ A semisynthetic vinca alkaloid antineoplastic used to treat a 
variety of tumors in dogs and cats
 ▶ Contraindications include pre-existing anemia, thrombocy-
topenia, or granulocytopenia (unless a result of the disease 
being treated) or active bacterial infection; reduce dose for 
patients with hepatic dysfunction. 
 ▶ Adverse effects in dogs include gastroenterocolitis (eg, 
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea), myelosuppression; peripheral 
neuropathy appears less likely than with other vinca alkaloids.
 ▶ Extravasation injury is possible; ensure the IV catheter is well 
placed and freely flowing.
 ▶ Adverse effects in cats include anemia, neutropenia, weight 
loss, and/or vomiting. 
 ▶ Wear gloves and protective clothing when preparing and ad-
ministering. Vinorelbine is a hazardous drug as defined by the 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). 
Potentially teratogenic 
Uses/Indications
Vinorelbine is an antineoplastic drug that has been studied in dogs 
for the treatment of hemangiosarcoma,1 locally aggressive or meta -
static cutaneous mast cell tumors,2 bronchoalveolar carcinoma,3 pri-
mary pulmonary carcinoma4 histiocytic sarcoma, 4 and with piroxi -
cam for urinary bladder carcinoma.5
Vinorelbine use in cats appears to be limited; there is 1 phase I 
study in cats with a variety of tumor types published.6
In humans, vinorelbine is indicated for the treatment of non–
small cell lung cancers (first-line, locally advanced, or metastatic) 
and is also used in the treatment of breast cancer; carcinomas of the 
esophagus and cervix; head, neck, and salivary gland cancer; Hod -
gkin’s lymphoma; mesothelioma; ovarian cancer; and small cell lung 
cancer. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Vinca alkaloids bind tubulin in the mitotic spindle, which prevents 
microtubule formation, interferes with axonal neurotransmitter 
movement, and causes microtubule depolymerization, thereby pre -
venting cell division during metaphase. Vinorelbine also interferes 
with amino acid metabolism by inhibiting glutamic acid utilization 
and preventing purine synthesis, citric acid cycle, and urea forma -
tion. 
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs receiving vinorelbine IV , a rapid distribution phase was 
noted. Protein binding was 90%, and the terminal half-life was 34.5 
hours.7 
In humans, ≈85% of circulating vinorelbine is bound to cellular 
components (≈75% to platelets and other cells, ≈10% to plasma pro-
teins). Vinorelbine is rapidly distributed to tissues, although the drug 
does not appreciably enter the CNS. It reaches 300-fold greater con-
centration in lung tissue than in plasma. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1335 =====
1308    Vinorelbine
Vinorelbine is extensively metabolized in the liver by CYP3A, and 
at least 2 active metabolites are formed. The drug is primarily excret-
ed in the bile and/or feces (≈45%), with lesser amounts (11% to 18%) 
of the unchanged drug eliminated in the urine. Terminal halflife is 
≈40 hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Vinorelbine is contraindicated in patients with pre-existing leuko -
penia or granulocytopenia, thrombocytopenia, or active bacterial 
infections.8 Severe myelosuppression resulting in serious infec -
tion, septic shock, and death can occur. Doses should be delayed 
or reduced for patients with decreased neutrophil counts. In hu -
mans, a dose reduction of 50% is suggested if neutrophil count is  
1000 cells/mm 3 to 1499 cells/mm3, and delaying treatment is advised 
if neutrophil count is less than 1000 cells/mm3. Previous fever, sepsis, 
or delayed treatments warrant a 25% dose reduction.
Doses of vinorelbine should be reduced in patients with hepatic 
disease. In humans, a 50% dose reduction is recommended if serum 
bilirubin levels are greater than 2 mg/dL, and a 75% dose reduction 
is recommended for bilirubin greater than 3 mg/dL.8 Vinorelbine use 
should be avoided in patients receiving radiation therapy in fields 
that include the liver.
Other vinca alkaloids (ie, vinblastine, vincristine) are substrates 
of P-glycoprotein and should be used with caution in herding breeds 
(eg, collies) that may have the the MDR1 mutation (also known as 
ABCB1-1delta) causing nonfunctional proteins, as adverse effects 
may be more likely. However, vinorelbine does not appear to be a 
significant substrate for P-glycoprotein, and it is, therefore, unclear 
whether testing for the MDR1 mutation (also known as ABCB1-1del-
ta) prior to initiating vinorelbine therapy is warranted.9
Intrathecal administration of vinca alkaloids must be avoided, as 
this route of administration may result in ascending paralysis and 
death.
In humans, vinorelbine can cause severe and fatal paralytic ileus, 
constipation, intestinal obstruction, necrosis, and perforation.8 Pul-
monary toxicity, including severe bronchospasm, interstitial pneu -
monitis, and acute respiratory distress syndrome, can also occur.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies vinorelbine as a hazardous drug; personal protec-
tive equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure.10 
Adverse Effects
In 16% to 46% of dogs, vinorelbine can cause gastroenterocolitis 
(nausea/vomiting and diarrhea), 2–5 which generally lasts less than 
24 hours; it is not considered highly emetogenic. 
Myelosuppression was noted in 32% to 54% of dogs 2–5 and can 
occur at usual dosages. Granulocyte nadir is at 7 to 10 days after 
treatment; recovery is 7 to 14 days later. Myelosuppression may be 
cumulative.3,4 Thrombocytopenia (grade 1 or 2) occurred in 7% of 
dogs in 1 retrospective study.4 Vinorelbine is considered more mye-
losuppressive than vincristine. 
Hepatic cirrhosis was noted in 1 dog3 and nonspecific abdominal 
pain with elevated liver enzymes occurred in another dog,4 although 
it was unclear whether those effects were directly attributable to vi -
norelbine. Vinorelbine may cause peripheral neurotoxic effects (eg, 
jaw and muscle pain, peripheral neuropathy, loss of deep tendon 
reflexes). One case of bilateral hind limb ataxia in a dog has been 
noted.4 
In a phase I study in 19 cats, the following adverse effects were 
noted: anemia (32%), neutropenia (21%), weight loss (16%), per -
sistent vomiting (11%), thrombocytopenia (5.2%), and grade 4 acute 
renal injury (5.2%).6 
Administration site reactions (eg, phlebitis, erythema) occur 
more commonly with rapid IV injection or when administered into 
peripheral veins. Vinorelbine is considered a vesicant, and extrav -
asation can cause significant tissue irritation, cellulitis, and necro -
sis. If clinical signs of extravasation are noted, discontinue infusion 
immediately and attempt to aspirate the drug back. Apply moderate 
heat to the area to help disperse the drug. Injections of hyaluronidase  
(150 units/mL, 1 to 6 mL through IV site; or 0.2 mL SC or intrader-
mally in 5 sites [1 mL total] at the leading edge of extravasated drug) 
may help diffuse the drug. Ice is not recommended for vinca alkaloid 
extravasation as it can significantly worsen skin ulceration.11 Topical 
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) can be considered to treat the area in -
volved. Never administer vinorelbine via SC or IM routes.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Vinorelbine possesses teratogenic and embryotoxic properties and 
should only be used in pregnant patients if the potential benefits to 
the dam outweigh the risk to the developing fetus. Placental transfer 
in rats was less than 1%. 7 Vinorelbine may also cause aspermia in 
males.
Concentrations of vinorelbine in rat mammary glands exceeded 
that of plasma concentration.7 It is not known whether vinorelbine is 
excreted in milk, but because of the potential for serious adverse re-
actions in nursing offspring, the use of milk replacer is recommend-
ed if the dam requires vinorelbine.
For sexually intact patients, verify pregnancy status prior to ad -
ministration.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In humans, death has occurred after a 5-fold overdose. In addition 
to the exacerbations of the expected adverse effects (eg, ileus, myleo-
suppression), neurotoxicity similar to those associated with vincris-
tine (eg, loss of reflexes, paresthesias) may also be noted.
In humans, treatment is supportive and can include anti-infec -
tives, hematopoietic drugs, and/or blood transfusions. Additionally, 
an attempt is made to prevent the effects associated with the syn -
drome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) with fluid 
restriction and close monitoring of fluid and electrolyte status.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
Vinorelbine is a CYP3A substrate. The following drug interactions 
have either been reported or are theoretical in humans or animals 
receiving vinorelbine and may be of significance in veterinary pa -
tients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily con -
traindicated, but weigh the potential risks and perform additional 
monitoring when appropriate. 
 ■ Amphotericin B : May increase the risk for nephrotoxicity, 
bronchospasm, and hypotension by an undetermined mechanism
 ■ Antidiuretic Hormone  (eg, desmopressin, vasopressin ): 
May increase the risk for water intoxication and/or hyponatremia
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole, vori-  
conazole): May increase serum concentration of vinorelbine; 
consider reducing the vinorelbine dose.
 ■ CYP3A Inhibitors  (eg, amiodarone, fluvoxamine, grapefruit 
juice): Concurrent use may increase vinorelbine concentration 
and risk for toxicity.
 ■ Heparins  (eg, dalteparin, enoxaparin, heparin ): Concurrent 
use may increase the risk for bleeding.

===== PDF_PAGE_1336 =====
Vinorelbine   1309
 ■ Immunosuppressive Drugs  (eg, azathioprine, cyclophos -
phamide, corticosteroids): Use with other immunosuppressant 
drugs may increase the risk for infection. 
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics  (except azithromycin): Macrolide 
antibiotics may increase the serum concentration of vinorelbine; 
consider reducing the vinorelbine dose.
 ■ Myelosuppressive Agents  (eg, antineoplastics, immuno -
suppressants, iron chelators): Concurrent use with other myelo-
suppressive medications may result in additive myelosuppression; 
avoid combination when possible.
 ■ Neuropathy-inducing Drugs  (eg, carboplatin, dapsone, 
isoniazid, metronidazole, nitrofurantoin): Concurrent use may 
increase the risk for peripheral neuropathy.
 ■ Ototoxic Drugs (eg, aminoglycosides, cisplatin, carbopla -
tin): May cause additive risk for ototoxicity
 ■ V accines  (live and inactivated): Vinorelbine may diminish vac-
cine efficacy and enhance adverse effects of vaccines.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Vinorelbine may significantly increase both blood and urine con-
centrations of uric acid (potentially significant for Dalmatians).
Dosages
NOTE: Because of the potential toxicity of this drug to patients, 
veterinary personnel, and clients, and because chemotherapy in -
dications, treatment protocols, and monitoring and safety guide-
lines often change, the following dosages should be used only as 
a general guide. Consultation with a veterinary oncologist and 
referral to current veterinary oncology references12–16 are strongly 
recommended.
DOGS:
Neoplastic disease  (extra-label): Initial dosage is usually  
15 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) IV into a freely flowing IV catheter 
over 6 to 10 minutes as a solution diluted to a concentration of  
1 – 3 mg/mL; flush IV line after administration. The frequency of 
administration is typically every 1 to 2 weeks. Dosage escalation 
to 16 – 18 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) IV can be considered based on 
tolerability. Dosage may be decreased by 10% to 20% if myelosup-
pression occurs.2–5
CATS:
Neoplastic disease (extra-label): Recommended starting dose is 
11.5 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) administered as a 1.5 mg/mL solution 
IV over 5 minutes every 7 days for up to 4 treatments; continua -
tion with doses every 2 weeks may be considered. Dosage may be 
decreased by 10% to 25% if myelosuppression occurs.6
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy
 ■ Baseline and periodic (ie, prior to each dose) CBC with platelet 
count
 ■ Baseline and periodic liver enzymes
Client Information
 ■ Vinorelbine is a chemotherapy (anticancer) medicine. The med -
icine can be hazardous to other animals and people that come in 
contact with it. On the day your animal gets the drug and then 
for a few days afterward, handle all bodily waste (urine, feces, lit-
ter), blood, or vomit only while wearing chemotherapy-resistant 
gloves. Seal the waste in a plastic bag, then place both the bag and 
gloves in the regular trash.
 ■ Those who are pregnant, attempting to conceive, or nursing 
should not clean up the animal’s waste.
 ■ Do not wash any items soiled with waste, vomit, or saliva from your 
dog with other laundry. Take precautions in handling the dog’s toys, 
food bowl, and water bowl; wash separately from other items.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to perform regular monitoring, in -
cluding blood tests and/or radiographs, to be sure this drug is not 
causing toxic effects to your animal. Do not miss these important 
follow up visits.
 ■ Observe your dog for lack of appetite, vomiting, or diarrhea. If 
these signs are severe, or if you notice difficulty breathing or signs 
of infection, contact your veterinarian immediately.
 ■ Bone-marrow suppression can occur. The greatest effects on bone 
marrow usually occur within a week after treatment. Y our veteri-
narian will do blood tests to watch for this, but if you see bleeding, 
bruising, fever, or other signs of an infection or if your animal 
becomes tired easily, contact your veterinarian right away.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Vinorelbine is a semisynthetic vinca alkaloid derived from the plant 
Catharanthus roseus. Pharmaceutical formulations contain vinorel -
bine tartrate; 1 mg of vinorelbine is equivalent to 1.385 mg of vi -
norelbine tartrate. Vinorelbine tartrate occurs as a white, yellow, or 
light-brown, hygroscopic, amorphous powder that is freely soluble 
in water. The commercially available injection has a pH of 3.3 to 3.8.
Vinorelbine may also be known as 5’-nor-anhydrovinblastine and 
Bagovir®, Vinelbine®, or Navelbine®.
Storage/Stability
Store intact vials between 2°C and 8°C (36°F-46°F) and protect 
them from light. The commercially available injection is pack -
aged under inert gas. Diluted solutions at concentrations between  
0.5 mg/mL and 2 mg/mL are stable for up to 24 hours at 5°C to 30°C 
(41°F-86°F).17  Dispose of any unused product or waste materials in 
accordance with proper procedures for cytotoxic drugs.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent upon factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information.
Compatible with lactated Ringer’s, Ringer’s, 0.45% and 0.9% so-
dium chloride, and 5% dextrose in water or 0.45% sodium chloride. 
Vinorelbine is reportedly syringe or Y-site compatible with 
amiodarone, bleomycin sulfate, butorphanol, calcium salts, carbo -
platin, ceftazidime, ciprofloxacin, cyclophosphamide, dexametha -
sone sodium phosphate, dexmedetomidine, doxorubicin, famoti -
dine, fentanyl, fluconazole, hydromorphone, leucovorin calcium, 
lidocaine hydrochloride, meropenem, metoclopramide HCl, midaz-
olam, naloxone, pamidronate, potassium salts, and zoledronic acid.
Vinorelbine sulfate compatibility information conflicts  with 
heparin sodium (in syringes).
Vinorelbine sulfate is reportedly physically incompatible with 
ampicillin sodium, amphotericin B (all forms), cefazolin, ceftriax -
one, diazepam, furosemide, nitroprusside sodium, pantoprazole, 
phenobarbital, piperacillin-tazobactam, and sodium bicarbonate.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Vinorelbine Sulfate Injection: 10 mg/mL in 1 mL and 5 mL vials; 
generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 

===== PDF_PAGE_1337 =====
1310    Vitamin A
Vitamin A
Vitamin (Retinoid)
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Potentially useful for adjunctive treatment of some types of 
dermatoses in dogs. Evidence is weak to support its use, but it 
is usually tolerated well.
 ▶ Give with food; may require 1 to 2 months before efficacy can 
be noted
 ▶ Must be given IM or SC; do not administer parenteral doses by 
the IV route. 
 ▶ Keratoconjunctivitis or increased liver enzymes possible
Uses/Indications
In dogs, although evidence supporting the use of vitamin A is weak, 
exogenously administered (nondietary) vitamin A may be useful for 
treating vitamin A–responsive dermatosis in cocker spaniels (and 
other breeds), sebaceous adenitis, primary idiopathic seborrhea and 
other primary keratinization disorders, follicular disorders (eg, color 
dilution alopecia), and keratoacanthoma. It also can be used to treat 
hypovitaminosis A in other species, including chelonians and birds.
One retrospective study ( n = 24) using oral vitamin A (mean 
dosage was 1037 units/kg/day) for a minimum of 1 month to treat 
sebaceous adenitis has been published.1 All but 2 dogs also received 
other treatments, including systemic antibiotics, systemic antifungal 
medications, fatty acid supplementation, or various topical treat -
ments. At follow-up, ≈½ of the owners were satisfied with the over -
all appearance of their dogs, reporting at least 25% improvement in 
clinical signs, but almost ⅓ of owners reported no improvement. The 
authors concluded that no correlations could be made between vi -
tamin A dosage and response to treatment; prognoses could not be 
made based on clinical and histopathologic findings.
Pharmacology/Actions
Vitamin A (and its derivatives) is necessary for growth, bone and den-
tal development, vision, reproduction, cortisol synthesis, immunity, 
and the integrity of mucosal and epithelial surfaces. Vitamin A is a 
cofactor in various biochemical reactions, including mucopolysaccha-
ride synthesis, cholesterol synthesis, and hydroxysteroid metabolism. 
Retinol combines with opsin to form rhodopsin in rod cells (respon-
sible for motion detection and night vision) and iodopsin in cone cells 
(responsible for light and color vision). All retinoids have some anti-
proliferative, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulatory effects.
Pharmacokinetics
Orally administered vitamin A (except retinoic acid) must be con -
verted to retinol by pancreatic and mucosal hydrolases before it is 
absorbed in the small intestine and re-esterified in mucosal cells. 
Absorption may be reduced with impaired hepatic or pancreat -
ic function. These retinyl esters (primarily retinyl palmitate) enter 
the systemic circulation via the lymphatics after they are bound by 
chylomicrons and are then cleared from the circulation and stored 
by the liver. Retinoic acid is directly absorbed unchanged and then 
transported into systemic circulation via albumin. It is metabolized 
by glucuronidation pathways.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Exogenously administered vitamin A is contraindicated in patients 
that are known to be hypersensitive to it or in patients with hypervi-
taminosis A. Vitamin A dosages in excess of the recommended daily 
requirements are contraindicated during pregnancy. Anaphylactic 
shock and death have occurred in humans after IV administration.
To avoid hypervitaminosis A, consider all sources of vitamin A 
(eg, dietary, other supplements, topicals) when prescribing vita -
min A.
Adverse Effects
Dogs appear to tolerate oral vitamin A well. Potential adverse effects 
in dogs can include GI effects, erythema, pruritus, and behavioral 
changes. Long-term oversupplementation can cause hypervitamin -
osis A, which is exhibited by localized or generalized papules (firm 
center), poor coat quality, alopecia, scaling, excessive bleeding, liver 
disease, and, rarely, keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Adverse effects gener-
ally resolve after drug discontinuation.
Cats appear to be susceptible to chronic vitamin A toxicity. A case 
report of hypervitaminosis A in a cat that was fed raw liver and de -
veloped hepatic fibrosis and stellate cell lipidosis has been published.2
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Exogenously administered vitamin A is contraindicated in  pregnancy. 
Safety to nursing offspring is not known, but vitamin A require -
ments in dams increase while nursing.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Data on acute toxicity from oral vitamin A in dogs or cats were not 
located. Oral LD50 in rats is 2000 mg/kg.3
In humans, acute toxic effects can include GI effects (eg, nausea, 
vomiting), drowsiness, headache, and vertigo. In adults, blurred vi -
sion has been reported, and in infants, bulging fontanelles. Toxic (1 
time) doses reported are 350,000 units per dose for infants and chil-
dren less than 6 years old, and greater than 2,000,000 units per dose 
for adults, or ≈25,000 units/kg. Long-term overdosing appears to 
hold the greater risk for dogs (and cats); refer to the Adverse Effects 
section for more information. Treatment consists of discontinuation 
of vitamin A and supportive therapy.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving vitamin A and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Cholestyramine : May reduce vitamin A absorption; separate 
dosages by at least 2 hours if using concomitantly
 ■ Clopidogrel : High doses of vitamin A may increase the risk 
for bleeding.
 ■ Heparin : High doses of vitamin A may increase the risk for bleeding.
 ■ Isotretinoin  (eg, other retinoids): Increased risk for vitamin 
A toxicity 
 ■ Mineral Oil : May reduce the amount of vitamin A absorbed 
from the gut. Separate dosages by at least 2 hours if using con -
comitantly.
 ■ Neomycin : May reduce vitamin A absorption
 ■ Tetracyclines  (eg, doxycycline, minocycline ): Concurrent 
use may increase the risk for pseudotumor cerebri (benign intra-
cranial hypertension).
 ■ W arfarin : High doses of vitamin A may increase the risk for 
bleeding.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Vitamin A may falsely elevate bilirubin when determined by Eh-
rlich’s reagent.

===== PDF_PAGE_1338 =====
Vitamin E ± Selenium   1311
Dosages
NOTE: Dosages are not well defined, and little evidence exists to 
support any dosing regimen. 
DOGS:
Adjunctive treatment of canine sebaceous adenitis (extra-label): 
Initially, 8000 – 10,000 units/dog (NOT units/kg) PO twice a day; 
can increase to 20,000  – 30,000 units/dog (NOT units/kg) PO 
twice a day. 4 From a retrospective study ( n = 24): doses varied 
from 380 – 2667 units/kg/day PO (mean dosage was 1037 units/kg  
per day for a minimum of 1 month).1 
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis, primary idiopathic seb -
orrhea, follicular disorders, keratoacanthoma ( extra-label):  
625 – 800 units/kg PO once a day or 10,000 – 50,000 units/dog 
(NOT units/kg) PO once a day with a fatty meal. It may take 4 to 
8 weeks before any improvement can be seen.5
REPTILES :
Adjunctive treatment of hypovitaminosis A in chelonians  (ex-
tra-label): In addition to adding carrots and cod liver oil to the 
diet, vitamin A injection at 2000 units/kg IM can be given.6
Hypovitaminosis A in geckos (extra-label): 0.01 mL of vitamin 
A+D for injection (containing 500,000 units/mL vitamin A) SC; 
repeat in 14 days7
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy
 ■ Schirmer tear test (STT) if using it long term. Recommendation 
for frequency for rechecking STT varies; every 3 weeks to every 6 
to 12 months have been suggested.
 ■ Liver enzymes if using it long term; baseline and every 6 to 12 
months
 ■ Other adverse effects as they arise
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine with food (meals), preferably food that is high 
in fat.
 ■ This medicine may be taken 1 to 2 months before it causes any 
improvement in condition.
 ■ Do not give more of this medicine than your veterinarian pre -
scribes. Vitamin A can be toxic, especially if high doses are given 
for a long time. 
 ■ Watch for dry eyes.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Vitamin A may consist of retinol, or its esters formed from edible 
fatty acids, principally acetic and palmitic acids. In liquid form, vita-
min A is a light yellow to red oil that may solidify upon refrigeration. 
In solid form, it takes on the appearance of any diluent that has been 
added. Vitamin A can be practically odorless, or it may have a mild 
fishy odor (but no rancid odor or taste). It is unstable in air and light. 
In liquid form, vitamin A is insoluble in water or glycerol and soluble 
in dehydrated alcohol or vegetable oils. In solid form, vitamin A may 
be dispersible in water.
Sources of vitamin A can be via retinols or provitamins. Retinols 
include retinol, retinal, and retinoic acid and are found in foods such 
as milk, meat, or eggs. Provitamins are plant-derived and include 
alpha-, beta- and gamma-carotene, which are converted to vitamin 
A in the body. Food processing, such as freezing, may reduce the 
amount of vitamin A in foods. 
Formerly, vitamin A recommended daily allowances (RDA; for 
humans) were expressed in units, but now units has been replaced 
by retinol activity equivalents (RAE), where 1 RAE = retinol 1 µg, 
beta-carotene (from supplements) 0.2 µg, beta-carotene (from food) 
12 µg, alpha-carotene 24 µg, or beta-cryptoxanthin 24 µg. (Note that 
pharmacologic doses continue to be expressed in units.)
Vitamin A may also be known as axerophthol, oleovitamin A, ret-
inol, or retinyl palmitate.
Storage/Stability
Store oral products in tight, light-resistant containers away from 
heat. Store the injection between 2°C and 8°C (36°F and 46°F); do 
not freeze. Protect products from air and light.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Vitamin A for injection can be found in combination with the other 
fat-soluble vitamins (vitamin D and/or E) labeled for use in newborn 
or adult cattle, sheep, and swine; FDA approval status is uncertain 
(OTC).
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Vitamin A Oral Capsules: 7500 units, 8000 units, 10,000 units, and 
25,000 units; generic; (OTC)
Vitamin A Palmitate (Retinyl Palmitate) for IM Injection:  
50,000 units/mL (15 mg retinol/mL); Aquasol-A®; (Rx). NOTE: IV 
administration is contraindicated.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Vitamin E ± Selenium
Alpha-tocopherol
(vye-ta-min-ee; se-lee-nee-um)
Nutritional; Vitamin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Vitamin E (alone) has been used for various skin-related con-
ditions (immune-mediated, ischemic dermatopathies); as an 
adjunctive treatment for hepatopathies and feline pansteatitis; 
and vitamin E deficiency states caused by dietary deficiency, 
pancreatitis, or genetics.
 ▶ Vitamin E with selenium is used for the treatment or prophy-
laxis of selenium-tocopherol deficiency (STD) syndromes in 
ewes and lambs (white muscle disease); sows, weanling and 
baby pigs (hepatic necrosis, mulberry heart disease, white 
muscle disease); calves and breeding cows (white muscle 
disease); and horses (myositis associated with STD).
 ▶ Contraindications: vitamin E/selenium products should only 
be used in the species for which they are FDA-approved.
 ▶ Adverse effects include anaphylactoid reactions; IM injections 
may cause transient muscle soreness. Selenium overdoses can 
cause depression, ataxia, dyspnea, blindness, diarrhea, muscle 
weakness, and a garlic odor on the breath. Selenium overdos-
es can be extremely toxic.
Uses/Indications
Vitamin E may be useful as adjunctive treatment of discoid lupus 
erythematosus, symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy, 1 pemphigus 
complex, and demodicosis in dogs. A review article on canine isch -
emic dermatopathies states: The mainstay for pharmacologic manage-
ment of ischemic dermatopathies is pentoxifylline in combination with 
vitamin E.2 
Vitamin E may also be of benefit in the adjunctive treatment of 
hepatic fibrosis or adjunctive therapy of copper-associated hepatop-
athy in dogs and pansteatitis in cats. There is some evidence that vi-
tamin E and silymarin have synergistic effects on hepatocytes and a 

===== PDF_PAGE_1339 =====
1312    Vitamin E ± Selenium
study in dogs found evidence that silymarin and vitamin E provided 
some efficacy in preventing gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicity. 3 
However, with respect to using vitamin E for canine liver disease, 
an article reviewing the evidence states: …vitamin E supplements 
have been recommended for dermatologic and hepatobiliary diseases 
(cholestatic and necro-inflammatory hepatopathies) in which antiox-
idant activity may be of benefit. However, no scientific data support 
their use for any of these indications. The results of one study showed 
a potential clinical benefit of oral vitamin E as adjunctive treatment 
of canine atopic dermatitis.4
Supplemental vitamin E appears useful for treating retinal pig -
ment epithelial dystrophy (RPED) with neuroaxonal degeneration in 
English cocker spaniels (and presumably other breeds).5 
A double-blinded and randomized pilot study (n = 8 in treatment 
group) in a canine experimental osteoarthritis model found some ev-
idence that dogs treated with vitamin E (≈400 units/dog [NOT units/
kg] PO per day) showed a reduction in inflammation joint markers and 
histological expression, as well as a trend to improving signs of pain.6 
Some dogs and cats with dilated cardiomyopathy have low vita -
min E concentrations, but it is unknown if vitamin E supplementa -
tion has any clinical effect. Vitamin E supplementation in cats with 
chronic kidney disease did not improve anemia or measures of oxi -
dative stress.7 
Depending on the product and target species, vitamin E/selenium 
is indicated for the treatment or prophylaxis of selenium-tocopher -
ol deficiency (STD) syndromes in ewes and lambs (white muscle 
disease); sows, weanling and baby pigs (hepatic necrosis, mulber -
ry heart disease, white muscle disease); calves and breeding cows 
(white muscle disease); and horses (myositis associated with STD). 
A small, noncontrolled study indicated that vitamin E/selenium may 
be useful as adjunct therapy to a miticide (ivermectin) for treating 
canine sarcoptic mange.8
Pharmacology/Actions
Both vitamin E and selenium are involved with cellular metabolism 
of sulfur. Vitamin E has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory prop -
erties and with selenium, protects against red blood cell hemolysis 
and prevents the action of peroxidase on unsaturated bonds in cell 
membranes.
Pharmacokinetics
After absorption, vitamin E is transported in the circulatory system 
via beta-lipoproteins. Water-soluble (water-dispersible) oral forms 
appear to be more bioavailable. Impaired hepatic or pancreatic func-
tion may reduce absorption. Vitamin E is distributed to all tissues 
and stored in adipose tissue. Vitamin E is only marginally trans -
ported across the placenta. Vitamin E is metabolized in the liver via 
glucuronidation and excreted primarily into the bile. Absorption of 
vitamin E may be impaired in patients with severe cholestatic liver 
disease or in animals with fat malabsorption syndromes. 
Pharmacokinetic parameters for selenium were not located.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Vitamin E (alone) should be used with caution in patients with co -
agulation disorders. 
Vitamin E/selenium products should only be used in the species 
for which they are FDA-approved. Because selenium can be extreme-
ly toxic, the indiscriminate use of these products can be dangerous. 
Give slowly when administering IV to horses.
Adverse Effects
Oral administration of vitamin E appears to be well-tolerated, with 
a wide margin of safety. Anaphylactoid reactions have been report -
ed. IM injections may be associated with transient muscle soreness. 
Other adverse effects are generally associated with overdoses of sele-
nium (see Overdose/Acute Toxicity).
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Because safety has not been established in all animal species, this 
supplement should only be used when the maternal benefits out -
weigh the potential risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Large overdoses of vitamin E can cause coagulopathies.
Selenium is toxic in overdose quantities but has a fairly wide safe-
ty margin. Cattle have tolerated chronic doses of 0.6 mg/kg/day with 
no adverse effects (approximate therapeutic dose is 0.06 mg/kg). 
Clinical signs of selenium toxicity include depression, ataxia, dys -
pnea, blindness, diarrhea, muscle weakness, and a garlic odor on the 
breath. Horses suffering from selenium toxicity may become blind, 
paralyzed, slough their hooves, and lose hair from the tail and mane. 
Dogs may exhibit signs of anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea at high 
doses.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving vitamin E/selenium and may 
be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Anticoagulant Agents (eg, heparins, rivaroxaban, warfa -
rin): Risk for bleeding may be increased.
 ■ Antiplatelet Agents (eg, aspirin, clopidogrel): Risk for bleed-
ing may be increased.  
 ■ Cholestyramine : May reduce the absorption of orally admin-
istered vitamin E
 ■ Iron : Large doses of vitamin E may delay the hematologic re -
sponse to iron therapy in patients with iron deficiency anemia. 
 ■ Mineral Oil : May reduce the absorption of orally administered 
vitamin E
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (eg, carprofen, 
flunixin, meloxicam, phenylbutazone): Risk for bleeding may be 
increased.  
 ■ Vitamin  A: Absorption, utilization, and storage may be en -
hanced by vitamin E.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ None noted
Dosages
The following dosages are for vitamin E as a single agent ; for dos -
ages of vitamin E/selenium veterinary-labeled products see Dosage 
Forms/Regulatory Status. Do not confuse dosages of units/animal 
with units/kg.
DOGS:
Ischemic dermatopathies (extra-label): 200 units/small-sized dog 
(NOT units/kg); 400 units/medium-sized dog (NOT units/kg);  
600 units/large-sized dog (NOT units/kg) PO every 12 hours. The 
ideal oral dosage of vitamin E for maximum cutaneous protection 
has not been elucidated, but it has a wide margin of safety for 
oral supplementation. Used in combination with pentoxifylline  
15 mg/kg PO every 8 hours to 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours.2
Atopic dermatitis (extra-label): 8.1 units/kg PO once daily im -
proved clinical sign scores in dogs with atopic dermatitis.4
Adjunctive treatment of immune-mediated skin diseases  (eg, 
discoid lupus erythematosus, canine demodicosis, or derma -

===== PDF_PAGE_1340 =====
Vitamin E ± Selenium   1313
tomyositis) (extra-label): Anecdotally, 200 – 800 units/dog (NOT 
units/kg) PO twice daily.
Adjunctive treatment of hepatopathies or as an antioxidant 
hepatoprotective (extra-label): Anecdotally, 50 – 400 units/dog 
(NOT units/kg) PO once daily. Some recommend water-soluble 
(water-dispersible) dosage forms as oral bioavailability may be 
higher.9 
Tocopherol deficiency associated with exocrine pancreatic dis-
ease (extra-label): 100 – 400 units/dog (NOT units/kg) PO once 
daily for 1 month then every 1 to 2 weeks as needed.10
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED)  (extra-label):  
600 – 900 units/dog (NOT units/kg) PO twice daily.5
CATS:
Pansteatitis (extra-label): 10 – 15 units/kg PO once daily. NOTE: 
One study in 4 cats with pansteatitis showed good clinical re -
sponse in 3 cats (one was lost to follow-up) after treatment with 
oral vitamin E 50 mg/kg once a day, in combination with pred -
nisolone (2 mg/kg/day for 1 week and then every other day for an 
additional 1 to 2 weeks) and dietary changes.11 
HORSES :
Vitamin E deficiency (extra-label): Natural-source water-dispers-
ible forms of vitamin E ( Elevate W .S.®) 10 units/kg PO (assume 
per day— Plumb) are 5 to 6 times more bioavailable than syn -
thetic vitamin E acetate, and a 5000 units/horse (NOT units/kg)  
(assume per day—Plumb ) more than doubles serum vitamin E 
levels within 12 hours. Foals should receive 5 – 6.6 units/kg/day 
PO using a liquid formulation. Before implementing supplemen-
tation, it is important to measure serum alpha-tocopherol con -
centrations to determine if there is an underlying deficiency and 
to monitor the efficacy of supplementation.12–14 NOTE: Donkeys 
may have a lower selenium requirement than horses.15
Equine metabolic syndrome (extra-label): 1000 units/horse 
(NOT units/kg) PO daily added to diet16 
Adjunctive treatment of neurologic disease (extra-label): There 
are many recommendations for using high levels of vitamin E 
supplementation for horses with neurologic disease, ranging 
from 1,500 – 23,000 units/500 kg (1102 lb) horse daily. The use 
of vitamin E for these conditions is empirically based on a belief 
that it could be neuroprotective in disorders not related to a de -
ficiency of vitamin E. There appears to be no scientific evidence 
that supplementation with doses of vitamin E above the 2007 
National Research Council (NRC) recommended dose will have 
a therapeutic effect in horses other than those associated with a 
vitamin E deficiency. Many of these dosage recommendations 
exceed the NRC upper safety recommendation of 20 units/kg  
(10,000 units/500 kg horse). Furthermore, many of these studies 
were performed before the development of natural forms of vita-
min E in horses and these amounts might be excessive if natural 
vitamin E is used therapeutically.17
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Blood selenium concentrations (when using the combination 
product). Normal values for selenium have been reported as: 
more than 1.14 µmol/L in calves, more than 0.63 µmol/L in cat -
tle, more than 1.26 µmol/L in sheep, and more than 0.6 µmol/L 
in pigs. Values indicating deficiency are: less than 0.40 µmol/L in 
cattle, less than 0.60 µmol/L in sheep, and less than 0.20 µmol/L 
in pigs. Intermediate values may result in suboptimal production.
 ■ Optionally, glutathione peroxidase activity may be monitored.
Client Information
 ■ Vitamin E is used to treat some skin, liver, and eye conditions and 
is safe when given as directed.
 ■ Large overdoses can cause bleeding. Contact your veterinarian if 
your animal develops bleeding from the gums, low energy level, 
or blood in the urine or feces. 
 ■ If using the vitamin E and selenium injection, do not give more 
than your veterinarian recommends; selenium can be toxic if too 
much is given.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Vitamin E is a lipid-soluble vitamin that can be found in either liquid 
or solid forms. The liquid forms occur as clear, yellow to brownish 
red, viscous oils that are insoluble in water, soluble in alcohol, and 
miscible with vegetable oils. Solid forms occur as white to tan-white 
granular powders that disperse in water to form cloudy suspensions. 
Vitamin E may also be known as alpha tocopherol. In 2000, one unit 
of vitamin E was redefined to equal the biologic activity of 1 mg 
all racemic-alpha-tocopheryl acetate, or 0.91 mg (910 µg) all race -
mic-alpha-tocopheryl. Potencies expressed in International units or 
USP units are no longer current.
Selenium in commercially available veterinary injections is found 
as sodium selenite. Each mg of sodium selenite contains ≈460 µg 
(46%) of selenium.
Storage/Stability
Vitamin E/selenium for injection should be stored at temperatures 
less than 25°C (77°F); protect from freezing.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Vitamin E Oral Liquid
Many products may be labeled for use in animals and as they are 
considered supplements and not drugs, they are not necessarily 
FDA-approved animal drugs. Some products with horse indications 
and dosages are: Elevate® W .S 500 units/mL and Elevate® Mainte-
nance Powder 1000 units/7 grams; (OTC).
Vitamin E (Alone) Injection
Vitamin E Injection: 300 units/mL in 250 mL vials; Emulsivit® E-300; 
(Rx). For SC or IM administration.
Vitamin E Injection: 500 units/mL in 250 mL vials; Vital E®-500; 
(OTC). For SC or IM administration.
Vitamin E/Selenium Oral
Equ-SeE®: Each teaspoon (5 cc) contains ≈1 mg selenium and  
220 units vitamin E; (OTC). 
Other top dress equine products containing vitamin E and selenium 
include Elevate® SE (1500 units vitamin E plus 1 mg selenium per  
7 grams); (OTC)
Vitamin E/Selenium Injection
Mu-Se®: Each mL contains: selenium 5 mg (as sodium selenite); vi -
tamin E 68 units; 100 mL vial for injection. FDA-approved for use in 
weanling calves, nonlactating dairy cattle, and breeding beef cattle. 
(Rx) Slaughter withdrawal (at label dosages) = 30 days. Dose: For 
weanling calves: 1 mL/ 90.9 kg (200 lb) body weight IM or SC. For 
breeding beef cows: 1 mL/90.9 kg (200 lb) body weight during mid-
dle third of pregnancy and 30 days before calving IM or SC.
Bo-Se®: Each mL contains selenium 1 mg (as sodium selenite) and 
vitamin E 68 units; 100 mL vial for injection. FDA-approved for use 
in calves, swine, and sheep. (Rx) Slaughter withdrawal (at label dos-
ages) = 30 days (calves); 14 days (lambs, ewes, sows, and pigs). Dose: 
Calves: 2.5 – 3.75 mL/45.5 kg (100 lb) body weight (depending on 

===== PDF_PAGE_1341 =====
1314    Voriconazole
severity of condition and geographical area) IM or SC. Lambs (2 
weeks of age or older): 1 mL/18.2 kg (40 lb) body weight IM or SC 
(1 mL minimum). Ewes: 2.5 mL/45.5 kg (100 lb) body weight IM or 
SC. Sows and weanling pigs: 1mL/18.2 kg (40 lb) body weight IM or 
SC (1 mL minimum). Do not use on newborn pigs. 
E-Se®: Each mL contains selenium 2.5 mg (as sodium selenite) and 
vitamin E 68 units in 100 mL vials. FDA-approved for use in horses. 
(Rx) Equine dose: 1 mL/45.5 kg (100 lb) body weight slow IV or deep 
IM (in 2 or more sites; gluteal or cervical muscles). May be repeated 
at 5- to 10- day intervals.
Vitamin E for injection is also available in combination with vita -
mins A and D. Vitamin E may also a component of feed additives, 
milk replacers and topical products.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Vitamin E Tablets: 100 units, 200 units, 400 units, generic; (OTC)
Vitamin E Capsules: 200 units, 400 units, and 1000 units; Vita-Plus 
E®, Alph E®, Vita-Plus E®, generic; (OTC)
Vitamin E Drops: 15 units/0.3 mL in 12 mL and 30 mL; Aquasol E®; 
(OTC)
Vitamin E Liquid: 400 units/15 mL in 30 and 60 mL; Nutr-E-Sol®; 
(OTC)
Topicals are available. There are no FDA-approved vitamin E/sele -
nium products for humans, but there are many products that con -
tain either vitamin E (alone or in combination with other vitamins ± 
minerals) or selenium (as an injection alone or in combination with 
other trace elements) available.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Voriconazole
(vor-ih-koh-nah-zohl) Vfend®
Second-Generation Triazole Antifungal
See also Voriconazole Ophthalmic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Broad-spectrum oral/parenteral triazole antifungal
 ▶ Cats appear to be susceptible to adverse effects. Until further 
pharmacokinetic and safety studies can be done, it should 
only be used in cats as a last resort.
 ▶ Like other compounds in this class, there are many potential 
drug interactions.
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies voriconazole as a hazardous drug; use ap-
propriate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Voriconazole may be useful to treat a variety of fungal infections 
in veterinary patients, particularly against Blastomyces spp, Crypto-
coccus spp, Coccidioides spp,1,2 and Aspergillus spp. It has high oral 
bioavailability in a variety of species and can cross into the CNS. 
There is limited clinical experience using voriconazole in veterinary 
patients. Because of adverse effects in cats, it is generally only rec -
ommended as a last resort. There is considerable interest in using 
voriconazole for treating aspergillosis in pet birds, as their relatively 
small size may make the drug more affordable; additional research 
must be performed before dosing regimens are available.
The drug may be used for horses with fungal keratomycosis.3–5 See 
also Voriconazole Ophthalmic.
Pharmacology/Actions
Voriconazole is a synthetic derivative of fluconazole, which has 
broad-spectrum antifungal activity against a variety of organisms, 
including Candida spp, Aspergillus spp, Trichosporon spp, Histoplas-
ma spp, Cryptococcus spp, Blastomyces spp, and Fusarium spp. Like 
the other azole/triazole antifungals, it inhibits a fungal cytochrome 
P450-dependent demethylation enzyme that produces ergosterol in 
the cell membrane. The resultant intracellular accumulation of meth-
ylated sterols weakens the cellular membranes of susceptible fungi, 
increasing membrane permeability, allowing leakage of cellular con-
tents, and impairing uptake of purine and pyrimidine precursors.
Unlike fluconazole, voriconazole also inhibits 24-methylene de -
hydrolanosterol demethylation in molds such as Aspergillus spp, giv-
ing it more activity against these fungi.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, voriconazole is rapidly and essentially completely absorbed 
after oral administration. Absorption is decreased when voriconazole 
is given with food but is not affected by drugs that raise gastric pH. 
Peak concentrations occur ≈3 hours after oral dosing. Voriconazole 
is only moderately (51%) bound to canine plasma proteins and the 
volume of distribution is ≈1.3 L/kg. Concentrations attained in CSF , 
aqueous humor, and synovial fluid are 43% to 53% that of plasma.6 It 
is metabolized in the liver to a variety of metabolites with the N-ox-
ide metabolite being the primary circulating metabolite. This metab-
olite has only weak antifungal activity (less than 100 times as active 
as the parent). The elimination pharmacokinetics of voriconazole in 
dogs is very complex. Both dose-dependent nonlinear elimination and 
auto-induced metabolism after multiple dosages are seen, complicat-
ing any dosage regimen; dosages may need to be increased over time. 
Autoinduction of metabolism apparently does not occur in humans, 
rabbits, or guinea pigs. Terminal half-life in one study was 3.3 hours.6 
In fasted cats receiving single oral doses of 4 – 6 mg/kg, peak con-
centrations of 2.2 to 2.5 µg/mL occurred within 1.5 hours after ad -
ministration. Volume of distribution was 1.7 to 2.1 L/kg. All 4 cats 
that received tablet formulations had trough voriconazole concen -
trations above 1 µg/mL for at least 72 hours after administration. 
Oral administration of a loading dose of 25 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg)  
followed by 12.5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) every other day caused 
voriconazole accumulation over the 2-week study period. Terminal 
half-life averaged 43 hours.7
In horses, voriconazole is well absorbed after oral administration 
with peak concentrations at ≈1 to 3 hours postdose. Voriconazole 
has low protein binding (31%); volume of distribution is ≈1.35 to  
1.6 L/kg. The drug is distributed into the CSF , tears, and synovial flu-
id. Elimination half-life is ≈13 hours after oral dosing. Mean half-life 
in tear film is ≈25 hours. It is not known if voriconazole self-induces 
hepatic metabolism after multiple doses in a horse.5,8,9
After single oral doses to alpacas, voriconazole had a low bioavail-
ability (≈24%), but IV doses of 4 mg/kg yielded plasma concentra -
tions above 0.1 µg/mL for at least 24 hours. Elimination half-life was 
≈8 hours.10
In Hispaniolan Amazon parrots, oral voriconazole had a short 
half-life (≈1 hour). The authors concluded that the drug could be 
safely administered to this species at a dose of 18 mg/kg PO every 8 
hours for 11 days, but that further studies were necessary to deter -
mine safety and efficacy of long-term treatment.11
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Voriconazole is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive 
to it or other azole antifungals, although evidence is lacking regard-
ing cross-reactivity between voriconazole and other azole antifungal 
agents. 
Voriconazole should be used with extreme caution in cats, as they 
appear to be prone to serious adverse effects. It should be given with 

===== PDF_PAGE_1342 =====
Voriconazole   1315
caution to patients with hepatic dysfunction or proarrhythmic con-
ditions. Electrolytes (eg, potassium, magnesium, calcium) should be 
corrected before starting voriconazole therapy. Infusion reactions 
are uncommon, but infusion should be stopped immediately if there 
is development of flushing, fever, sweating, tachycardia, dyspnea, 
nausea, or pruritis.
The voriconazole IV product contains 3200 mg of sulfobutyl ether 
beta-cyclodextrin sodium (SBECD) per vial; this compound can ac-
cumulate in patients with decreased renal function.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies voriconazole as a hazardous drug; personal pro -
tective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure.12 
Adverse Effects
Accurate adverse effect profiles are unknown for veterinary species. 
Liver enlargement and up to a 2- to 3-fold increase in cytochrome 
P450 hepatic microsomal enzyme concentrations were noted in dogs 
orally dosed for 30 days. This may significantly impact the metabo -
lism of other drugs that are hepatically metabolized (see Drug In-
teractions). Mild to moderate adverse GI effects have been noted 
in dogs receiving oral voriconazole. 6 A dog treated with an IV in -
fusion of voriconazole developed significant pyrexia and tachypnea 
after the infusion.13 In dogs, high serum voriconazole concentration 
was associated with a reversible neurotoxicosis and increased liver 
enzymes.14
Cats appear to be susceptible to developing adverse effects from 
voriconazole. Two cats initially treated with 10 mg/kg PO once daily 
developed significant adverse reactions, including azotemia, inappe-
tence, lethargy, and weight loss. 15 One developed a presumed cuta -
neous drug reaction, which resolved when voriconazole was discon-
tinued, and the other cat developed ataxia and hind limb paresis. In 
another published case report, 3 cats receiving voriconazole at doses 
of 10 – 13 mg/kg PO once daily developed neurologic signs that in -
cluded ataxia in all subjects, 2 of the 3 cats developed paraplegia, and 
2 of the 3 cats had ophthalmic signs (eg, mydriasis, decreased or ab-
sent pupillary light responses, reduced menace response). 16 One cat 
developed an arrhythmia and in another, hypokalemia was noted. In 
a pharmacokinetic study, severe miosis and ptyalism were noted in 
cats receiving voriconazole tablets and suspension; ptyalism caused 
by voriconazole suspension prevented drug absorption in one cat.7 
In humans, commonly encountered adverse effects include vi -
sual disturbances (eg, blurring, spots, wavy lines) usually within 30 
minutes of dosing or if higher drug concentrations are attained, and 
rashes (usually mild to moderate in severity). Less frequent adverse 
effects include GI effects (eg, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea), hepatotox-
icity (eg, jaundice, abnormal liver function tests), hypertension/hy -
potension, tachycardia, peripheral edema, hypokalemia, and hypo -
magnesemia. Rarely, eye hemorrhage, exfoliative dermal reactions, 
anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, pancytopenia, QT prolon -
gation, torsade de pointes, and nephrotoxicity have been reported. 
Hallucinations have also been reported.17
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Voriconazole was teratogenic in rats at low doses (10 mg/kg) and 
embryotoxic in rabbits at higher doses (100 mg/kg). 18 In humans, 
voriconazole has a high risk for major birth defects and miscarriage. 
It is unknown if voriconazole enters milk. Because safety has not 
been established in animals, this drug should only be used when the 
maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The minimum lethal dose in rats and mice was 300 mg/kg (4 to 7 
times maintenance dose). Toxic effects included increased saliva -
tion, mydriasis, ataxia, depression, dyspnea, and seizures. Accidental 
single overdoses of up to 5 times the recommended dose in human 
pediatric patients caused only brief photophobia. No antidote is 
known for voriconazole overdoses. GI decontamination should be 
considered for large oral overdoses, followed by close observation 
and supportive treatment if required. Hemodialysis may assist in the 
removal of voriconazole and the sulfobutyl ether beta-cyclodextrin 
sodium (SBECD) vehicle.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
There are many potential drug interactions involving voriconazole. 
Voriconazole is a substrate of CYP450 2C and inhibitor of CYP450 
3A isoenzymes. The following partial listing includes reported 
or theoretical interactions in humans receiving voriconazole that 
may also be of significance in veterinary patients. Because, in dogs, 
voriconazole induces hepatic microsomal enzymes (in humans it 
does not), additional interactions and further clarification may be 
reported, as clinical use increases in veterinary patients. Unless oth-
erwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but 
weigh the potential risks and perform additional monitoring when 
appropriate.
 ■ Amiodarone : Potential for serious cardiac arrhythmias such as 
torsade de pointes; concurrent use is contraindicated in humans
 ■ Benzodiazepines (eg, alprazolam, midazolam): Voriconazole 
may increase benzodiazepine concentrations.
 ■ Bromocriptine : Voriconazole may increase serum concentra -
tions of bromocriptine.
 ■ Buspirone : Voriconazole may increase serum concentrations of 
buspirone.
 ■ Calcium Channel Blockers  (eg, amlodipine, diltiazem, ve-
rapamil): Voriconazole may increase serum concentrations; dos-
age adjustment may be required.
 ■ Cisapride : Voriconazole may increase serum concentrations of 
cisapride and increase risk for serious cardiac arrhythmias; use is 
contraindicated.
 ■ Corticosteroids  (eg, prednisolone): Potentially increased 
AUC for prednisolone
 ■ Cyclosporine : Increased cyclosporine concentrations; 50% re-
duction in cyclosporine dose recommended
 ■ Doxorubicin : Voriconazole may increase serum concentrations 
of doxorubicin; concurrent use is contraindication in humans.
 ■ Fentanyl, Alfentanil : Voriconazole may increase plasma con-
centrations; monitor for toxicity and adjust dosage if necessary. 
 ■ Glipizide, Glyburide : Voriconazole may increase serum con-
centrations of these drugs and increase risk for hypoglycemia.
 ■ Methadone : Voriconazole may increase plasma concentrations 
of R-methadone; monitor for methadone toxicity and adjust dos-
age if necessary.
 ■ Phenobarbital : May decrease voriconazole concentrations re-
sulting in therapeutic failure; use together is contraindicated.
 ■ Procainamide : Potential for serious cardiac arrhythmias such 
as torsade de pointes 
 ■ Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs; eg, omeprazole): Voriconazole 
may increase omeprazole (and potentially other PPIs) concentra-
tions.
 ■ Quinidine : Potential for serious cardiac arrhythmias such as 
torsade de pointes; concurrent use is contraindicated in humans.
 ■ Rifampin : Decreased voriconazole concentrations; use together 
contraindicated

===== PDF_PAGE_1343 =====
1316    Voriconazole
 ■ Sildenafil : Voriconazole may increase plasma concentrations; 
monitor for toxicity and adjust dosage if necessary.
 ■ Sotalol : Potential for serious cardiac arrhythmias such as tor -
sade de pointes
 ■ Vinca Alkaloids  (eg, vinblastine, vincristine ): Possible in -
creased Vinca alkaloid concentrations; monitor for toxicity.
 ■ W arfarin : Voriconazole may potentiate warfarin’s effects.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No specific concerns were noted; see Monitoring for additional 
information.
Dosages
DOGS:
NOTE: In dogs, voriconazole may induce its own metabolism (see 
Pharmacokinetics); dosages may need to be increased over time.
Coccidioidomycosis (extra-label): 4 mg/kg PO every 12 hours1 
Systemic aspergillosis  (extra-label): 4 –  5 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours19
Sinonasal aspergillosis postsurgical debridement of fungal 
plaques (extra-label): From a case series ( n = 3), 2.5 – 3.3 mg/kg 
PO every 12 hours14
CATS:
Aspergillosis (extra-label): From a pharmacokinetic study, 
a loading dose of 25 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO, followed by  
12.5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) every 72 hours. 7 NOTE: Case reports 
have documented significant toxicity at 10 mg/kg PO daily.15,16
HORSES :
Susceptible, systemic fungal infections  (extra-label): Based on 
pharmacokinetic studies, 3 – 4 mg/kg PO once daily or 3 mg/kg 
PO twice daily should be sufficient to treat aspergillosis, but high-
er doses (4 – 5 mg/kg PO once daily) are probably necessary to 
treat infections with Fusarium spp.8,9,20
Guttural pouch mycosis (extra-label): 3 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours; used in combination with topical 1% enilconazole21 
Keratomycosis (extra-label): Based on a pharmacokinetic study, 
4 mg/kg PO once daily is expected to achieve voriconazole con -
centration in tear fluid at the AUC:MIC ratio associated with 
treatment efficacy against Aspergillus spp.5
BIRDS:
Susceptible, systemic fungal infections (extra-label): Based on a 
pharmacokinetic study in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots, the au -
thors concluded that the drug could be safely administered to this 
species at a dose of 18 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for 11 days, but 
that further studies were necessary to determine safety and effica-
cy of long-term treatment. 11
Avian aspergillosis: 12.5 mg/kg PO twice daily for 60 to 90 days 
or by nebulization as a 1 mg/mL solution for 60 minutes once dai-
ly.22 In a pharmacokinetic study involving racing pigeons, a sug -
gested dosage is 10 mg/kg PO twice daily or 20 mg/kg PO once 
daily.23
REPTILES :
Susceptible, systemic fungal infections (extra-label): 
a) Red-eared sliders: Based on pharmacokinetic study, 5 mg/kg 
SC24
b) Chrysosporium anamorph of Nannizziopsis vriesii  (CANV) 
in bearded dragons : 10 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for 4 to 9 
weeks24
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ Baseline and periodic serum liver chemistry panel and  electrolytes
 ■ Voriconazole plasma concentration (target range 1 to 4 µg/mL)25
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine to your animal at least 1 hour before or 1 hour 
after feeding.
 ■ Report any possible side effects to your veterinarian immediately, 
including itching/rash; yellowing of the whites of the eyes, gums, 
or skin; reduced appetite; difficulty walking; vision problems.
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined 
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH). Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the 
use of personal protective equipment when handling this medi -
cine especially if you are pregnant or trying to conceive.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A triazole antifungal, voriconazole occurs as a white to light-col -
ored powder with a molecular weight of 349.3. Aqueous solubility is  
0.7 mg/mL.
Voriconazole may also be known as UK-109496, voriconazol, vo-
raconazolum, or Vfend®.
Storage/Stability
Voriconazole tablets should be stored at 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F).
The unreconstituted powder for oral suspension should be stored 
in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]). Once reconstituted, it 
should be stored in tightly closed containers at room temperature 
(15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]); do not refrigerate or freeze. After reconsti-
tution, the suspension is stable for 14 days. The suspension should be 
shaken well for 10 seconds prior to each administered dose.
The powder for injection should be stored at room temperature 
(15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F). After reconstituting with 19 mL of sterile 
water for injection, the manufacturer recommends using immedi -
ately; however, chemical and physical stability remain for up to 24 
hours if stored in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]). Discard 
solution if it is not clear or if particles are visible.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
The injectable solution must be further diluted to a concentration 
of 5 mg/mL or less for administration over 1 to 2 hours. Suitable 
diluents for IV infusion include (partial list): 0.9% sodium chloride, 
lactated Ringer’s solution, 5% dextrose in lactated Ringer’s solution, 
and 5% dextrose. Voriconazole is not compatible with simultaneous 
infusion with blood products or concentrated electrolyte solutions.
Voriconazole tablets can be crushed and made into a 2.5 mg/mL 
oral suspension by mixing a crushed 200 mg  tablet with 20 mL wa -
ter, then adding 60 mL OraPlus®. Thoroughly mix the suspension 
(eg, shaken, vortex mixed) until no particles are visible. Suspension 
should also be shaken for ≈30 to 60 seconds prior to each use. The 
suspension will remain stable for 14 days if kept under refrigera -
tion.11,26 A voriconazole 40 mg/mL suspension can also be com -
pounded using 200 mg tablets and a vehicle comprised of a commer-
cial suspending agent and either water (3:1 v/v) or sweetening (1:1 
v/v) agents. To prepare, thoroughly mix a crushed 200 mg tablet with 
5 mL of vehicle. The resultant suspension is stable for up to 30 days at 
room temperature or refrigerated.27 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Voriconazole Tablets: 50 mg and 200 mg; Vfend®, generic; (Rx)

===== PDF_PAGE_1344 =====
Warfarin   1317
Voriconazole Powder for Oral Suspension: 45 g (40 mg/mL after re-
constitution) in 75 mL bottles; Vfend®, generic; (Rx)
Voriconazole Powder for Injection, Lyophilized: 200 mg in sin -
gle-use vials; Vfend I.V .®, generic; (Rx). Also contains sulfobutyl 
ether beta-cyclodextrin sodium (SBECD, a solubilizing agent)  
3200 mg/vial. See Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Warfarin
(war-far-in) Coumadin®
Anticoagulant
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Coumarin derivative anticoagulant uncommonly used for 
long-term thromboprophylaxis, primarily in dogs. Requires 
careful monitoring and dosage adjustment
 ▶ Use in cats is not recommended.
 ▶ Full anticoagulant effect requires several days to be achieved; 
may need additional anticoagulant (eg, heparin) during this 
time.
 ▶ Contraindications include pre-existent hemorrhage; pregnancy; 
patients undergoing or contemplating eye or CNS surgery, ma-
jor regional lumbar block anesthesia, or surgery of large, open 
surfaces; active bleeding from the GI, respiratory, or GU tract; 
aneurysm; acute nephritis; cerebrovascular hemorrhage; blood 
dyscrasias; uncontrolled or malignant hypertension; hepatic 
insufficiency; pericardial effusion; and visceral carcinomas.
 ▶ Adverse effects include dose-related hemorrhage; death is 
possible.
 ▶ Many potentially significant drug interactions
 ▶ Teratogenic. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health (NIOSH) classifies warfarin as a hazardous drug; use 
appropriate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
In veterinary medicine, warfarin has been used for the oral, long-
term treatment (or prevention of recurrence) of thrombotic condi -
tions, primarily in dogs. Use of warfarin in veterinary species is con-
troversial due to unproven benefit in reducing mortality, increased 
expense associated with monitoring, and potential for serious effects 
(bleeding); many clinicians do not recommend its use.1
Pharmacology/Actions
Warfarin inhibits vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKORC1), which 
interferes with the action of vitamin K1 in the synthesis of the coagu-
lation factors II, VII, IX, and X, as well as the anticoagulant proteins 
C and S. Warfarin acts indirectly as an anticoagulant (it has no direct 
anticoagulant effect) to prevent the extension of an existing throm -
bus and reduce formation of new clots. Sufficient amounts of vitamin 
K1 can override this effect. Depletion of existing clotting factors oc -
curs gradually over the first several days of treatment, and addition-
al anticoagulant therapy (eg, heparin) may be required. Warfarin is 
administered as a racemic mixture of S (+) and R (-) warfarin. The S 
(+) enantiomer is a significantly more potent vitamin K antagonist 
than the R (-) enantiomer in species studied.
Pharmacokinetics
Warfarin is rapidly and completely absorbed in humans after oral 
administration. In cats, warfarin is also rapidly absorbed after oral 
administration.
After absorption, warfarin is ≈99% bound to plasma proteins in 
humans. Only free (unbound) warfarin is active. It is reported that 
there are wide species variations with regard to protein binding; in 
cats, greater than 96% of the drug is protein bound, and horses have 
a higher free (unbound) fraction of the drug than do sheep, swine, or 
rats. Although other coumarin and indanedione anticoagulants are 
distributed in human milk, warfarin does not enter milk.
Warfarin is principally metabolized in the liver to inactive metab-
olites that are excreted in urine and bile (and then reabsorbed and 
excreted in the urine). The plasma half-life of warfarin may be sever-
al hours to several days depending on the patient (and possibly spe-
cies). In cats, the terminal half-life of the S enantiomer is ≈23 to 28 
hours and the terminal half-life of R enantiomer is ≈11 to 18 hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Warfarin is contraindicated in patients with pre-existent hemorrhag-
ic tendencies or diseases, as well as patients undergoing or contem -
plating eye or CNS surgery, major regional lumbar block anesthesia, 
or surgery of large, open surfaces. It should not be used in patients 
with active bleeding from the GI, respiratory, or GU tract. Other 
contraindications include aneurysm, acute nephritis, cerebrovascu -
lar hemorrhage, blood dyscrasias, uncontrolled or malignant hyper-
tension, hepatic insufficiency, pericardial effusion, pregnancy, and 
visceral carcinomas. Warfarin should not be used in patients with 
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia until platelet counts have sta -
bilized. Anticoagulated patients have experienced hematomas after 
spinal or epidural anesthesia. Clients must be willing to comply with 
the frequency and expense of routine monitoring.
Use warfarin with extreme caution in cats. Most clinicians no lon-
ger recommend use of warfarin in cats due to an increased mortal -
ity rate and a high rate of significant adverse events, including fatal 
hemorrhage.1
Excessive anticoagulation can be managed by withholding one to 
several doses, with or without administration of vitamin K and/or 
blood products, with a subsequent dose reduction. Presurgical man-
agement may require withholding warfarin for up to several days 
prior to surgery and use of alternative anticoagulants (eg, heparin), 
although warfarin may continue uninterrupted if the surgical bleed-
ing risk is low.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies warfarin as a hazardous drug 2; personal protec -
tive equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure. 
Adverse Effects
The principal adverse effect of warfarin use is dose-related hemor -
rhage, which may manifest with clinical signs of anemia, throm -
bocytopenia, weakness, hematomas and ecchymoses, epistaxis, 
hematemesis, hematuria, melena, hematochezia, hemarthrosis, 
hemothorax, intracranial and/or pericardial hemorrhage, and death. 
In humans, skin necrosis, calciphylaxis, and cholesterol microemboli 
have been reported.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Warfarin is embryotoxic, can cause congenital malformations, and is 
considered contraindicated during pregnancy. If anticoagulant ther-
apy is required during pregnancy, most clinicians recommend using 
unfractionated or low-molecular weight heparin. 
Based on limited published data, warfarin has not been detected 
in the breast milk of humans treated and is generally considered safe 
to use in nursing patients, but the nursing infant should be moni -
tored for bruising or bleeding.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Acute overdoses of warfarin may result in life-threatening hemor -
rhage. In dogs and cats, single doses of 5 – 50 mg/kg have been asso-
ciated with toxicity. It must be remembered that a lag time of 2 to 5 
days may occur before signs of toxicity occur, and animals must be 
monitored and treated accordingly. Cumulative toxic doses of war -

===== PDF_PAGE_1345 =====
1318    Warfarin
farin have been reported as 1 – 5 mg/kg for 5 to 15 days in dogs and 
1 mg/kg for 7 days in cats. Common clinical signs associated with 
overdose may include anorexia, hematuria, lethargy, and vomiting.
If overdose is detected early, prevent absorption from the gut 
using standard protocols. If clinical signs are noted, they should be 
treated with blood products and vitamin K 1 (phytonadione). Refer 
to Phytonadione (Vitamin K1) monograph for more information.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged to consult with one 
of the 24-hour poison consultation centers that specialize in provid-
ing information specific for veterinary patients. For general infor -
mation related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact 
information for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
Drug interactions with warfarin are perhaps the most important in 
human medicine. Warfarin is metabolized principally by CYP2C9, 
but also by many other CYP enzymes. The following drug inter -
actions have either been reported or are theoretical in humans or 
animals receiving warfarin and may be of significance in veterinary 
patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily con-
traindicated, but weigh the potential risks and perform additional 
monitoring when appropriate.
A multitude of drugs have been documented or theorized to in -
teract with warfarin. The following drugs or drug classes may in-
crease the anticoagulant  response of warfarin (not necessarily a 
complete list):
 ■ Acetaminophen
 ■ Allopurinol
 ■ Amiodarone
 ■ Anabolic Steroids (eg, boldenone)
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, fluconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole)
 ■ Cephalosporins  (eg, cefazolin, cefpodoxime, cephalexin)
 ■ Chloramphenicol
 ■ Cisapride
 ■ Clopidogrel
 ■ Danazol
 ■ Fatty Acids, Omega-3
 ■ Fluoroquinolones (eg, enrofloxacin)
 ■ Glucosamine
 ■ Heparins ( unfractionated and low molecular weight heparins)
 ■ Lactulose
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics  (eg, azithromycin, clarithromycin, 
erythromycin)
 ■ Metronidazole
 ■ Mirtazapine
 ■ Neomycin
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs; eg, 
carprofen, meloxicam, phenylbutazone)
 ■ Penicillins  (eg, amoxicillin, dicloxacillin, penicillin G, pipera-
cillin)
 ■ Pentoxifylline
 ■ Proton Pump Inhibitors  (PPIs; eg, omeprazole, pantoprazole)
 ■ Quinidine
 ■ Salicylates (eg, aspirin3)
 ■ Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors  (SSRIs; eg, flu-
oxetine, sertraline)
 ■ Sulfonamides  (including combinations with ormetoprim and 
trimethoprim) 
 ■ Thyroid Medications
 ■ Tramadol
 ■ Vitamin E
The following drugs or drug classes may decrease the anticoagulant 
response of warfarin (not necessarily a complete list):
 ■ Barbiturates  (eg, phenobarbital)
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone)
 ■ Cyclosporine : Additionally, warfarin may reduce cyclosporine 
efficacy.
 ■ Estrogens
 ■ Griseofulvin
 ■ Mercaptopurine
 ■ Rifampin
 ■ Phenobarbital
 ■ Spironolactone
 ■ Sucralfate
 ■ Vitamin K
Should concurrent use of any of the above drugs with warfarin be 
necessary, enhanced monitoring is required.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Warfarin may cause falsely decreased theophylline values if using 
the Schack and Waxler ultraviolet method of assay.
Dosages
NOTE: Warfarin is not recommended as an anticoagulant due to 
an inconsistent anticoagulant effect, the need for close monitor -
ing, and the risk for significant adverse effects including death due 
to hemorrhage.1
DOGS:
Anticoagulant (extra-label): 
a) Initial dose of 0.05 – 0.2 mg/kg PO once daily, with dosage 
adjusted (see Monitoring) to achieve an INR of 2 to 3. The 2 
most important principles in adjusting the warfarin dose were 
to make adjustments to the total weekly dose rather than the 
total daily dose, and to keep the dose adjustments small (10% 
to 15% of the total weekly dose).4–7 
b) Initial (loading) dose of 0.2 mg/kg PO once daily for 2 days, 
followed by 0.1 mg/kg PO once daily has been suggested.8
HORSES :  
Anticoagulant (extra-label): Rarely recommended. Anecdotal -
ly, for adjunctive treatment of laminitis, 0.0198 mg/kg PO once 
daily; monitor prothrombin time until prolonged 2 to 4 seconds 
beyond baseline.9
Monitoring
NOTE: The frequency of monitoring is controversial, and dependent 
on several factors including dose, the patient’s condition, and con -
comitant problems.
 ■ Although prothrombin times (PT) or international normalized 
ratio (INR; not validated for veterinary patients 1) are most com-
monly used to monitor warfarin, proteins induced by vitamin K 
antagonists (PIVKA) have been suggested as being more sensi -
tive. Prothrombin times during treatment with warfarin are usu-
ally recommended to be 1.5 to 2 times normal and INRs to be 
between 2 and 3. 5,6,10,11 A retrospective study in dogs used INR 
to adjust dosage. In that study, some dogs required weekly or bi -
weekly dose adjustments based on the INR value for the first 2 
to 4 weeks. Based on concurrent disease processes or concomi -
tant drug therapy, it is recommended that dogs have an INR value 
checked at least every 3 months with chronic treatment.4 
 ■ Platelet counts and packed cell volume (PCV) should be done pe-
riodically.
 ■ Monitor for bleeding, including feces and urine
 ■ Clinical efficacy

===== PDF_PAGE_1346 =====
Xylazine   1319
Client Information
 ■ Other medications and foods can interact with warfarin and can 
either increase the risk for bleeding or reduce warfarin’s antico -
agulant effects. Talk with your veterinarian before changing diets 
or starting a new medicine (including those sold over the count -
er and supplements) or stopping medications that your animal is 
currently taking. 
 ■ Do not allow your animal to be in situations where it could be in-
jured or cut, as serious bleeding may occur. If abnormal bleeding 
is seen, contact your veterinarian immediately.
 ■ To assure the dose is correct, routine blood tests will be needed. 
Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
 ■ If a dose is missed, it should be taken as soon as possible on the 
same day. Do not double up doses the next day.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A coumarin derivative, warfarin sodium occurs as a slightly bitter 
tasting, odorless, white, amorphous or crystalline powder that dis -
colors in light. It is very soluble in water and freely soluble in alcohol. 
The commercially available products contain a racemic mixture of 
the two optical isomers.
Warfarin sodium may also be known as sodium warfarin, warfari-
num natricum, Coumadin®, Jantoven®, or Panwarfin®; there are many 
other trade names internationally.
Storage/Stability
Warfarin sodium tablets should be stored in tight, light-resistant 
containers at room temperature 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F). 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 5 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Warfarin Sodium Oral Tablets (scored): 1 mg, 2 mg, 2.5 mg, 3 mg,  
4 mg, 5 mg, 6 mg, 7.5 mg, and 10 mg; Coumadin®, Jantoven®, generic; 
(Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Xylazine
(zye-la-zeen) Rompun®, AnaSed®
Alpha-2-Adrenergic Agonist 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used as a sedative and analgesic agent in a variety of species; 
used as an emetic in cats
 ▶ Contraindicated in animals receiving epinephrine or having 
active ventricular arrhythmias. Do not give to animals that 
are exhausted, dehydrated, or with urinary tract obstruction. 
Avoid intra-arterial injection as it may cause severe seizures 
and collapse.
 ▶ Use with extreme caution in patients that have pre-exist-
ing cardiac dysfunction, hypotension or shock, respiratory 
dysfunction, severe hepatic or renal insufficiency, pre-existing 
seizure disorders, or if severely debilitated. Xylazine should 
generally not be used in the last trimester of pregnancy, 
particularly in cattle. Horses may kick after a stimulatory event 
(usually auditory); use caution.
 ▶ Use xylazine with caution in patients treated for intestinal 
impactions and in horses during the vasoconstrictive develop-
ment phase of laminitis.
 ▶ Adverse effects in dogs include muscle tremors, bradycardia 
with partial atrioventricular (AV) block, reduced respirato-
ry rate, movement in response to sharp auditory stimuli, 
emesis, and bloat from aerophagia, which may require 
 decompression.
 ▶ Adverse effects in cats include emesis, muscle tremors, 
bradycardia with partial AV block, reduced respiratory rate, 
movement in response to sharp auditory stimuli, increased 
urination.
 ▶ Adverse effects in horses include muscle tremors, bra-
dycardia with partial AV block, reduced respiratory rate, 
movement in response to sharp auditory stimuli, sweating, 
increased intracranial pressure, decreased GI motility, and 
decreased mucociliary clearance.
 ▶ Adverse effects in cattle include salivation, ruminal atony, 
bloating, regurgitation, hypothermia, diarrhea, bradycardia, 
premature parturition, and ataxia.
 ▶ Yohimbine, tolazoline, and atipamezole may be used alone 
or in combination to reverse effects or speed recovery times.
 ▶ Dosages between species can be very different; be certain of 
product concentration when preparing doses, especially if 
treating ruminants.
Uses/Indications
Xylazine is FDA-approved for use in dogs, cats, horses, deer, and elk 
to produce a state of sedation with a shorter period of analgesia and 
as a preanesthetic agent before local anesthesia. It is also approved 
as a preanesthetic agent before general anesthesia in dogs, cats, and 
horses. In horses, xylazine is often used in combination with other 
agents (eg, opioids, ketamine, guaifenesin) to induce anesthesia or 
perioperative sedation and analgesia.1
Xylazine use in small animal species is somewhat controversial. It 
is usually reserved for healthy animals because it can cause arrhyth-
mias, reduce cardiac output, and increase the risk for general anes -
thesia-related death. Newer alpha-2 agonists (eg, dexmedetomidine) 
are preferred over xylazine, as they have fewer adverse effects in dogs 
and cats.
In cats, xylazine causes emesis and can be used to induce vomiting 
after toxin ingestion or drug overdoses.2–4
Pharmacology/Actions
Xylazine, a potent alpha-2-adrenergic agonist, is classified as a sed -

===== PDF_PAGE_1347 =====
1320    Xylazine
ative/analgesic agent with muscle relaxant properties. Xylazine pos-
sesses several of the same pharmacologic actions as morphine. How-
ever, it does not cause CNS excitation in cats, horses, or cattle but 
causes sedation and CNS depression. In horses, the visceral analgesia 
produced has been demonstrated to be superior to that produced by 
meperidine, butorphanol, or pentazocine.5
Xylazine can also have alpha-1 agonist activity and is less selective 
for alpha-2 receptors than detomidine, romifidine, or dexmedeto -
midine. The alpha-2: alpha-1 receptor selectivity of xylazine is 160:1 
(detomidine = 260:1, romifidine = 340:1, medetomidine and dexme-
detomidine = 1620:1).
Emesis is often seen in cats and occasionally in dogs receiving 
xylazine. Although it is thought to be centrally mediated, neither 
dopaminergic blockers (eg, phenothiazines) nor alpha-blockers (eg, 
yohimbine, tolazoline) block the emetic effect. Xylazine does not 
cause emesis in cattle, sheep, or goats. Xylazine depresses thermo -
regulatory mechanisms and either hypo- or hyperthermia is a possi-
bility, depending on ambient air temperatures.
Effects on the cardiopulmonary system include an initial increase 
in peripheral vascular resistance with increased blood pressure fol -
lowed by a longer period of lowered blood pressures (below base -
line). An initial reflex bradycardia may occur in response to alpha-1- 
mediated vasoconstriction and can be seen with some animals 
developing a second-degree atrioventricular (AV) block or other 
arrhythmias. An overall decrease in cardiac output of up to 30% may 
be seen. Xylazine, with or without concurrent halothane, has been 
demonstrated to enhance the arrhythmogenic effects of epinephrine 
in dogs.
Xylazine’s effects on respiratory function are usually clinically 
insignificant; however, at high doses, xylazine can cause respiratory 
depression with decreased tidal volumes and respiratory rates and 
an overall decreased minute volume. Xylazine causes skeletal muscle 
relaxation through inhibition of centrally mediated pathways, which 
may result in dyspnea in brachycephalic dogs and horses with upper 
airway disease.
Xylazine can increase blood glucose secondary to decreased pan-
creatic secretion of insulin. In nondiabetic animals, there appears to 
be little clinical significance associated with this effect, although an 
osmotic diuresis may result from transient hyperglycemia, and poly-
uria may occur due to decreased production of vasopressin (antidi -
uretic hormone [ADH]).
In dogs, clinical doses decrease tear production in a dose-related 
manner6 but do not affect intraocular pressure and pupil size.7
In horses, signs of sedation include a lowering of the head with 
relaxed facial muscles and drooping of the lower lip. The retractor 
muscle is relaxed in male horses, but unlike with acepromazine, 
there are no reports of permanent penile paralysis. Although the 
animal may appear to be thoroughly sedated, auditory stimuli may 
provoke arousal with kicking and avoidance responses.
Differences are seen with regard to the sensitivity of species to 
xylazine. Domestic ruminants are extremely sensitive to xylazine 
when compared with dogs, cats, or horses, and they generally re -
quire ≈10% of the dose that is required for horses to exhibit the same 
effect. Pigs are less sensitive and require higher doses (≈20 times 
compared with the ruminant’s dose). Xylazine, in combination with 
ketamine or tiletamine/zolazepam, is commonly used in swine  for 
chemical restraint.
Pharmacokinetics
Absorption is rapid following IM injection, but the bioavailability 
is incomplete and variable. Bioavailability ranges of 40% to 48% in 
horses, 17% to 73% in sheep, and 52% to 90% in dogs have been re -
ported after IM administration.
In dogs and cats, the onset of action following an IM or SC dose is 
≈10 to 15 minutes and 3 to 5 minutes following an IV dose. The an-
algesic effects may persist for only 15 to 30 minutes, but the sedative 
actions may last for 1 to 2 hours, depending on the dose given. The 
serum half-life of xylazine in dogs has been reported as averaging 30 
minutes. Complete recovery after dosing may take 2 to 4 hours in 
dogs and cats.
In horses, the onset of action following IV administration occurs 
within 1 to 2 minutes, with a maximum effect observed 3 to 10 min-
utes after injection. The duration of effect is dose dependent but may 
last for ≈1.5 hours. After a single dose of xylazine, the serum half-life 
is ≈50 minutes in a horse. Recovery times generally take from 2 to 
3 hours. Intraosseous xylazine administration resulted in no signif -
icant differences in pharmacokinetic parameters or physiologic re -
sponse as compared to IV administration. 8 Intra-articular adminis-
tration resulted in systemic drug absorption (bioavailability = 58%) 
and occurrence of systemic effects.9
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Do not give xylazine to animals that are dehydrated, debilitated, or 
with urinary tract obstruction. Xylazine is contraindicated in ani -
mals receiving epinephrine or having active ventricular arrhythmias. 
It should be used with extreme caution in animals with pre-existing 
cardiac dysfunction, hypotension or shock, respiratory dysfunc -
tion, severe hepatic or renal insufficiency, or pre-existing seizure 
 disorders.
Do not confuse IV and IM dosages. Avoid intracarotid injection 
as it may cause severe seizures and collapse. Be certain of product 
concentration when drawing up into the syringe, especially if treat -
ing ruminants, as ruminants are extremely sensitive to the sedative 
effects of alpha-2 agonists.
Large animal species, including horses, may become ataxic fol -
lowing dosing, and caution should be observed. Use with caution 
in horses after xylazine administration, as they have been known to 
kick after a stimulatory event (usually auditory) even when horses 
to be appear sedated. The addition of opioids (eg, butorphanol) may 
help temper this effect. Because xylazine may inhibit GI motility, 
use it with caution in patients treated for intestinal impactions. Use 
cautiously in horses during the development of the vasoconstrictive 
phase of laminitis, as xylazine has been shown to reduce digital flow 
of blood for about 8 hours after administration.
Adverse Effects
Emesis is generally seen within 3 to 5 minutes after xylazine ad -
ministration in cats and occasionally in dogs. To prevent aspiration, 
do not induce further anesthesia until this time has lapsed. Other 
adverse effects noted in dogs and cats after xylazine administration 
include muscle tremors, bradycardia with second-degree atrioven -
tricular (AV) block, reduced respiratory rate, movement in response 
to sharp auditory stimuli, and increased urination. 
Xylazine can reduce tear production and cause diuresis in dogs 
and cats.6,10 
Adverse effects for horses include muscle tremors, bradycardia 
with second-degree AV block, reduced respiratory rate, movement 
in response to sharp auditory stimuli, and sweating (rarely pro -
fuse).11 Additionally, horses receiving xylazine may develop transient 
hypertension, increased urine production, decreased gastric empty-
ing, decreased motility of duodenum, jejunum and pelvic flexure, in-
creased intrauterine pressure/contractions, and reduced mucociliary 
clearance rates. Ataxia occurs in a dose-dependent fashion.12
In cattle, adverse reactions associated with xylazine include sali -
vation, ruminal atony, bloating and regurgitation, hypothermia, di -
arrhea, and bradycardia. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Limited information was located on the safety of xylazine in preg -
nancy. No reports of teratogenicity in animals were located.

===== PDF_PAGE_1348 =====
Xylazine   1321
Xylazine can have an oxytocin-like effect on the uterus of preg -
nant cattle and may induce premature parturition. Because it may 
induce premature parturition, it should generally not be used in the 
last trimester of pregnancy, particularly in cattle. For horses, one 
review concludes “ …alpha-2  agonists are safe in pregnant animals, 
but close monitoring is advised. ”13 Reduced fetal survival rates have 
been noted when xylazine is used as a premedication for cesarean    
deliveries.14 
Xylazine does not appear to be excreted in detectable quantities 
in cows’ milk.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In the event of an accidental overdose, emesis, cardiac arrhythmias, 
hypotension, and profound CNS and respiratory depression may oc-
cur. Seizures have also been reported after overdoses. There has been 
much interest in using alpha-blocking agents as antidotes or reversal 
agents to xylazine. Y ohimbine, atipamezole, and tolazoline have been 
suggested to be used alone and in combination to reverse the effects 
of xylazine or speed recovery times. See Y ohimbine, Tolazoline, and 
Atipamezole for more information.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving xylazine and may be of sig -
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Acepromazine : Concurrent use of acepromazine with xyla -
zine is generally considered safe; however, there is potential for 
additive hypotensive effects after the first hypertensive phase of 
xylazine. Manufacturers warn against using xylazine in conjunc -
tion with tranquilizers. Thus, this combination should be used 
cautiously in animals susceptible to hemodynamic complications.
 ■ Anesthetic Agents (eg, alfaxalone, isoflurane, ketamine, 
propofol): May cause additive CNS depression if used with xyla-
zine. Dosages of these agents may need to be reduced.
 ■ Anticholinergic Agents (eg, atropine, butylscopolamine, 
glycopyrrolate): Use of anticholinergic agents with alpha-2 ago -
nists may significantly increase arterial blood pressure, heart rate, 
and the incidence of arrhythmia. 15,16 Clinical use of atropine or 
glycopyrrolate to prevent or treat bradycardia caused by alpha-2 
agonists is controversial and use together is discouraged; this may 
be particularly important when using higher doses of the alpha-2 
agonist.
 ■ Antiemetic Agents (eg, maropitant, metoclopramide, on -
dansetron): Antiemetics may decrease the emetogenic effects of 
xylazine. 
 ■ Atipamezole : Used clinically to reverse to effects of xylazine
 ■ Benzodiazepines  (eg, diazepam, midazolam ): May cause 
additive CNS depression if used with xylazine. Dosages of these 
agents may need to be reduced. 
 ■ Chloramphenicol : Prolonged sedation and GI stasis possible17
 ■ CNS Depressant Agents, Other  (eg, barbiturates, metho-
carbamol, trazodone): May cause additive CNS depression if used 
with xylazine. Dosages of these agents may need to be reduced.
 ■ Epinephrine : The use of epinephrine with xylazine, with or 
without the concurrent use of halothane, may induce ventricular 
arrhythmias.
 ■ Opioids  (eg, buprenorphine, morphine, tramadol): May cause 
additive CNS depression if used with xylazine. Dosages of these 
agents may need to be reduced 
 ■ Reserpine : A case of a horse developing colic-like clinical signs 
after reserpine and xylazine has been reported. Until more is 
known about this potential interaction, the use of these 2 agents 
together should be avoided.
 ■ Yohimbine : May reverse the effects of medetomidine; however, 
atipamezole is preferred for clinical use to reverse the drug’s ef -
fects because atipamezole is more selective for the alpha receptors 
and is unlikely to cause hypotension, which is common following 
administration of yohimbine.
Laboratory/Diagnostic Interactions
 ■ In horses, xylazine infusion caused overestimation of lithium di -
lution method for cardiac output (LiDCO) measurements.18
 ■ The use of xylazine before abdominal radiography can make test 
interpretation difficult in animals that develop gaseous distention 
of the stomach or bloat.
Dosages
NOTE: A reversal agent should always be on hand; reversal of 
sedative effects also reverses analgesic effects.
DOGS:
NOTE: Most clinicians prefer using newer alpha-2 agonists (eg, 
dexmedetomidine) that have a greater selectivity for the alpha-2 
adrenergic receptor.
Sedation accompanied by a short period of analgesia; pre-an -
esthetic agent (label dosage; FDA-approved): 1.1 mg/kg IV OR 
1.1 – 2.2 mg/kg IM or SC. 19 NOTE: The label dosage for dogs is 
considered by most clinicians to be greater than is necessary for 
most indications. The labeled indications are provided below, but 
the use of lower, extra-label dosages should be considered.
Preanesthetic agent (extra-label): 0.2 – 1 mg/kg IV , IM, or SC20
Analgesic adjunct (extra-label): 0.05 – 0.5 mg/kg IV , IM, or SC
CATS:
NOTE: Except for its use as an emetic, most clinicians prefer 
using newer alpha-2 agonists (eg, dexmedetomidine) that have 
greater selectivity for the alpha-2 adrenergic receptor.
Sedation accompanied by a short period of analgesia; pre-an -
esthetic agent (label dosage; FDA-approved): 1.1 mg/kg IV OR  
2.2 mg/kg IM or SC.11 NOTE: The label dosage for cats is consid-
ered by most clinicians to be greater than is necessary for most 
indications. The labeled indications are provided below, but the 
use of lower extra-label dosages should be considered.
Emetic (extra-label): 0.4 – 1.1 mg/kg IM or SC; will not work 
with toxicants that target the CRTZ. After emesis, effects can be 
reversed with yohimbine 0.1 mg/kg IV , tolazoline 0.5 – 1 mg/kg 
IV , or atipamezole 0.05  0.2 mg/kg IM can be considered. Tolazo-
line may be superior to yohimbine to reverse the emetic effects of 
xylazine in the cat.3,21,22
Preanesthetic agent (extra-label dose): 0.2 – 1 mg/kg IV , IM, or 
SC20
Analgesic adjunct (extra-label): 0.05 – 0.5 mg/kg IV , IM, or SC
Anxiolytic agent (extra-label): 0.05 – 0.2 mg/kg IV or IM23
HORSES : 
Sedation accompanied by a short period of analgesia; pre-an -
esthetic agent  (label dosage; FDA-approved): 1.1 mg/kg IV;  

===== PDF_PAGE_1349 =====
1322    Xylazine
2.2 mg/kg IM. 24 Allow the animal to rest quietly until full effect 
is reached. 
NOTE: FDA-approved dosages usually produce sedation lasting 1 
to 2 hours and analgesia lasting for 15 to 30 minutes.
NOTE: More information for extra-label protocols for the use 
of xylazine as part of drug combinations for injectable sedation, 
anesthesia/analgesia protocols can be found in other references.25 
The following are some examples of published recommended 
dosages and protocols:
a) Standing sedation and analgesia  (extra-label):  Full dose is  
1 mg/kg IV; for intraoperative use, IV dose is usually lower 
than the full dose, or an IV CRI can be used. CRI dosages re -
ported range from 0.5 – 1 mg/kg/hour IV .26 Epidural dosages 
range from 0.17 – 0.25 mg/kg.13 Alternately, 0.5 – 1.1 mg/kg IV 
(onset of peak action in 2 to 5 minutes; duration ≈30 minutes); 
1 – 2 mg/kg IM (onset of peak action in 15 minutes; duration 
≈30 minutes). For prolonged procedures: 0.5 mg/kg IV , fol -
lowed by a CRI of 0.65 mg/kg/hour.27
b) Field anesthesia: (extra-label): Sedate with xylazine 1 mg/kg 
IV OR 2 mg/kg IM given 5 to 10 minutes (longer for IM route) 
before induction of anesthesia with ketamine 2 mg/kg IV . The 
horse must be adequately sedated (chin to the metacarpals) 
before giving the ketamine (ketamine can cause muscle rigidi-
ty).28
c) Part of induction protocols (extra-label): 
  Normal healthy patients: 0.44 – 0.66 mg/kg IV . Wait for seda-
tion and muscle relaxation to occur (≈5 minutes) before in -
duction of general anesthesia. Higher doses (up to 2 mg/kg IV) 
may be needed depending on the horse’s level of excitation.
  Compromised patients: Use a very modest dose of xylazine 
0.22 – 0.44 mg/kg IV , depending on status and demeanor, to 
minimize its cardiovascular effects in compromised patients. 
Slow administration of guaifenesin (5% solution) can be used 
to gradually create the desired level of sedation, followed by a 
more rapid administration of guaifenesin and ketamine.29
d) IV anesthesia (greater than 30 minutes) using “GKX” or 
“triple-drip” (extra-label): Guaifenesin (50 mg/mL), ketamine 
(1 – 2 mg/mL; 2 mg/mL concentration used for more painful 
or noxious procedures), and xylazine (0.5 mg/mL). Most prac-
titioners prefer to induce with xylazine/ketamine or xylazine/
diazepam/ketamine, and then use GKX for maintenance. Typ-
ically, the CRI runs at 1.5 – 2.2 mL/kg/hour IV , depending on 
the procedure, patient response, and ketamine concentration.
e) Recovery after inhalant anesthesia (extra-label): 0.2 – 0.5 mg/kg 
IV can be administered after inhalant anesthesia to improve 
recovery.30,31
f) Supplementation of general anesthesia (extra-label): Xyla -
zine 0.5 – 1 mg/kg/hour IV CRI has been used with ketamine 
and isoflurane anesthesia.26,32,33
g) Low-dose sedation to facilitate lameness evaluations (ex-
tra-label): 0.3 mg/kg (route not stated, assume IV- Plumb) did 
not mask lameness (measured with body-mounted inertial 
sensors) or cause ataxia, despite all horses receiving xylazine 
showing subjective signs of sedation within 5 minutes of ad -
ministration and reduced chin-to-ground measurement at a 
20-minute observation point.34 
CATTLE:
CAUTION: Cattle are extremely sensitive to xylazine’s effects; be 
certain of dose and dosage form. Use only the 20 mg/mL solution 
for this species. 
NOTE: Xylazine is approved for use in cattle in several countries; 
withdrawal times vary depending on labeling in each country. In 
the United States, xylazine is not FDA-approved for use in cattle. 
Xylazine withdrawal intervals vary based on the dose and route of 
administration. Withdrawal intervals may be lengthened if xyla -
zine sedation is reversed with tolazoline or yohimbine. Consult 
FARAD for further information.
Chemical restraint and injectable anesthesia (extra-label): The 
reader is encouraged to refer to the in-depth review by Abraham- 
sen35 where detailed discussions on the use of alpha-2 agonists 
alone and in combination with other anesthetic adjuncts (eg, ket-
amine stun) for both standing and recumbent procedures can be 
found. Examples: 
a) Analgesia and restraint for standing procedures in cattle  
(extra-label): Butorphanol 0.01 – 0.025 mg/kg in combination 
with xylazine 0.02 – 0.05 mg/kg and ketamine 0.04 – 0.1 mg/kg  
and administered IM or SC, depending on dose route and 
patient demeanor. The higher end of these dosages is likely 
to result in the animal becoming recumbent. 35 For a 450 kg 
(992.1 lb) animal, total doses (NOT mg/kg) of butorphanol  
5 mg, xylazine 10 mg, and ketamine 20 mg would constitute 
the low end of the dosing range. Up to an hour of cooperation 
was accomplished using this protocol, but more fractious pa -
tients may require increased doses. For animals weighing more 
than 450 kg (992.1 lb), it is suggested to give no more than 
butorphanol 10 mg (total dose, NOT mg/kg) or xylazine 20 mg 
(total dose, NOT mg/kg) for the initial dose.36
b) Standing sedation (extra-label): The following xylazine dos -
ages would be expected to produce standing sedation with a 
low incidence of recumbency for facilitating short diagnos -
tic or therapeutic procedures. Patients will generally tolerate 
mildly uncomfortable stimuli, but these dosages should not be 
counted on to provide significant analgesia. Duration of effect 
generally lasts about 30 to 40 minutes. NOTE: IM administra-
tion of doses intended to be given IV reduces the chance for 
recumbency.35
Patient type IV (mg/kg) IM (mg/kg) 
Quiet dairy breeds 0.0075 – 0.01 0.015 – 0.02 
Tractable cattle 0.01 – 0.02 0.02 – 0.04 
Anxious cattle 0.02 – 0.03 0.04 – 0.06 
Extremely anxious or 
unruly cattle
0.025 – 0.05 0.05 – 0.1
Sedation/analgesia: 0.1 – 0.3 mg/kg IM; 0.05 – 0.15 mg/kg IV; 
0.05 – 0.07 mg/kg epidurally. When xylazine is used IV/IM, anal-
gesia can be short-lived (½ hour).37
DEER/ELK :
Sedative/analgesic (label dosage; FDA-approved): NOTE: 
FDA-approved dosages usually produce sedation lasting 1 to 2 
hours and analgesia lasting for 15 to 30 minutes. 
a) Fallow deer: 4.4 – 8.8 mg/kg IM
b) Mule, sika, or white-tailed deer: 2.2 – 4.4 mg/kg IM
c) Elk: 0.55 – 1.1 mg/kg IM24
Sedative/analgesic (extra-label): For chemical immobilization, 
reconstitute 1 vial of tiletamine/zolazepam using xylazine  
400 mg/4 mL; administer 1 mL/45.5 kg (1 mL/100 lb).38
SHEEP & GOATS:
NOTE: Use xylazine with extreme caution in these species due 
to the risk for acute pulmonary edema and hypoxemia, low pulse 
oximetry readings, and subsequent cyanosis. 39–41 Use only the  
20 mg/mL solution. Consult FARAD for xylazine meat and milk 
withdrawal intervals, which vary based on dose and route of ad -
ministration. More information using xylazine as part of drug 

===== PDF_PAGE_1350 =====
Xylazine   1323
combinations for injectable sedation, anesthesia/analgesia proto-
cols can be found in other references.35,42,43
Light, standing sedation  (extra-label): 0.01 mg/kg IV for light 
standing sedation to 0.2 mg/kg IM for recumbency of an hour’s 
duration. Goats are a bit more sensitive than sheep. Dosage ranges 
of 0.05 – 0.1 mg/kg IV (goats) and 0.1 – 0.4 mg/kg IV (sheep) have 
also been recommended. When beginning to use these drugs, it 
is advisable to start with a conservative dose until one develops a 
feel for the level of sedation provided.44,45
CAMELIDS :
Procedural pain ( eg, castrations) when recumbency (up to 30 
minutes) is desired (extra-label): Alpacas: Xylazine 0.46 mg/kg  
in combination with butorphanol 0.046 mg/kg and ketamine 
4.6 mg/kg and administered IM. Llamas: Xylazine 0.37 mg/kg 
in combination with butorphanol 0.037 mg/kg and ketamine  
3.7 mg/kg and administered IM. May administer 50% of the orig-
inal dose of xylazine and ketamine during anesthesia to prolong 
the effect up to 15 minutes. Expect 20 minutes of surgical time; 
the patient should stand 45 to 60 minutes after injection.46 
Standing sedation and restraint (extra-label): Xylazine 0.1 mg/kg  
in combination with ketamine 0.2 mg/kg and either morphine  
0.1 mg/kg OR butorphanol 0.05 mg/kg and administered IM. This 
combination provides ≈15 minutes of standing restraint. An ad -
ditional dose of ketamine 0.01 mg/kg IM will extend the duration 
for another 5 to 10 minutes.47 
Sedative/analgesic with tiletamine/zolazepam (extra-label): Xyla-
zine 0.2 or 0.4 mg/kg in combination with tiletamine/zolazepam 2 
mg/kg and administered IM produces significant antinociception. 
Transient hypoxemia was associated with xylazine administration, 
which is not considered clinically important in healthy llamas. 48 
Adding morphine to the combination of xylazine and tiletamine/
zolazepam resulted in a longer duration of analgesia.49
Sedative/analgesic (extra-label): 0.2 mg/kg IV OR 0.3 mg/kg IM 
or SC may provide profound sedation for 10 to 20 minutes and an 
additional 10 to 20 minutes of mild sedation, but overall effects 
are often unpredictable.47
SWINE:
NOTE: Xylazine dosages in swine are higher than those used in 
other species.
Sedative/analgesic (extra-label): 
a) Xylazine 1 – 2.5 mg/kg IM in combination with ketamine  
10 – 12 mg/kg IM 50,51 or xylazine 2 mg/kg IM in combination 
with ketamine 20 mg/kg IM and midazolam 0.25 mg/kg IM51,52
b) 0.5 – 4 mg/kg IM, alone or in combination with ketamine53,54
Induction of general anesthesia (extra-label): Xylazine 1 – 2 mg/
kg in combination with tiletamine/zolazepam 4 – 6 mg/kg IM51
Maintenance of anesthesia (extra-label): Triple drip (ie, guaifen-
esin/ketamine/xylazine [GKX]) -- To 500 or 1000 mL of guaifen-
esin (50 mg/mL), add xylazine 1 mg (NOT mg/kg) plus ketamine 
1 – 2 mg (NOT mg/kg) per mL of guaifenesin. Run solution at  
2.2 mL/kg/hour IV CRI for up to 2 hours.51 
BIRDS:
Sedative/analgesic (extra-label): 
a) 1 – 4 mg/kg IM; provides sedation for ketamine anesthesia. 
Xylazine has been used at dosages of up to 10 mg/kg in small 
psittacines.55,56
b) Xylazine 2 – 6 mg/kg in combination with ketamine 10 – 30 mg/kg 
and administered IM; birds weighing less than 250 g require 
a higher dose (on a mg/kg basis) than birds weighing greater 
than 250 g.57
FERRETS :
Sedative/analgesic (extra-label):
a) 0.5 – 2 mg/kg IM or SC. Usually combined with atropine  
0.05 mg/kg OR glycopyrrolate 0.01 mg/kg and administered 
IM
b) Xylazine 2 mg/kg in combination with butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg 
and administered IM58,59
c) Xylazine 1.5 mg/kg in combination with tiletamine/zolazepam 
1.5 mg/kg +/- butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg and administered IM
RABBITS, RODENTS, SMALL MAMMALS :
Sedative/analgesic (extra-label)60:
a) Rabbits:
i. Xylazine 5 mg/kg in combination with ketamine 35 mg/kg 
and administered IM; surgical anesthesia for 20 to 30 min-
utes, good relaxation, sleep time is 60 to 120 minutes, some 
effects reversible with atipamezole
ii. Xylazine 5 mg/kg in combination with ketamine 25 mg/kg 
and butorphanol 0.1 mg/kg and administered IM; surgical 
anesthesia for 60 to 90 minutes, good relaxation, sleep time 
is 120 to 180 minutes
iii. Xylazine 5 mg/kg in combination with ketamine 25 mg/kg 
and acepromazine 1 mg/kg and administered IM; surgical 
anesthesia for 45 to 75 minutes, good relaxation, sleep time 
is 100 to 150 minutes 
b) Gerbils: Xylazine 2 mg/kg in combination with ketamine  
50 mg/kg and administered IP 
c) Guinea pigs: Xylazine 5 mg/kg in combination with ketamine 
40 mg/kg and administered IP
d) Hamsters: Xylazine 10 mg/kg in combination with ketamine 
200 mg/kg and administered IP 
e) Mice: Xylazine 10 mg/kg in combination with ketamine  
80 mg/kg and administered IP
f) Rats: Xylazine 10 mg/kg in combination with ketamine  
75 mg/kg and administered IP
Monitoring
 ■ Level of sedation and analgesia
 ■ Heart rate and rhythm, blood pressure, respiratory depth and rate, 
ETCO2, pulse oximetry (SpO 2), and body temperature should be 
considered in all patients, and mandatory in higher risk patients.
 ■ Hydration status
Client Information
 ■ Xylazine should only be used by individuals familiar with its use.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Xylazine HCl is an alpha-2-adrenergic agonist that is structurally 
related to clonidine. It occurs as a colorless, white or almost white 
crystalline powder that is freely soluble in water. The pH of the com-
mercially prepared injections is ≈5.5. Dosages and bottle concentra-
tions are expressed in terms of the base.
Xylazine HCl may also be known as Bay-Va-1470, Rompun®, 
AnaSed®, Chanazine®, Nerfasin®, Sedazine®, Tranquived®, X-Ject E ®, 
Xylamax®, or Xylamed®.
Storage/Stability
Do not store above 30°C (86°F). Some manufacturers state to store at 
20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F) and permit excursions up to 40°C (104°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Xylazine is reportedly physically compatible in the same syringe 
with several compounds, including acepromazine, buprenorphine, 
butorphanol, chloral hydrate, and meperidine. Anecdotally, xylazine 

===== PDF_PAGE_1351 =====
1324    Yohimbine
is physically compatible when combined in the same vial with ket -
amine and/or tiletamine/zolazepam, and in IV solution with guai -
fenesin and ketamine (ie, “triple drip”). However, the stability and 
potency of these combinations have not been studied and cannot be 
recommended.
A study evaluated the stability, sterility, pH, particulate formation, 
and efficacy of compounded ketamine, acepromazine, and xylazine 
(KAX) in laboratory rodents. The results supported the finding that 
the drugs are stable and effective for at least 180 days after mixing 
if stored at room temperature in the dark. Compounded ketamine/
xylazine combinations at concentrations intended for laboratory 
rodents demonstrated 3 months’ stability at any temperature when 
diluted in saline. 61 Undiluted ketamine/xylazine was stable for 3 
months only if refrigerated. The ketamine/acepromazine/xylazine 
combination was only stable for 1 month if refrigerated, and the un-
refrigerated combination was not stable at any temperature.62
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. The use of this drug may 
not be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and reg-
ulations before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
Xylazine Injection: 20 mg/mL in 20 mL vials or 100 mg/mL in  
50 mL vials: Rompun®, AnaSed®, generic; (Rx). FDA-approved for use 
(depending on strength and product) in dogs, cats, horses, deer, and 
elk. Do not use in horses intended for human consumption or in 
Cervidae less than 15 days before or during hunting season.
Xylazine is not FDA-approved for use in cattle in the United States; 
however, in Canada, at label dosages, it reportedly has been assigned 
withdrawal times of 3 days for meat and 48 hours for milk. Consult 
FARAD for meat and milk withdrawal intervals, which vary based 
on dose and route of administration.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Y ohimbine
(yo-him-been) Yobine®, Antagonil®
Alpha-2-Adrenergic Antagonist 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to reverse xylazine, other alpha-2 agonists, and, poten-
tially, amitraz; may be used prophylactically before amitraz 
dips
 ▶ Use with caution in patients that have renal disease or seizure 
disorders. 
 ▶ Reversal effects may diminish before the agonist’s effects 
dissipate.
 ▶ Adverse effects include transient apprehension or CNS ex-
citement, muscle tremors, salivation, hypertension, increased 
cardiac and respiratory rates, and hyperemic mucous mem-
branes; more likely in small animal species and horses.
 ▶ Many potential drug interactions
Uses/Indications
Y ohimbine is indicated to reverse the effects of xylazine in dogs, but 
it is used clinically to reverse the effects of other alpha-2 agonists and 
in several other species as well.
Y ohimbine may be efficacious in reversing some of the toxic ef -
fects associated with other agents (eg, amitraz) and can be used pro-
phylactically before amitraz dips.
Pharmacology/Actions
Y ohimbine is an alpha-2-adrenergic antagonist that can competitive-
ly antagonize the effects of xylazine and other alpha-2-adrenergic ag-
onists. Alone, yohimbine increases heart rate and can decrease blood 
pressure (at high doses), 1 causes CNS stimulation and antidiuresis, 
and has hyperinsulinemic effects. A study in cats found that yohim-
bine could antagonize xylazine- and medetomidine-induced diuresis 
in healthy cats.2 It can increase borborygmi and GI sounds in horses3 
and act as an antiemetic in cats.4
A study in horses that received detomidine 0.03 mg/kg IV fol -
lowed 15 minutes later by yohimbine 0.2 mg/kg IV found that yo -
himbine rapidly reversed the sedative effects of detomidine, ef -
fectively returned heart rate and the percent of atrioventricular 
conduction disturbances to pre-detomidine values, and effectively 
reduced detomidine-induced hyperglycemia. 5 Another study in 
horses after they received sublingual detomidine showed the effects 
of yohimbine 0.075 mg/kg IV on detomidine-induced changes in the 
chin-to-ground distance were minimal, and that the effects on deto-
midine-induced changes in heart rate and rhythm only persisted for 
15 to 20 minutes.6
By blocking central alpha-2 receptors, yohimbine enhances sym-
pathetic outflow (norepinephrine). Peripheral alpha-2 receptors are 
also found in the cardiovascular system, genitourinary system, GI 
tract, platelets, and adipose tissue.
Pharmacokinetics
A study (using 2 compartmental analyses) where yohimbine  
0.12 mg/kg IV was administered to horses found a large volume of 
distribution (mean, 3.2 L/kg), a low clearance (mean, 13.6 mL/kg 
per minute), and a long elimination half-life (4.4 hours).7 A separate 
study from the same group, using IV doses of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4 mg/kg  
IV , reported similar results.8 The main metabolite, hydroxy-yohim-
bine, can be detected in urine samples for as long as 96 hours post -
administration.7
A study reported the pharmacokinetics of yohimbine in steers 
and dogs.9 The apparent volume of distribution (steady-state) was  
≈5 L/kg in steers and 4.5 L/kg in dogs. The total body clearance was 
≈70 mL/minute/kg in steers and 30 mL/minute/kg in dogs. The half-
life of the drug was ≈0.5 to 1 hour in steers and 1.5 to 2 hours in dogs.
Y ohimbine is believed to penetrate the CNS quite readily. When it 
is used to reverse the effects of xylazine, the onset of action generally 
occurs within 3 minutes. 
The metabolic fate of the drug is not fully understood, but in 
humans, 90% of the drug is metabolized in the liver primarily by 
hydroxylation. In horses, at least 2 metabolites were detected in a 
pharmacokinetic study, both of which appeared to be hydroxylated 
metabolites.8 Whether any metabolites have activity is not known, 
but in humans, there have been reports that the major metabolite, 
11-hydroxy yohimbine, may have pharmacologic activity. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Y ohimbine is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to 
it. In humans, yohimbine is contraindicated in patients with renal 
disease.
Y ohimbine should be used cautiously in patients with seizure dis-
orders. When used to reverse the effects of xylazine, normal pain 
perception may result. The alpha-2-adrenergic antagonist effects of 
yohimbine may diminish before the effects of the agonist dissipate.
Prolonged withdrawal periods for horses in athletic events may 
be necessary. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1352 =====
Yohimbine   1325
Adverse Effects
Y ohimbine may cause transient apprehension or CNS excitement, 
muscle tremors, hypertension, tachycardia, 10 salivation, increased 
respiratory rates, and hyperemic mucous membranes. Adverse ef -
fects appear to be more probable in small animal species and horses. 
An in vitro study found that yohimbine inhibited collagen-in -
duced aggregation of bovine and equine platelets. 11 Clinical signif -
icance is not known.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safe use of yohimbine in pregnant animals or animals intended for 
breeding has not been established. No information on safety during 
lactation was located.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Dogs receiving 0.55 mg/kg (5 times the recommended dose) exhibit-
ed transient clinical signs of seizures and muscle tremors.
Y ohimbine is commonly found in combination with other stimu-
lants in over-the-counter medications. The most common signs are 
hyperactivity, tachycardia, anxiety, diarrhea, hind limb weakness, 
hyperthermia, injected sclera, and vocalization.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
Little information is available; use yohimbine with caution with oth-
er alpha-2-adrenergic antagonists  or other drugs that can cause 
CNS stimulation.
 ■ Antihypertensives (eg, angiotensin-converting enzyme in -
hibitors [ACEIs], calcium channel blockers [eg, amlodipine ], 
hydralazine): Reduced effectiveness of antihypertensive medica-
tions has been noted.
 ■ Detomidine : In horses, a study found that giving yohimbine 
after prior administration of detomidine caused yohimbine clear-
ance and volume of distribution to decrease with resultant in -
creases in yohimbine peak plasma levels. The authors concluded 
that this increases the potential for untoward effects and warrants 
further study into the physiologic effects of this combination of 
drugs.12 
 ■ Reserpine : Concurrent administration of high doses (1 mg/kg 
IV of each drug) was uniformly fatal to dogs.1 
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline, clomipramine): 
In humans, yohimbine is not recommended for use with antidepres-
sants or other mood-altering agents; hypertension has been reported 
with tricyclic antidepressants.
Dosages
DOGS:
Xylazine reversal (label dosage; FDA-approved): 0.11 mg/kg IV 
slowly13 
Reversal or prevention of amitraz toxicity  (extra-label): If ati -
pamezole is unavailable, yohimbine 0.1 mg/kg IV or 0.25 mg/kg 
IM14,15; some clinicians recommend using yohimbine in combina-
tion with atipamezole 50 µg/kg IM.14,16
CATS:
Reversal of xylazine-containing anesthetic combinations (ex-
tra-label): 0.5 mg/kg IV at the end of the procedure17
HORSES :  
Alpha-2-adrenergic agonist reversal (extra-label): The less spe -
cific alpha-2 agonists—xylazine, detomidine, and romifidine—are 
typically reversed using yohimbine 0.05 – 0.2 mg/kg adminis -
tered IM or slowly IV .18 A study where yohimbine was given at  
0.2 mg/kg IV 15 minutes after IV detomidine found that it effec -
tively reversed detomidine-induced sedation, bradycardia, atrio -
ventricular heart block, and hyperglycemia.19
CATTLE:
Alpha-2-adrenergic agonist (xylazine) reversal  (extra-label):  
0.1 – 0.125 mg/kg IM. Consider IV administration in an emer -
gency situation. If ketamine or tiletamine/zolazepam have been 
used, allow 30 to 45 minutes before reversing xylazine (nonemer-
gency situation) to avoid rough recovery.20–22
LLAMAS :
Xylazine reversal (extra-label): 0.125 – 0.25 mg/kg IV or IM23,24
SWINE: 
Reversal of dexmedetomidine combination with butorphanol 
and midazolam (extra-label): 0.3 mg/kg IM25
Reversal of xylazine, ketamine, tiletamine/zolazepam anesthe-
sia in sows (extra-label): 0.1 mg/kg IM26,27
BIRDS:
Reversal agent for alpha-2-adrenergic agonists  (eg, xylazine):  
0.1 mg/kg IV28
RABBITS, RODENTS, SMALL MAMMALS :
Reversing the effects of xylazine and to partially antagonize the 
effects of ketamine and acepromazine (extra-label): 
a) Rabbits: 0.2 mg/kg IV as needed29
b) Mice/Rats: 0.2 mg/kg IP as needed29
Monitoring
 ■ CNS status (arousal level)
 ■ Cardiac rate; rhythm (if indicated), blood pressure (if indicated 
and practical)
 ■ Respiratory rate
Client Information
 ■ This agent should only be used by veterinary professionals.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Y ohimbine HCl, a Rauwolfia or indolealkylamine alkaloid, has a mo-
lecular weight of 390.9. It is chemically related to reserpine.
Y ohimbine may also be known as aphrodine hydrochloride, 
 chlorhydrate de quebrachine, corynine hydrochloride, Aphrodyne®, 
Dayto Himbin®, Pluriviron mono®, Prowess Plain®, Urobine®, Virigen®, 
Yobine®, Yocon®, Yocoral®, Yohimex®, Yohydrol, Yomax®, or Zumba®.
Storage/Stability
Store yohimbine injection at room temperature (15°C-30°C 
[59°F-86°F]) and protected from light and heat.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
Y ohimbine Sterile Solution for Injection: 2 mg/mL in 20 mL vials; 
Yobine®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs. NADA# 140-866. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1353 =====
1326    Zidovudine 
The United States product label states yohimbine is not for use in 
food-producing animals.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
No FDA-approved products were located; 2 mg, 5.4 mg, and 6 mg 
tablets are available in Canada (Rx) but unlikely to be of veterinary 
benefit.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Zidovudine 
(zid-o-vew-den) Retrovir® 
Antiretroviral 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Antiretroviral agent that may be useful for adjunctive treat-
ment of FeLV or FIV in cats
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with renal, hepatic, or bone mar-
row dysfunction.
 ▶ Nonregenerative anemia is the most common adverse effect 
in cats.
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies zidovudine as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
In veterinary medicine, zidovudine may be useful for treating feline 
immunodeficiency virus (FIV) or feline leukemia virus (FeLV). Al -
though zidovudine can reduce the viral load in infected cats and im-
prove clinical signs, it may not alter the natural course of the disease 
to a great extent. 
A double-blind placebo-controlled trial assessed the efficacy of 
human interferon-alpha2a 100,000 IU/kg SC every 24 hours, zidovu-
dine 5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours, and a combination of both drugs in 
cats infected naturally with FeLV . This study reported that although 
there was a trend for improved clinical status in treated cats, they 
were unable to demonstrate measurable statistically significant effi -
cacy of either drug alone or together when given for 6 weeks.1 
As drug resistance can be seen, one source recommends that zid-
ovudine treatment is likely best reserved for those situations where 
symptomatic/supportive measures are not working.2 Drug resistance 
can be seen as early as 6 months after starting treatment.3
Pharmacology/Actions
Zidovudine is considered an antiretroviral agent. Although its exact 
mechanism of action is not fully understood, zidovudine is convert-
ed in vivo to an active metabolite (triphosphate) that interferes with 
viral RNA-directed DNA polymerase (reverse transcriptase). This 
causes a virustatic effect in retroviruses.
Zidovudine has some activity against gram-negative bacteria and 
can be cytotoxic as well.
Pharmacokinetics
Zidovudine is well absorbed after oral administration. In cats, oral 
bioavailability is ≈95%. When zidovudine is administered with food, 
peak concentrations may be decreased, but the total area under the 
curve may not be affected; peak concentrations occur ≈1 hour post -
dosing in cats. The drug is widely distributed, including into the CSF . 
It is only marginally bound to plasma proteins. Zidovudine is rapidly 
metabolized and excreted in the urine. Half-life in cats is ≈1.5 hours.4
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Zidovudine is contraindicated in patients that have developed 
life-threatening hypersensitivity reactions to it in the past.5
Use zidovudine with caution in patients with bone marrow, renal, 
or hepatic dysfunction. The European Advisory Board on Cat Dis -
eases (ABCD) guidelines on prevention and management of feline 
immunodeficiency advise against the use of zidovudine in cats with 
myelosuppression. Dosage adjustment may be necessary for cats 
with renal or hepatic dysfunction.
In humans, hematologic toxicity, including neutropenia and se -
vere anemia, has been associated with zidovudine use. 5 Symptom-
atic myopathy has also occurred with prolonged use. Lactic acidosis 
and severe hepatomegaly with steatosis have been reported with nu-
cleoside analogues. In humans, rapid infusions or bolus injections 
should be avoided, and zidovudine should not be given IM. 
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies zidovudine as a hazardous drug 6; personal pro -
tective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure
Adverse Effects
In cats, reductions in RBCs, PCV , and hemoglobin are the most 
common adverse effects reported. Anemia may be nonregenerative 
and is most commonly seen with the higher end of the dose range  
(10 – 15 mg/kg). If hematocrit drops below 20%, treatment should be 
discontinued, and anemia then usually resolves within a few days. 3 
Diarrhea and weakness have also been reported. 
In a controlled trial with a total of 22 cats receiving zidovudine, no 
notable adverse effects were detected.1
Although there are many adverse effects reported in humans, 
granulocytopenia and GI effects, especially nausea, vomiting, and 
anorexia, appear to be the most likely to occur. 5 The frequency and 
severity of adverse effects in humans are greater in patients with 
more advanced infection at the time of treatment initiation.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Zidovudine given to rats in doses up to 7 times the usual adult 
(human) doses had no effect on conception rates. Fetal toxicity oc -
curred in rats receiving up to 450 mg/kg/day and in rabbits given  
500 mg/kg/day.
Zidovudine is excreted in milk. Clinical significance is not clear 
for nursing offspring. Because safety has not been established in ani-
mals, this drug should only be used when the maternal benefits out-
weigh the potential risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Human adults and children have survived oral overdoses of up to  
50 g without permanent sequelae.5 Vomiting and transient hematologic 
effects are the most consistent adverse effects reported with overdoses.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving zidovudine and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Antifungals, Azole  (eg, fluconazole, ketoconazole): May in-
crease zidovudine serum concentration
 ■ Atovaquone : May increase zidovudine serum concentration
 ■ Doxorubicin : May antagonize each other’s effects; avoid use 
together.
 ■ Interferon Alfa : Increased risk for hematologic and hepatic 
toxicity

===== PDF_PAGE_1354 =====
Zinc (Systemic)   1327
 ■ Methadone : May increase serum concentration of zidovudine
 ■ Myelotoxic/Cytotoxic drugs (eg, chloramphenicol, doxo -
rubicin, flucytosine, vincristine, vinblastine): Administered with 
zidovudine may increase the risk for hematologic toxicity
 ■ Probenecid : May increase zidovudine serum concentration
 ■ Rifampin : May decrease serum concentration (AUC) of zidovu-
dine
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ None were noted.
Dosages
CATS:
Adjunctive therapy of feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and feline 
immunodeficiency virus (FIV) (extra-label): 5 – 10 mg/kg PO 
or SC every 12 hours. 3,7,8 The higher dose should be used care -
fully as adverse effects (eg, nonregenerative anemia) can develop. 
When using the injectable formulation SC, the product should be 
diluted (see Compatibility/Compounding Considerations) prior 
to administration to avoid local irritation 3; dilution to 4 mg/mL 
is advised.5
Monitoring
 ■ Baseline and weekly CBC for the first month during treatment, 
then monthly if stable3
 ■ CD4/CD8 rates, if possible
 ■ Clinical efficacy
Client Information
 ■ For this medication to work properly, give it exactly as your veter-
inarian has prescribed.
 ■ Side effects can include anemia, diarrhea, and weakness. If your 
cat seems overly tired or has no energy, contact your veterinarian 
right away.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor you cat while it is taking 
this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Zidovudine, a thymidine analogue, is synthetically produced and oc-
curs as a white to beige-colored, odorless, crystalline solid. ≈20 mg is 
soluble in 1 mL of water.
Zidovudine may also be known as ZDV , azidodeoxythymidine, 
3’-azido-2’ ,3’-dideoxythymidine, azidothymidine, AZT, BW-A509U, 
BW-509U, compound-S, zidovudinum, and Retrovir®; many other 
trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Store zidovudine oral tablets, capsules, and solution at room tem -
perature 15°C to 25°C (59°F-77°F). Protect from heat, light, and 
moisture. 
Store zidovudine injection at room temperature (20-25°C 
[68-77°F]) and protect from light. Once diluted, it is stable for 24 
hours at room temperature or 48 hours if refrigerated at 2°C to 8°C 
(36°F-46°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent upon factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information. 
Zidovudine for injection is compatible with 5% dextrose, 0.9% 
sodium chloride, 5% dextrose with 0.45% sodium chloride, lactated 
Ringer’s, and 5% dextrose with lactated Ringer’s solutions.9 It is re -
ported as Y-site compatible with amikacin, clindamycin phosphate, 
dexamethasone sodium phosphate, dexmedetomidine, dobutamine, 
fluconazole, gentamicin sulfate, heparin sodium, hydromorphone, 
metoclopramide, metronidazole, ondansetron, pantoprazole, potas-
sium chloride, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, and voriconazole. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Zidovudine Oral Tablets: 300 mg; Retrovir®, generic; (Rx)
Zidovudine Oral Capsules: 100 mg; Retrovir®, generic; (Rx)
Zidovudine Oral Syrup: 50 mg/5 mL (10 mg/mL) in 240 mL; Retro-
vir®, generic; (Rx)
Zidovudine Injection Solution: 10 mg/mL in 20 mL single-use vials; 
Retrovir®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Zinc (Systemic)
(zeenk) 
Nutritional; Trace Element
See also Zinc Gluconate (Neutralized), Topical
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Metal nutritional agent that may be used for zinc deficiency, to 
reduce copper toxicity in susceptible dog breeds (eg, Bedling-
ton terriers, West Highland white terriers) with hepatic copper 
toxicosis, and treat hepatic fibrosis in dogs 
 ▶ Contraindications include animals taking penicillamine and 
those that are hypersensitive to it. 
 ▶ Use caution or avoid use in animals that may have copper 
deficiency or elevated zinc concentration; consider obtaining 
copper and zinc serum concentrations before treating. 
 ▶ Adverse effects related to large doses of zinc supplementation 
may include GI disturbances or hematologic abnormalities 
(usually hemolysis), particularly if a coexistent copper deficien-
cy exists.
 ▶ Zinc overdoses (eg, United States pennies minted after 1982) 
can be serious.
Uses/Indications
Zinc sulfate is used systemically as a nutritional supplement in a va-
riety of species. Oral zinc acetate has been shown to reduce copper 
toxicity in dog breeds that are susceptible to hepatic copper toxicosis 
(eg, Bedlington terriers, West Highland white terriers). Zinc ther -
apy may also be of benefit in the treatment of hepatic fibrosis and 
zinc-responsive dermatosis. In dogs and cats, zinc has been used for 
adjunctive therapy for superficial necrolytic dermatitis (metabolic 
epidermal necrosis; hepatocutaneous syndrome).
Pharmacology/Actions
Zinc is a necessary nutritional supplement; it is required by over 
200 metalloenzymes for proper function. Enzyme systems that re -
quire zinc include DNA polymerase, ALP , alcohol dehydrogenase, 
carbonic anhydrase, and RNA polymerase. Zinc is also necessary to 
maintain the structural integrity of cell membranes and nucleic ac -
ids. Zinc catalyzes essential biochemical reactions, such as activation 
of substrates of carbonic anhydrase in erythrocytes. Zinc-dependent 
physiological processes include sexual maturation and reproduction, 
cell growth and division, vision, night vision, wound healing, im -
mune response, and taste acuity. In dogs with hepatitis, zinc induces 
the intestinal copper-binding protein metallothionein, resulting in 
antifibrotic and hepatoprotective properties.1
When administered orally, large doses of zinc can inhibit the in -
testinal absorption of copper and inhibit the reabsorption of secreted 
copper (eg, from bile or feces).

===== PDF_PAGE_1355 =====
1328    Zinc (Systemic)
Pharmacokinetics
About 20% to 30% of dietary zinc is absorbed, principally from the 
duodenum and ileum. Bioavailability is dependent on the food in 
which it is present. Phytates can chelate zinc and form insoluble 
complexes in an alkaline pH; high concentrations of dietary calcium 
or phosphorus may also impair absorption. Food may have a similar 
effect on the bioavailability of zinc supplements. Zinc is stored most-
ly in red and white blood cells but is also found in the muscle, skin, 
bone, retina, pancreas, liver, kidney, and prostate gland. Serum zinc 
is bound to albumin and amino acids. Elimination is primarily via 
the feces, but some zinc is also excreted by the kidneys and in sweat. 
Zinc found in feces may be reabsorbed in the colon.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Zinc supplementation should be avoided or used cautiously in pa -
tients with copper deficiency.
Zinc sulfate injection is NOT for direct IV infusion and it is only 
intended for use in parenteral nutrition solutions . Solutions with 
an osmolarity of 900 mOsm/L or greater must be infused through 
a central catheter. Zinc sulfate injection contains aluminum; pro -
longed administration may lead to aluminum toxicity, particularly 
in animals with renal insufficiency.
Do not confuse dosages or concentrations of zinc salts with those 
of elemental zinc.
Adverse Effects
Large doses of zinc may cause GI disturbances; zinc acetate or me -
thionine may be less irritating to the GI than other salts and mixing 
the contents of the capsule with a small amount of tuna or hamburg-
er may also minimize vomiting. Hematologic abnormalities (usual -
ly hemolysis) may occur with large doses or serum concentrations 
greater than 1000 µg/dL (1 mg/dL), particularly if a coexistent cop -
per deficiency exists. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Zinc requirements increase during pregnancy. Although zinc defi -
ciency during pregnancy has been associated with adverse perina -
tal outcomes, other studies report no such occurrences. In humans, 
since zinc deficiency is very rare, the routine use of zinc supplemen-
tation during pregnancy is not recommended. No evidence of im -
paired fertility or fetal harm was noted in laboratory animals receiv-
ing up to 6 times the recommended human dose. 
Zinc is excreted in breast milk; use it with caution in lactating 
animals. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Signs associated with overdoses of zinc in mammals include hemo -
lytic anemia, neutropenia, hypotension, acute pancreatitis, jaundice, 
vomiting, and pulmonary edema. The most common clinical signs 
associated with a zinc overdose in dogs and cats include vomiting, 
diarrhea, polydipsia, and lethargy.
Zinc toxicosis in dogs ingesting topical zinc oxide includes vom -
iting, diarrhea, and hemolytic anemia.2
Zinc intoxication in birds is relatively common, but clinical signs 
of intoxication in birds are varied and nonspecific. They include leth-
argy, anorexia, regurgitation, polyuria, polydipsia, hematuria, hema-
tochezia, pallor, dark or bright green diarrhea, foul-smelling feces, 
paresis, seizures, and sudden death. 3 Treatment involves removing 
the source of zinc, chelation therapy (edetate calcium disodium, 
penicillamine,4 or succimer), and supportive care.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving zinc and may be of signif -
icance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Calcium Supplements, Oral : May potentially inhibit oral 
zinc absorption
 ■ Copper : Large doses of zinc can inhibit copper absorption in the 
intestine; if this interaction is not desired, separate copper and 
zinc supplements by at least 2 hours. 
 ■ Fluoroquinolones  (eg, enrofloxacin, ciprofloxacin): Zinc salts 
may reduce the oral absorption of some fluoroquinolones.
 ■ Iron Supplements, Oral : May potentially inhibit oral zinc ab-
sorption; zinc salts may reduce the oral absorption of iron.
 ■ Penicillamine : May potentially inhibit oral zinc absorp -
tion; zinc salts may reduce the oral absorption of penicillamine; 
the combination is considered contraindicated in dogs with 
 hepatopathy.
 ■ Tetracyclines : Zinc salts may chelate oral tetracyclines and re-
duce their absorption; tetracyclines may reduce zinc absorption; 
separate doses by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Ursodiol : May potentially inhibit oral zinc absorption; the clin-
ical significance is not clear.
Dosages
NOTE: Zinc products may be labeled with concentrations ex -
pressed as salt OR as elemental zinc. Assume the labeled concen-
tration per tablet or capsule is elemental zinc unless the labeled 
ingredients and concentrations state otherwise. Dosages below 
are for elemental zinc unless otherwise noted.
DOGS:
Adjunctive treatment and prophylaxis of primary copper hepa-
topathy (extra-label): 8 – 10 mg/kg elemental zinc PO every 12 
hours. Separate dose from meals by 1 to 2 hours. Monitor con -
centrations every 2 to 3 months and adjust the dose as necessary.5 
Hepatic fibrosis  (extra-label): Empirical dosage is 15 mg/kg 
of  elemental zinc per day (or 200 mg elemental zinc per me -
dium-sized dog per day, tapered to 50 – 100 mg/dog (NOT  
mg/kg) PO per day based on serum zinc concentrations). Zinc 
should ideally be given on an empty stomach (1 hour before or 
after a meal); mix with tuna oil if nausea is noted.1,6
Prevention of copper accumulation associated with chronic 
hepatitis (extra-label): 100 mg elemental zinc/dog (NOT mg/kg)  
PO daily for 3 to 6 months, then reduce to 50 mg elemental  
zinc/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO per day. 
Adjunctive therapy for superficial necrolytic dermatitis or 
zinc-responsive dermatosis (extra-label): 2 – 3 mg/kg PO once 
a day of elemental zinc with food either once daily or divided ev-
ery 12 hours.7,8 Doses may need to be adjusted based on response 
to therapy. The addition of low-dose glucocorticoid therapy may 
benefit cases that do not respond solely to zinc supplementation. 
In syndrome I patients (fed balanced diets) that do not respond 
to oral zinc supplementation and low-dose glucocorticoid thera -
py, slow IV or IM injections with sterile zinc sulfate solutions at 
10 – 15 mg/kg weekly (maximum of 600 mg/month) for at least 1 
month have been recommended. Syndrome I patients require life-
long therapy. Syndrome II patients (fed diets low in zinc or high 
in phytates [cereal grains, soy-based or corn-based diets] or with 
high concentrations of minerals [calcium, iron, or copper] that 
may bind dietary zinc) can have zinc supplementation discontin-
ued after the diet has been corrected and clinical signs resolve.8

===== PDF_PAGE_1356 =====
Zoledronate   1329
CATS:
Adjunctive therapy of severe hepatic lipidosis  (extra-label):  
7 – 10 mg/kg PO once daily, in B-complex mixture if possible9
Primary copper hepatopathy (extra-label): 2 – 4 mg/kg elemen-
tal zinc PO every 12 to 24 hours
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis (extra-label): Dosages are not 
well described; doses used in dogs could possibly be extrapolated 
for cats.8 
Monitoring
 ■ Hepatic diseases: 
 ■ Plasma zinc concentration: The goal is above 200 µg/dL but less 
than 800 µg/dL.10
 ■ Copper quantification when possible; serum ALT serially when 
copper quantification is not feasible.
 ■ There is a poor correlation between serum zinc concentrations 
and zinc-deficient states in dogs, and zinc concentrations may 
have more value in the detection of potentially toxic intake or cor-
roboration of a clinical diagnosis of toxicity or deficiency.11
 ■ Periodically measure CBC to monitor for hemolytic anemia.12 
Client Information
 ■ Although it is best to give oral zinc on an empty stomach, if vom-
iting occurs, mix it with hamburger or tuna fish to decrease this 
side effect.
 ■ Do not give more than prescribed; zinc can be very toxic (espe -
cially in dogs).
 ■ While your animal is taking this medication, it is important to 
return to your veterinarian for blood tests. Do not miss these im-
portant follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Zinc acetate occurs as white crystals or granules. It has a faint ace -
tous odor and effloresces slightly. One gram is soluble in 2.5 mL of 
water or 30 mL of alcohol. Zinc acetate contains 30% elemental zinc 
(100 mg zinc acetate = 30 mg elemental zinc).
Zinc sulfate occurs as a colorless granular powder, small needles, 
or transparent prisms. It is odorless but has an astringent metallic 
taste. 1.67 g are soluble in 1 mL of water. Zinc sulfate is insoluble 
in alcohol and contains 23% zinc by weight (100 mg zinc sulfate = 
23 mg elemental zinc).
Zinc gluconate occurs as a white or practically white powder 
or granules. It is soluble in water and very slightly soluble in alco -
hol. Zinc gluconate contains 14.3% zinc (100 mg zinc gluconate =  
14.3 mg elemental zinc).
Zinc methionine contains 18% to 21% elemental zinc. For every  
5 mg of zinc methionine, there is ≈1 mg of elemental zinc.
Zinc acetate may also be known as E650 or zinci acetas  dihydricus.
Zinc sulfate may also be known as zinc sulphate, zinci sulfas, or 
zincum sulfuricum; many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Store zinc acetate crystals in tight containers. Unless otherwise rec -
ommended by the manufacturer, store zinc sulfate products in tight 
containers at room temperature of 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
If using bulk chemical powder: Zinc acetate contains 30% elemen -
tal zinc; zinc gluconate contains 14.3% elemental zinc; zinc sulfate 
contains 23% elemental zinc; zinc methionine contains 18% to 21% 
elemental zinc. One milligram of elemental zinc is provided by the 
following: 2.8 mg zinc acetate, 2.09 mg zinc chloride, 7.14 mg zinc 
gluconate, and 4.4 mg zinc sulfate. Zinc for injection is intended only 
as an additive to parenteral nutrition; do not administer the undilut-
ed drug. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
None as single-ingredient products for systemic use located; sev -
eral vitamin/mineral supplements contain zinc, however. NutriVed 
Chewable Zinpro® Tablets contain 15 mg elemental zinc and 30 mg 
methionine; (OTC).
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Zinc Acetate is available from chemical supply houses.
Zinc Capsules: 25 mg and 50 mg elemental zinc (as zinc acetate or 
zinc sulfate), Galzin®, generic; (Rx/OTC)
Zinc Injection: 1 mg/mL (as 2.46 mg sulfate) in 5 mL and 10 mL 
vials; 5 mg/mL (as 21.95 mg sulfate) in 5 mL vials; 1 mg/mL (as  
2.09 mg chloride) in 10 mL vials; and 3 mg/mL (as 7.41 mg sulfate) 
in 10 mL vials; generic; (Rx)
Zinc Tablets: 10 mg, 15 mg, 25 mg, 30 mg, and 50 mg elemental zinc 
(usually as zinc gluconate or zinc sulfate); generic; (OTC)
Zinc is also available in topical dermatologic and ophthalmic prepa-
rations.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Zoledronate
Zoledronic Acid
(zoe-le-dron-ik as-id) Zometa®, Reclast®
Bisphosphonate 
Prescriber Highlights 
 ▶ Used IV for treating hypercalcemia of malignancy and for ad-
juvant analgesic treatment of malignant osteolytic bone pain 
most commonly associated with osteosarcoma
 ▶ Administer as an infusion in saline or dextrose over no less 
than 15 minutes (shorter than required for pamidronate 
administration).
 ▶ Appears well tolerated in veterinary patients with comorbid-
ities including hypercalcemia but may cause electrolyte abnor-
malities and renal toxicity
 ▶ Check renal function prior to administration.
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies zoledronic acid as a hazardous drug; use 
appropriate precautions when handling. 
Uses/Indications 
Zoledronate may be useful as an adjunctive analgesic for treating os-
teolytic bone pain associated with primary and metastatic skeletal 
malignancies including osteosarcoma in dogs and hypercalcemia as-
sociated with malignancy.1–6 The drug had a chondroprotective effect 
in dogs with experimentally induced osteoarthritis.7
Zoledronate appears to slow tumor growth and reduce pathologic 
bone turnover in cats with oral squamous cell carcinoma.8
Horses with bone fragility disorder treated with zoledronate 
demonstrated both clinical and scintigraphic improvement.9
Pharmacology/Actions 
Bisphosphonates, at therapeutic concentrations, inhibit bone resorp-
tion and do not inhibit bone mineralization via binding to hydroxy-
apatite crystals. Bisphosphonates impede osteoclast activity and 
induce osteoclast apoptosis, an effect that may be seen with mono -
therapy10 or in combination with chemotherapy. 11,12 Zoledronate’s 
primary target is the osteoclast enzyme farnesyl pyrophosphate 
synthase. Urinary calcium and phosphorus excretion is increased, 

===== PDF_PAGE_1357 =====
1330    Zoledronate
and hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, and hypermagnesemia may 
result. Markers of bone turnover are reduced in healthy dogs as well 
as dogs with experimentally induced disease. 13,14 Zoledronate has 
≈100 times greater relative antiresorptive potency as compared with 
pamidronate.15
Bisphosphonates in vitro have direct cytotoxic or cytostatic ef -
fects on human and canine osteosarcoma cell lines. 16 Additionally, 
zoledronate demonstrates bone-preserving activities at the primary 
tumor in a mouse model of canine osteosarcoma.17 Zoledronate may 
also have antiangiogenic effects and inhibit cell migration in certain 
cancers.8
Pharmacokinetics 
Zoledronate was administered by 15-minute IV infusion to 4 healthy 
dogs; the volume of distribution was ≈0.3 L/kg, and half-life was 2.2 
hours.18
In 8 healthy horses receiving 0.057 mg/kg of an experimental 
zoledronic acid formulation administered by 30-minute IV infusion, 
the volume of distribution was 1.5 L/kg, and the elimination half-life 
was 2.2 hours.19
In humans, after IV infusion, ≈50% to 75% is incorporated into 
bone; the balance is largely excreted unchanged in the urine. It is not 
metabolized and does not alter the metabolism of other drugs. It has 
a terminal elimination half-life of ≈146 hours. Total drug exposure 
(area under the curve) is increased with increasing renal impair -
ment. The shorter half-life reported in animals presumably reflects 
a shorter sampling period.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Zoledronic acid is contraindicated in patients with hypersensitivity 
to it and in patients with hypocalcemia or severe renal impairment.20 
Dosage adjustments are not necessary in patients with mild to mod-
erate renal impairment. Zoledronic acid may cause renal injury and 
should be used with caution in patients that are receiving nephrotox-
ic drugs or that have moderate renal impairment, electrolyte imbal-
ances, or disorders affecting mineral metabolism. Patients should be 
adequately hydrated prior to receiving zoledronic acid.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies zoledronic acid as group 3 ( non-antineoplastic 
agents that primarily have adverse reproductive effects).21 
Do not confuse the trade name ZOMeta® (zolendronate) with 
ZIMeta® (dipyrone).
Adverse Effects 
Zoledronate administered by 15-minute IV infusions appears to be 
well tolerated in veterinary patients. 22 One retrospective study re -
ported adverse effects in dogs that included azotemia, vomiting, and 
diarrhea; however, concurrent medications could not be ruled out as 
the cause of these effects.22 Acute kidney injury has also been report-
ed in dogs but this effect appears infrequent and mild to moderate 
in severity.23 Hypocalcemia has been noted, and osteonecrosis of the 
jaw has been reported.24 Irritation may occur if extravasated.5
In humans, nausea, musculoskeletal pain, osteonecrosis of the 
jaw, atypical fractures, anemia, iritis/uveitis, hypotension, hyperma-
gnesemia, hypophosphatemia, hypocalcemia, hypocalcemia-related 
cardiac or neurologic adverse effects, thrombocytopenia, and agran-
ulocytosis have been reported. 20 Postinfusion pyrexia, fatigue, my -
algia, and arthralgia commonly occur, and analgesic or antipyretic 
medication may be used to limit these effects. Infusion site reactions 
(eg, redness, swelling) occur infrequently. Adverse effects can occur 
days to months after administration.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
In pregnant rats, administration of zoledronate during gestation at 
doses greater than 2.4 times the recommended human systemic ex -
posure amount resulted in pre- and postimplantation losses and fe -
tal skeletal, visceral, and external malformations; maternal mortality 
also increased.20
It is unknown if zoledronic acid is excreted in milk.20 As neonatal 
exposure could have effects persisting for weeks to months, use with 
extreme caution in lactating animals; consider milk replacer.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 
Clinically significant hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, and hypo -
magnesemia may occur and should be corrected. Severe hypocalce -
mia has caused tetany and has been associated with atrial fibrillation. 
In humans, the risk for renal toxicity increases with 5-minute IV in-
fusion times and doses of 8 mg. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions 
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving zoledronate and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Aminoglycosides : May enhance hypocalcemic effects of zole -
dronate; monitor.
 ■ Corticosteroids  (eg, dexamethasone, fludrocortisone, pred-
nis(ol)one): Zoledronate must be used carefully (with monitoring) 
when used in conjunction with other drugs that can affect calcium.
 ■ Loop Diuretics  (eg, furosemide): Loop diuretics promote cal-
cium excretion and may result in additive effects on calcium con-
centrations. 
 ■ Nephrotoxic Drugs  (eg, aminoglycosides, amphotericin B, 
cisplatin): Use with caution; potential for increased risk for neph-
rotoxicity
 ■ nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs; eg, 
carprofen, flunixin, meloxicam): Use with caution; potential for 
increased risk for nephrotoxicity
 ■ Thiazide Diuretics  (eg, hydrochlorothiazide): Thiazide di -
uretics promote calcium retention and may impair the hypocal -
cemic effects of zoledronate.
Laboratory Considerations 
 ■ None noted
Dosages 
NOTE: See Compatibility/Compounding Considerations prior 
to administration.
DOGS:
Adjunctive treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy (extra- 
label): 4 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) IV infusion over 15 minutes.25 Ad-
ministration of doses ranging from 0.1 – 0.32 mg/kg have been 
reported.5,22
Palliative treatment of bone pain associated with osteosarcoma 
(extra-label): 0.1 mg/kg IV infusion over 15 minutes on the sec -
ond of 2 days of ionizing radiation and repeated every 4 weeks26
CATS:
Adjunctive treatment of bone-invasive oral squamous cell car-
cinoma (extra-label): 0.2 mg/kg IV infusion over 15 minutes ev -
ery 28 days8

===== PDF_PAGE_1358 =====
Zonisamide   1331
HORSES :
Bone fragility disorder (extra-label): 0.075 mg/kg IV infusion 
over 30 minutes. Zoledronic acid solution was compounded 
immediately before administration using pharmaceutical grade 
zoledronate, citric acid, and mannitol solution.9
Monitoring 
 ■ Baseline and periodic serum renal chemistry panel and electro -
lytes (eg, calcium [total, ionized], phosphorous, potassium, mag-
nesium) and hydration status should be monitored before starting 
each dose and especially for patients with pre-existing azotemia 
or for those receiving concurrent nephrotoxic drugs.
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC
 ■ Baseline and periodic markers of bone turnover (eg, bone-specific 
ALP , urine N-telopeptide)1
 ■ Baseline and periodic urinalysis
Client Information
 ■ Y our pet may have an elevated temperature or loss of appetite after 
receiving this medicine. Some animals may also experience mus-
cle, bone, or joint pain for several days after treatment. Contact 
your veterinarian if you think your pet is in pain.
 ■ This medicine must be given in your veterinarian’s clinic. It can-
not be administered at home.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your pet while it is be -
ing treated with this medicine. Do not miss these important fol -
low-up visits.
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined 
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH). Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the 
use of personal protective equipment when handling your ani -
mals waste (eg, urine, feces, vomit).
Chemistry/Synonyms
Zoledronic acid is an imidazole bisphosphonate acid analogue of py-
rophosphate that occurs as a white crystalline powder. It is sparingly 
soluble in water, and practically insoluble in organic solvents. 
Zoledronic acid is also known as zoledronate, CGP-42446, zole -
dronsyra, Reclast®, Aclasta®, and Zometa®.
Storage/Stability 
Store zoledronate at room temperature 25°C (77°F); excursions to 
15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F) are permitted. 
Zoledronic acid concentrate (0.8 mg/mL) that has been diluted 
for infusion should be stored refrigerated at 2°C to 8°C (36°F-46°F). 
The total time between dilution and completion of administration 
must not exceed 24 hours. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Do not mix zoledronate with any IV fluid containing divalent cat-
ions (eg, calcium and magnesium containing fluids such as lactated 
Ringer’s solution [LRS], Plasmalyte®, Ringer’s). It is recommended to 
use a 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% dextrose IV solution and a dedi -
cated IV line. Refrigerated solutions should equilibrate to room tem-
perature before administration.
Zoledronate is reportedly Y-site compatible with the following 
drugs (partial list): aminocaproic acid, ampicillin/sulbactam, azithro-
mycin, buprenorphine, butorphanol tartrate, carboplatin, cefazolin, 
cefotaxime, ceftazidime, cisplatin, clindamycin, cyclophospha -
mide, cytarabine, dacarbazine, dexamethasone sodium phosphate, 
dexmedetomidine, dexrazoxane, diphenhydramine, dopamine, 
dobutamine, doxorubicin HCl (also liposome form), doxycycline, 
erythromycin lactobionate, famotidine, fentanyl citrate, fluconazole, 
fluorouracil, gemcitabine, heparin, hydromorphone, hydroxyzine, 
imipenem-cilastatin, lidocaine HCl, mannitol, metoclopramide, 
methylprednisolone sodium succinate, midazolam, mitoxantrone, 
morphine, ondansetron, pantoprazole, piperacillin-tazobactam, po-
tassium chloride, ranitidine, vinblastine, and vincristine.
Zoledronate is reportedly incompatible with dantrolene, diaze -
pam, and phenytoin sodium.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Zoledronic Acid Injection: 4 mg in 5 mL (0.8 mg/mL) concentrated 
solution in single-dose vials and 4 mg and 5 mg in 100 mL ready-to-
use IV solution; Reclast®, Zometa®, generic; (Rx).
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Zonisamide
(zoh-niss-a-mide) Zonegran®
Anticonvulsant 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ May be useful as an add-on drug for refractory epilepsy. May 
also be considered for initial treatment as monotherapy in 
dogs
 ▶ Half-life of 15 hours in dogs allows for twice-daily adminis-
tration, and half-life of 33 hours in cats allows for once-daily 
administration.
 ▶ Increase in dose may be needed when used in conjunction 
with phenobarbital.
 ▶ Common adverse effects include sedation, ataxia, and inappe-
tence. Rarely, hepatopathy, urinary calculi, and metabolic and 
acute tubular acidosis have been reported. 
 ▶ Known teratogen in dogs
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies zonisamide as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
In dogs, zonisamide has demonstrated effectiveness as monothera -
py1–3 and as an add-on drug for the treatment of refractory epilepsy.4 
Open-label studies in dogs with zonisamide used as monotherapy 
or as an add-on drug reported 58% to 81% response rates. 1,3,4 Based 
on the limited available evidence, zonisamide is recommended as 
monotherapy or as add-on treatment for canine epilepsy.5 
Limited use in cats has occurred with anecdotal success in con -
trolling seizures.6
Pharmacology/Actions
Although the exact mechanism of action for zonisamide is not 
known, it is postulated to produce antiseizure activity at sodium and 
T-type calcium channels, reducing transient inward currents and 
thereby stabilizing neuronal membranes and suppressing neuronal 
hypersynchronization.7,8 Zonisamide may potentiate serotoninergic 
and dopaminergic neurotransmission but does not appear to poten-
tiate gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). It has carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitory activity and can scavenge for free radicals in the brain.
Zonisamide reduced the number of paroxysmal electroencepha -
logram (EEG) discharges in cats with familial spontaneous epilepsy.9
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, zonisamide is well absorbed (oral bioavailability ≈68%), 
with a volume of distribution of ≈0.8 L/kg and an average protein 
binding of 40%.10,11 Plasma Tmax after a single oral dose was reported 

===== PDF_PAGE_1359 =====
1332    Zonisamide
to be 0.44 hours, and Cmax was observed to be 14.4 µg/mL; Cmax after 
repeated administration over 8 weeks was 58 µg/mL. 10,12,13 Concen-
trations of zonisamide are known to be higher in whole blood and 
RBCs as compared with plasma, so terminal half-life between RBC 
and plasma varies considerably. Oral plasma terminal half-life after 
repeated administration for 8 weeks was ≈23 hours, 10 but RBC half-
life was reported at ≈37 hours; plasma half-life following a single oral 
dose was found to be 17.2 hours. Plasma clearance after a single oral 
dose was reported to be ≈32 mL/hour/kg. Most of the drug is excret-
ed via the kidneys into the urine but ≈20% is metabolized, primarily 
in the liver. Unlike in humans, zonisamide exhibits linear pharma -
cokinetics (dose to plasma trough concentrations) in dogs at doses 
between 5 – 30 mg/kg PO twice daily. 11,14 Zonisamide administered 
rectally (10 – 30 mg/kg) failed to reach therapeutic concentration.15,16 
In cats, zonisamide has an onset of action of ≈4 hours and a half-
life of ≈33 hours; steady state is likely reached within 7 days.17,18  
In Hispaniolan parrots, 20 mg/kg PO every 12 hours resulted in 
plasma concentrations within the known therapeutic range. Elimi -
nation half-life was ≈10 hours.19
Human metabolism of zonisamide includes acetylation and glu -
curonidation of an intermediate metabolite.20 Approximately ⅔ of a 
dose is eliminated renally as unchanged drug and metabolites. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
In humans, zonisamide is contraindicated in patients that are hyper-
sensitive to it or any sulfonamide drug. 21 Use zonisamide with cau -
tion in patients with significant renal impairment; dosage reduction 
may be required. Although it is unlikely that a sulfa hypersensitivity 
reaction can be elicited, use caution in animals with keratoconjuncti-
vitis sicca or other previous sulfonamide-related adverse effects. 
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies zonisamide as a hazardous drug (nonantineo -
plastic agent representing an occupational hazard to healthcare 
workers); personal protective equipment (PPE) should be used ac -
cordingly to minimize the risk for exposure.22 See Controlling Occu-
pational Exposure to Hazardous Drugs for more information.
Adverse Effects
A systematic review and meta-analysis of adverse effects of antiepi -
leptic drugs in dogs showed a weak level of evidence for zonisamide 
safety profile when used as monotherapy and adjunctive therapy. 23 
The most common type I adverse effects (ie, dose dependent, pre -
dictable) were sedation followed by ataxia, vomiting, and decreased 
serum ALP activity; less common effects included increased serum 
ALT and glutamate dehydrogenase (GLDH) activity, aggression, an-
orexia, emaciation, and decreased T 4 and serum albumin. 23 When 
zonisamide was used as monotherapy, increased serum ALT and 
GLDH activity was not reported; however, in a recent review on in-
cidence of hepatopathies in dogs on oral zonisamide, less than 1% 
of dogs experienced acute, potentially life-threatening hepatopathy 
associated with oral zonisamide therapy within the first 3 weeks of 
therapy.24 Subclinical abnormalities in ALT and ALP activity were 
also noted in less than 10% of dogs during long-term therapy; clini-
cal signs of liver disease were not observed. 
Type II adverse effects (ie, idiosyncratic, nondose dependent, un-
predictable) were idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity and mixed acid-base 
disorder.23 A reduction in total T 4 was observed in one study, while 
free T4 decreased slightly but remained within the reference range.10 
There are case reports of dogs developing zonisamide-associated 
apparent acute idiopathic hepatic necrosis, 25,26 pseudolymphoma,27 
urinary calculi,25 hepatopathy,28 acute tubular acidosis,29 febrile neu-
tropenia,30 erythema multiforme, 31,32 and abnormal behavior (eg, 
sudden aggression, insomnia, restlessness, constant attention-seek -
ing behavior).33 
In a combined pharmacokinetic and toxicity study in cats, 50% of 
the cats receiving zonisamide 20 mg/kg per day developed adverse 
effects including inappetence, diarrhea, vomiting, ataxia, and som -
nolence; however, weight loss did not occur. 18 Zonisamide-related 
hypersensitivity syndrome in a cat has been reported. 34 Anorexia 
necessitated drug discontinuation in a cat. 35 Although a systematic 
review found that the majority of cats receiving zonisamide did not 
have adverse effects in reported studies, the efficacy and safety profile 
of zonisamide in cats was considered weak.36 
Zonisamide is a sulfonamide-containing compound, but it does 
not contain the arylamine group known for causing a reactive inter-
mediate, which may become a hapten for immunogenicity, ultimate-
ly leading to a sulfa allergy. Cross-reactivity between zonisamide and 
sulfa antibiotics has been demonstrated in vitro but has not been 
confirmed to be cross-reactive in humans. Based on currently avail-
able information, zonisamide is unlikely to cause keratoconjunctivi-
tis sicca or other sulfonamide-related adverse effects in dogs or cats.
In a pharmacokinetic study of 10 birds, zonisamide did not al -
ter appetite, body weight, or hematologic or serum chemistry panel 
 values.19  
In humans, the most common adverse effects include anorexia, 
nausea, dizziness, somnolence, agitation, and headache. 21 Rare -
ly, serious dermatologic reactions (eg, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 
toxic epidermal necrolysis [TEN]), blood dyscrasias, oligohidrosis, 
and hyperthermia have been reported in humans. Nephrolithiasis 
occurs in 4% of humans. Anorexia and weight loss in humans have 
also been noted.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Zonisamide is teratogenic in dogs, mice, and rats. 21 Zonisamide 10 
or 30 mg/kg/day (approximate therapeutic doses in dogs) admin -
istered to pregnant dogs resulted in ventricular septal defects, car -
diomegaly, and various valvular and arterial anomalies at the high -
er dose.14 A plasma zonisamide concentration of 25 µg/mL was the 
threshold level for malformation. Owners of pregnant dogs should 
be made aware of and accept the significant risks associated with the 
use of this drug.
Zonisamide enters maternal milk at levels of 40% to 80% that 
of maternal plasma concentration. Use zonisamide with caution in 
nursing animals.37 Because safety has not been established in ani -
mals, this drug should only be used when the maternal benefits out-
weigh the potential risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The LD50 of zonisamide in dogs is reportedly 1 g/kg. Human patients 
have survived zonisamide overdoses of ≈7.5 g (total dose) without 
complications.38 In humans, overdoses may cause coma, bradycardia, 
hypotension, and respiratory depression.21 Clinical signs associated 
with toxicity in dogs include sedation/lethargy, anxiety, ataxia, and/
or vomiting. In cats, toxicity effects (eg, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, 
lethargy, ataxia) were noted in 50% of cats in a study.18 
Treatment recommendations include GI decontamination, if in -
gestion was recent, and supportive therapy. Supportive care may be 
required for several days because of the drug’s long half-life.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged that a 24-hour poison 
consultation center that specializes in providing information specific 
for veterinary patients be consulted. For general information related 
to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact information for 
poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
In humans, zonisamide is a substrate of CYP3A4. 21 It did not alter 
P-glycoprotein efflux in an experimental model. 39,40 The following 
drug interactions have either been reported or are theoretical in hu-
mans or animals receiving zonisamide and may be of significance in 
veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not nec-

===== PDF_PAGE_1360 =====
Zonisamide   1333
essarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and perform 
additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ CYP3A Inducers  (eg, dexamethasone, rifampin): May shorten 
the half-life of zonisamide and require dose adjustment8
 ■ Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors (CAIs; eg, acetazol-
amide): Concurrent use with CAIs may increase the risk for met-
abolic acidosis and kidney stone formation.41
 ■ Phenobarbital : In dogs, phenobarbital may increase the clear-
ance of zonisamide and decrease the peak concentrations, half-
life, and area under the curve (AUC) of zonisamide 12,13,42,43; this 
effect persisted up to 10 weeks after phenobarbital discontinua -
tion.13 Zonisamide dose may need to be increased by up to 50%.12 
In dogs, if zonisamide will be given in conjunction with pheno -
barbital, it is recommend that zonisamide be given at the high end 
of the dose range44–47; however, one source recommends reducing 
the phenobarbital dose by 25%.48
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Zonisamide may decrease total T4 levels.10
Dosages
DOGS:
Seizure control (extra-label): 
a) For dogs not already receiving phenobarbital, begin with  
5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours.1,4,5,49
b) For dogs already receiving phenobarbital, begin with 7 –  10 mg/kg 
PO every 12 hours.5,49 See Monitoring.  
CATS:
Monotherapy for seizure control (extra-label): 2.5 – 5 mg/kg PO 
every 12 hours9
Adjunctive seizure control for cats refractory to phenobarbital 
(extra-label): Anecdotally, 5 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours. 17,35 
From a case series, 6 – 17 mg/kg PO once daily. 6 Because of its 
long half-life in cats, doses of 5 – 10 mg/kg PO once daily are 
likely to be appropriate.
Monitoring
 ■ Anticonvulsant efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, inappetence, vomiting)
 ■ Therapeutic drug monitoring may be useful in veterinary patients 
when seizures are not controlled. Therapeutic concentrations 
for zonisamide are thought to be 10 – 40 µg/mL. 1,4,5 One recom-
mendation is to monitor trough levels (ie, within 1 hour prior to 
next scheduled dose) 1 to 2 weeks after initiating therapy or after 
dose changes and whenever seizure frequency changes. 5 Consid-
er measuring peak zonisamide concentrations (ie, within 3 to 4 
hours postdosing) for patients taking phenobarbital concurrently 
and that have poor seizure control. Samples obtained from whole 
blood yield higher zonisamide concentration than samples from 
plasma.11 Consult with the veterinary diagnostic laboratory mea-
suring drug concentrations to ensure appropriate samples are col-
lected and to gain guidance on dosage adjustments.
 ■ Baseline and periodic (eg, after 1 month of therapy, then every 3 
to 6 months if no problems) CBC and serum chemistry panel 5,7 
for hepatic enzyme activity (eg, ALT, ALP), BUN, electrolytes (es-
pecially bicarbonate), and venous blood–gas analysis. 
Client Information
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. If your animal 
vomits or acts sick after getting it on an empty stomach, give the 
medicine with food or a small treat.
 ■ Do not stop giving this medicine to your animal without discuss-
ing with your veterinarian first, as it may cause seizures to occur.
 ■ Keep a seizure diary to help determine how well this medicine is 
working.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian immediately if your animal stops eat -
ing, has a lack of appetite, becomes overly tired or develops a yel-
lowish tint to the eyes, skin, or gums (jaundice).
 ■ This medicine is considered to be hazardous as defined by the Na-
tional Institute for Occupational Safety and Health because it may 
affect the reproductive ability of men or women actively trying 
to conceive, women who are pregnant or may become pregnant, 
and women who are breastfeeding. It is recommended that you 
wear gloves when administering this medication to your animal 
and wash your hands thoroughly afterwards. If you have ques -
tions about this medication’s hazards, contact your veterinarian 
or pharmacist. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Zonisamide, a sulfonamide unrelated to other antiseizure drugs, oc-
curs as a white powder with a pKa of 10.2. It is moderately soluble in 
water (0.8 mg/mL).
Zonisamide may also be known as AD-810, CI-912, PD-110843, 
Excegran®, or Zonegran®.
Storage/Stability
Zonisamide capsules should be stored at 25°C (76°F); excursions are 
permitted between 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F). Store in a dry place 
and protect from light.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
The preparation and stability of extemporaneously compounded 
(from 100 mg capsules) zonisamide 10 mg/mL suspensions in sim -
ple syrup or methylcellulose (0.5%) have been published.50 The sim-
ple-syrup suspension was stable for at least 28 days when stored at 
room temperature or under refrigeration and the methylcellulose 
(0.5%) suspension was stable for 28 days when stored under refriger-
ation and for 7 days when stored at room temperature.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Zonisamide Capsules: 25 mg, 50 mg, and 100 mg; Zonegran®, generic; 
(Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb

===== PDF_PAGE_1361 =====
ALISON CLODE , DVM, DACVO
Port City Veterinary Referral Hospital
InTown Veterinary Group
Portsmouth, New Hampshire
The following section lists the majority of veterinary-labeled oph -
thalmic topical products and some of the more commonly used 
human-labeled products in veterinary medicine; written by Alison 
Clode, DVM, DACVO, based on previous work by Gigi Davidson, 
DICVP , and Michael Davidson, DVM, DACVO. Section editor: 
James A. Budde, PharmD, DICVP . Drugs are listed in alphabetical 
order.
For additional information, an excellent review on veterinary 
ophthalmic pharmacology and therapeutics can be found in the fol-
lowing textbooks: Slatter’s Fundamentals of Veterinary Ophthalmolo-
gy, 6th Edition. Maggs DJ, Miller PE, and Ofri R, Eds. Saunders, 2017 
and Veterinary Ophthalmology, 5th Edition; Gelatt KN, Gilger BC, 
Kern TJ, Eds. Wiley-Blackwell, 2013. 
Routes of Administration 
for Ophthalmic Drugs
The route of administration selected to deliver therapy for an ocular 
condition is critical to successful therapy. The following table lists 
advantages and disadvantages of each route of administration for oc-
ular medications. NOTE: Unless otherwise indicated, small animals 
(dogs and cats) receive 1 drop of solutions per administration, or 
¼ – ½ inch of ointments per administration; horses receive 1 – 2 
drops (administered directly to the eye) or 0.1 mL (administered via 
subpalpebral lavage (SPL) catheter or squirted directly into the eye) 
of solutions, or ¼ – ½ inch of ointments per administration.
Ophthalmic Agents, Topical
Route Target tissues Dosage forms Advantages Disadvantages Comments
Topical Conjunctiva, 
cornea, anterior 
uvea, lids
Solutions, 
 suspensions
 ■ General ease of ad-
ministration 
 ■ Minimal interference 
with vision
 ■ Low incidence of 
contact dermatitis
 ■ Minimal toxicity to 
interior of eye in pres-
ence of penetrating 
wound
 ■ Imprecise dosing
 ■ Potential for contamination
 ■ Short contact time with eye
 ■ Requires more frequent applica-
tion than ointment
 ■ Diluted by tearing
 ■ Systemic absorption
 ■ Difficult to administer to horses 
without SPL catheter placement
 ■ Doses greater than 1 drop rarely 
indicated in small animals (maxi-
mum tear capacity is 10 – 20 μ Ls, 
volume of a drop is 25 – 50 μLs)
 ■ Allow 5 minutes between drops
 ■ Instill in order of least viscous to 
most, solutions prior to suspen-
sions, and aqueous base prior to 
oil base
 ■ Owners should be counseled to 
avoid contact of applicator tip 
with eye.
Ointments  ■ Longer contact time
 ■ Less frequent admin-
istration than drops
 ■ Protect cornea from 
drying
 ■ Not diluted by tearing 
 ■ Contribute to volume of ocular 
discharge
 ■ Temporarily blur vision
 ■ More difficult to administer
 ■ Contact dermatitis
 ■ Should not be applied to 
penetrating corneal wounds as 
vehicles cause granulomatous 
uveitis
 ■ Difficult to determine exact dose
 ■ Metal tubes may fatigue and 
split before all medication is 
used.
 ■ Owners should be counseled to 
avoid contact of application tube 
with eye.
 ■ Observe patient for brief period 
after application due to tempo-
rarily blurred vision
 ■ Instill solutions and suspensions 
prior to ointments
Subconjunctival 
injection
Cornea, anterior 
uvea
Sterile solutions 
and suspen-
sions
 ■ High local concen-
trations with smaller 
total dose minimizes 
systemic effects
 ■ Circumvents poor 
patient compliance 
with topical adminis-
tration 
 ■ Uncertain drug disposition 
following administration
 ■ May create scar tissue
 ■ Drug cannot be removed once 
applied.
 ■ Drug vehicle residues may 
persist.
 ■ Inadvertent globe perforation
 ■ Indicated for poorly compliant 
owners and/or uncooperative 
patients
 ■ Indicated for drugs with poor 
corneal penetration
Intracameral 
injection
Anterior seg-
ment
Sterile, 
non-preserved 
solutions and 
suspensions
 ■ Allows very high local 
drug concentrations 
 ■ Risk for infection
 ■ Risk for hemorrhage, retinal 
detachment, cataract formation, 
and retinal degeneration
 ■ Risk for intraocular toxicity
 ■ Indicated to dissolve fibrin and 
blood clots in the anterior cham-
ber (eg, tPA)
 ■ Indicated for intraocular surgery 
(local anesthetics, viscoelastic 
substances)
 ■ With caution, indicated for severe 
intraocular infections 
1334     

===== PDF_PAGE_1362 =====
    1335
Route Target tissues Dosage forms Advantages Disadvantages Comments
Intravitreal 
injection
Posterior seg-
ment
Sterile, 
non-preserved 
solutions and 
suspensions
 ■ Allows very high local 
drug concentrations
 ■ Risk for infection
 ■ Risk for hemorrhage, retinal 
detachment, cataract formation, 
and retinal degeneration
 ■ Risk for intraocular toxicity
 ■ Indicated to manage end-stage 
glaucoma (gentamicin/steroid)
 ■ With caution, indicated for severe 
intraocular infections
 ■ With caution, indicated for intrac-
table uveitis
Retrobulbar 
and peribulbar 
injection
Posterior 
segment, optic 
nerve
Sterile solu-
tions and 
 suspensions
 ■ Allows very high local 
drug concentrations
 ■ Risk for infection
 ■ Risk for globe perforation, 
optic nerve trauma, retrobulbar 
hemorrhage
 ■ Indicated prior to enucleation 
(local anesthetics)
 ■ Indicated for intraocular surgery 
when neuromuscular blockade is 
not possible
Systemic drugs
(oral, SC, IM, IV)
Lids, posterior 
segment, optic 
nerve, anterior 
uvea (occasion-
ally)
Tablets, cap-
sules, sterile 
solutions and 
suspensions
 ■ Allows drug penetra-
tion to areas topical 
therapy will not reach
 ■ Systemic effects, including toxic-
ities, occur
 ■ Limited penetration into the 
cornea
 ■ See specific monographs for use 
of systemic agents. 
GIGI DAVIDSON , BSPharm, DICVP
Physiochemical Considerations for Compounding 
Ophthalmic Preparations
The availability of suitable commercially available products for ev -
ery veterinary ophthalmic indication is highly unlikely. Many agents 
used in veterinary ophthalmology are no longer or were never com-
mercially available. Examples of agents that are commonly used by 
veterinarians but are not currently commercially available include 
acetylcysteine, amphotericin B, chloramphenicol, cidofovir, tacroli-
mus, and voriconazole ophthalmic solutions and/or ointments. Even 
if commercially available, products may be of inappropriate concen-
tration to achieve a therapeutic effect in a given patient (eg, cyclo -
sporine) or may have agents and excipients that may have adverse 
effects in animal patients (eg, polymyxin B in cats). In other cases, no 
product is commercially available and must be compounded from 
other nonophthalmic drugs or from bulk chemicals (eg, acetylcys -
teine ophthalmic solution and disodium edetate ophthalmic solu -
tion). For these reasons, pharmacists are frequently called upon to 
compound products to be used in the animal eye. These products 
may be administered topically in the form of solutions, suspensions, 
or ointments or administered by periocular or intraocular injection, 
by drug-implanted collagen shields, or by drug-impregnated dispos-
able contact lens delivery systems. The quality and sterility of these 
products are critical, and preparations for injection into the eye must 
meet endotoxin limits. To ensure adequate stability, uniformity, and 
sterility, both the American Society of Health-Systems Pharmacists 
and the United States Pharmacopoeia (USP) Convention have pub-
lished standards (eg, USP General Chapter <797> Pharmaceutical 
Compounding—Sterile Preparations ) for pharmacy-prepared oph -
thalmic products. These standards address the following areas of 
concern.
Validation of Formulation
Before compounding any preparation for ophthalmic use, the phar-
macist should obtain documentation that substantiates the stability, 
safety, and benefit of the requested formulation. Pharmacists may 
call the manufacturer of the drug, refer to primary literature, call 
regional eye centers, or call professional compounding organizations 
to obtain such information. If no such documentation is available, 
the pharmacist must employ professional judgment in determining 
a suitable formulation for ophthalmic administration and then apply 
the most conservative beyond-use dates established in USP <797>. 
Factors to consider when making this judgment include sterility, to-
nicity, endotoxin burden, pH and buffering, the toxicity of the drug, 
need for preservatives, solubility, stability in the chosen vehicle, par-
ticle size in suspensions, viscosity, packaging, and any precautions 
necessary to keep drug residues from occurring in any food-produc-
ing animals.
Documentation
A readily retrievable document (electronic or written), known as 
a Master Formulation Record, must be maintained for each oph -
thalmic preparation compounded. This Master Formulation Re -
cord must indicate the name of the preparation, the dosage form, 
the specifications and source of each ingredient used, the weights 
and measures of each ingredient used, the equipment required, a 
complete description of each step in the compounding process with 
a special notation of aseptic techniques to be utilized and which 
method of sterilization is employed, beyond-use dating, storage re -
quirements, specific packaging requirements, sample label and aux-
iliary labeling, quality control testing that must be performed (eg, 
pH, sterility, endotoxin testing for injections), and references for the 
formula. The expected visual appearance of the final preparation 
must also be described in the Master Formulation Record. Com -
pounding Records for each compound prepared must also be made 
(electronic or written) and must include the date of compounding, 
lot or batch number assigned, the quantity of each ingredient used 
to prepare the compound, the manufacturer, lot number, and expi -
ration date of each ingredient used, results of any quality testing, a 
sign-off provision for compounder and checker, the amount com -
pounded, and the projected beyond-use date for the compounded 
preparation. 
Sterility
Ophthalmic dosage forms must be compounded in aseptic condi -
tions. Sterile compounding standards must be consulted in the Unit-
ed States Pharmacopeia General Chapter <797>. Sterility is the most 
important consideration for ophthalmic products. Contaminated 
ophthalmic products can result in eye infections leading to blindness 
or even loss of the eye, especially if pathogens, such as  Pseudomonas, 
Principles of Compounding Ophthalmic Products

===== PDF_PAGE_1363 =====
1336     
are present. Eye infections from contamination can also lead to sys-
temic infections requiring hospitalization and may even result in 
death. All ophthalmics should be compounded in a primary en -
gineering control (PEC; eg, laminar flow hood or compounding 
aseptic isolator) that maintains an ISO 5 level of air quality. PECs 
must be certified at least annually for acceptable performance and 
maintenance of expected environmental quality. The compounding 
pharmacist must also be appropriately garbed as described in USP 
<797> and must use impeccable aseptic technique when handling 
products intended for use in the eye. All products must be rendered 
sterile after formulation in the laminar flow hood and maintain ste-
rility throughout their labeled beyond-use date. 
Sterilization of the final preparation for ophthalmic solutions is 
most easily achieved through filtration through vehicle-compatible 
0.2 µm sterilizing filters, which also remove particulate matter. Note 
that this method is not suitable for ophthalmic suspensions or oint-
ments. Ophthalmic suspensions and ointments must be sterilized by 
other means (such as autoclaving, dry heat, or irradiation) to avoid 
filtering out active drugs. Preservatives may also be added to prevent 
bacterial growth, especially if the container is intended for multiple 
uses. FDA has established maximum potency per unit dose thresh -
olds for preservative agents in FDA-approved ophthalmic products, 
which can be found at https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/
iig/index.cfm, USP <797>, places limits on beyond-use dates for 
nonpreserved aqueous ophthalmic preparations. The preservative 
selected must be compatible with the active drug and excipients as 
well as nontoxic to the eye or to the patient. 
Clarity
Drugs prepared as ophthalmic solutions should meet requirements 
for particle size and quantity as standardized in USP <789> Particu-
late Matter in Ophthalmic Solutions. Drugs prepared as ophthalmic 
suspensions cannot be filtered but must be of a particle size that does 
not irritate or scratch the cornea, typically less than 25 µm. A general 
rule of thumb is that particles that can be felt when rubbing a drop of 
the preparation between the thumb and forefinger are too large to be 
used in the eye. The use of an ointment mill is highly recommended 
to decrease the particle size for ophthalmic ointments. 
Tonicity
Ophthalmic products do not need to be isotonic if the contact time 
with the cornea is only a few minutes. The eye can tolerate a range 
of 200 to 600 mOsm/L for short periods of time. Some ophthalmic 
preparations are intentionally hypertonic in order to reduce corneal 
edema. For ointments, irrigations, and products that will remain in 
contact with the eye longer than a few minutes, isotonic products 
should be used. Hypotonic agents may cause corneal edema, and hy-
pertonic agents may dehydrate the cornea and cause pain. Tear fluid 
and normal saline have identical osmotic pressures, making 0.9% 
sodium chloride an excellent vehicle for ophthalmic products. For 
products that are hypotonic, sodium chloride equivalencies can be 
used to determine how much sodium chloride is necessary to render 
the product isotonic. An extensive list of sodium chloride equiva -
lents for drugs has been published.1 
Buffering and pH
Ophthalmic preparations are generally buffered in a range from 4.5 
to 11.5. Buffering is necessary to provide maximal stability of the 
drug or for the comfort and safety of the patient. Alkaloids, such as 
atropine and pilocarpine, are usually buffered. If the activity and sta-
bility of the drug are not pH-dependent, and the pH of the product 
is not irritating, then buffers may be omitted from the formulation. 
Commonly used buffers for ophthalmic preparations include Pal -
itzsch buffer, boric acid buffer, boric acid/sodium borate buffer, sodi-
um acetate/boric acid buffer, Sorensen’s modified phosphate buffer, 
Atkins and Pantin buffer solution, Feldman buffer, and Gilford oph-
thalmic buffer. Formulations for these solutions and ratios required 
to achieve the desired pH have been published.2
Viscosity Enhancers
Because tears and blinking reflexes reduce the total amount of drug 
available for penetration, an increase in residence time in the eye 
will increase drug absorption. Increasing the viscosity of the drug 
is the most common way to prolong contact time. Methylcellulose 
derivatives (eg, carboxymethylcellulose, hydroxyethylcellulose, and 
hydroxypropylmethylcellulose) are the most commonly used agents. 
Polyvinyl alcohol and polyvinylpyrrolidone have also been used. The 
FDA has established maximum potency per unit dose thresholds for 
carboxymethylcellulose and for viscosity agents in FDA-approved 
ophthalmic products, which can be found at https://www.accessdata.
fda.gov/scripts/cder/iig/index.cfm. 
Quality Control
Finished preparations should be thoroughly inspected visually for 
clarity and uniformity of suspension. The pH of the final preparation 
should always be checked, and the value should be recorded on the 
master formula record for that batch. Most compounded prepara -
tions should have a pH of 5 to 7 unless otherwise indicated for sta -
bility or penetration of ocular tissue. Sterility testing and endotoxin 
testing should be performed where required. 
Packaging
Ophthalmic preparations should be packaged in sterile dropper 
bottles (glass or plastic), or individual doses can be placed in ster -
ile syringes with sterile tip caps. Ointments should be packaged in 
sterile ointment tubes and heat-sealed. Preparations that are sensi -
tive to light and moisture should be packaged in tight, light-resistant 
 containers. 
Beyond-Use Dating
Beyond-use dates must be assigned according to the limits specified 
in the most current official USP Chapter <797>. Limits are assigned 
based on the risk for contamination according to the method of 
preparation, use of nonsterile ingredients, and presence or absence 
of preservatives. 
Considerations for the Use of Ophthalmics  
in Veterinary Patients
Veterinary patients experience many of the same ophthalmic dis -
eases and conditions as humans, and treatments are often based on 
human therapy. Animals, however, have a variety of species-related 
characteristics that might cause human-designed therapies to fail or 
be toxic. Behavioral characteristics, such as grooming, may signifi -
cantly reduce the contact time of ophthalmic agents with the eye and 
increase systemic exposure through ingestion. Anatomical differenc-
es, such as size and tear capacity volume, must be considered when 
formulating ophthalmic therapies. Ease of administration must also 
be considered. Horses and other large animals may simply elevate 
their eyes out of a caregiver’s reach if ophthalmic treatments are ob-
jectionable. Specialized delivery devices have been created to treat 
these patients. Subcutaneous palpebral lavage systems are tunneled 
under the skin over the animal’s brow into the upper eyelid and al -
low for the passage of medication through long catheters that are 
easily reachable by caregivers. Food-producing animals require spe-
cial consideration, as systemic absorption of ophthalmic agents in 

===== PDF_PAGE_1364 =====
    1337
animals could result in violative drug residues in food intended for 
human consumption. Finally, the use of active pharmaceutical ingre-
dient powders (ie, bulk drug substances) to prepare compounds for 
animals is allowed only under the regulatory discretion provided by 
CVM FDA ’s Guidance for Industry #256. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
General Principles of Ocular Penetration
GIGI DAVIDSON , BSPharm, DICVP
Corneal penetration
Drugs must generally be administered topically to treat corneal and 
intraocular conditions. Although the eye would appear to be an easy 
target for topical administration, the eye has several anatomical bar-
riers to prevent penetration by foreign substances. Instantaneous 
tear production, strong blinking reflexes, and alternating layers of 
lipophilic and hydrophilic tissue all work in conjunction to prevent 
the entry of foreign substances. The clear tissue known as the cornea 
covers the visible outer surface of the eye between the lids. The cor -
nea must be clear to allow for vision, and nature has accomplished 
this by omitting blood vessels in the cornea. Because of this lack of 
vascular tissue, systemically administered drugs rarely penetrate 
the cornea. Additionally, the cornea is composed of several layers 
of lipophilic (outer layers) and hydrophilic (inner layer) tissue. For 
a topically administered drug to fully penetrate the cornea, the drug 
must be able to exist in ready equilibrium between both ionized and 
nonionized forms in order to cross these layers (eg, chloramphen -
icol, atropine, and pilocarpine). Most antibiotics are water-soluble 
and will not penetrate the lipophilic outer layer of the cornea unless 
ulcers are present. Small molecular weight (less than 350) and high 
local concentration of drugs will increase penetration, however, even 
if the drugs are ionized and hydrophilic. Thus, topical administra -
tion is ideal as it allows for very high local concentrations of the drug 
on the cornea. For a topically administered drug to reach the anteri-
or chamber and bind to intraocular structures (eg, ciliary body, iris, 
aqueous humor) to exert a clinical effect, the drug must pass through 
the cornea. Drugs may also reach the anterior chamber to some ex -
tent by passive absorption through the conjunctiva.
Key points for corneal penetration of drugs:
 ■ Lipophilic
 ■ Equilibrium between ionized and nonionized forms
 ■ Small molecular weight (less than 350)
 ■ High local concentrations
Intravitreal Penetration
Topically administered drugs reach the vitreous only in very small 
concentrations. To treat severe conditions of the anterior chamber 
(uveitis) as well as intravitreal conditions, drugs may be adminis -
tered by periocular or intraocular injection. The periocular routes 
include subconjunctival injection and sub-Tenon’s membrane injec-
tion, while the intraocular routes are intracameral injection (directly 
into the aqueous humor) or intravitreal injection (directly into the 
vitreous humor). Periocular injections can be administered under 
sedation and topical anesthesia. Intraocular injections are usually 
only performed while the patient is very heavily sedated or under 
general anesthesia. Both periocular and intraocular routes bypass 
the outermost chemical and physical ocular defenses and allow for 
a better concentration of drugs in the vitreous. The volume of ad -
ministration for these routes is relatively small: periocular injections 
should not exceed 0.5 to 1 mL in small animals and 2 mL in large 
animals, and intraocular injections should not exceed 0.1 mL in 
small animals and 0.25 mL in large animals because of the risk for 
increased intraocular pressure. Drugs injected into the eye should be 
free of preservatives and buffers and must be sterile and meet endo-
toxin limits for injections. 
Route of Therapy for Given Ocular Target
Target tissue Routes of administration
Eyelids Topical, systemic
Corneal surface Topical
Anterior segment Topical if good penetration or mild disease
Systemic if poor penetration or severe disease
Posterior segment Systemic or intraocular injection (rarely)
Questions to Ponder Prior to 
Compounding Ophthalmic Products
 ■ Where is the target of therapy? (eyelids, corneal surface, cornea, 
anterior segment, posterior segment)
 ■ What is the character of the drug?
• Lipophilic? Hydrophilic?
• What is the molecular weight?
• What is the inherent toxicity of the drug to the eye (gentami -
cin)? To the caregiver (chloramphenicol)? To the patient (poly-
myxin B in cats)?
• Are there data to support what concentration is necessary for 
corneal penetration?
• Is the drug soluble in a vehicle that is not toxic to the eye?
• If not soluble, will the particle size of the suspension or the 
ointment scratch the corneal or conjunctiva?
• What is the pH of the final product? Is this in an acceptable 
range to avoid irritation (4.5 to 11.5)?
• What is the tonicity of the final product? Hypertonic? Hy -
potonic? How long will the product be in contact with the 
cornea if not isotonic?
• Will the viscosity need to be enhanced to prolong contact with 
the eye? Which agent is compatible?
• What is the duration of therapy? Will the product require 
preservation if used long-term and/or multiple times? 
Which preservative is compatible?

===== PDF_PAGE_1365 =====
1338    Topical Ophthalmic Agents Listed by Class/Indication
Topical Ophthalmic Agents Listed by Class/Indication
NOTE: Some agents are listed in 
more than one category.
Analgesics (see also NSAIDs 
and Anesthetics, Ocular)
Morphine
Nalbuphine
Anesthetics, Ocular
Benoxinate
Lidocaine
Proparacaine
Tetracaine
Antibacterials, Single-Agent
Amikacin
Azithromycin
Besifloxacin
Chloramphenicol
Ciprofloxacin
Erythromycin
Gatifloxacin
Gentamicin
Levofloxacin
Moxifloxacin
Ofloxacin
Povidone Iodine
Silver Sulfadiazine
Sulfacetamide
Tobramycin
Vancomycin
Antibiotic Combinations 
Bacitracin/Polymyxin B
Neomycin/Polymyxin B/Bacitracin
Neomycin/Polymyxin B/Gramicidin
Oxytetracycline/Polymyxin B
Antibiotic Corticosteroid 
Combinations 
Gentamicin/Prednisolone
Neomycin/Polymyxin B with 
Dexamethasone
Neomycin/Polymyxin B with 
Hydrocortisone
Neomycin/Polymyxin B/Bacitracin 
with Hydrocortisone
Sulfacetamide/Prednisolone
Tobramycin/Dexamethasone
Tobramycin/Loteprednol etabonate
Anticollagenase Agents
Acetylcysteine
Edetate Disodium
Antifungals
Amphotericin B
Itraconazole
Miconazole
Natamycin
Silver Sulfadiazine
Voriconazole
Antihistamines (see also 
Mast Cell Inhibitors)
Alcaftadine
Azelastine
Bepotastine
Cromolyn
Epinastine
Ketotifen
Lodoxamide
Nedocromil sodium
Olapatadine
Antineoplastics
Fluorouracil
Mitomycin
Antiseptics
Povidone Iodine
Silver Sulfadiazine
Antivirals
Acyclovir
Cidofovir
Ganciclovir
Idoxuridine
Trifluridine
Chelating Agents
Edetate Disodium
Corticosteroids, Single-Agent
Dexamethasone
Difluprednate
Fluorometholone
Hydrocortisone
Loteprednol
Prednisolone
Decongestants
Phenylephrine
Diagnostics
Fluorescein Sodium
Lissamine Green
Phenylephrine
Rose Bengal
Fibrinolytics
Alteplase (Tissue Plasminogen 
Activator [tPA])
Glaucoma, Ocular Hyperten-
sion Agents
Alpha-Adrenergic Agonists
Apraclonidine 
Brimonidine 
Beta-Blockers
Betaxolol
Carteolol
Levobunolol
Timolol
Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors
Brinzolamide
Dorzolamide
Miotics, Cholinesterase 
 Inhibitors
Demecarium
Miotics, Direct-Acting
Pilocarpine
Prostaglandin Analogues
Bimatoprost
Latanaprost
Tafluprost
Travoprost
Fixed-Dose Combinations
Brimonidine/Timolol
Brinzolamide/Brimonidine
Dorzolamide/Timolol
Hyperosmotic Agents
Sodium Chloride, Hypertonic
Immunologics
Cyclosporine
Pimecrolimus
Tacrolimus
Irrigating Solutions
Mast Cell Stabilizers
Cromolyn
Nedocromil
Mydriatics and Cycloplegic 
Mydriatics
Atropine
Cyclopentolate
Phenylephrine (mydriatic)
Tropicamide
Mydriatic Combinations
Cyclopentolate/Phenylephrine
Hydroxyamphetamine/ 
Tropicamide
Nonsteroidal 
Anti-Inflammatory Drugs 
(NSAIDs)
Bromfenac
Diclofenac
Flurbiprofen
Ketorolac
Nepafenac
Ocular Lubricants
Surgical Adjuncts
Fluorouracil (5-FU)
Mitomycin

===== PDF_PAGE_1366 =====
Acetylcysteine Ophthalmic    1339
Acetylcysteine Ophthalmic
(a-see-tuhl-sis-teen)
Anticollagenase Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Mucolytic agent with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory 
effects; used to stop digestion of the cornea by collagenases 
and proteases
 ▶ Used to improve tear film stability
 ▶ Foul odor is usual and does not affect drug activity
Uses/Indications
Acetylcysteine is used topically to prevent corneal melting caused by 
proteinases and collagenases that are present when bacterial and/or 
fungal infection of ulcers occurs. Acetylcysteine at concentrations 
greater than 0.5% reduces such enzymatic activity in vitro. 1,2 Ad -
ditionally, acetylcysteine is beneficial in stabilizing the tear film in 
quantitative and qualitative tear film deficiency disorders.3
Pharmacology/Actions
Acetylcysteine inhibits collagenase activity by reducing disulfide 
bonds and chelating the cofactors zinc and calcium. Additionally, 
acetylcysteine inhibits matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) pro -
duction by corneal epithelial cells. 4 Although MMPs play a role in 
initial corneal wound healing, down-regulation is necessary to pre -
vent corneal digestion and allow corneal wound healing.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Acetylcysteine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. 
Acetylcysteine exposure to the pulmonary tree may result in se -
vere bronchospasm, so this medicine should be used with caution in 
asthmatic patients. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include irritation, 
redness, and tearing of the eyes. If inhaled, acetylcysteine can rarely 
cause bronchoconstriction and tracheal irritation. Concentrations of 
acetylcysteine greater than 10% are irritating to the eye. 
Acetylcysteine may decrease corneal epithelial migration.4 
Dosages
Corneal ulcers  (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) every 1 
to 2 hours for the first 24 hours, followed by 3 to 4 times daily until 
clinical improvement occurs
Dry eye  (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) every 12 to 24 
hours as long as clinical improvement is present
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy as demonstrated by control of corneal melting 
and subsequent corneal wound healing, or signs of improved tear 
film quantity and quality 
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Wait 5 to 10 minutes after applying this medication before apply-
ing any other medications to the eye(s).
 ■ Foul, rotten-egg odor is normal with this drug and does not affect 
how well it works.
 ■ Store solutions in the refrigerator. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [35.6°F-46.4°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. Compounded 5% or 10% 
solutions of acetylcysteine are reported as stable for 60 days in the 
refrigerator, protected from light.5
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Acetylcysteine ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed direct-
ly with any other ophthalmic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Acetylcysteine ophthalmic solution (1% to 5%) must be compound-
ed by a qualified compounding pharmacist.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Acyclovir Ophthalmic
(a-sye-klo-veer)
Antiviral
For systemic use of acyclovir, refer to Acyclovir
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used as an ophthalmic ointment in cats to treat feline herpes-
virus-1 (FHV-1) with variable reported efficacy 
 ▶ Requires frequent administration (ie, 5 to 6 times daily)
 ▶ This medication should NOT be used systemically in cats be-
cause of myelotoxicity, poor bioavailability, and poor efficacy 
against FHV-1. 
 ▶ In the United States, acyclovir is not commercially available as 
an ophthalmic preparation; it must be compounded.
Uses/Indications
Acyclovir has been used topically as an ophthalmic ointment in cats 
with feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1), although inferior in vitro efficacy 
against herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) and requirements for frequent ad -
ministration limit its clinical usefulness.1-4
Pharmacology/Actions
Acyclovir is an acyclic nucleoside analogue that inhibits viral repli -
cation through the inhibition of feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) DNA 
polymerase. In the first of 3 activation steps, acyclovir is selectively 
phosphorylated by viral thymidine kinase, with the 2 subsequent 
steps performed by host cell enzymes. Poor efficacy against FHV-1 is 
due to poor selectivity of viral thymidine kinase for FHV-1. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Acyclovir is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hyper-
sensitivity to it or drugs like it (valacyclovir) or to any component of 
the formulation. Systemic use of acyclovir is contraindicated in cats 
as it could lead to leukopenia, acute anemia, and  nephrotoxicity.5 
Adverse Effects
When acyclovir is used systemically, adverse effects reported in hu -
mans or animals include bone marrow suppression, nephrotoxicity, 
and hepatotoxicity. When acyclovir is applied topically to the eyes, 
mild stinging and blepharitis may occur after application.
Dosages
Feline herpesvirus-1 (extra-label): ¼ – ½ inch strip to the affected 
eye(s) 5 times daily4; decreased frequency of administration is asso-
ciated with decreased clinical effect.
Monitoring
 ■ Resolution of clinical signs associated with corneal ulceration, 
corneal vascularization, conjunctivitis
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC and serum renal chemistries with pro-
longed topical therapy

===== PDF_PAGE_1367 =====
1340    Alcaftadine Ophthalmic
Client Information
 ■ This medicine must be given 5 times daily to be effective.
 ■ Store acyclovir according to package instructions. Discard this 
medicine if the color changes or if it becomes cloudy. 
 ■ Do not allow cats to lick this medicine when grooming. 
Storage/Stability
Because this compound must be compounded (in the United States), 
storage recommendations can vary; follow storage requirements list-
ed on the packaging.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Acyclovir ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Acyclovir is not approved in an ophthalmic dosage form, but sterile 
ophthalmic ointment may be compounded by qualified compound-
ing pharmacists.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Alcaftadine Ophthalmic
(al-kaf-ta-deen) Lastacaft®
Antihistamine
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ H1 receptor antagonist and mast cell stabilizer
 ▶ Indicated for allergic conjunctivitis
 ▶ May cause ocular burning, stinging, and irritation
Uses/Indications
Alcaftadine may be used in animals to alleviate the clinical signs of 
allergic conjunctivitis. No reports of clinical efficacy or tolerability in 
animals have been published.
Pharmacology/Actions
Alcaftadine is a histamine-1 (H 1) receptor antagonist and mast cell 
stabilizer. Inhibition of histamine receptor activation decreases the 
early-phase response in allergic conjunctivitis. Mast cell stabiliza -
tion controls the late-phase allergic response in the conjunctiva by 
inhibiting the release of cytokines and lipid mediators. In humans, 
itching is prevented within 3 minutes after administration and this 
effect lasts up to 24 hours.1 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Alcaftadine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include irritation, burning and 
stinging on application, redness, and pruritus. Evaluation of adverse 
effects has not been performed in animals. Discontinue use if pruri-
tus worsens. Alcaftadine has demonstrated less cytotoxicity in cor -
neal epithelial cell cultures compared with other topical antiallergic 
medications.2 
Dosages
Allergic conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) 
once daily 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolution of ocular pruritus
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination 
of the solution. Keep the dropper bottle tightly closed when the 
medication is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication at room temperature away from moisture 
and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (15°C-25°C 
[59°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
 Alcaftadine ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Alcaftadine 0.25% Ophthalmic Solution (containing alcaftadine 
0.25%; benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; edetate disodium; sodium 
phosphate, monobasic; purified water; NaCl; NaOH and/or HCl to 
adjust pH to 7, with osmolality of 290 mOsm/kg); 3 mL in sterile 
ophthalmic dropper bottle; Lastacaft®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Alteplase Ophthalmic
Tissue Plasminogen Activator (tPA)
(ahl-teh-plays) Activase®
Fibrinolytic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used via intracameral (anterior chamber) injection to lyse 
intraocular fibrinohemorrhagic clots
 ▶ Does not lead to fibrinolysis when administered topically
 ▶ Toxic to the corneal endothelium in intracameral doses greater 
than 50 µg
 ▶ Not approved for intraocular injection; must be prepared from 
the injectable form intended for intracatheter administration
Uses/Indications
Alteplase ophthalmic is most commonly injected intracamerally to 
lyse intraocular fibrin and blood clots. Intraocular fibrin clots, which 
form as a result of intraocular inflammation and/or bleeding, can 
induce synechiae formation and obstruct aqueous humor flow and 
drainage, thus predisposing affected eyes to the development of glau-
coma. Intracameral injection of alteplase in humans following cat -
aract surgery dissolves fibrin clots and reduces posterior synechiae 
without resulting in re-bleeding.1 
Immediate postoperative intracameral injection of alteplase in 
dogs undergoing cataract surgery does not significantly impact post-
operative development of anterior chamber fibrin or postoperative 
ocular hypertension.2 Topical application of alteplase does not lyse 
intraocular clots. 3 In dogs and cats, intracameral injection of al -
teplase 25 µg results in fibrinolysis without corneal toxicity, whereas 
alteplase doses of 50 µg lead to corneal endothelial toxicity.3,4 

===== PDF_PAGE_1368 =====
Amikacin Ophthalmic   1341
Pharmacology/Actions
Alteplase (tissue plasminogen activator) is an enzyme (serine pro -
tease) that binds to fibrin in clots, which converts the plasminogen 
component of the clot to plasmin, thus inducing local fibrinolysis. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tissue plasminogen activator is contraindicated in patients that have 
a history of hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formula -
tion. The most frequent adverse reaction associated with thrombo -
lytics in approved indications is bleeding. Caution should be exer -
cised with patients that have thrombocytopenia, other hemostatic 
defects (including those secondary to severe hepatic or renal dis -
ease), or any condition for which bleeding constitutes a significant 
hazard.5 Intracameral doses of 50 µg have resulted in toxicity to the 
corneal epithelium in dogs and cats.3,4
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include increased risk 
for bleeding following administration. Corneal toxicity is likely with 
intracameral alteplase doses of 50 µg but does not occur with doses 
of 25 µg.3,4 
Dosages
Intraocular fibrinolysis  (extra-label): Intracameral injection of  
0.1 mL of a 0.25 mg/mL sterile solution (25 µg total dose) 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Resolution of the intraocular clot, which generally occurs within 
24 to 48 hours.6 Observe the patient for signs of re-bleeding.
Client Information
 ■ This medication is not administered outside of veterinary clinics.
Storage/Stability
Refer to individual packaging for storage information; generally, this 
product is kept under refrigeration (2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]). Protect 
the lyophilized material during extended storage from excessive ex-
posure to light. After reconstitution, the drug may be stored between 
2°C and 30°C (36°F-86°F) and used within 8 hours. Discard any un-
used solution after administration is complete. Alteplase contains 
no preservatives. Store aliquots of reconstituted and further diluted 
solutions in an ultralow (-80°C [-112°F]) freezer for 45 days unless 
extended stability and sterility testing has been conducted. Do not 
re-freeze aliquots once thawed. Discard this product if the color 
changes, if it becomes cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Alteplase ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
(in vitro) with any other ophthalmic medications. It is not available 
as an ophthalmic injection. For intraocular injection, Cathflo Acti-
vase® is further diluted with normal saline to a final concentration of  
0.25 mg/mL.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Alteplase is not approved for ophthalmic use. 
Cathflo Activase® is available (containing alteplase 2.2 mg [which in-
cludes a 10% overfill], L-arginine 77 mg, polysorbate-80 0.2 mg, and 
phosphoric acid for pH adjustment. Each reconstituted vial will de -
liver 1 mg/mL of alteplase at a pH of ≈7.3). For intraocular injection, 
this solution is further diluted with normal saline to a final concen -
tration of 0.25 mg/mL.  
Activase® is available as 50 and 100 mg lyophilized powder vials with 
diluent (sterile water for injection) included.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Amikacin Ophthalmic
(am-uh-kay-sin) 
Aminoglycoside Antibiotic
For systemic use, see Amikacin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Topical ophthalmic aminoglycoside antibiotic used for sus-
ceptible ocular bacterial infections that are resistant to other 
aminoglycoside antibiotics
 ▶ Amikacin is not commercially available as an ophthalmic 
preparation in the United States; it must be compounded.
 ▶ Cats may be more subject to toxic effects of amikacin than 
other species. 
Uses/Indications
Although an amikacin ophthalmic formulation is not commercial -
ly available, it can be compounded for use in ophthalmic infections 
caused by susceptible strains of Pseudomonas spp, Escherichia coli, 
Proteus spp, Klebsiella spp, and other gram-negative bacteria.1 Ami-
kacin has activity against penicillinase and nonpenicillinase-pro -
ducing species of Staphylococcus spp, but low activity against oth -
er gram-positive organisms. Amikacin is less toxic to the posterior 
segment compared with other aminoglycoside antibiotics and the 
injectable dosage form is sometimes used as an intravitreal injection 
to treat bacterial endophthalmitis. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated amika -
cin as a Critically Important, High Priority antimicrobial for human 
medicine.2 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) has desig -
nated amikacin as a Veterinary Critically Important Antimicrobial 
(VCIA) Agent in equine species.3 
Pharmacology/Actions
Amikacin sulfate, an aminoglycoside, is actively transported into 
the bacterial cell. It binds to a specific receptor protein on the 30S 
subunit of bacterial ribosomes. It consequently interferes with an 
initiation complex between mRNA (messenger RNA) and the 30S 
subunit, inhibiting protein synthesis by inducing misreading of the 
mRNA. Aminoglycosides are bactericidal, whereas most other an -
tibiotics that interfere with protein synthesis are bacteriostatic. Al -
though topical administration does not produce substantial aqueous 
humor concentrations, subconjunctival injections of amikacin solu-
tions may achieve therapeutic concentrations in the cornea and the 
aqueous humor.4 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Amikacin is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hyper-
sensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. 
Adverse Effects
When amikacin is used systemically, it can cause nephrotoxicity and 
neurotoxicity (ototoxicity and vestibular toxicity). Cats are more sus-
ceptible to the toxic effects of amikacin, and it is recommended that 
all patients receiving topical amikacin be monitored for systemic 
toxicity.  Although uncommon, topical aminoglycoside preparations 
have been reported to cause local reactions such as lid itching, swell-
ing, and conjunctival erythema in humans.
Dosages
Susceptible ocular infections (extra-label): Apply 1 drop to the af -
fected eye(s) every 1 to 2 hours for the first 24 hours, followed by 
every 4 to 6 hours, pending clinical improvement

===== PDF_PAGE_1369 =====
1342    Amphotericin B Ophthalmic
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: cytology and culture to evaluate for the presence 
of bacteria. Clinical resolution of signs of ocular surface infection 
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, signs of vestibular or auditory toxicity or 
nephrotoxicity)
 ■ Urinalysis with sediment to check for casts in the urine, which 
may be an early indicator for nephrotoxicity 
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when this medicine 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine according to the directions on the product 
label, protected from light. Do not freeze.
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are visible particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store product as directed on the product label, protected from light. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Amikacin sulfate ophthalmic solution should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Amikacin is not approved in an ophthalmic dosage form, but sterile 
solutions of amikacin 1% to 5% may be compounded by qualified 
compounding pharmacists.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Amphotericin B Ophthalmic
(am-foe-ter-i-sin bee) 
Polyene Antifungal 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Antifungal agent used to treat ocular surface fungal infections
 ▶ Not commercially available in an ophthalmic dosage form 
 ▶ Solutions made from the formulation for IV injection may be 
used topically or injected subconjunctivally.
Uses/Indications
Amphotericin B is used primarily in horses to treat fungal keratitis. 
It is effective against yeast and dimorphic fungal organisms, includ-
ing Histoplasma spp, Coccidioides spp, Candida albicans, Blastomyces 
spp, Cryptococcus spp, Sporothrix spp, and Mucor spp, with variable 
activity against filamentous organisms (more efficacy for Aspergillus 
spp than Fusarium spp). 
Amphotericin B has demonstrated in vitro ability to reduce bio -
film formation by Candida spp, thus decreasing virulence. 1 Topical 
administration is minimally effective. There is evidence supporting 
the beneficial effect of subconjunctival and intrastromal injections 
in humans.2,3 
Pharmacology/Actions
Amphotericin B acts by binding fungal sterols in cell membranes, 
resulting in leakage of intracellular constituents. Amphotericin B is 
usually fungistatic but can be fungicidal in higher concentrations.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Amphotericin B is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include mild burn -
ing, stinging, irritation, or redness. Topical application may be tox -
ic to the corneal epithelium, 4 whereas subconjunctival injection of 
nonliposomal forms may induce ocular irritation.5 
Dosages
Topical administration (extra-label; 0.15% to 0.5% solution): 1 – 2 
drops in the affected eye(s), or 0.1 mL in the subpalpebral lavage 
(SPL) catheter, every 2 to 6 hours, depending upon severity of in -
fection
Subconjunctival injection (extra-label): Inject 0.3 mL of a 0.5 mg/mL 
solution under the bulbar conjunctiva every 48 to 96 hours.2 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy and evaluation for clinical signs suggestive of 
continued infection
 ■ Corneal scraping to determine the resolution of fungal infection
Client Information
 ■ Give this medication to your animal as directed by your 
 veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication in a refrigerator protected from light. 
 ■ Discard this medication if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store the product in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [35.6°F-46.4°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Amphotericin B should not be mixed with salt-containing solutions 
and should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any other drugs. 
Amphotericin B is not available as an ophthalmic preparation but 
may be prepared as a topical solution (0.15% to 0.5% in dextrose 
5% or sterile water) or as a subconjunctival injection (0.5 mg/mL 
in sterile water). Historically, only the nonliposomal injection was 
recommended for compounding topical solutions; however, studies 
demonstrate that topical liposomal amphotericin B ophthalmic solu-
tions are equally effective and less irritating. 6 Although stability is 
concentration-dependent, most solutions are chemically stable for 7 
days in the refrigerator protected from light. Additionally, recent ev-
idence suggests that ophthalmic solutions prepared from liposomal 
amphotericin B retain chemical potency for up to 6 months.7 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
None are available, but amphotericin B may be compounded by 
reconstituting the injection as a 0.15% to 0.5% solution and used 
as an ophthalmic solution. See Compatibility/Compounding 
 Considerations.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb

===== PDF_PAGE_1370 =====
Apraclonidine Ophthalmic   1343
Apraclonidine Ophthalmic
(a-pra-cloe-ni-deen) Iopidine®
Alpha-Adrenergic Anti-Glaucoma Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to manage glaucoma
 ▶ Uncommonly used in veterinary species
 ▶ Do not use in cats, as bradycardia and vomiting may occur.
 ▶ Results in dry nose and mouth, headaches, cardiac arrhyth-
mias, and fatigue in humans
 ▶ Tachyphylaxis may occur with long-term use. 
Uses/Indications
Apraclonidine ophthalmic may be used as a short-term adjunct for 
patients that are maximally treated with other anti-glaucoma agents 
but still require additional lowering of intraocular pressure (IOP). Al-
though reports of the use of apraclonidine in veterinary patients are 
sparse, one report documented control of IOP for ≈8 months in a dog 
in conjunction with dorzolamide/timolol ophthalmic medications.1 
Pharmacology/Actions
Apraclonidine is a relatively selective alpha-2-adrenergic agonist. 
Activation of presynaptic alpha-2 receptors leads to inhibition of 
norepinephrine release, and activation of postsynaptic alpha-2 re -
ceptors on the nonpigmented ciliary body epithelial cells leads to 
decreased intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), 
both of which decrease aqueous humor production and intraocu -
lar pressure (IOP). Additionally, aqueous humor outflow may be in-
creased by a direct effect on uveoscleral outflow, as well as structural 
alterations to conventional outflow tract that decrease resistance to 
outflow. Tachyphylaxis (loss of effect) may occur over time, usually 
in less than 1 month in humans. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Apraclonidine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. 
Apraclonidine should not be used in patients that are receiving 
clonidine or monoamine oxidase inhibitors  (MAOIs). Do not use 
apraclonidine in cats, as it can cause bradycardia, hypersalivation, 
diarrhea, and vomiting.2 Apraclonidine should be used with caution, 
if at all, in animals with hepatic or renal insufficiency.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include conjuncti -
val blanching, eyelid elevation, and mydriasis. Dogs may experi -
ence vomiting and diarrhea. 3 Rarely, ophthalmic use of apracloni -
dine may cause dry mouth, dry eye, tachycardia, hypertension, and  
tachypnea. 
Dosages
Glaucoma (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) every 8 to 12 
hours
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Intraocular pressure (IOP)
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication as directed on the product label away from 
moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store product in the refrigerator or at controlled room temperature 
(2°C-25°C [36°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not 
freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Apraclonidine ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed direct-
ly with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Apraclonidine 0.5% Ophthalmic Solution (containing benzalkoni -
um chloride 0.01%, NaCl, sodium acetate, NaOH and/or HCl [pH 
4.4 to 7.8], and purified water) in 5 mL and 10 mL sterile ophthalmic 
dropper bottles; Iopidine®; (Rx)
Apraclonidine 1% Ophthalmic Solution (containing benzalkonium 
chloride 0.01%, NaCl, sodium acetate, NaOH and/or HCl [pH 4.4 
to 7.8], and purified water), 0.1 mL in plastic ophthalmic dispensers, 
packaged 2 per pouch enclosed in foil overwrap; Iopidine®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Atropine Ophthalmic
(ah-troe-peen) Isopto Atropine®
Mydriatic/Cycloplegic
For systemic use, refer to Atropine
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used therapeutically to dilate the pupil, paralyze the ciliary 
body, and stabilize the blood–aqueous barrier in animals with 
anterior uveitis
 ▶ Used to perform cycloplegic refraction; not intended to induce 
mydriasis for diagnostic evaluation of the posterior segment 
as mydriasis will persist for days to weeks
 ▶ Use with caution in affected and unaffected eyes of animals 
diagnosed with primary glaucoma.
Uses/Indications
Atropine ophthalmic is primarily used to reverse miosis and treat 
ciliary body spasm associated with anterior uveitis. It stabilizes the 
blood–aqueous barrier and lessens the occurrence of pupillary ad -
hesions by minimizing intraocular exudation of proteins and cells 
caused by uveal inflammation. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Atropine is a nonselective muscarinic receptor antagonist, leading 
to parasympatholytic activity. In the eye, anticholinergic activity 
produces mydriasis and cycloplegia by blocking stimulation of the 
iris sphincter muscle and the ciliary body accommodative muscle. It 
induces mydriasis in ≈1 hour, and the effects may persist up to 120 
hours in dogs, 144 hours in cats, and days to weeks in horses.1
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Atropine ophthalmic is contraindicated in patients that have a his -
tory of hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. 
Atropine ophthalmic should also not be used in patients with prima-
ry glaucoma or in dogs that are predisposed to developing glauco -
ma, as elevation in intraocular pressure (IOP) may result.2 Atropine 
ophthalmic may induce colic in horses secondary to systemic ab -
sorption, but this is rare.3 Avoid using the ointment formulation on 

===== PDF_PAGE_1371 =====
1344    Azelastine Ophthalmic
penetrating corneal wounds because of the potential for intraocular 
damage associated with exposure of the ointment’s inactive ingredi-
ents to the intraocular environment.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in animals include sensitivity to bright light 
or sunlight and burning and irritation upon application. Cats and 
dogs may experience transiently decreased tear production; thus, 
concurrent administration of topical tear replacers is appropriate. 
Hypersalivation, which may occur because of drainage of the bit -
ter-tasting solution into the nasopharynx, can be avoided by use of 
ointment formulations. Atropine ophthalmic causes tachycardia in 
healthy dogs.4
Dosages
Mydriasis and cycloplegia (extra-label): Initially, 1 drop or a ¼ – ½ 
inch strip to the affected eye(s) 2 to 3 times daily and then once daily 
or every other day afterward to achieve mydriasis
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: confirm continued mydriasis and degree of pa -
tient comfort
Client Information
 ■ Wash your hands prior to and after applying this medicine to your 
animal’s eye(s) to prevent human exposure and unintended expo-
sure of your animal’s eye.
 ■ Excessive drooling may occur (especially in cats).
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Do not touch the dropper (or ointment) tip or 
allow it to touch your animal’s eye or any other surface to prevent 
contamination.
 ■ Keep the cap tightly closed when this medicine is not in use.
 ■ This medicine may cause your animal’s tear production to de -
crease. Y our veterinarian may also recommend the use of an over-
the-counter (OTC) tear replacement solution or ointment for 
your animal’s eye(s) to alleviate this problem.
 ■ Wait for 5 to 10 minutes after applying atropine before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
Storage/Stability
Store at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Atropine sulfate ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed di -
rectly with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Atropine Sulfate 1% Ophthalmic Ointment USP (containing atro -
pine sulfate 10 mg; white petrolatum; mineral oil; lanolin oil; puri -
fied water) in 3.5 g ophthalmic tubes; generic; (Rx)
Atropine Sulfate 1% Ophthalmic Solution, USP (containing atropine 
sulfate 20 mg; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%, dibasic sodium phos -
phate; edetate disodium; hypromellose (2910); monobasic sodium 
phosphate; NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH to 3.5 to 6; water for 
injection), 2 mL, 5 mL, and 15 mL in sterile ophthalmic dropper 
bottles; Isopto Atropine®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Azelastine Ophthalmic
(a-za-las-teen) 
Antihistamine
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for the treatment of allergic conjunctivitis 
 ▶ Rapid onset of action (3 minutes) and long duration of action 
(8 hours) in humans
Uses/Indications
Azelastine is used to relieve pruritus caused by allergic conjunctivi -
tis. No studies describing the efficacy and safety of azelastine after 
topical administration have been performed in veterinary patients.
Pharmacology/Actions
Azelastine is an H1- and H2-receptor antagonist, which also inhibits 
the release of histamine from mast cells and the production of leu -
kotrienes involved in the allergic response. 1 Azelastine has a rapid 
onset of action (3 minutes) and a long duration of antipruritic action 
(8 hours) in humans. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Azelastine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hyper-
sensitivity to it or any component of the formulation.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include transient burning or 
stinging upon instillation in the eye (greater than experienced with 
other ophthalmic solutions, possibly related to the moderate pH of 5 
to 6.5) and a bitter taste. Asthma, conjunctivitis, dyspnea, eye pain, 
fatigue, influenza-like symptoms, pharyngitis, pruritus, rhinitis, and 
temporary blurring are other reported adverse effects (some of these 
effects were indistinguishable from the disease being treated).2
Dosages
Allergic conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) 2 
times daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy. Resolution of pruritus and conjunctivitis
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine in the refrigerator or at room temperature 
away from moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze.
 ■ Do not use if the color changes, becomes cloudy, or if there are 
particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store upright between 2°C and 25°C (36°F-77°F) away from mois -
ture and sunlight.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Azelastine ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly (in 
vitro) with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Azelastine HCl 0.05% Ophthalmic Solution (containing 0.5 mg 
azelastine hydrochloride; disodium edetate dehydrate; hypromellose; 
sorbitol solution; NaOH; water for injection; benzalkonium chloride 

===== PDF_PAGE_1372 =====
Azithromycin Ophthalmic   1345
0.125 mg; pH of ≈5 to 6.5; osmolarity of ≈271 – 312 mOsm/kg),  
6 mL in a sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Azithromycin Ophthalmic
(uh-zith-roe-mye-sin) Azasite®
Macrolide Antibiotic
For systemic use, refer to Azithromycin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat ocular surface bacterial infections
 ▶ May cause reversible phospholipid accumulation in the cornea
 ▶ Prolonged use of antibiotic preparations may result in over-
growth of nonsusceptible organisms, including fungi.
Uses/Indications
Azithromycin ophthalmic solution is used to treat susceptible strains 
of Haemophilus spp, Streptococcus spp, and Staphylococcus spp. In vi-
tro efficacy against some Chlamydia spp and Mycoplasma spp has 
also been reported.1 Reports of clinical efficacy and/or toxicity/toler-
ability of azithromycin ophthalmic in animals are not available.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated azithro-
mycin as a Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobial for 
human medicine.2
Pharmacology/Actions
Azithromycin is a bacteriostatic macrolide antibiotic that binds to 
the 50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible microorganisms and inter-
feres with microbial protein synthesis.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Azithromycin ophthalmic solution is contraindicated in patients 
that have a history of hypersensitivity to it or any component of the 
formulation. Azithromycin ophthalmic solution is indicated for top-
ical ophthalmic use only; it should not be administered systemically, 
injected subconjunctivally, or introduced directly into the anterior 
chamber of the eye.1 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include burning, stinging, and 
irritation on application. Systemic azithromycin has also caused 
phospholipidosis (intracellular phospholipid accumulation) in dogs, 
mice, and rats, and cytoplasmic microvacuolation of the cornea was 
observed in rabbits following ocular administration, which resolved 
when the medication was discontinued.1
Dosages
Bacterial conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) 2 
times daily the first 2 days, followed by once daily for 5 days
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolution of bacterial conjunctivitis
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine exactly as your veterinarian has prescribed.
 ■ Wash your hands before applying this medicine to your animal’s 
eye(s).
 ■ Be sure you understand how to give this medicine to your animal 
to avoid contamination of the medicine, which could worsen the 
eye condition.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying 
any other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Keep the cap on the medicine tightly closed when it is not in use.
 ■ Store this medicine in the refrigerator. After opening, the medi -
cine can be stored at room temperature. Discard the medicine 14 
days after opening or if if the color of the solution changes, if it 
becomes cloudy, or if there are particles.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. Discard this product 14 
days after opening.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Azithromycin ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Azithromycin 1% Ophthalmic Solution (containing azithromycin 
10 mg [1%]; mannitol; citric acid; sodium chloride; poloxamer 407; 
polycarbophil; edetate disodium; water for injection; NaOH to ad -
just pH), 2.5 mL in a sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; Azasite®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Benoxinate Ophthalmic
Oxybuprocaine Ophthalmic
(bin-ak-sin-ate) Altafluor®, Fluress®, Flurox® 
Topical Ocular Anesthetic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Rapid-acting topical anesthetic used for ocular diagnostic 
procedures
 ▶ Should never be prescribed for therapeutic administration
 ▶ Only available in combinations with the vital dye fluorescein 
sodium
 ▶ Chronic use results in tear film instability and corneal epithelial 
and stromal damage, which may progress to vision loss.
 ▶ Less burning, stinging, and chemosis than tetracaine
Uses/Indications
Like other topical anesthetic agents, benoxinate is indicated for use 
in ophthalmic diagnostic procedures, including measurement of 
intraocular pressure (tonometry), ocular ultrasonography, gonios -
copy, and corneal and conjunctival sampling for cytology and cul -
ture. Benoxinate is also indicated for therapeutic procedures in the 
hospital, including removing foreign bodies and sutures from the 
cornea, eyelid and conjunctival surgery, corneal grafting procedures, 
and cataract extraction. It is only available in ophthalmic solutions 
combined with the vital dye fluorescein. In dogs, benoxinate caus -
es fewer adverse reactions (burning, stinging, and chemosis) than 
tetracaine.1,2 Benoxinate has demonstrated comparable corneal an -
esthesia to that achieved by topical proparacaine in normal horses 
and donkeys.3
Pharmacology/Actions
Benoxinate induces local anesthesia by inhibiting neuronal depolar-
ization, thus preventing the generation of an action potential. The 
action occurs due to the binding of the local anesthetic molecule to 
the intracellular portion of the voltage-gated sodium channel within 
the neuron, thus inhibiting the intracellular movement of sodium. 
Variations in the structure of different local anesthetics influence 
their relative potencies; however, all local anesthetics have decreased 
efficacy in the acidic environment of inflammation, whereas alkaline 
environments improve intracellular penetration, thus increasing ef-
ficacy. The duration of action is dose- and species-dependent, with 
a total duration of corneal anesthesia following a single drop of 55 

===== PDF_PAGE_1373 =====
1346    Bepotastine Ophthalmic
minutes in dogs and 45 minutes in cats.1,2
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Benoxinate is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. It should 
never be prescribed as an ocular analgesic as prolonged use of a top-
ical ocular anesthetic will produce significant corneal epithelial and 
stromal disease, as well as tear film instability, and may result in loss 
of vision.4 
Adverse Effects
Benoxinate is usually well-tolerated, but local irritation (conjunctival 
redness, lacrimation, or squinting) may occur several hours after ad-
ministration. These signs occur less frequently with benoxinate than 
with tetracaine.3 Although patients that are sensitive to other local 
anesthetics may be less likely to react to benoxinate, local or system-
ic sensitivity may still occur and rarely manifest as a pseudoallergic 
(anaphylactoid) reaction mimicking an IgE-mediated vasodilatory 
event. Cardiovascular, respiratory, and CNS depressant effects that 
may result from local anesthetics are extremely rare with appropriate 
use of topical local anesthetics. However, care should be exercised 
when administering to small veterinary patients (ie, puppies, kittens, 
“pocket pets”) or those with pathways that may increase absorption 
(ie, amphibians). Its use as a therapeutic analgesic leads to super -
ficial punctate keratitis, which may advance to diffuse necrotizing 
keratitis, severe infiltrative keratitis, persistent epithelial defects, or 
damage to Descemet’s membrane.4
Dosages
Ophthalmic procedures requiring local anesthesia  (extra-label):  
1 – 2 drops to the target eye(s) prior to examination or performing 
procedure. May repeat adding 1 drop every 5 to 10 minutes for 2 to 3 
additional times. With further applications, the duration of corneal 
anesthesia can be extended to 55 minutes in dogs. Additional dos -
es should be avoided in small patients (ie, puppies, kittens, “pocket 
pets”).
Monitoring
 ■ Onset of action as indicated by awake patient, permitting diag -
nostic procedures to be performed 
 ■ Onset of action as indicated by a reduction in anesthetic require-
ments when administered pre- and intra-operatively
 ■ Damage to corneal epithelium indicated by a positive fluorescein 
stain test
Client Information
 ■ Animal owners must not administer benoxinate in the home. It is 
reserved for diagnostic procedures at veterinary clinics.
Storage/Stability
Store the product in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]). Once 
opened, the medication can be stored at room temperature for up to 
1 month.5 Keep this product away from moisture and sunlight; do 
not freeze. 
Discard this medication if the color of the solution changes, if it 
becomes cloudy, or if it develops particles. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Benoxinate ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
(in vitro) with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Benoxinate HCl 0.4% and Fluorescein Sodium 0.25% (containing 
fluorescein sodium 2.5 mg; benoxinate hydrochloride 4 mg; boric 
acid; povidone; purified water; HCl to adjust pH to 4.3 to 5.3; chlo -
robutanol 1%); 5 mL in sterile ophthalmic dropper bottles; Altaflu-
or®, Fluress®, Flurox®; (Rx). No benoxinate ophthalmic products have 
been approved by the US FDA.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Bepotastine Ophthalmic
(be-po-tas-teen) Bepreve®
Antihistamine 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ H1 receptor antagonist used in the management of allergic 
conjunctivitis
Uses/Indications
Bepotastine is used to relieve pruritus caused by allergic conjunc -
tivitis. The efficacy and safety of topical bepotastine has not been 
evaluated in veterinary species.
Pharmacology/Actions
Bepotastine is a direct histamine-1 (H 1) antagonist and mast cell 
stabilizer, with inhibitory effects on other inflammatory mediators, 
such as leukotrienes and eosinophils. The onset of action (control of 
itching) in humans is 15 minutes following instillation, with a dura-
tion of effect up to 8 hours.1
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Bepotastine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Use it with 
caution in pregnant or nursing patients.2
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include transient burning or 
stinging upon instillation in the eye, nasal irritation, and a bad taste 
in the mouth.1 
Dosages
Allergic conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) 2 
times daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolution of pruritus and conjunctivitis
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store at room temperature away from moisture and sunlight. Do 
not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store at controlled room temperature (15°C-25°C [59°F-77°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Bepotastine ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
(in vitro) with any other ophthalmic medications.  
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Bepotastine Besilate 1.5% Ophthalmic solution (containing bepotas-
tine besilate 15 mg; benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; monobasic so -

===== PDF_PAGE_1374 =====
Besifloxacin Ophthalmic   1347
dium phosphate dehydrate; NaCl; NaOH to adjust pH to 6.8; water 
for injection, USP , with an osmolality of 290 mOsm/kg), 5 mL and 
10 mL in sterile ophthalmic dropper bottles; Bepreve®; generic (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Besifloxacin Ophthalmic
(be-si-flocks-a sin) Besivance®
Fourth-Generation Fluoroquinolone Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Available in ophthalmic formulation only
 ▶ Used to treat bacterial conjunctivitis or keratitis
 ▶ Physically incompatible with many drugs; therefore, should 
not be directly mixed with other ophthalmic medications
 ▶ As with other topical antibiotics, prolonged use may result in 
overgrowth of nonsusceptible organisms.
Uses/Indications
Besifloxacin ophthalmic is used to treat bacterial conjunctivitis and 
keratitis. It is generally effective against gram-negative, gram-posi -
tive, and anaerobic organisms, particularly Staphylococcus spp, Strep-
tococcus spp, Haemophilus spp, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.  
Pharmacology/Actions
Besifloxacin is a fourth-generation fluoroquinolone antibiotic that 
acts, via inhibition of both topoisomerase II (DNA gyrase) and to -
poisomerase IV , to impair bacterial DNA synthesis. Inhibition of 
both enzymes decreases the development of resistance to this class of 
fluoroquinolones in general, and organisms have demonstrated even 
lower resistance to besifloxacin due to this balanced inhibition.1 Besi-
floxacin achieves superior aqueous humor concentrations in normal 
dogs relative to gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin (other fourth-gener -
ation fluoroquinolones)2; however, other studies have demonstrat -
ed effective ocular surface concentrations of besifloxacin following 
topical administration, with lesser aqueous humor concentrations. 1 
The currently available formulation of besifloxacin is formulated 
with a mucoadhesive polymer that increases contact time with the 
ocular surface, which is favorable for concentration-dependent fluo-
roquinolone antibiotics.1,3
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Besifloxacin is contraindicated in patients with a history of hyper -
sensitivity to besifloxacin, other fluoroquinolones, or any compo -
nent of the formulation. For topical ophthalmic use only, not for 
injection subconjunctivally or into the anterior chamber of the eye.3 
Fluoroquinolone-induced retinal toxicity in domestic cats has not 
been demonstrated with this product.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include blurred vi -
sion, tearing, eye pain, conjunctival redness, itching, and a bad taste 
in the mouth. Temporary punctate keratitis, which resolves with 
discontinuation of medication, has also been reported rarely in hu -
mans.4
Dosages
Conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) 3 times 
 daily
Keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye every 2 to 8 hours
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy. Corneal cytology with culture and susceptibility 
testing to evaluate for the persistence of bacteria, and evaluation 
for clinical signs suggestive of continued infection
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine to your animal as directed by your veterinar -
ian. Be sure you understand how to safely give to your animal.
 ■ Invert the bottle and shake once before use. Do not give your an-
imal this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, or if 
particles are seen in the solution.
 ■ Crystals may develop on the surface of the eye during treatment 
but will not cause harm.
 ■ Do not mix this medicine with other eye medications.
 ■ If you are giving your animal other eye medications, wait 5 min -
utes after applying this medicine before applying any other med-
ications to the eye.
 ■ Do not freeze this medicine. Store this medicine at room tempera-
ture, away from light and moisture.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature 20°C to 25°C 
(68°F-77°F) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics interact with many other drugs, includ-
ing those containing cations (eg, iron, aluminum, magnesium, calci-
um). Besifloxacin should not be mixed with any other drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Besifloxacin 0.6% (6 mg/mL) Ophthalmic Suspension (contain -
ing besifloxacin 0.6%; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; polycarbo -
phil; mannitol; poloxamer 407; NaCl; edetate disodium dehydrate; 
NaOH; water for injection, with an osmolality of ≈290 mOsm/kg), 
5 mL in a sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; Besivance®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Betaxolol Ophthalmic
(be-tax-uh-lol) Betoptic®, Betoptic S® 
Beta-1-Selective Beta-Adrenergic Blocker
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Beta-blocker that decreases intraocular pressure (IOP) as a 
treatment for glaucoma
 ▶ More effective reduction in IOP using 0.5% solution relative to 
0.25% solutions in veterinary patients; however, increased risk 
for adverse effects exists when using the higher concentration 
 ▶ Delays onset of glaucoma in the normal eye of dogs with 
unilateral glaucoma
 ▶ Use with caution in asthmatic patients because of the poten-
tial to induce bronchospasm.
Uses/Indications
Betaxolol is a beta-1-selective beta-blocker used to reduce intra -
ocular pressure (IOP) in primary glaucoma and as prophylaxis to 
prevent glaucoma in the normal eye of animals with unilateral glau-
coma.1 In combination with tafluprost, betaxolol leads to a greater 
reduction of IOP in normal dogs compared to timolol.2 
Pharmacology/Actions
Betaxolol works through the blockade of the beta-receptors in the 
ciliary body epithelium to reduce intraocular pressure (IOP) by 
decreasing aqueous humor production. Several mechanisms have 
been postulated for this effect, including beta-blockade, particularly 
beta-2 receptors, reducing norepinephrine-induced tonic sympa -
thetic stimulation, leading to decreased activation of cAMP in the 

===== PDF_PAGE_1375 =====
1348    Bimatoprost Ophthalmic
ciliary body; inhibition of Na+K+ATPase activity; or vasoactive 
mechanisms on the iris and ciliary body. Betaxolol also inhibits 
glutamine-induced increases in intracellular calcium and sodium, 
thereby providing a potential protective effect against ischemic in -
sult to the retina.3 Because of betaxolol’s beta-1-selective activity, its 
hypotensive effect may be less than that of nonselective beta-block -
ers, as beta-2 blockade is of greater importance to aqueous humor 
production. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Betaxolol is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Betaxolol 
should be used carefully in patients with heart block, bradycardia, 
heart failure, asthma, chronic bronchitis, or other cardiopulmonary 
conditions, although systemic cardiopulmonary adverse effects are 
not likely with ocular use of betaxolol. Beta-blockers should be used 
with caution in patients with diabetes mellitus, as these drugs may 
mask signs of acute hypoglycemia. Beta-blockers should be used 
with caution in patients with hyperthyroidism, as these drugs may 
mask indications of this condition. Abrupt discontinuation of beta 
blockers should be avoided.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include transient 
burning, stinging, and irritation upon application to the eye, as well 
as keratitis, anisocoria, and photophobia. Bradycardia, heart block, 
congestive heart failure, pulmonary distress, insomnia, dizziness, 
headaches, lethargy, and depression have been reported in humans. 
Other topically applied beta-blockers produce significant reductions 
in heart rate in healthy cats.4 
Dosages
Glaucoma (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) twice daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Monitor intraocular pressure (IOP)
 ■ Observe asthmatic and diabetic patients for respiratory difficulty 
or acute hypoglycemia, respectively.
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Suspension formulations must be shaken well before using.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication in the refrigerator or at room temperature 
away from moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]) or at 
controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away from 
moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Betaxolol ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Betaxolol HCl 0.5% Ophthalmic Solution (containing 5.6 mg betax-
olol HCl equivalent to 5 mg betaxolol; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; 
edetate disodium; NaCl, HCl, and/or NaOH to adjust pH; purified 
water) in 2.5 mL, 5 mL, 10 mL, and 15 mL sterile ophthalmic drop -
per bottles; Betoptic®, generic; (Rx)
Betaxolol HCl 0.25% ophthalmic solution (containing betaxolol 
HCl 2.8 mg equivalent to 2.5 mg betaxolol; benzalkonium chloride 
0.01%; mannitol; poly (styrene-divinyl benzene); edetate disodium; 
NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH; purified water) in sterile 10 mL and 
15 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; Betoptic®-S; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Bimatoprost Ophthalmic
(bi-mat-oh-prost) Lumigan®, Latisse®, Durysta®
Prostaglandin Analogue Anti-Glaucoma Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to decrease intraocular pressure (IOP) in patients with 
primary glaucoma or ocular hypertension
 ▶ Not effective for feline glaucoma, and unlikely to be effective 
for equine glaucoma
 ▶ Do not use if intraocular inflammation is present, as the drug 
may worsen the inflammation or lead to pupillary block 
 glaucoma
 ▶ Twice-daily dosing results in less fluctuation of IOP .
 ▶ Lower concentration of benzalkonium chloride than latano-
prost or travoprost; therefore, bimatoprost causes less ocular 
discomfort on administration
 ▶ May increase brown pigment, resulting in discoloration of 
light-colored irises and increased eyelash growth
Uses/Indications
Bimatoprost is used to lower intraocular pressure (IOP) in the man-
agement of glaucoma in dogs. It is indicated as a treatment for pri -
mary glaucoma; however, secondary glaucomas (caused by uveitis, 
lens luxation, or intraocular tumor) are not appropriately treated 
with bimatoprost. Due to differences in intraocular receptors, bi -
matoprost is ineffective in lowering the IOP in cats, although it does 
produce miosis.1,2 Although once-daily administration is indicated 
in humans, twice-daily administration has been demonstrated to 
more consistently lower IOP in dogs. 3 Significant miosis also oc -
curs following administration. 3 An intracameral sustained-release 
bimatoprost implant has demonstrated increased IOP-lowering effi-
cacy in comparison with topical administration of varied concentra-
tions of bimatoprost in normotensive dogs.4
Pharmacology/Actions
Bimatoprost, a prostaglandin analogue, is a synthetic structural an -
alogue of prostaglandin derived from a fatty acid precursor, anan -
damide. It selectively mimics the effects of naturally occurring prost-
amides. Bimatoprost is believed to lower intraocular pressure (IOP) 
by increasing the outflow of aqueous humor through both the tra -
becular meshwork and uveoscleral routes. 5 In humans, the onset of 
action is in 4 hours, with a total duration of 8 to 12 hours. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Bimatoprost is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Bimato -
prost should be used with caution in the presence of anterior uveitis 
and secondary glaucoma, particularly in cases already exhibiting 
significant miosis, as this treatment may exacerbate miosis, promote 
synechiae formation, and worsen glaucoma. Bimatoprost should also 
be used with caution in dogs with primary anterior lens luxation, as 
the miosis that results may trap the lens and/or vitreous within the 

===== PDF_PAGE_1376 =====
Brimonidine Ophthalmic   1349
pupillary aperture, thus creating pupillary block glaucoma. Bimato-
prost is not contraindicated in dogs with secondary posterior lens 
luxation, as the miosis may (favorably) trap the lens in the posterior 
segment.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include stinging, 
burning, erythema (conjunctival hyperemia), and irritation on ad -
ministration. Macular edema has been reported in humans using 
bimatoprost. Bimatoprost may cause increased eyelash growth, may 
worsen intraocular inflammation through prostaglandin-mediated 
mechanism, and/or cause darkening of the iris through direct stim -
ulation of iris melanocytes. 
Dosages
Glaucoma (extra-label): 
a.  Solution: Initially, 1 drop to the affected eye(s) once daily in 
the evening; increase to twice daily as glaucoma progresses. 
Twice-daily administration of bimatoprost may be more effec-
tive in dogs.
b.  Sustained-release implant: Intracameral injection of the sus -
tained-release implant is performed using the associated oph-
thalmic drug delivery system. Repeat implantation should not 
be performed in an eye that has received a prior implant.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy measured through sustained reduction of intra -
ocular pressure (IOP)
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication in the refrigerator or at room temperature 
away from moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store solution in the refrigerator or at controlled room temperature 
(2°C-25°C [36°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not 
freeze.
Store implant in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]). 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Bimatoprost ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications.  
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Bimatoprost 0.01% Ophthalmic Solution (containing bimatoprost 
0.1 mg/mL; benzalkonium chloride 0.02%; NaCl; sodium phosphate, 
dibasic; citric acid; purified water; NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH 
to 6.8 to 7.8, with an osmolality of 290 mOsm/kg) in sterile 2.5 mL, 
5  mL, and 7.5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; Lumigan®, generic; 
(Rx)
Bimatoprost 0.03% Ophthalmic Solution (containing bimatoprost 
0.3 mg; benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; NaCl; sodium phosphate, 
dibasic; citric acid; purified water; NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH 
to 6.8 to 7.8, with an osmolality of 290 mOsm/kg) in sterile 2.5 mL, 
5 mL, and 7.5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; Latisse®, generic; (Rx). 
NOTE: Latisse® is approved for topical use only for inducing eyelash 
growth and should not be used in the eye.
Bimatoprost 10 µg Ophthalmic Implant (containing 10 µg bimato -
prost in a single-use applicator that is packaged in a sealed foil pouch 
containing desiccant, NDC 0023-9652-01); Durysta® (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Brimonidine Ophthalmic
(bri-moe-ni-deen)  Alphagan P®, Combigan®, Qoliana®, 
 Simbrinza®
Alpha-Adrenergic Agonist; Anti-Glaucoma Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to decrease intraocular pressure (IOP) in patients with 
glaucoma
 ▶ Produces less severe adverse effects than apraclonidine, but it 
is not a first-line anti-glaucoma agent in veterinary species
 ▶ Greenish-yellow color of the solution is a characteristic and 
not a sign of degradation or contamination
Uses/Indications
Brimonidine may be used to treat elevated intraocular pressure 
(IOP) in patients with glaucoma or ocular hypertension. Its use in 
glaucomatous beagles 2 to 3 times daily has demonstrated no consis-
tent clinical effect.1 Administration of brimonidine to normotensive 
horses, with or without timolol, has not shown any clinically signif-
icant effect.2 
Pharmacology/Actions
Brimonidine is a relatively selective alpha-2-adrenergic agonist. Ac-
tivation of presynaptic alpha-2 receptors inhibits norepinephrine 
release, and activation of postsynaptic alpha-2 receptors on the non-
pigmented ciliary body epithelial cells decreases intracellular cAMP , 
both of which result in decreased aqueous humor production and 
decreased intraocular pressure (IOP). Additionally, aqueous humor 
outflow may be increased by a direct effect on uveoscleral outflow, as 
well as structural alterations to the conventional outflow tract that 
decrease resistance to outflow. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Brimonidine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Brimoni -
dine should be used cautiously, if at all, in patients with vascular in-
sufficiency syndromes (eg, laminitis, cerebral, or coronary vascular 
insufficiency). Concomitant use of monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
(MAOIs; eg, amitraz, selegiline) may potentiate the risk for systemic 
hypotension. Instruct pet owners to keep it out of reach of household 
animals, as ingestion of brimonidine ophthalmic solution has caused 
serious cardiovascular toxicities.3 Overdoses of brimonidine can be 
treated with atipamezole, yohimbine, and other alpha-2 antagonists. 
Caution should be exercised if brimonidine is used in conjunction 
with beta-blockers (ophthalmic and systemic), antihypertensives, 
and/or cardiac glycosides. When brimonidine is used in humans, the 
clinical effect diminishes over time and requires careful monitoring.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals are numerous and 
include (but are not limited to) oral dryness, allergic conjunctivitis, 
conjunctival hyperemia, ocular pruritus, burning, stinging, foreign 
body sensation, irritation, eyelid and conjunctival edema, dizziness, 
muscular pain, and hypertension. Use of brimonidine in dogs is asso-
ciated with miosis and bradycardia.4 Administration of brimonidine 
in cats consistently results in vomiting, which may be ameliorated 
by premedication with oral maripotant. 5 Brimonidine in cats also 
produces dose-dependent sedation, bradycardia, and hypotension.6 

===== PDF_PAGE_1377 =====
1350    Brinzolamide Ophthalmic
Dosages
Glaucoma (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) 2 to 3 times daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy measured through continued control of intraoc-
ular pressure (IOP)
 ■ Baseline and periodic heart rate and blood pressure, particularly 
in dogs and cats
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Keep this medicine out of reach of household animals and chil -
dren, as ingestion of brimonidine ophthalmic solution can cause 
serious heart problems. 
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication at room temperature away from moisture 
and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Brimonidine ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Brimonidine Tartrate 0.1% Ophthalmic Solution (containing brimo-
nidine tartrate 0.1%; boric acid; calcium chloride; magnesium chlo -
ride; potassium chloride; purified water; purite®  0.005% as preser -
vative; sodium borate; sodium carboxymethylcellulose; NaCl; HCl 
and/or NaOH to adjust pH to 7.7), 5 mL, 10 mL, or 15 mL in sterile 
ophthalmic dropper bottles; Alphagan-P®; (Rx)
Brimonidine Tartrate 0.15% Ophthalmic Solution (containing bri -
monidine tartrate 0.15%; boric acid; calcium chloride; magnesium 
chloride; potassium chloride; purified water; purite®  0.005% as 
preservative; sodium borate; sodium carboxymethylcellulose; NaCl; 
HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH to 7.7), 5 mL, 10 mL, or 15 mL in 
sterile ophthalmic dropper bottles; Alphagan-P®; (Rx)
Brimonidine Tartrate 0.15% Ophthalmic Solution (containing bri -
monidine tartrate 1.5 mg/mL; polyquad®  (polyquaternium-1) 
0.01 mg/mL; povidone; boric acid; sodium borate; calcium chloride; 
magnesium chloride; potassium chloride; mannitol; sodium chlo -
ride; purified water; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH), 5 mL, 10 mL, 
or 15 mL in sterile ophthalmic dropper bottles; Qoliana®; (Rx)
Brimonidine Tartrate 0.2% Ophthalmic Solution (containing brimo-
nidine tartrate 0.2%; benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; polyvinyl alco-
hol; NaCl; citric acid; purified water; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH 
to 5.6 to 6.6, with an osmolality of 280 – 330 mOsm/kg) in a 5 mL, 
10 mL, and 15 mL dropper bottle; generic; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED COMBINATION PRODUCTS:
Brimonidine Tartrate 0.2% and Timolol Maleate 0.5% Ophthal -
mic Solution (containing brimonidine tartrate 0.2%; timolol 0.5%; 
benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; purified water; sodium phosphate, 
dibasic; sodium phosphate, monobasic; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust 
pH to 6.5 to 7.3, with an osmolality of 280 – 330 mOsm/kg), 5 mL, 
10 mL, or 15 mL in sterile ophthalmic dropper bottles; Combigan®, 
generic; (Rx)
Brimonidine Tartrate 0.2% and Brinzolamide 1% Ophthalmic Sus -
pension (containing brinzolamide 10 mg; brimonidine tartrate 2 mg, 
equivalent to 1.32 mg free base; benzalkonium chloride 0.03 mg; 
propylene glycol; carbomer 974P; boric acid; mannitol; NaCl; tylox-
apol; purified water; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH), 8 mL in sterile 
ophthalmic dropper bottle; Simbrinza®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Brinzolamide Ophthalmic
(bryn-zoe-la-mide) Azopt®, Simbrinza®
Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitor Anti-Glaucoma Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Decreases intraocular pressure (IOP) by reducing the produc-
tion of aqueous humor
 ▶ May be better tolerated than dorzolamide because of less 
acidic pH
 ▶ Sulfonamide derivative; caregivers with sulfa allergies should 
avoid direct contact with the medicine.
Uses/Indications
Brinzolamide is used to decrease intraocular pressure (IOP) in glau-
coma and ocular hypertension. It may be used in cases of primary 
glaucoma or secondary glaucoma (caused by uveitis, lens luxation, 
or intraocular tumors) in dogs, cats, and horses. Brinzolamide effec-
tively lowers the IOP in normal horses but does not decrease the IOP 
in normal cats.1,2 Efficacy of prophylactic brinzolamide administra -
tion for preventing manifestation of primary glaucoma in unaffect -
ed eyes of dogs with contralateral primary glaucoma has not been 
demonstrated.3 
Pharmacology/Actions
Carbonic anhydrase (CA) is an enzyme found in many body tissues, 
including the eye. CA inhibitors reduce the formation of hydrogen 
and bicarbonate ions from carbon dioxide and water by noncom -
petitive, reversible inhibition of the enzyme CA, thereby reducing 
the availability of these ions for active transport into secretions. In 
humans, CA exists as a number of isoenzymes, with CA-II being the 
most relevant to glaucoma management. Inhibition of CA in the cili-
ary processes of the eye decreases aqueous humor secretion, presum-
ably by slowing the formation of bicarbonate ions with subsequent 
reduction in sodium and fluid transport, which results in a reduction 
in intraocular pressure (IOP).4 Brinzolamide is more lipophilic than 
dorzolamide, resulting in increased intraocular concentrations fol -
lowing topical administration.5 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Brinzolamide is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation or drugs 
like it, such as sulfonamides. Caregivers with sulfonamide allergies 
should use caution when applying brinzolamide. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include stinging, 
burning, and irritation upon application. Corneal edema may occur 
in patients with low corneal endothelial cell counts. Humans experi-
ence headaches and a bitter taste in the mouth after brinzolamide ad-
ministration. It is possible that animals experience these adverse ef -
fects. Carbonic anhydrase (CA) inhibitors, including brinzolamide, 
have been implicated in the development of significant ulcerative 
and nonulcerative keratitis following long-term administration.6 

===== PDF_PAGE_1378 =====
Bromfenac Ophthalmic   1351
Dosages
Glaucoma (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) 2 to 3 times 
daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Confirm maintenance of intraocular pressure (IOP) within the 
normal range for the species being treated
 ■ Monitor for corneal edema
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Shake this medication well before using.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store in the refrigerator or at room temperature away from mois-
ture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the refrigerator or at controlled room tempera-
ture (4°C-30°C [39°F-86°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do 
not freeze.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Brinzolamide ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Brinzolamide 1% Ophthalmic Suspension (containing brinzolamide 
10 mg; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; mannitol; carbomer 974P; ty-
loxapol; edetate disodium; NaCl; purified water; HCl and/or NaOH 
to adjust pH to 7.5; osmolality of 300 mOsm/kg), 10 mL or 15 mL in 
sterile ophthalmic dropper bottles; Azopt®; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED COMBINATION PRODUCTS:
Brinzolamide 1% and Brimonidine Tartrate 0.2% Ophthalmic Sus -
pension (containing brinzolamide 10 mg; brimonidine tartrate 2 mg, 
equivalent to 1.32 mg as brimonidine free base; benzalkonium chlo-
ride 0.03 mg; propylene glycol; carbomer 974P; boric acid; mannitol; 
sodium chloride; tyloxapol; purified water; HCl and/or NaOH to 
adjust pH), 8 mL in sterile 10 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Sim-
brinza®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Bromfenac Ophthalmic
(brome-fen-ak) Bromsite®, Prolensa®
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug (NSAID)
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to control anterior segment inflammation
 ▶ Longer duration of action than diclofenac
 ▶ May delay ocular wound healing and increase risk for intraoc-
ular bleeding
Uses/Indications
Bromfenac is indicated for controlling anterior segment inflamma -
tion (eg, conjunctivitis, keratitis, anterior uveitis) and for providing 
analgesia following surgical removal of cataracts. In a prospective 
study evaluating inflammation, postoperative ocular hypertension, 
and posterior capsular opacification (PCO) in dogs following cata -
ract surgery, the effectiveness of prednisolone acetate was compared 
with artificial lens implants that were impregnated with celecoxib 
(NSAID) or topically applied bromfenac. Over the long-term fol -
low-up period of 56 weeks, bromfenac was comparable to prednis -
olone acetate in controlling inflammation and did not lead to an in-
creased incidence of ocular hypertension, and it effectively managed 
PCO.1 In contrast, bromfenac was associated with an increased inci-
dence of elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) relative to flurbiprofen 
in dogs 6 weeks following surgical cataract removal.2
Pharmacology/Actions
Bromfenac is an NSAID that blocks prostaglandin synthesis by inhib-
iting cyclooxygenase 1 and 2. Prostaglandins mediate many adverse 
effects that occur because of intraocular inflammation, including dis-
ruption of the blood-aqueous humor barrier, vasodilation, increased 
vascular permeability, leukocytosis, and increased intraocular pres -
sure (IOP).3 Blocking prostaglandin production, therefore, minimizes 
the adverse short- and long-term effects of intraocular inflammation.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Bromfenac is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. The po -
tential for cross-sensitivity to acetylsalicylic acid, phenylacetic acid 
derivatives, and other NSAIDs exists. Topical NSAIDs may result 
in corneal epithelial breakdown and corneal thinning, erosion, or 
ulceration.3 Topical NSAIDs may slow or delay corneal wound heal-
ing. As topical corticosteroids are also known to slow or delay heal -
ing, concomitant use of topical NSAIDs and topical steroids may 
increase the potential for healing problems. Because of interference 
with thrombocyte aggregation, ophthalmic NSAIDs may cause in -
creased bleeding of ocular tissues (including hyphema) in conjunc -
tion with ocular surgery. It is recommended that bromfenac ophthal-
mic solution be used with caution in patients with known bleeding 
tendencies or those receiving other medications that may prolong 
bleeding times.3 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects associated with bromfenac that have been reported 
in humans or animals include burning, stinging, and irritation upon 
application; conjunctival hyperemia; risk for ocular bleeding; and 
delayed corneal wound healing.
Dosages
Anterior segment inflammation (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected 
eye(s) every 8 hours initially, then reduced to lowest effective dose
Postoperative ocular analgesia (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected 
eye(s) every 6 to 8 hours as needed to control pain
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy through evidence of efficacious analgesia and 
control of intraocular inflammation
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication at room temperature away from moisture 
and sunlight; do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1379 =====
1352    Carteolol Ophthalmic
 ■ Discard compounded gels by the discard date indicated by the 
compounding pharmacist.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (15°C-25°C 
[59°F-77°F])  away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Bromfenac ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Bromfenac 0.09% Ophthalmic Solution (containing bromfenac so -
dium sesquihydrate 0.1035% equivalent to 0.09% bromfenac-free 
acid; benzalkonium chloride 0.05 mg/mL; boric acid; polysorbate 
80; povidone; sodium borate; sodium sulfite anhydrous; NaOH to 
adjust pH; water for injection), in sterile 2.5 mL and 5 mL ophthal -
mic dropper bottle; generic; (Rx)
Bromfenac 0.07% Ophthalmic Solution (containing bromfenac so -
dium hydrate 0.805 mg; benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; boric acid; 
edetate disodium; povidone; sodium borate; sodium sulfite; tylox -
apol; NaOH to adjust pH; water for injection), in sterile 1.6 mL or 
3 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Prolensa®; (Rx)
Bromfenac 0.075% Ophthalmic Solution (containing bromfenac 
sodium sesquihydrate 0.81 mg equivalent to bromfenac-free acid 
0.76 mg; boric acid; sodium borate; citric acid; sodium citrate; polox-
amer 407; polycarbophil; NaCl; edetate disodium; water for injec -
tion; NaOH to adjust pH; benzalkonium chloride 0.05 mg/0.005%), 
in sterile 5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Bromsite®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Carteolol Ophthalmic
(kar-tay-uh-lol) 
Nonselective Beta-Blocker
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Nonselective (beta-1 and beta-2) beta-blocker that decreases 
aqueous humor production to decrease intraocular pressure 
(IOP) as a treatment for glaucoma
 ▶ May delay onset of glaucoma in the normal eye of dogs with 
unilateral glaucoma
 ▶ Use with caution in asthmatic patients due to the potential to 
induce bronchospasm
Uses/Indications
Carteolol may be used to reduce intraocular pressure (IOP) in pri -
mary glaucoma and as prophylaxis to prevent glaucoma in the nor -
mal eye of animals with unilateral glaucoma. The evaluation of its 
efficacy in animals has not been performed.
Pharmacology/Actions
Carteolol is a nonselective beta-adrenergic blocking agent with 
associated intrinsic sympathomimetic activity and without sig -
nificant membrane-stabilizing activity. 1 Blockade of ciliary body 
beta-receptors (particularly beta-2-receptors) reduces intraocular 
pressure (IOP) by decreasing aqueous humor production. Several 
mechanisms of action have been postulated for this effect, includ -
ing beta-blockade (particularly beta-2-receptors) reducing norepi -
nephrine-induced tonic sympathetic stimulation, which then leads 
to decreased activation of cAMP in the ciliary body; inhibition of 
Na+K+ATPase activity; or vasoactive mechanisms on the iris and 
ciliary body. Topically administered beta-blockers also inhibit gluta-
mine-induced increases in intracellular calcium and sodium, there -
by providing a potential protective effect against ischemic insult to 
the retina.2
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Carteolol is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Carteolol 
should be used carefully in patients with heart block, bradycardia, 
heart failure, asthma, chronic bronchitis, or other cardiopulmonary 
conditions, although systemic cardiopulmonary adverse effects are 
not likely with ocular use of carteolol.
Beta-blockers should be used with caution in patients with diabe-
tes mellitus, as these drugs may mask signs of acute hypoglycemia. 
Beta-blockers should also be used with caution in patients with hy -
perthyroidism, as these drugs may mask indications of this condi -
tion. Abrupt discontinuation of beta-blockers should be avoided.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include transient 
burning, stinging, and irritation upon application to the eye. Al -
though not specifically evaluated, it is possible that carteolol could 
lead to reduction in heart rate following topical administration in 
veterinary species.3 
Dosages
Glaucoma (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) 2 times daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Monitor intraocular pressure (IOP)
 ■ Observe asthmatic and diabetic patients for respiratory difficulty 
or acute hypoglycemia, respectively
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication at room temperature away from moisture 
and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (15°C-25°C 
[59°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Carteolol ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Carteolol HCl 1% Ophthalmic Solution (containing carteolol HCl 
10 mg; benzalkonium chloride 0.05 mg; NaCl; monobasic and diba -
sic sodium phosphate; NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH to 6 to 8; 
purified water), in a 5 mL, 10 mL, and 15 mL dropper bottle; generic; 
(Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb

===== PDF_PAGE_1380 =====
Chloramphenicol Ophthalmic    1353
Chloramphenicol Ophthalmic
(klor-am-fen-uh-kol) 
Broad-Spectrum Antibiotic
For systemic use, refer to Chloramphenicol
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to provide antibacterial coverage in the presence of 
corneal ulcerations or therapeutic antibacterial coverage for 
susceptible ocular surface infections, particularly feline Myco-
plasma spp or Chlamydia spp infections
 ▶ Chloramphenicol has caused acute toxicity and death in 
humans; instruct caregiver to wear gloves and avoid contact 
with this drug.
 ▶ Chloramphenicol ophthalmic preparations are no longer com-
mercially available but may be compounded by a qualified 
compounding pharmacist. 
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies chloramphenicol as a hazardous drug; use 
appropriate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Chloramphenicol is used for the treatment of surface ocular infec -
tions involving the conjunctiva and/or cornea caused by chloram -
phenicol-susceptible organisms.1 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated chloram-
phenicol as a Highly Important antimicrobial for human medicine.2 
The Office International des Epizooties  (OIE) has designated am -
phenicol as a Veterinary Critically Important Antimicrobial (VCIA) 
Agent in veterinary species.3
Pharmacology/Actions
Chloramphenicol is a broad-spectrum, bacteriostatic antibiotic that 
inhibits protein synthesis by interfering with the transfer of activated 
amino acids from soluble RNA to ribosomes, thus preventing pro -
tein elongation. It generally has good activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and intracellular organisms, common to the ocular 
surface; the activity against Pseudomonas spp is consistently poor. 
Development of resistance to chloramphenicol is uncommon for 
Staphylococcus spp and Streptococcus spp.4–7 
Chloramphenicol is found in measurable amounts in the aqueous 
humor following topical application to the eye. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Chloramphenicol is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. 
Chloramphenicol may induce dose-dependent bone marrow 
suppression or idiosyncratic aplastic anemia, both of which have a 
low risk of occurring following topical ophthalmic administration.8,9 
Caregivers should be instructed to wear gloves and wash hands after 
handling this drug. Chloramphenicol is banned for use in food-pro-
ducing animals.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies chloramphenicol as a hazardous drug; personal 
protective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize 
the risk for exposure.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in animals include occasional burning or 
stinging on application. Bone marrow suppression and blood dy -
scrasias have been reported following the use of systemic chloram -
phenicol.
Dosages
Bacterial conjunctivitis (extra-label): ¼ – ½ inch strip or 1 drop in 
the affected eye(s) every 6 to 8 hours 
Monitoring
 ■ Cytology and culture to evaluate for the presence of bacteria
 ■ Clinical resolution of signs related to ocular surface infection 
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC to monitor for bone marrow suppres-
sion
Client Information
 ■ Humans should avoid direct contact with this medicine. Wear 
gloves during administration and wash hands after handling this 
medicine.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Do not touch the dropper (or ointment) tip or 
allow it to touch your animal’s eye or any other surface to prevent 
contamination.
 ■ Keep cap tightly closed when not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Do not use if the color changes, becomes cloudy, or if there are 
particles in the solution. 
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined 
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH). Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the use 
of personal protective equipment when handling this  medicine.
Storage/Stability
Store at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Chloramphenicol should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any 
other drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Chloramphenicol was formerly available as a 0.5% ophthalmic solu-
tion or a 1% ointment but is no longer commercially available. A 
qualified compounding pharmacist may prepare it if needed.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Cidofovir Ophthalmic
(sye-doe-fo-veer) 
Antiviral 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used as an ophthalmic antiviral agent in cats with feline her-
pesvirus-1 (FHV-1)
 ▶ Less frequent administration and shorter treatment duration 
when compared to other ophthalmic antiviral agents
 ▶ Cidofovir has caused hypospermia and birth defects in 
humans and should not be used in animals intended for 
 breeding.
 ▶ Not commercially available in an ophthalmic dosage form but 
can be compounded as a 0.5% ophthalmic solution
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies cidofovir as a hazardous drug; use appropri-
ate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Cidofovir is compounded into a 0.5% ophthalmic solution for the 
topical treatment of feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) keratitis in cats. 
In vitro efficacy of cidofovir against FHV-1 is consistently high. 1,2 

===== PDF_PAGE_1381 =====
1354    Ciprofloxacin Ophthalmic
Because cidofovir is effective when administered twice daily for 10 
days,3 it has a significant therapeutic advantage over other antivi -
ral ophthalmic agents (eg, trifluridine, vidarabine, and idoxuridine)  
which must be administered 4 to 6 times daily for 2 to 3 weeks. 
Cidofovir decreases viral shedding in dogs experimentally infect-
ed with ocular canine herpesvirus-1 infections; however, it causes 
local irritation and toxicity. 3 Although the efficacy of cidofovir has 
not been evaluated in horses for treatment of keratitis associated 
with equine herpesvirus-2, it has demonstrated mild in vitro efficacy 
versus other equine alpha-herpesviruses.
Pharmacology/Actions
Cidofovir suppresses viral replication by inhibiting the synthesis of 
viral DNA. Cidofovir diphosphate, the active intracellular metabo -
lite, demonstrates much greater selectivity for viral, rather than hu -
man, DNA. Because cidofovir is incorporated into the growing DNA 
chain, it reduces the rate of viral DNA synthesis, thereby having a 
virustatic effect.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Cidofovir is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Do not use 
cidofovir in animals intended for breeding, as cidofovir has been 
shown to cause hypospermia and is mutagenic and teratogenic in 
humans. Following IV administration, cidofovir has caused death by 
irreversible nephrotoxicity4; do not use in animals with pre-existing 
renal impairment or concurrently with nephrotoxic drugs. Direct in-
traocular injection is contraindicated.4
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies cidofovir as a hazardous drug; personal protec -
tive equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals following topical 
administration include burning or stinging on application and na -
solacrimal occlusion in rabbits and humans following prolonged 
(weeks) treatment. Severe adverse effects reported in humans fol -
lowing IV administration include nephrotoxicity (after even a single 
IV dose), neutropenia, metabolic acidosis, and uveitis/ocular hypot-
ony. Although these reactions reported with IV administration have 
not been reported following ocular administration, nephrotoxicity 
is theoretically possible. Topical ocular administration of cidofovir 
to dogs has led to signs of irritation (eg, conjunctival pigmentation, 
blepharitis).3
Dosages
Feline herpesvirus-1 keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected 
eye(s) 2 times daily for 10 days5
Canine herpesvirus-1 ocular infections (extra-label): 1 drop to the 
affected eye(s) twice daily for 14 days3
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical resolution of signs related to herpesvirus ocular infec -
tions (eg, corneal ulceration, corneal vascularization, conjuncti -
vitis)
 ■ Consider baseline and periodic renal chemistry panels
Client Information
 ■ Humans should avoid direct contact with this drug. Wear gloves 
during administration and wash hands after each treatment is 
done.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Do not touch the dropper (or ointment) tip or 
allow it to touch your animal’s eye or any other surface to prevent 
contamination.
 ■ Keep cap tightly closed when this medicine is not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Do not use if the color changes or becomes cloudy or if there are 
particles in the solution.
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined 
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH). Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the use 
of personal protective equipment when handling this  medicine.
Storage/Stability
Store in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [35.6°F-46.4°F]) away from mois-
ture and sunlight; do not freeze.
The reported chemical stability of this solution is 180 days when 
stored in glass at 4°C (39.2°F), -20°C (-4°F), and -80°C (-112°F). 6 
Storage times should be determined by the results of individual ex -
tended stability and sterility testing or compendial standards.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Cidofovir should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any other drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Cidofovir is not approved for use as an ophthalmic dosage form, but 
a cidofovir 0.5% ophthalmic solution can be prepared by a qualified 
compounding pharmacist. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Ciprofloxacin Ophthalmic
(sip-roe-flox-a sin) Ciloxan®
Fluoroquinolone Antibiotic
For systemic use, refer to Ciprofloxacin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat bacterial conjunctivitis or keratitis
 ▶ Physically incompatible with many drugs; therefore, should 
not be directly mixed with other ophthalmic medications
 ▶ Crystalline drug precipitates may be noted in the superficial 
portion of corneal defects during use.
Uses/Indications
In veterinary patients, ciprofloxacin ophthalmic may be used for the 
treatment of bacterial conjunctivitis or keratitis caused by suscep -
tible strains of Staphylococcus spp, Streptococcus spp, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, Chlamydia spp, and Haemophilus spp.1  
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated cipro -
floxacin as a Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobial in 
human medicine.2 
Pharmacology/Actions
Ciprofloxacin is a bactericidal and concentration-dependent antibi-
otic, with susceptible bacteria cell death occurring within 20 to 30 
minutes of exposure. Ciprofloxacin has demonstrated a significant 
postantibiotic effect in both gram-negative and gram-positive bacte-
ria and is active in both the stationary and growth phases of bacterial 
replication. Its mechanism of action is not thoroughly understood, 
but it is believed to act by inhibiting bacterial DNA-gyrase (a type-
II topoisomerase), thereby preventing DNA supercoiling and DNA 
synthesis. 
Although ciprofloxacin is considered to have greater efficacy 
against gram-negative organisms as compared with gram-positive, 
studies involving ocular isolates obtained from dogs and horses with 

===== PDF_PAGE_1382 =====
Cromolyn Ophthalmic   1355
bacterial keratitis indicate good efficacy with minimal resistance 
against Streptococcus spp, Staphylococcus spp, and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa.3–6 However, more recent reports involving isolates from 
humans with ocular infections indicate lower susceptibility of Staph-
ylococcus spp to ciprofloxacin.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Ciprofloxacin is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it, other fluoroquinolones, or any component of 
the formulation. Ophthalmic preparations are for topical ophthalmic 
use only. They are not for injection subconjunctivally or into the an-
terior chamber of the eye. Fluoroquinolone-induced retinal toxicity 
in domestic cats has not been demonstrated with a topical formula-
tion of ciprofloxacin.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include blurred 
vision, tearing, eye pain, redness, itching, and a bad taste in the 
mouth.7 Crystalline drug precipitates may be observed in the super-
ficial portion of corneal defects during use; however, this effect did 
not  adversely affect clinical and visual outcomes in human clinical 
studies.7 The arthropathy that occurs in immature animals associat-
ed with oral administration of quinolones has not been noted follow-
ing topical ophthalmic administration.
Dosages
Conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop or ¼ – ½ inch strip to the affect-
ed eye(s) every 2 to 8 hours
Keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop or ¼ – ½ inch strip to the affected eye 
every 2 to 8 hours 
Monitoring
 ■ Corneal cytology and culture to evaluate for the persistence of 
bacteria
 ■ Evaluation for clinical signs suggestive of persistent infection
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Do not touch the dropper tip or allow it to touch 
your animal’s eye or any other surface to prevent contamination.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicine to your animal’s eye(s).
 ■ Crystals may appear on the surface of your animal’s eye during 
treatment. This change is not harmful and will go away once treat-
ment is complete.
 ■ Keep cap tightly closed when not in use. Store this medication in 
the refrigerator or at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [35.6°F-46.4°F]) or 
at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away from 
moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics interact with many other drugs, includ-
ing those containing cations (eg, iron, aluminum, magnesium, or 
calcium). Ciprofloxacin should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with 
any other drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Ciprofloxacin 0.3% Ophthalmic Solution (containing ciprofloxacin 
HCl 3.5 mg equivalent to 3 mg base; benzalkonium chloride 0.006%; 
sodium acetate; acetic acid; mannitol; edetate disodium; HCl and/or 
NaOH may be used to adjust pH to 4.5; purified water; osmolality is 
300 mOsm/kg), 2.5 mL, 5 mL, or 10 mL in sterile ophthalmic drop -
per bottles; Ciloxan®, generic; (Rx)
Ciprofloxacin 0.3% Ophthalmic Ointment (containing ciprofloxacin 
HCl 3.33 mg equivalent to 3 mg base; mineral oil; white petrolatum), 
in 3.5 g sterile ophthalmic ointment tubes; Ciloxan®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Cromolyn Ophthalmic
(kroh-mah-lin) 
Mast Cell Stabilizer
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for seasonal allergic conjunctivitis or atopic conjunctivitis
 ▶ Administer 2 to 6 times daily
 ▶ Mild transient stinging and burning may occur upon 
 application
Uses/Indications
Mast cell-stabilizing ophthalmic agents are used to control the clin -
ical signs of allergic and atopic conjunctivitis. Response to therapy 
(eg, decreased itching, tearing, redness, and discharge) is usually evi-
dent within a few days, but longer treatment for up to 6 weeks may be 
required. Once improvement has been established, therapy should 
be continued for as long as needed to sustain improvement. 1 If re -
quired, corticosteroids may be used concomitantly with cromolyn 
ophthalmic solution. Efficacy of cromolyn as treatment for conjunc-
tivitis in veterinary species has not been established.
Pharmacology/Actions
Cromolyn inhibits the degranulation of sensitized mast cells and 
blocks the release of histamine and slow-releasing substance of ana-
phylaxis from mast cells following antigen recognition. Cromolyn 
does not have intrinsic vasoconstrictor, antihistaminic, cyclooxygen-
ase inhibition, or other anti-inflammatory properties. Cromolyn is 
poorly absorbed when applied topically.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Cromolyn is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hyper-
sensitivity to cromolyn or any component of the formulation.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include a transient 
mild stinging and burning upon application.
Dosages
Allergic conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop to each eye 2 to 6 times 
daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolution of clinical signs associated with aller-
gic conjunctivitis
Client Information
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.

===== PDF_PAGE_1383 =====
1356    Cyclopentolate Ophthalmic
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying 
any other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use the medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at room temperature (15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]) 
away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Cromolyn ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Cromolyn Sodium 4% Ophthalmic Solution (containing cromolyn 
sodium 40 mg; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; edetate disodium 
0.1%; purified water; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH to 4 to 7), 
10 mL in sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Cyclopentolate Ophthalmic
(sye-kloe-pen-toe-late)  Cyclogyl® Cyclomydril®, Akpentolate®, 
Pentolair® 
Anticholinergic Cycloplegic/Mydriatic Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Primarily used as a diagnostic agent to facilitate mydriasis and 
cycloplegia
 ▶ Rapid and intense onset of mydriasis and cycloplegia in 15 to 
60 minutes; heavily pigmented irises may require an increased 
frequency of administration or stronger concentrations. May 
increase intraocular pressure (IOP); therefore, use cautiously in 
patients with glaucoma
 ▶ Higher concentrations (at least 1%) cause stinging on 
 application.
 ▶ Available as a combination product with phenylephrine (Cyc-
lomydril®) to facilitate mydriasis with less cycloplegia
Uses/Indications
Cyclopentolate is primarily used to induce rapid mydriasis and cy -
cloplegia to enable funduscopic examination and cycloplegic refrac-
tion to be performed. It is also available as a combination with phen-
ylephrine to accomplish greater mydriasis with lesser cycloplegia.
Pharmacology/Actions
Cyclopentolate blocks the responses of the sphincter muscle of the iris 
and the accommodative muscle of the ciliary body to cholinergic stimu-
lation, resulting in pupillary dilation (mydriasis) and paralysis of accom-
modation (cycloplegia).1 Cyclopentolate acts rapidly, producing maxi-
mal dilation in less than 1 hour in dogs2 and cats,3 and within 12 hours 
in horses,4,5 with a total duration of mydriasis from 2 to 4 days. Complete 
recovery of accommodation usually takes 6 to 24 hours. Heavily pig-
mented irises may require an increased frequency of administration or 
stronger concentrations than lightly pigmented irises.1 When cyclopen-
tolate is combined with phenylephrine (an adrenergic drug), synergistic 
mydriasis occurs, with less accompanying cycloplegia due to the lower 
concentration of cyclopentolate in the combination product.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Cyclopentolate is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Although 
a single drop of cyclopentolate did not elevate intraocular pressure 
(IOP) in normal dogs,2 cyclopentolate may cause an increase in IOP 
and therefore should be used cautiously in patients with glaucoma. 
Administration to normal cats3 and horses4 has been associated with 
increased IOP in studies; however, another study documented no ef-
fect on IOP in normal horses.5 Reduction in STT has been reported 
in cats.3
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include burning and 
stinging on application.1 Increased intraocular pressure (IOP), pho-
tophobia, blurred vision, irritation, hyperemia, conjunctivitis, bleph-
aroconjunctivitis, punctate keratitis, and synechiae have also been 
reported.1 Burning and stinging are usually associated with higher 
concentrations (at least 1% ). CNS and cardiovascular disturbances 
are often noted in human pediatric patients and may occur when 
used in smaller animals. 
Dosages
Mydriasis and cycloplegia (extra-label): 1 drop to the desired eye(s) 
followed by a second drop 5 minutes later if necessary. NOTE: Use of 
a single drop may avoid adverse systemic effects in smaller animals. 
Administer this medicine 40 to 50 minutes prior to a diagnostic pro-
cedure to ensure full effects. 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: desired mydriasis and cycloplegia achieved; full 
recovery in 24 hours
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is rarely used at home.
 ■ This medicine may make your animal sensitive to light for ≈24 
hours after administration. Keep your animal out of bright sun -
light until pupils return to normal size.
 ■ Wash your hands after use to prevent accidental contact with eyes 
(causes pupil dilation).
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying 
any other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C 
[68°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Cyclopentolate ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed direct-
ly with any other ophthalmic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Cyclopentolate HCl Ophthalmic Solution 0.5% (containing cy -
clopentolate HCl 0.5%; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; boric acid; 
edetate disodium; sodium carbonate and/or HCl to adjust pH to be-
tween 3 and 5.5; purified water), 15 mL in sterile ophthalmic drop -
per bottles; Cyclogyl®, generic; (Rx)
Cyclopentolate HCl Ophthalmic Solution 1% (containing cyclopen-
tolate HCl 1%; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; boric acid; edetate di-
sodium; sodium carbonate and/or HCl to adjust pH to between 3 

===== PDF_PAGE_1384 =====
Cyclosporine Ophthalmic   1357
and 5.5; purified water), 2 mL, 5 mL, or 15 mL in sterile ophthalmic 
dropper bottles; Cyclogyl®, Pentolair®, Akpentolate®; (Rx)
Cyclopentolate HCl Ophthalmic Solution 2% (containing cyclopen-
tolate HCl 2%; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; boric acid; edetate di-
sodium; sodium carbonate and/or HCl to adjust pH to between 3 
and 5.5; purified water), 2 mL, 5 mL, or 15 mL in sterile ophthalmic 
dropper bottles; Cyclogyl®; (Rx)
Human-Labeled Combination Products:
Cyclopentolate HCl 0.2% and Phenylephrine HCl 1% Ophthalmic 
Solution (containing cyclopentolate HCl 0.2%; phenylephrine HCl 
1%; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; edetate disodium; boric acid; 
HCl and/or sodium carbonate to adjust pH; purified water), 2 mL or 
5 mL in sterile ophthalmic dropper bottles; Cyclomydril®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Cyclosporine Ophthalmic
(sye-klo-spore-in)  Cequa®, Ciclosporin, Cyclosporin A, 
 Optimmune®, Restasis® 
Immunosuppressive Agent
See also Cyclosporine (Systemic)
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Approved as an ophthalmic ointment for the treatment of 
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) in dogs and for other ocular 
surface inflammatory diseases in other species
 ▶ Poor intraocular penetration requires alternate routes of ad-
ministration to manage intraocular inflammatory diseases
 ▶ Animals that do not respond to the approved (0.2%) ophthal-
mic ointment may benefit from higher concentrations (1% 
to 2%) of cyclosporine ophthalmic solution, which must be 
compounded.
 ▶ Weeks of therapy may be required to cause an increase of tear 
production; however, discontinuation of therapy can quickly 
(within days) result in loss of normal tear production. 
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies cyclosporine as a hazardous drug; use ap-
propriate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Topical ophthalmic cyclosporine is approved for the treatment of 
keratoconjunctivitis (KCS) in dogs; it may also be used to treat oth -
er ocular surface inflammatory conditions, such as chronic super -
ficial keratitis (CSK; pannus), immune-mediated keratitis (IMMK), 
eosinophilic keratitis, pigmentary keratitis, and postoperative ker -
atitis in dogs and other species. 1,2 Topical cyclosporine 1.5% has 
demonstrated efficacy for the management of eosinophilic keratitis 
in cats.3 Sustained-released cyclosporine implants have been devel -
oped for suprachoroidal and episcleral implantation; the former is 
for the treatment of equine recurrent uveitis (ERU), and the latter for 
IMMK in horses and KCS in dogs.4-9
Pharmacology/Actions
Cyclosporine, a calcineurin inhibitor, is an immunosuppressive agent 
that focuses on cell-mediated immune responses, with some humor-
al immunosuppressive action. Cyclosporine binds to T-cell cyclo -
philin and blocks calcineurin-mediated T-cell activation. T-helper 
lymphocytes are the primary target, but T-suppressor cells are also 
affected. Cyclosporine can also inhibit cytokine production and re -
lease (including IL-2 and interferon-gamma in dogs10-12 and IL-3, IL-
4, and tissue necrosis factor-alpha in humans), thereby affecting the 
function of eosinophils, mast cells, granulocytes, and macrophages. 
The immunosuppressive effects make cyclosporine useful when it 
is administered locally in animals with ocular diseases that are sus -
pected to be immune-mediated, such as keratoconjunctivitis (KCS) 
and chronic superficial keratitis (CSK). Cyclosporine increases 
lymphocyte apoptosis and decreases corneal epithelial apoptosis in 
dogs with KCS,13 thus protecting the ocular surface. However, oth -
er mechanisms likely improve tear production, as tear production is 
increased by topical administration of cyclosporin in dogs without 
KCS. For this reason, cyclosporine is thought to have direct stimu -
latory effects on the lacrimal gland, possibly by altering neurotrans-
mitter release.14 After initiation of cyclosporine therapy, effective tear 
production takes several weeks; however, cessation of therapy results 
in the return of clinical signs in a matter of days. 1 Clinical improve-
ment in cases of KCS is not necessarily dependent on an increase in 
aqueous tear production as measured by the Schirmer tear test (STT) 
because other components of the tear film that are not assessed by the 
STT may also improve with topical cyclosporine administration.15 
Because of the frequent need for the chronic daily administra -
tion of topical cyclosporine, the sustained-release cyclosporine de -
vices are surgically placed in the episcleral space in horses with im -
mune-mediated keratitis (IMMK). The duration of drug release is 
≈18 months.4 Due to limited penetration to the intraocular environ-
ment, the sustained-release cyclosporine disc devices are surgically 
implanted suprachoroidally in horses with equine recurrent uveitis 
(ERU). The duration of drug release is ≈2 to 3 years.7 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Cyclosporine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Use in the 
presence of ocular viral or fungal infections should be undertaken 
with caution. Cyclosporine is available as an ophthalmic solution for 
humans (0.05% to 0.09%); however, these formulations are not effec-
tive in controlling keratoconjunctivitis (KCS) in dogs. More concen-
trated solutions of cyclosporine ophthalmic (1% to 2%) may be pre-
pared (compounded) by qualified compounding pharmacists. It is 
not recommended to administer cyclosporine ophthalmic ointment 
or solutions compounded in oil via subpalpebral lavage catheter be-
cause of the likely irreversible obstruction of the catheter, necessitat-
ing replacement.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies cyclosporine as a hazardous drug; personal pro -
tective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include local irrita -
tion, periocular erythema, lid spasm, rubbing of the eye, alopecia, 
and epiphora. Many adverse effects are believed to be induced by the 
vehicle preparation used in compounded formulations rather than 
by cyclosporine itself. In dogs with herpesvirus keratitis, the admin-
istration of topical ophthalmic cyclosporine has not been shown to 
induce recrudescence of clinical signs.
Dosages
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca and chronic superficial keratitis in 
dogs (label dosage; FDA-approved): ¼ inch strip to the affected 
eye(s) every 12 hours17
Inflammatory ocular surface diseases (extra-label):
a. Ointment: ¼ – ½ inch strip to the affected eye(s) every 12 
hours 
b. Cyclosporine solutions (1% to 2%): 1 drop to the affected 
eye(s) every 12 hours
Immune-mediated keratitis (extra-label): Surgical implantation of a 
sustained-release device created for episcleral implantation should be 

===== PDF_PAGE_1385 =====
1358    Demecarium Ophthalmic
performed by a board-certified veterinary ophthalmologist. The implant 
contains cyclosporine for continued release over ≈12 to 18 months.
Equine recurrent uveitis (ERU) (extra-label): Surgical implantation 
of a sustained-release device created for suprachoroidal implantation 
should be performed by a board-certified veterinary ophthalmolo -
gist. The implant contains cyclosporine for continued release over 
≈2 to 3 years.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical effect for keratoconjunctivitis (KCS). Evaluate Schirmer 
tear test, as well as a reduction in mucoid ocular discharge and 
conjunctival hyperemia. 
 ■ Clinical effect for ocular surface inflammatory conditions (topical 
administration; episcleral device). Evaluate for lack of progression 
(and possibly regression) of chronic inflammatory changes, such 
as corneal pigmentation, vascularization, and fibrosis.
 ■ Clinical effect for equine recurrent uveitis (ERU; suprachoroidal 
device): Evaluate markers of intraocular inflammation (eg, flare, 
hypopyon, ocular hypotony, miosis, vitreal debris) and frequency 
of recurrence.
Client Information
 ■ Make sure you understand how to give this medication to your an-
imal. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 to 10 minutes after applying this medicine before apply-
ing any other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store cyclosporine ointment in the refrigerator or at room tem -
perature away from moisture and sunlight. Handle and squeeze 
the tube gently so the metal will not crack and leak.
 ■ Store cyclosporine solutions at room temperature (do not refrig-
erate or freeze). 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color of the solution changes, if it 
becomes cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution.
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined 
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH). Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the use 
of personal protective equipment when handling this  medicine.
Storage/Stability
Store the commercially available ophthalmic ointment in the refrig-
erator (2°C-8°C [35.6°F-46.4°F]) or at controlled room temperature 
(20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight. Do not 
refrigerate or freeze compounded cyclosporine solutions. 
The long-term stability of a 1% solution in corn oil determined by 
USP is 180 days. Storage times should be determined by the results 
of individual extended stability and sterility testing or compendial 
standards.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Cyclosporine should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any other 
drugs. 
Do not administer cyclosporine ophthalmic ointment or solu -
tions compounded in oil in a subpalpebral lavage catheter, because 
of the likely irreversible obstruction of the catheter.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Cyclosporine 0.2% Ophthalmic Ointment (containing cyclosporine 
2 mg/g, USP; petrolatum, USP; corn oil, NF; petrolatum and lanolin 
alcohol), in a 3.5 g ophthalmic ointment tube; Optimmune®; (Rx). 
Approved for use in dogs.
Cyclosporine 1% to 2% Ophthalmic Solutions in fixed oils may be 
compounded by qualified compounding pharmacists. 
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Cyclosporine 0.05% Ophthalmic Emulsion (containing cyclosporine 
0.05%; glycerin; castor oil; polysorbate 80; carbomer copolymer type 
A; purified water; NaOH to adjust pH), 30 or 60 sterile, single-use 
LDPE vials (0.4 mL each), or 5.5 mL sterile multi-dose ophthalmic 
dropper; Restasis®; (Rx). NOTE: This solution is not effective in con-
trolling keratoconjunctivitis (KCS) in dogs.
Cyclosporine 0.09% Ophthalmic Solution (containing cyclosporine 
0.09%; polyoxyl 40 hydrogenated castor oil; octoxynol-40; sodium 
phosphate, monobasic, dihydrate; sodium phosphate, dibasic, anhy-
drous; sodium chloride; povidone K90; hydrochloric acid; sodium 
hydroxide; water), in 6 pouches with 10 single-use vials (0.25 mL 
each) per pouch; Cequa®; (Rx). NOTE: This solution is not effective 
in controlling KCS in dogs.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Demecarium Ophthalmic
(deh-meh-kar-ee-um) 
Anticholinesterase Ocular Antihypertensive
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used primarily for preventive management of glaucoma in 
the unaffected eye of canine patients diagnosed with primary 
glaucoma in the fellow eye
 ▶ Product must be compounded as it is no longer commercially 
available.
 ▶ Used 1 to 2 times daily
Uses/Indications
Demecarium ophthalmic is used for preventive management of 
glaucoma in the contralateral eye of canine patients diagnosed with 
primary glaucoma in the fellow eye. 1,2 Demecarium’s therapeutic 
efficacy for managing active glaucoma is minimal relative to other 
commercially available medications.
Pharmacology/Actions
Demecarium is an anticholinesterase that prolongs the effect of ace-
tylcholine by inactivating the cholinesterases that break down ace -
tylcholine, which has been released at the neuroeffector junction of 
parasympathetic postganglionic nerves. Demecarium inactivates 
both pseudocholinesterase and acetylcholinesterase. It causes con -
striction of the iris sphincter muscle (miosis) and the ciliary body 
muscle. These actions facilitate the outflow of aqueous humor, lead-
ing to a reduction in intraocular pressure (IOP). Demecarium is an 
organophosphate and may cause severe and even fatal dose-related 
toxicity associated with a decrease in systemic acetylcholinesterase 
levels, especially in cats.3 See Adverse Effects.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Demecarium is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Deme -
carium is contraindicated in pregnant animals; caregivers that are 
pregnant or intend to become pregnant should be warned to avoid 
contact with this medication.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include stinging, 
burning, and ocular irritation. Demecarium can cause severe and 
even fatal dose-related systemic toxicity, especially in cats. 3 Signs of 
systemic toxicity include vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, lethargy, and 
weakness. Short-term (8 days) induction of aqueous humor flare oc-
curs following the administration of demecarium in normal dogs.4 

===== PDF_PAGE_1386 =====
Dexamethasone Ophthalmic    1359
Dosages
Prophylaxis of glaucoma in the normal eye (extra-label): 1 drop to 
the nonglaucomatous eye 1 to 2 times daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy; maintenance of normal intraocular pressure 
(IOP) in the contralateral eye of dogs with unilateral glaucoma
 ■ Monitor for signs of systemic toxicity (vomiting, anorexia, diar -
rhea, lethargy, and weakness)
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying 
any other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this product as directed on the product labeling, away from 
moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product as directed on the product labeling away from 
moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Demecarium ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Demecarium bromide is no longer commercially available but may 
be prepared (compounded) as a 0.125% or 0.25% ophthalmic solu -
tion by qualified compounding pharmacists.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Dexamethasone Ophthalmic
(decks-uh-meth-uh-sown)  Maxidex®, Dexasporin®, Maxitrol®, 
Tobradex®
Corticosteroid
For systemic use, refer to Dexamethasone
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Topical corticosteroid used to treat ocular surface and intraoc-
ular inflammatory conditions
 ▶ May be combined with antibiotics (eg, neomycin, polymyxin 
B) 
 ▶ Contraindications include a hypersensitivity to dexameth-
asone; an existing or suspected bacterial, viral, or fungal 
ocular infection; and in the presence of a corneal abrasion or 
ulceration.
Uses/Indications
Dexamethasone ophthalmic can be used to treat inflammation follow-
ing ocular injury or cataract surgery or to treat generalized inflamma-
tory conditions of the anterior segment (eg, conjunctivitis, keratitis, 
anterior uveitis). Evaluation of relative efficacy of dexamethasone oph-
thalmic in veterinary patients has not been performed. 
Dexamethasone is available in many combinations with antimi -
crobial agents for topical ophthalmic use. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Corticosteroids have broad immunomodulatory and anti-inflam -
matory actions, which are mediated via direct effects on gene ex -
pression, as well as by nongenomic effects on cell membranes and 
receptors. Ultimately, corticosteroids decrease pro-inflammatory 
gene transcription, production of pro-inflammatory prostaglandins 
and leukotrienes, B- and T-cell number and function, cell-medi -
ated immunity, and humoral immunity. 1 Specific mechanisms in -
volved in controlling ocular inflammatory conditions are not de -
finitively known. Dexamethasone is a potent base steroid (relative 
glucocorticoid potency of 30 versus 4 for prednisolone and 1 for 
hydrocortisone). Greater intraocular penetration, and therefore po-
tential clinical efficacy in cases of anterior uveitis, is achieved with 
dexamethasone alcohol formulations relative to sodium phosphate 
formulations; however, intraocular penetration of dexamethasone 
alcohol and sodium phosphate preparations is less than that of pred-
nisolone acetate suspensions. 
Following the topical administration of dexamethasone sodium 
phosphate, measurable concentrations of dexamethasone are present 
in the anterior segment of normal cat and dog eyes.2, 3 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Dexamethasone is contraindicated in patients that have a histo -
ry of hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. 
Due to inhibition of epithelial wound healing and potentiation of 
infection, dexamethasone ophthalmic is also contraindicated when 
corneal ulceration is suspected or present or in the presence of cor -
neal infection (bacterial, fungal, or viral). 4 Topical administration 
of glucocorticoids may produce systemic effects. For more, refer to 
Glucocorticoid Agents, General Information . Use dexamethasone 
ophthalmic with caution in patients with endocrine diseases (eg, 
diabetes mellitus, acromegaly), infectious diseases, chronic kidney 
disease, congestive heart failure, systemic hypertension, or gastric 
ulceration. When use of dexamethasone ophthalmic is necessary 
to treat a patient with these conditions, the minimal effective dose 
should be administered for the shortest possible time.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include development of cataracts 
(via altered glucose or lenticular metabolic effects), increased intra -
ocular pressure (IOP; via activation of glucocorticoid receptors in the 
trabecular meshwork), infection (via immunosuppression), decreased 
wound healing (via increased collagenolytic activity), mydriasis, and 
calcific keratopathy. In some animals, IOP may increase with chronic 
use; however, most reports suggest the change is reversible when the 
treatment is discontinued.5, 6 Cats with glaucoma have demonstrated 
a potentially clinically significant increase in IOP with administration 
of topical dexamethasone.7 Systemic effects with topical ophthalmic 
administration are rare but include hepatopathy, suppression of en-
dogenous glucocorticoid production, and focal alopecia. Concurrent 
use of systemic steroids increases the risk for these adverse effects. 
Dosages
Conjunctivitis, keratitis, anterior uveitis (extra-label): 1 drop or ¼ 
inch strip to the affected eye(s) as frequently as every 2 hours until 
clinical improvement occurs, then gradually (over days to weeks) de-
crease the frequency of administration, provided clinical improve -
ment is maintained.
Post-cataract removal (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) ev-
ery 8 to 12 hours
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Resolution or development of signs of inflammation
 ■ Intraocular pressure (IOP; especially in cats) and ocular surface 

===== PDF_PAGE_1387 =====
1360    Diclofenac Ophthalmic
integrity (eg, fluorescein stain) as needed based on clinical 
 presentation
 ■ Blood or urine glucose changes based on development of clinical 
signs (eg, polyuria, polydipsia) in diabetic animals
Client Information
 ■ This medicine can be given for various lengths of time. Be sure 
you understand how often and for how long your animal should 
be given this medicine.
 ■ Shake suspensions well before using. 
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian as soon as possible if your animal’s eye 
condition worsens or does not improve while using this medicine.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal’s eye condi-
tion while taking this medicine. Do not miss these important fol-
low-up visits.
 ■ Store this medicine as directed on the product label. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, becomes cloudy, or 
if there are visible particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Storage recommendations can vary; follow storage requirements list-
ed on packaging. Most commonly, this product is recommended to 
be stored at controlled room temperature 68°F to 77°F [20°C-25°C]) 
away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Dexamethasone ophthalmic solutions should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Dexamethasone Sodium Phosphate 0.1% Ophthalmic Suspension 
(containing dexamethasone 0.1%; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; 
hypromellose 0.5%; NaCl; dibasic sodium phosphate; polysorbate 
80; edetate disodium; citric acid and/or NaOH to adjust pH; purified 
water), 5 mL or 15 mL in sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; Maxi-
dex®; generic; (Rx)
Dexamethasone Sodium Phosphate 0.1% Ophthalmic Solution (con-
taining dexamethasone 0.1%; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; hypro-
mellose 0.5%; NaCl; dibasic sodium phosphate; polysorbate 80; ede-
tate disodium; citric acid and/or NaOH to adjust pH; purified water), 
5 mL or 15 mL sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; generic; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED COMBINATION PRODUCTS:
Neomycin and Polymyxin B Sulfates and Dexamethasone Ophthal-
mic Suspension (containing neomycin sulfate equivalent to neomy-
cin 3.5 mg, polymyxin B sulfate 10,000 units, dexamethasone 0.1%, 
benzalkonium chloride 0.004%, hypromellose 2910 0.5%, sodium 
chloride, polysorbate 20, HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH, purified 
water), in a 5 mL sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; Maxitrol®, Dex-
asporin®; (Rx) 
Neomycin and Polymyxin B Sulfates and Dexamethasone Ophthal-
mic ointment (containing neomycin sulfate equivalent to neomy -
cin 3.5 mg, polymyxin B sulfate 10,000 units, dexamethasone 0.1%, 
methylparaben 0.05%, propylparaben 0.01%, white petrolatum, 
anhydrous liquid lanolin), in a sterile 3.5 g tube; Maxitrol®, generic; 
(Rx)
Tobramycin and Dexamethasone Ophthalmic Ointment (containing 
tobramycin 0.3%, dexamethasone 0.1%, chlorobutanol 0.5% , miner-
al oil, white petrolatum), in a sterile 3.5 g tube; Tobradex®; (Rx)
Tobramycin and Dexamethasone Ophthalmic Suspension (contain-
ing tobramycin 0.3%, dexamethasone 0.1%, benzalkonium chloride 
0.01%, tyloxapol, edetate disodium, NaCl, hydroxyethyl cellulose, 
sodium sulfate, sulfuric acid and/or NaOH to adjust pH, purified 
water), in a sterile 2.5 mL ophthalmic dropper; Tobradex®, generic; 
(Rx)
Tobramycin and Dexamethasone Ophthalmic Suspension (contain-
ing tobramycin 0.3%, dexamethasone 0.05%, xanthan gum, tyloxa -
pol, disodium edetate, NaCl, propylene glycol, sodium sulfate, ben -
zalkonium chloride 0.01%, NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH, purified 
water), in a sterile 5 mL ophthalmic dropper; Tobradex®; (Rx) 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Diclofenac Ophthalmic
(dye-kloe-fen-ak)  Voltaren®
Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drug (NSAID)
For topical cream, refer to Diclofenac, Topical
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to control anterior segment inflammation 
 ▶ May delay ocular wound healing and increase risk for intraoc-
ular bleeding
 ▶ Sulfite preservatives in diclofenac may trigger asthma attacks 
in susceptible patients.
Uses/Indications
Diclofenac ophthalmic is indicated for controlling anterior segment 
inflammation (eg, conjunctivitis, keratitis, anterior uveitis), induc -
ing mydriasis during cataract-removal surgery, and for providing 
analgesia following surgical removal of cataracts. In dogs and cats, 
diclofenac significantly reduces clinical signs associated with exper-
imentally induced intraocular inflammation 1,2; however, it has not 
demonstrated reliable reduction in corneal sensitivity in normal 
dogs.3,4  
Pharmacology/Actions
Diclofenac is an NSAID that blocks prostaglandin synthesis by in -
hibiting cyclooxygenase 1 and 2. Prostaglandins mediate many of the 
adverse effects of intraocular inflammation, including disruption of 
the blood-aqueous barrier, vasodilation, increased vascular permea-
bility, leukocytosis, and increased intraocular pressure (IOP). Block-
ing prostaglandin production therefore minimizes the adverse short- 
and long-term effects of intraocular in flammation. Prostaglandins 
also appear to play a role in the miotic response produced during 
ocular surgery by constricting the iris sphincter independently of 
cholinergic mechanisms. Thus, diclofenac inhibits miosis induced 
during cataract surgery.4 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Diclofenac is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. The po -
tential for cross-sensitivity to acetylsalicylic acid, phenylacetic acid 
derivatives, and other NSAIDs exists.5 Topical NSAIDs may result in 
corneal epithelial breakdown and corneal thinning, erosion, or ul -
ceration, which could cause delayed corneal wound healing; concur-
rent use of topical NSAIDs and topical corticosteroids may further 
delay healing and increase the potential for development of adverse 
effects.5 Due to interference with thrombocyte aggregation, oph -
thalmic NSAIDs may cause increased bleeding of ocular tissues (eg, 
hyphema) in conjunction with ocular surgery. It is recommended 

===== PDF_PAGE_1388 =====
Difluprednate Ophthalmic    1361
that diclofenac ophthalmic solution be used with caution in patients 
with known bleeding tendencies (eg, severe liver disease) or in those 
receiving anticoagulant medications (eg, heparins, rivaroxaban), 
which may prolong bleeding time.5 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include transient ocu-
lar burning or stinging on administration.5 Superficial punctate ker-
atitis has been reported with long-term use. NSAIDs may also cause 
direct cellular damage, causing delayed healing and/or deterioration 
of existing corneal wounds. Although unlikely, systemic adverse ef -
fects may occur with the use of topical NSAIDs, including increased 
risk for gastric ulceration, decreased platelet aggregation, worsening 
of asthma and cardiac disease, and renal toxicity. Concurrent use of 
systemic NSAIDs and corticosteroids increases the risk for systemic 
adverse effects. The increased bleeding tendency of ocular tissues in 
conjunction with ocular surgery has also been reported. A comparison 
of the anti-inflammatory effects of topically administered diclofenac 
and prednisolone acetate in dogs with cataracts and well-regulated 
diabetes did not detect differences in measured parameters indica -
tive of diabetes control (eg, fructosamine, body weight), although the 
authors concluded more research is warranted.6 Although diclofenac 
administration was not associated with an elevation in intraocular 
pressure (IOP) in dogs with normal eyes, 7 it did result in increased 
IOP in dogs with experimentally induced uveitis.8 
Dosages
Postoperative cataract surgery (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected 
eye(s) every 6 hours throughout the first 2 weeks of the postoperative 
period
Anterior segment inflammation (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected 
eye(s) every 6 to 12 hours
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy (eg, decreased or absent anterior segment inflam-
mation) 
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, delayed wound healing) 
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if the solution be -
comes cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution.
 ■ Diclofenac ophthalmic may cause burning or stinging on admin-
istration. It may also increase the risk for bleeding and may slow 
down healing in the eye.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed on the medicine when 
it is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is tak-
ing this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (68°F to 77°F 
[20°C-25°C]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Diclofenac ophthalmic solutions should not be mixed directly with 
any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Diclofenac Sodium 0.1% Ophthalmic Solution (containing 1 mg di-
clofenac sodium; polyoxyl 35 castor oil; boric acid; tromethamine; 
sorbic acid (2 mg/mL); edetate disodium (1 mg/mL); purified water), 
in a 5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Voltaren®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Difluprednate Ophthalmic
(dye-floo-pred-nate) Durezol®
Corticosteroid
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for treatment of anterior segment inflammatory 
 conditions
 ▶ Exerts clinical effect equal to that of prednisolone acetate
 ▶ Do not use in patients with an existing or suspected bacterial, 
viral, or fungal ocular infection or in the presence of corneal 
ulceration
Uses/Indications
Difluprednate ophthalmic can be used to treat inflammation follow-
ing ocular injury or cataract surgery or to treat generalized inflam -
matory conditions of the anterior segment (eg, conjunctivitis, kerati-
tis, anterior uveitis). It has been shown to exert comparable efficacy 
to prednisolone acetate in humans1 and in dogs with experimentally 
induced anterior chamber inflammation.2 
Pharmacology/Actions
Corticosteroids have broad immunomodulatory and anti-inflam -
matory actions, which are mediated via direct effects on gene ex -
pression, as well as by nongenomic effects on cell membranes and 
receptors. Ultimately, corticosteroids decrease proinflammatory 
gene transcription, production of proinflammatory prostaglandins 
and leukotrienes, B- and T-cell number and function, cell-mediated 
immunity, and humoral immunity.3 Specific mechanisms involved in 
regulating ocular inflammation are not known. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Difluprednate is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Due to 
inhibition of epithelial wound healing and potentiation of infection, 
difluprednate ophthalmic is contraindicated when corneal ulcer -
ation is suspected or present or in the presence of corneal infection 
(bacterial, fungal, or viral),4 infectious diseases, chronic renal failure, 
congestive heart failure, systemic hypertension, or gastric ulceration. 
When use of difluprednate is necessary in these conditions, the min-
imal effective dose should be administered for the shortest possible 
time.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include development of cata -
racts (via altered glucose or lenticular metabolic effects), increased 
intraocular pressure (IOP; via activation of glucocorticoid receptors 
in the trabecular meshwork), infection (via immunosuppression), 
decreased wound healing (via increased collagenolytic activity), 
mydriasis, and calcific keratopathy. Increased IOP may occur in 
some animals with long-term use of difluprednate; however, most 
reports suggest the change is reversible. 5,6 Systemic effects are rare 
but include hepatopathy, suppression of endogenous glucocorticoid 
production, and focal alopecia. Concurrent use of systemic steroids 
increases the risk for these adverse effects.
Dosages
Conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop in affected eye(s) every 4 to 8 
hours, then gradually decrease the dose over days to weeks, provided 

===== PDF_PAGE_1389 =====
1362    Dorzolamide Ophthalmic
clinical improvement is maintained
Keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop in affected eye(s) every 4 to 8 hours, 
then gradually decrease the dose over days to weeks, provided clini-
cal improvement is maintained
Anterior uveitis (extra-label): 1 drop in affected eye(s) 4 times daily 
for 14 days, then gradually decrease the dose over days to weeks, 
provided clinical improvement is maintained
Post-cataract removal (extra-label): 1 drop in the surgical eye 4 
times daily, beginning 24 hours after surgery and continuing 2 weeks 
postoperative, then decrease to 2 times daily for 1 week, then contin-
ue to taper dosage based on clinical response
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Resolution or development of signs of inflammation
 ■ Intraocular pressure (IOP; especially in cats) and ocular sur -
face integrity (eg, fluorescein stain) as needed based on clinical 
 presentation
 ■ Blood or urine glucose changes based on development of clinical 
signs (eg, polyuria, polydipsia) in diabetic animals
Client Information
 ■ This medicine can be given for various lengths of time. Be sure 
you understand how often and for how long your animal should 
be given this medicine.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian as soon as possible if your animal’s eye 
condition worsens or does not improve while using this medicine.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal’s eye condi-
tion while taking this medicine. Do not miss these important fol-
low-up visits.
 ■ Store this medicine as directed on the product label. Do not freeze.
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are visible particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C 
[68°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Difluprednate ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Difluprednate 0.05% Ophthalmic Emulsion (containing diflupred -
nate 0.05%; sorbic acid 0.1%; boric acid; castor oil; glycerin; polysor-
bate 80; water for injection; sodium acetate; sodium EDTA; NaOH 
to adjust the pH to 5.2 to 5.8, with tonicity of 304 – 411 mOsm/kg), 
in 5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Durezol®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Dorzolamide Ophthalmic
(dor-zoe-la-mide) Trusopt®, Cosopt®, Cosopt® PF
Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitor Anti-Glaucoma Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Decreases intraocular pressure (IOP) by reducing the produc-
tion of aqueous humor
 ▶ Three-times-daily dosing recommended over twice-daily 
dosing
 ▶ More stinging on application compared with brinzolamide, 
due to more acidic pH of dorzolamide
 ▶ Sulfonamide derivative; caregivers with sulfa allergies should 
avoid direct contact with the medicine.
 ▶ Available as a single agent or in combination with timolol 
maleate
Uses/Indications
Dorzolamide ophthalmic (alone or in combination with timolol) is 
used to decrease intraocular pressure (IOP) in patients with glauco-
ma and ocular hypertension. In dogs with and without glaucoma, 
dorzolamide leads to a significant IOP reduction, which is more con-
sistent when it is dosed 3 times daily versus 2 times daily. 1,2 When 
dorzolamide ophthalmic is administered in combination with a be -
ta-blocker, the IOP-lowering effects are additive.3,4 Reduced IOP also 
occurs in normal cats and horses, 5 and similar to dogs, improved 
efficacy may result when dorzolamide is administered in combina -
tion with timolol in horses. 6,7 Efficacy of prophylactic dorzolamide 
administration for preventing manifestation of primary glaucoma in 
unaffected eyes of dogs with contralateral primary glaucoma has not 
been demonstrated.8 
Pharmacology/Actions
Carbonic anhydrase (CA) is an enzyme found in many body tissues, 
including the eye. CA inhibitors reduce the formation of hydrogen 
and bicarbonate ions from carbon dioxide and water by noncompet-
itive, reversible inhibition of the enzyme CA, thereby reducing the 
availability of these ions for active transport into secretions. 9 In hu-
mans, CA exists as multiple isoenzymes, with CA-II being the most 
relevant to glaucoma management. Inhibition of CA in the ciliary 
processes of the eye decreases aqueous humor secretion, presumably 
by slowing the formation of bicarbonate ions with subsequent re -
duction in sodium and fluid transport, which results in a decrease in 
intraocular pressure (IOP).9 Dorzolamide equilibrates between acid-
ic and basic forms, allowing for both lipid and water solubility and 
greater corneal and scleral penetration. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Dorzolamide is contraindicated in patients that have a history 
of hypersensitivity to it or sulfonamides or any component of the 
 formulation. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include burning and 
stinging upon application (due to low pH), superficial punctate ker-
atitis, local hypersensitivity reactions, and corneal edema. Systemic 
adverse effects are not usually observed with the topical application; 
however, renal tubular acidosis and hypokalemia have been reported 
in a cat due to topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitor  (CAI) adminis-
tration.10 CAIs, including dorzolamide, have been implicated in the 
development of significant ulcerative and nonulcerative keratitis fol-
lowing long-term administration.11 
Dosages
Glaucoma (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) or 0.1 mL in the 
subpalpebral lavage (SPL) catheter every 8 to 12 hours

===== PDF_PAGE_1390 =====
Edetate Disodium Ophthalmic    1363
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Confirm maintenance of intraocular pressure (IOP) within the 
normal range for the species being treated
 ■ Monitor for corneal edema
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store at room temperature away from moisture and sunlight. Do 
not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C 
[68°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Dorzolamide ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Dorzolamide HCl 2% Ophthalmic Solution (containing dorzol -
amide HCl 22.3 mg equivalent to 20 mg dorzolamide; benzalkonium 
chloride 0.0075%; hydroxyethyl cellulose; mannitol; sodium citrate 
dehydrate; NaOH to adjust pH; water for injection), in 5 mL and 
10 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; Trusopt®, generic; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED COMBINATION PRODUCTS:
Dorzolamide HCl 2% and Timolol maleate 0.5% Ophthalmic Solu -
tion (containing dorzolamide HCl equivalent to 20 mg dorzolamide; 
timolol maleate 6.8 mg equivalent to 5 mg timolol; benzalkonium 
chloride 0.0075%; sodium citrate; hydroxyethyl cellulose; NaOH; 
mannitol; water for injection, with a pH of 5.65 and an osmolality of 
242 – 323 mOsm/kg), in sterile 10 mL ophthalmic dispenser bottles. 
Cosopt®, generic; (Rx) 
Dorzolamide HCl 2% and Timolol maleate 0.5% Ophthalmic Solu -
tion, preservative-free (containing 22.3 mg dorzolamide HCl equiv-
alent to 20 mg dorzolamide; 6.8 mg timolol maleate equivalent to 
5  mg timolol; hydroxyethyl cellulose; mannitol; sodium citrate; 
NaOH to adjust pH; water for injection), in 15 sterile single-use con-
tainers, 0.2 mL per container; Cosopt® PF; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Edetate Disodium Ophthalmic
Sodium EDTA
(ed-uh-tayt dye-so-dee-um)
Chelating Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for dissolution of corneal calcium deposits
 ▶ Also used to decrease corneal digestion due to collagenase 
activity in infected ulcers
 ▶ Do not mix with calcium-containing drugs
 ▶ No longer commercially available; must be compounded
Uses/Indications
Edetate disodium is used topically to remove calcific corneal depos-
its that occur in the superficial cornea, which may cause pain or im-
pair vision. Corneal calcium deposits may form in association with 
chronic keratitis, chronic uveitis, or hypercalcemia. These deposits 
may be dissolved from the conjunctiva, corneal epithelium, and 
anterior stroma following EDTA administration. Calcium deposits 
in the deep stroma are not affected, as edetate disodium is lipid-in -
soluble and does not penetrate the corneal epithelium. Topical ad -
ministration of EDTA also decreases collagenase activity in infected 
corneal ulcers, thus helping to control corneal melting.1,2 Edetate di-
sodium has been used as an emergency treatment to decontaminate 
the eye after injury by zinc chloride, and for emergency management 
and follow-up treatment of calcium hydroxide burns in the eye.
Pharmacology/Actions
Edetate disodium forms a soluble complex with calcium ions and 
other divalent and trivalent metals, which leads to the dissolution 
of calcium deposits from the ocular surface. As calcium (and other) 
ions serve as cofactors for enzymes responsible for collagenolysis, 
binding the ions makes them unavailable to the enzymes, thus de -
creasing enzymatic activity.1 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Edetate disodium ophthalmic should not be used in patients that are 
hypersensitive to it or any component of the formulation.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include swelling of 
the stroma (usually following application of concentrations greater 
than 1%), stinging on application, and swelling of the eyelids. Toxic 
effects have been demonstrated in vitro to corneal epithelial cells.3 
Dosages
Calcium chelation for corneal deposits and/or collagenolysis (ex-
tra-label): 1 drop of the solution (0.35% to 1.85%, but most com -
monly 1%) to the affected eye(s) initially 4 to 6 times daily and then 
3 to 4 times daily as indicated
Zinc chloride injury (extra-label): Topical, to the cornea, as a 1.7% 
(0.046 M) solution as irrigation for 15 minutes; more likely to be 
effective if started within 2 minutes of exposure
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Monitor mineral deposits in the cornea 
 ■ Monitor corneal digestion (melting)
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine as directed on the product label. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this product if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution. 
 ■ Discard this product by the date indicated on the label.
Storage/Stability
Store this product as directed on the product labeling; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Edetate disodium ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed di-
rectly with any other ophthalmic medications, especially those con-
taining calcium. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1391 =====
1364    Epinastine Ophthalmic
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Edetate disodium ophthalmic solution must be prepared (com -
pounded) by a qualified compounding pharmacist. It is usually pre-
pared as a 1% solution in an artificial tear solution not containing 
calcium.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Epinastine Ophthalmic
(ep-i-nas-teen) Elestat®
Antihistamine
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ H1-selective antihistamine with H2-blocking and mast cell 
stabilizing activity
 ▶ Used to relieve signs of allergic conjunctivitis (particularly 
pruritus)
 ▶ Duration of action allows for twice-daily dosing
Uses/Indications
Epinastine is used to treat and prevent pruritus associated with aller-
gic conjunctivitis. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Epinastine is a topically active, direct histamine-1 (H 1) receptor an-
tagonist and an inhibitor of histamine release from the mast cell. Epi-
nastine is selective for the H1 receptor and has an affinity for the his-
tamine-2 (H2) receptor. Epinastine also possesses an affinity for the 
alpha-1, alpha-2, and 5-HT2 receptors.1 No evaluation of its use as a 
topical ophthalmic agent has been performed in veterinary species.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Epinastine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hyper-
sensitivity to it or any component of the formulation.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include burning sensation in 
the eye, folliculitis, hyperemia, pruritus, and epiphora. 1 The most 
frequently reported nonocular adverse reactions include cold symp-
toms and upper respiratory infections, headache, rhinitis, sinusitis, 
increased cough, and pharyngitis. Some of these adverse effects may 
be related to the underlying disease being treated. 
Dosages
Allergic conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) 
every 12 hours
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolution of signs related to allergic conjuncti -
vitis (eg, pruritus, tearing, squinting)
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication at room temperature away from moisture 
and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in solution.
Storage/Stability
Store at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Epinastine ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Epinastine HCl 0.05% Ophthalmic Solution (containing epinastine 
0.05%; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; edetate disodium; purified 
water; NaCl; sodium phosphate, monobasic; NaOH and/or HCl to 
adjust pH to 7; osmolality range of 250 – 310 mOsm/kg), in a 5 mL 
sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; Elestat®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Erythromycin Ophthalmic
(eh-rith-rowe-mye-sin) 
Macrolide Antibiotic
For systemic use, refer to Erythromycin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat susceptible ocular surface infections (eg, Myco-
plasma spp and Chlamydia spp in cats)
 ▶ Only available as an ophthalmic ointment
 ▶ Used up to 6 times daily
 ▶ Use with caution in pocket pets that may ingest the drug via 
grooming.
Uses/Indications
Erythromycin ophthalmic ointment is used for the treatment of super-
ficial ocular infections involving the conjunctiva and/or cornea caused 
by organisms that are susceptible to erythromycin. See Pharmacology/
Actions. Administration of topical erythromycin to normal cat eyes did 
not induce significant changes in normal ocular surface microflora.1 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated erythro-
mycin as a Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobial for 
human medicine.2 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) has 
designated macrolides as Veterinary Critically Important Antimicro-
bial (VCIA) Agents in avian, bovine, caprine, equine,  lagomorphs, 
ovine, and swine species.3 
Pharmacology/Actions
Erythromycin inhibits protein synthesis by binding the 50S subunit 
of the bacterial ribosome, thus inhibiting the formation of peptide 
bonds between amino acids by a variety of specific mechanisms. 
Erythromycin is usually active against Streptococcus spp, Staphylo-
coccus spp, Mycoplasma spp, and Chlamydia spp.4 
Erythromycin is considered ineffective against Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa.5 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Erythromycin is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Topical mac-
rolides should be used carefully, if at all, in pocket pets (eg, hamsters, 
chinchillas) and rabbits, as these animals may ingest macrolides while 
grooming, which increases the potential for GI adverse effects. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include mild ocular 
stinging, burning, irritation, and redness. Pocket pets ingesting mac-
rolides may suffer from acute and potentially fatal diarrhea. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1392 =====
Fluorescein Stain Ophthalmic   1365
Dosages
Susceptible ocular infections (extra-label): ¼ – ½ inch strip in the af-
fected eye(s) up to 6 times daily depending on the severity of infection
Monitoring
 ■ Corneal cytology and culture to evaluate for the presence of bac -
teria
 ■ Clinical efficacy: improvement and resolution of clinical signs as-
sociated with bacterial infection
 ■ GI clinical signs; discontinue administration if diarrhea occurs 
following use on pocket pets.
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian
 ■ Do not give this medicine to pocket pets (eg, hamsters, chinchillas) 
or rabbits without frequent examinations by your veterinarian. 
 ■ To prevent contamination, do not touch the dropper tip or allow 
it to touch your animal’s eye or any other surface. Keep the cap 
tightly closed on the medication when it is not in use.
 ■ If you are administering more than 1 eye medication to your an -
imal, wait 5 minutes between each medication before giving the 
next. Use eye drops before eye ointments to allow the drops to 
absorb into the eye. 
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is re-
ceiving this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
 ■ Store this medicine at room temperature; do not freeze. Do not 
use the medicine if the color or consistency changes.
Storage/Stability
Store erythromycin ophthalmic formulations at controlled room 
temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]); do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Erythromycin should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any other 
drugs. Erythromycin is not available as an ophthalmic solution.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Erythromycin 0.5% Ophthalmic Ointment (containing erythromy -
cin 5 mg/g in a sterile ophthalmic base of mineral oil and white pet-
rolatum), in a 3.5 g ointment tube; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Fluorescein Stain Ophthalmic
(flur-e-seen)
Ocular Diagnostic Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used clinically to delineate full-thickness loss of corneal epi-
thelium (corneal ulcer), to evaluate tear film breakup time, and 
to determine patency of nasolacrimal outflow system (Jones 
test) 
 ▶ Yellow-green dye binds to corneal stroma but not to the cor-
neal epithelium or Descemet membrane
 ▶ Available in combination with topical anesthetic (oxybupro-
caine) to minimize discomfort on application and to facilitate 
additional diagnostic tests
 ▶ IV injection of its approved formulations is used diagnostically 
during fluorescein angiography.
 ▶ Fluorescein should not be used during intraocular surgery.
Uses/Indications
Topical application of fluorescein solutions to the ocular surface en-
ables identification of corneal ulcers, evaluation of tear film breakup 
time (an indicator of tear film quality), and determination of paten-
cy of the nasolacrimal system (Jones test). Manufactured solutions 
of fluorescein, with or without topical anesthetics, are available for 
use, whereas dilution of individually wrapped fluorescein strips with 
eyewash is an alternative method that also decreases the risk for con-
tamination between patients. Visualization of fluorescein retention 
by the cornea or conjunctiva, with either white or cobalt blue light, 
indicates epithelial loss (ulceration). The rapid appearance of breaks 
in fluorescein within the tear film suggests tear film quality distur -
bances. The appearance of fluorescein at the nostril following appli-
cation to the ocular surface indicates functional patency of the naso-
lacrimal duct system (positive Jones test). IV injection of fluorescein 
solutions is used to evaluate blood flow patterns within the eye in the 
diagnostic procedure fluorescein angiography. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Fluorescein is a water-soluble dye that is not retained by normal cor-
nea because it does not pass through the hydrophobic epithelium. If 
the epithelium is absent, fluorescein penetrates the hydrophilic cor-
neal stroma and stains it bright yellow-green. The green color is best 
visualized utilizing blue light from a cobalt filter attached to a pen -
light transilluminator, or a Wood’s lamp. It may also be visible with 
ambient white light. Defects in the corneal stroma that extend to the 
deepest layer (Descemet membrane) will not retain fluorescein in 
the deepest aspect, as Descemet membrane is hydrophobic. In fluo -
rescein angiography, vessels in the active areas of inflammation and 
neovascularization demonstrate leakage of fluorescein associated 
with increased vascular permeability. Fluorescein fluoresces in light 
with a wavelength between 485 and 500 nm, with maximal emission 
between 520 and 530 nm.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Fluorescein is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Fluorescein 
should not be used during intraocular surgery. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals following the appli -
cation of the strips include local hypersensitivity reactions and tran-
sient discomfort. Temporary staining of the skin and fur may result 
after use. Adverse effects following IV administration can be severe 
and include nausea, vomiting, GI distress, headache, syncope, hy -
potension, and signs of hypersensitivity. In humans, cardiac arrest, 
basilar artery ischemia, severe shock, convulsions, thrombophlebitis 
at the injection site, and, in rare cases, death have been reported. 
Extravasation of the solution at the injection site causes intense pain 
at the site and dull aching pain in the injected limb. 1
Dosages
Determination of corneal injury: Wet fluorescein strip with 1 to 2 
drops of normal saline solution. Apply moistened tip to conjunctiva 
or fornix. Allow patient to blink several times after application. Wait 
60 seconds, rinse with sterile irrigating solution, and examine with 
the use of a light source; a cobalt filter may be attached to the light 
surface for better visualization. Defects in the corneal epithelium il-
luminate the stroma bright green. In deep corneal lesions, the lesion’s 
center may fail to take up the stain and appears black, indicating that 
a descemetocele is present.
Tear film breakup time: Wet fluorescein strip with 1 to 2 drops of 
normal saline solution. Apply moistened tip to conjunctiva or fornix. 
Allow patient to blink once, and then hold lids open and monitor 
tear film for breaks, which appear as dark lines within the green. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1393 =====
1366    Fluorometholone Ophthalmic
Normal values are greater than 20 seconds in dogs, with shorter 
times indicating qualitative tear film deficiency.
Nasolacrimal outflow patency (Jones test) : Wet fluorescein strip 
with 1 to 2 drops of normal saline solution. Apply moistened tip to 
conjunctiva or fornix. It is recommended that the patient’s nose be 
tipped downward to facilitate drainage of fluorescein-laden tears 
through the nasolacrimal system, at which point fluorescein will be 
visible at the nares; a cobalt filter may be attached to a light surface 
for better visualization. Normal times are 2 to 5 minutes in dogs and 
up to 10 minutes in cats.
Fluorescein angiography: Rapid IV injection (≈1 mL/second) of 2 
to 5 mL of fluorescein 100 mg/mL in the antecubital vein is followed 
by ocular vasculature visualization, using a cobalt filter light source 
and appropriate magnification. Time to filling and pattern of filling 
of vasculature within the anterior and posterior segments are noted 
and correlated with normal versus disease states. (This procedure is 
performed by board-certified veterinary ophthalmologists.)
Monitoring
 ■ Diagnostic product; no monitoring is required
Client Information
 ■ Do not use fluorescein strips at home.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C 
[68°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Fluorescein ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Although IV fluorescein solutions have been approved by the 
US FDA, no topical ophthalmic fluorescein products have been 
 approved.
Fluorescein Sodium 10% Injection (containing fluorescein 100 mg/mL 
and sterile water for injection; NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH), in 5 
mL single-use glass vials; Fluorescite®; (Rx)
Fluorescein Sodium 10% Injection (containing fluorescein  
100 mg/mL and sterile water for injection; NaOH and/or HCl to ad-
just pH), in 5 mL single-dose glass vials; AK-FLUOR 10%®; (Rx)
Fluorescein Sodium 25% Injection (containing fluorescein  
250 mg/mL and sterile water for injection; NaOH and/or HCl to ad-
just pH), in 2 mL single-dose glass vials; AK-FLUOR 25%; (Rx)
Fluorescein Sodium Ophthalmic Strips USP 1 mg per strip; individ-
ually wrapped strips in cartons of 50, 100, or 300; Dry Eye Test®, Ful-
Glo®, Bioglo®, Glostrips®; (Rx)
COMBINATION PRODUCTS APPROVED FOR USE IN HUMANS:
Fluorescein Sodium and Benoxinate Hydrochloride Ophthalmic 
Solution 0.25%/0.4% (containing fluorescein sodium 2.5 mg; beno -
xinate hydrochloride 4 mg; povidone; hydrochloric acid; boric acid; 
sodium hydroxide; water for injection; hydrochloric acid and/or so-
dium hydroxide to adjust pH to 4.3 to 5.3), in sterile 5 mL ophthal -
mic dropper bottle; Altafluor Benox®, generic; (Rx)
Fluorescein Sodium and Benoxinate Hydrochloride Ophthalmic 
Solution 0.25%/0.4% (containing fluorescein sodium 2.5 mg; ben -
oxinate hydrochloride 4 mg; chlorobutanol 10 mg; boric acid; povi-
done; sodium hydroxide and/or hydrochloric acid may be added to 
adjust pH to 4.3 to 5.3; purified water), in sterile 5 mL ophthalmic 
dropper bottle; Fluress®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Fluorometholone Ophthalmic
(flew-roe-meth-oh-lone) Flarex®, FML®, FML Forte®
Corticosteroid 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat anterior segment inflammatory conditions
 ▶ Contraindications include the presence of corneal ulceration 
and existing or suspected bacterial, viral, or fungal ocular 
infection. 
 ▶ Use with caution in avian species, as systemic adrenal suppres-
sion may result.
 ▶ Shake suspension well before using.
Uses/Indications
Fluorometholone ophthalmic can be used to treat inflammation 
following ocular injury or cataract surgery or to treat generalized 
inflammatory conditions of the anterior segment (eg, conjunctivi -
tis, keratitis, anterior uveitis). Evaluation of relative efficacy of flu -
orometholone ophthalmic in veterinary patients has not been per -
formed.
Pharmacology/Actions
Corticosteroids have broad immunomodulatory and anti-inflamma-
tory actions, mediated via direct effects on gene expression, as well as 
by nongenomic effects on cell membranes and receptors. Ultimate -
ly, corticosteroids decrease pro-inflammatory gene transcription, 
production of pro-inflammatory prostaglandins and leukotrienes, 
B- and T-cell number and function, cell-mediated immunity, and 
humoral immunity.1 The specific mechanisms involved in regulat -
ing ocular inflammation are not known. Fluorometholone alcohol 
preparations are most effective for ocular surface inflammation, 
rather than intraocular inflammation, due to comparatively poor 
transcorneal penetration relative to the acetate preparations. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Fluorometholone is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Ocular 
corticosteroids should not be used in animals with bacterial, fungal, 
or viral ocular infections, or if corneal ulceration is present, as they 
may potentiate infection and decrease epithelial wound healing. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include development of cataracts 
(via altered glucose or lenticular metabolic effects), increased intra -
ocular pressure (IOP; via activation of glucocorticoid receptors in 
the trabecular meshwork), infection (via immunosuppression), de -
creased wound healing (via increased collagenolytic activity), mydri-
asis, and calcific keratopathy. Some animals may develop increased 
IOP with chronic use; however, most reports suggest the change is 
reversible.2,3 Additionally, fluorometholone is associated with less 
risk of IOP elevation compared with other topical corticosteroids. 
Systemic effects are rare but include hepatopathy, suppression of en-
dogenous glucocorticoid production, and focal alopecia. Concurrent 
use of systemic steroids increases the risk for these adverse effects. 
Dosages
Conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop or ¼ inch strip in the affected 
eye(s) as frequently as every 4 hours until clinical improvement oc -
curs, then gradually (over days to weeks) decrease the dosage, pro -
vided clinical improvement is maintained
Keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop or ¼ inch strip in the affected eye(s) as 
frequently as every 4 hours until clinical improvement occurs, then 

===== PDF_PAGE_1394 =====
Fluorouracil Ophthalmic   1367
gradually (over days to weeks) decrease the dosage, provided clinical 
improvement is maintained
Anterior uveitis (extra-label): 1 drop or ¼ inch strip in the affected 
eye(s) as frequently as every 4 hours until clinical improvement oc -
curs, then gradually (over days to weeks) decrease the dosage, pro -
vided clinical improvement is maintained
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy through resolution of signs of inflammation
 ■ Monitor intraocular pressure (IOP) and ocular surface integrity
 ■ Blood or urine glucose changes based on development of clinical 
signs (eg, polyuria, polydipsia) in diabetic animals
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ It is important to shake the suspension well before giving this 
medicine to your animal.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 to 10 minutes after applying this medicine before apply-
ing any other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine in the refrigerator or at room temperature 
away from moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes or if there are parti-
cles in the suspension.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the refrigerator or at controlled room tempera-
ture (2°C-25°C [36°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do 
not freeze.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Fluorometholone ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed di-
rectly with any other ophthalmic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Fluorometholone 0.1% Ophthalmic Suspension (containing fluoro-
metholone 1 mg/mL; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; sodium chlo -
ride; monobasic sodium phosphate; edetate disodium; hydroxyethyl 
cellulose; tyloxapol; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH; purified water), 
5 mL or 10 mL in sterile ophthalmic dropper bottles; FML®, Flarex®; 
(Rx)
Fluorometholone 0.25% Ophthalmic Suspension (containing fluoro-
metholone 2.5 mg/mL; benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; edetate diso-
dium; polysorbate 80; polyvinyl alcohol 1.4%; purified water; NaCl; 
sodium phosphate, dibasic; sodium phosphate, monobasic; NaOH 
to adjust the pH from 6.2 to 7.5), 5 mL or 10 mL in sterile ophthalmic 
dropper bottles; FML Forte®; (Rx)
Fluorometholone 0.1% Ophthalmic Ointment (containing fluoro -
metholone 1 mg/mL; phenylmercuric acetate (0.0008%); mineral oil; 
petrolatum (and) lanolin alcohol; white petrolatum), in 3.5 g oph -
thalmic ointment tubes; FML®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Fluorouracil Ophthalmic
(flewr-oh-your-uh-sil) 
Antineoplastic Agent
For systemic use, see Fluorouracil
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Antifibrotic agent used adjunctively in periocular surgeries 
(most commonly in glaucoma implant procedures) 
 ▶ Antineoplastic used for susceptible cutaneous tumors
 ▶ Do NOT use in cats or in patients with myelosuppression or 
serious infections.
 ▶ Adverse effects include dose-dependent myelosuppression, GI 
toxicity, and neurotoxicity.
 ▶ Known teratogen
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies fluorouracil as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Fluorouracil ophthalmic is used as an adjunct in ocular surger -
ies, particularly in those that treat glaucoma through placement of 
drainage shunts or alteration of the natural aqueous humor outflow 
tracts, because of fluorouracil’s ability to reduce fibroblastic prolifer-
ation and prevent subsequent scarring. 1 Fluorouracil ophthalmic is 
also used to treat ocular surface neoplastic conditions, such as squa-
mous cell carcinoma and sarcoids. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Fluorouracil is a pyrimidine analogue that is converted through in -
tracellular mechanisms into multiple active metabolites which inter-
fere with DNA and RNA synthesis, inhibit cell growth, and promote 
cell death.2 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Fluorouracil is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to 
it or any component of the formulation. Fluorouracil is absolutely 
contraindicated in cats by any route of administration, including 
ophthalmic administration, as cats develop a severe, potentially fatal 
neurotoxicity when they are exposed to fluorouracil by any route. Do 
not use fluorouracil in patients that are pregnant or in those that are 
myelosuppressed or have concurrent serious infections. Although 
systemic adverse effects are less likely after topical application of flu-
orouracil in other species, they can occur.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies fluorouracil as a hazardous drug; personal pro -
tective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure. 
Adverse Effects
Although less likely after topical administration, adverse effects re -
ported in humans or animals include myelosuppression, GI toxicity 
(eg, diarrhea, GI ulceration, sloughing, stomatitis), and neurotoxic -
ity (seizures). The most frequent adverse reactions with ophthalmic 
fluorouracil administration occur locally and are often related to an 
extension of the pharmacological activity of the drug. 3 These effects 
include burning, crusting, allergic contact dermatitis, erosions, er -
ythema, hyperpigmentation, irritation, pain, periorbital alopecia, 
photosensitivity, pruritus, scarring, rash, soreness, and ulceration. 
Dosages
NOTE: Multiple protocols exist for use during surgical procedures 
for correction of glaucoma; these protocols vary with the type of pro-
cedure and other patient parameters. As these procedures should be 
performed by board-certified veterinary ophthalmologists, the pro -
tocols are not detailed here.

===== PDF_PAGE_1395 =====
1368    Flurbiprofen Ophthalmic
Ocular surface neoplasia (extra-label): Fluorouracil 1% ophthalmic 
solution (compounded), 1 drop in affected eye(s) 4 times daily for 1 
week; may be repeated in regular cycles. 4,5 Use of a topical 1% fluo-
rouracil ointment applied 4 times daily also has been described.6,7
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Maintenance of patency of the glaucoma implant, which leads to 
control of intraocular pressure 
 ■ Cell or tissue samples for evaluation to confirm remission of 
 neoplasia
Client Information
 ■ This is a chemotherapy (anticancer) drug. The drug and its by -
products can be hazardous to other animals and humans. Preg -
nant women and sick or immunocompromised individuals 
should avoid contact. 
 ■ Wear protective gloves and a mask when administering this med-
icine. After administration, seal these gloves, mask, and other 
waste products in a plastic bag, and then place in the regular trash. 
Wash your hands immediately after each application. 
 ■ Loss of hair around the eyes may occur after use.
 ■ Wait for 5 to 10 minutes after applying this medicine before apply-
ing any other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine according to instructions on the bottle or pre-
scription label. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solutions.
Storage/Stability
Store this product as directed on the product label.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Fluorouracil ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed direct -
ly with any other ophthalmic medications. Fluorouracil ophthalmic 
preparations are not commercially available but may be prepared by 
qualified compounding pharmacists by utilizing the 50 mg/mL in -
jectable solution. Fluorouracil 1% ophthalmic solution prepared this 
way is reported to be stable for 3 weeks.8 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Fluorouracil ophthalmic formulations must be prepared (com -
pounded) by a qualified compounding pharmacist. See Compound-
ing: How to Find a Quality Assured Pharmacy.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Flurbiprofen Ophthalmic
(flur-bi-proe-fin) Ocufen®
Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drug (NSAID)
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to control anterior segment inflammation
 ▶ May cause transient increases in intraocular pressure (IOP)
 ▶ May delay ocular wound healing and increase risk for intraoc-
ular bleeding
Uses/Indications
Flurbiprofen ophthalmic is indicated for controlling anterior segment 
inflammation (eg, conjunctivitis, keratitis, anterior uveitis), inducing 
mydriasis during cataract-removal surgery, and for providing analge-
sia following surgical removal of cataracts. In dogs, flurbiprofen signifi-
cantly reduced clinical signs associated with experimentally induced 
intraocular inflammation,1 whereas it demonstrated poor efficacy in 
cats.2 Flurbiprofen did not decrease corneal sensitivity in normal dogs, 
suggesting its use as an ophthalmic analgesic may be limited3; howev-
er, analgesic effects may improve in the presence of ocular pain.
Pharmacology/Actions
Flurbiprofen is an NSAID that blocks prostaglandin synthesis by in-
hibiting cyclooxygenase 1 and 2. Prostaglandins mediate many of the 
adverse effects of intraocular inflammation, including disruption of 
the blood–aqueous barrier, vasodilation, increased vascular permea-
bility, leukocytosis, and increased intraocular pressure (IOP). Block-
ing prostaglandin production therefore minimizes the adverse short- 
and long-term effects of intraocular inflammation. Prostaglandins 
also appear to play a role in the miotic response produced during 
ocular surgery by constricting the iris sphincter independently of 
cholinergic mechanisms. Thus, flurbiprofen inhibits miosis induced 
during cataract surgery.4
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Flurbiprofen is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. The po -
tential for cross-sensitivity to acetylsalicylic acid, phenylacetic acid 
derivatives, and other NSAIDs exists.4 Topical NSAIDs may result in 
corneal epithelial breakdown and corneal thinning, erosion, or ul -
ceration, which could cause delayed corneal wound healing; concur-
rent use of topical NSAIDs and topical corticosteroids may further 
delay healing and increase the potential for development of adverse 
effects.4 Due to interference with thrombocyte aggregation, ophthal-
mic NSAIDs may cause increased bleeding of ocular tissues (eg, hy-
phema) in conjunction with ocular surgery. It is recommended that 
flurbiprofen ophthalmic solution be used with caution in patients 
with known bleeding tendencies (eg, severe liver disease) or in those 
receiving anticoagulant medications (eg, heparins, rivaroxaban), 
which may prolong bleeding time.4 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include transient oc-
ular burning or stinging on administration.4 Additional adverse reac-
tions reported with the use of flurbiprofen ophthalmic include fibrosis, 
miosis, and mydriasis. NSAIDs may also cause direct cellular dam -
age, causing delayed healing and/or deterioration of existing corneal 
wounds. Although unlikely, systemic adverse effects may occur with 
the use of topical NSAIDs, including increased risk for gastric ulcer-
ation, decreased platelet aggregation, worsening of asthma and car -
diac disease, and renal toxicity. Concurrent use of systemic NSAIDs 
and corticosteroids increases the risk for systemic adverse effects. The 
increased bleeding tendency of ocular tissues in conjunction with 
ocular surgery has also been reported. Flurbiprofen has been docu -
mented to elevate intraocular pressure (IOP) in dogs,5,6 and decrease 
the IOP-lowering effect of latanoprost in normal canine eyes6 and ca-
nine eyes following surgical cataract removal.7 Flurbiprofen increased 
corneal sensitivity when it was administered to normal canine eyes; 
therefore, it is suspected to be associated with an ocular irritant effect.8
Dosages
Preoperative for cataract surgery  (extra-label): 1 drop every 30 
minutes for 4 applications beginning 2 hours prior to surgery
Anterior segment inflammation (extra-label): 1 drop in affected 
eye(s) every 8 hours; frequency may be reduced to once daily after 
resolution of initial inflammation
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy (eg, decreased or absent anterior segment inflam-
mation)
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, delayed wound healing)

===== PDF_PAGE_1396 =====
Ganciclovir Ophthalmic   1369
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
 ■ Flurbiprofen ophthalmic may cause burning or stinging on ad -
ministration. It may also increase the risk for bleeding and may 
slow down healing in the eye.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed on the medicine when 
it is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medicine is before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is tak-
ing this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
Storage/Stability
Store as directed on package labeling (15°C-25°C [59°F-77°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Flurbiprofen ophthalmic solutions should not be mixed directly with 
any other drugs.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Flurbiprofen sodium 0.03% Ophthalmic Solution (containing flurbi-
profen 0.3 mg/mL; thimerosal 0.005%; citric acid; edetate disodium; 
polyvinyl alcohol 1.4%; potassium chloride; purified water; NaCl; 
sodium citrate; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH to 6 to 7; osmolal -
ity of 260 – 330 mOsm/kg), in 2.5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; 
Ocufen®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Ganciclovir Ophthalmic
(gan-sye-kloe-veer) Zirgan®
Antiviral Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used as an ophthalmic antiviral in cats with feline herpesvi-
rus-1 (FHV-1) and dogs with canine herpesvirus-1 (CHV-1) 
 ▶ May cause myelosuppression and nephrotoxicity in cats if 
ingested
 ▶ In vitro efficacy versus FHV-1 is 2 to 10 times greater than 
similar antivirals.
Uses/Indications
In veterinary patients, ganciclovir may be used to treat feline herpesvi-
rus-1 (FHV-1)-induced ocular surface disease in cats. In vitro efficacy of 
ganciclovir versus FHV-1 has been demonstrated at various concentra-
tions1 and is 2 times greater than cidofovir and penciclovir and 10 times 
greater than acyclovir.2,3 When ganciclovir was administered to cats with 
healthy eyes 3 times daily, no signs of ocular irritation developed.1 
Evaluation of ganciclovir in experimentally induced canine her -
pesvirus-1 infections (CHV-1) indicated good efficacy without signs 
of ocular toxicity.4 In vitro evaluation of ganciclovir suggests efficacy 
against equine alpha-herpesviruses5,6 ; however, evaluation of ganci-
clovir’s use in vivo has not been performed.
Pharmacology/Actions
Ganciclovir is a guanosine derivative that, upon phosphorylation, 
inhibits DNA replication of herpes simplex viruses (HSV). Ganci -
clovir is transformed by viral and cellular thymidine kinases (TK) 
to ganciclovir triphosphate, which works as an antiviral agent by 
competitive inhibition of viral DNA-polymerase and prevents DNA 
elongation. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Ganciclovir is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation.
Myelosuppression and nephrotoxicity may occur in cats after sys-
temic treatment. Ganciclovir has been shown to be embryotoxic in 
rabbits and mice and teratogenic in rabbits following IV administra-
tion.7 Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. Do not allow cats to ingest the topical formu -
lation; an e-collar may be required to avoid unintentional ingestion 
during grooming.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include blurred vi -
sion, eye irritation, punctate keratitis, chemosis, and conjunctival 
hyperemia and discharge. 1,7 Myelosuppression and nephrotoxicity 
are possible in cats after ingestion by grooming. 
Dosages
Herpes keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop in affected eye(s) up to 5 times 
daily until the corneal ulcer has healed, then 3 times daily for 7 days
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolution of clinical signs associated with her -
pes keratitis (eg, corneal ulceration, corneal vascularization, con-
junctivitis)
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC and chemistry panel for cats to detect 
myelosuppression and nephrotoxicity
Client Information
 ■ Wipe the cat’s face after applying. Do not let cats lick this medica-
tion, as it can be toxic when ingested.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this product at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in the gel.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C 
[68°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Ganciclovir should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any other 
drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Ganciclovir 0.15% Ophthalmic Gel (containing ganciclovir  
1.5 mg/mL; carbopol; water for injection; NaOH (to adjust the pH to 
7.4); mannitol; benzalkonium chloride 0.075 mg), in a 5 g ophthal -
mic gel tube; Zirgan®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 

===== PDF_PAGE_1397 =====
1370    Gatifloxacin Ophthalmic
Gatifloxacin Ophthalmic
(gat-i-flocks-a sin) Zymaxid®, Zymar®
Fourth-Generation Fluoroquinolone Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Fluoroquinolone antimicrobial available in ophthalmic formu-
lation only; used to treat bacterial conjunctivitis or keratitis
 ▶ Appropriately used as a therapeutic antibiotic in cases with 
known ocular surface infection; not appropriate for prophylac-
tic use
 ▶ Physically incompatible with many drugs; therefore, it should 
not be directly mixed with other ophthalmic medications
 ▶ Crystalline drug precipitates may be noted in the superficial 
portion of corneal defects during use.
Uses/Indications
Gatifloxacin ophthalmic may be useful for treating bacterial conjunc-
tivitis or keratitis caused by susceptible strains of Staphylococcus spp, 
Streptococcus spp, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Chlamydophila spp, and 
Haemophilus spp. Gatifloxacin has demonstrated good in vitro activity 
versus Pseudomonas spp organisms cultured from dogs with ulcerative 
keratitis,1 particularly in relation to the second-generation fluoroquino-
lone ciprofloxacin.2 In comparison to moxifloxacin and besifloxacin, 
gatifloxacin demonstrated lower corneal and aqueous humor concen-
trations when administered to dogs with normal eyes. 3 Gatifloxacin 
should be used to treat, rather than prevent, bacterial ocular infections. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Gatifloxacin is a fluoroquinolone antibiotic that acts via inhibition 
of both topoisomerase II (DNA gyrase) and topoisomerase IV to 
impair bacterial DNA synthesis. Inhibition of these 2 enzymes de -
creases the development of resistance to this class of fluoroquinolo-
nes. In comparison with besifloxacin, gatifloxacin is reported to have 
slightly greater in vitro efficacy versus gram-negative organisms, 
with slightly lesser in vitro efficacy versus gram-positive organisms.4 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Gatifloxacin is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it, other fluoroquinolones, or any component of the 
formulation. This drug should only be used as a topical ophthalmic. 
Do not inject gatifloxacin subconjunctivally or into the anterior 
chamber of the eye. Fluoroquinolone-induced retinal toxicity in do-
mestic cats has not been demonstrated with this product.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include blurred vi -
sion, tearing, eye pain, redness, itching, and a bad taste in the mouth. 
Crystalline drug precipitates may be noted in the superficial portion 
of corneal defects during use.
Dosages
Conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop in affected eye(s) every 2 to 8 hours
Keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye every 2 to 8 hours
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy. Corneal cytology and culture to evaluate for per-
sistence of bacteria, and evaluation for clinical signs suggestive of 
continued infection
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian. 
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Crystals may appear on the ocular surface after initiation of treat-
ment.
 ■ This medicine may precipitate when mixed with other ophthal -
mic medicines. Therefore, when giving this medicine to your 
horse through a subpalpebral lavage catheter, it is important to 
flush the catheter well with air between medications.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C 
[68°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Gatifloxacin ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications and is considered physically 
incompatible with many drugs.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Gatifloxacin 0.3% Ophthalmic Solution (containing gatifloxacin 
3 mg/mL; benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; edetate disodium; puri -
fied water and NaCl; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH to ≈6; osmo -
lality of 260 to 330 mOsm/kg) in 5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; 
Zymar®, generic; (Rx)
Gatifloxacin 0.5% Ophthalmic Solution (containing gatifloxacin 
5 mg/mL; benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; edetate disodium; puri -
fied water and NaCl; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH to ≈6; osmolal-
ity of 260 to 330 mOsm/kg), 2.5 mL in a sterile ophthalmic dropper 
bottle; Zymaxid®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Gentamicin Ophthalmic
(jen-ta-mye-sin sul-fate) Genoptic®, Gentocin®, Gentak®
Aminoglycoside Antibiotic
For systemic use, see Gentamicin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Topical ophthalmic aminoglycoside antibiotic used as a treat-
ment for susceptible ocular surface bacterial infections 
 ▶ Do not use if a full-thickness corneal wound is present, as 
gentamicin is toxic to the eye’s interior.
 ▶ Fortified solutions of gentamicin sulfate up to 13.6 mg/mL 
may be compounded for use in susceptible infections of 
equine bacterial keratitis.
Uses/Indications
Gentamicin ophthalmic is primarily used for patients with ocular infec-
tions caused by gram-negative aerobes, such as Pseudomonas aerugino-
sa.1,2 Gentamicin does not demonstrate consistent efficacy against ver-
sus Staphylococcus spp or Streptococcus spp isolates.1,3 As the spectrum 
of gentamicin is weighted toward gram-negative organisms, and as it is 
more toxic to the corneal epithelium, gentamicin should not be consid-
ered a first-line prophylactic antibiotic in veterinary ophthalmology.4,5 
In horses with end-stage glaucoma, intravitreal injection of gen -
tamicin at higher doses is used to chemically ablate the ciliary body, 
thus reducing the production of aqueous humor and lowering intra-
ocular pressure (IOP)6; lower doses may be used to manage equine 
recurrent uveitis (ERU).7,8 See Gentamicin.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated gentami-
cin as a Critically Important, High Priority antimicrobial for human 
medicine.9 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) has desig -

===== PDF_PAGE_1398 =====
Hydrocortisone Ophthalmic    1371
nated gentamicin as a Veterinary Critically Important Antimicrobial 
(VCIA) Agent in equine species.10 
Pharmacology/Actions
Gentamicin sulfate, an aminoglycoside, is actively transported into 
the bacterial cell. It binds to a specific receptor protein on the 30S 
subunit of bacterial ribosomes. It consequently interferes with an 
initiation complex between mRNA (messenger RNA) and the 30S 
subunit, inhibiting protein synthesis by inducing misreading of the 
mRNA. Aminoglycosides are bactericidal, whereas most other anti-
biotics that interfere with protein synthesis are bacteriostatic.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Gentamicin is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Gentamicin 
should not be used if a full-thickness corneal wound is present, as 
gentamicin is toxic to the eye’s interior. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include ocular burn-
ing and irritation upon drug instillation, nonspecific conjunctivitis, 
conjunctival epithelial defects, and conjunctival hyperemia. Other 
adverse reactions that have rarely been reported include allergic re -
actions, thrombocytopenic purpura, and hallucinations (humans).11 
In dogs and cats, although causation has not been proven, intravit -
real gentamicin injections for ciliary body ablation may be linked to 
the development of intraocular tumors.12,13 In horses, cataract forma-
tion and diffuse retinal degeneration have been reported following 
the intravitreal injection of low-dosage gentamicin for equine recur-
rent uveitis (ERU) management.8  
When gentamicin is used systemically, it can cause nephrotoxicity 
and neurotoxicity (ototoxicity and vestibular toxicity). Cats are more 
susceptible to the toxic effects of gentamicin, and it is recommended 
that all patients receiving topical gentamicin be monitored for sys -
temic toxicity.
Dosages
Susceptible ocular infections (extra-label): 1 drop of the solution or 
¼ – ½ inch strip in the affected eye(s) 4 to 6 times daily. The frequency 
may be increased to every 30 to 60 minutes for a few hours if needed.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: cytology and culture to evaluate for presence of 
bacteria; clinical resolution of signs of ocular surface infection 
and or recurrent inflammation
 ■ Intraocular pressure (IOP) when used as adjunctive treatment for 
equine glaucoma or recurrent uveitis
 ■ Urinalysis with sediment to check for casts in the urine, which 
may be an early indicator for renal toxicity
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine as directed by your veterinarian. 
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep cap tightly closed when not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine according to the directions on the product 
label, protected from light. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product as directed on the product label, protected from 
light; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Gentamicin sulfate should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any 
other drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Gentamicin Sulfate 0.3% Ophthalmic solution (containing gentami-
cin sulfate equivalent to 3 mg gentamicin base; disodium phosphate; 
monosodium phosphate; NaCl; benzalkonium chloride; aqueous 
solution with pH 6.8 to 7.3), in sterile 5 mL dropper bottle; generic; 
(Rx)
VETERINARY-LABELED COMBINATION PRODUCTS:
Gentamicin Sulfate 0.3% and Betamethasone Ophthalmic solution 
(containing gentamicin sulfate equivalent to 3 mg gentamicin base; 
1 mg betamethasone acetate equivalent to 0.89 mg betamethasone 
alcohol; polyoxyol 40 stearate; polyethoxy 35 castor oil; edetate di -
sodium; 0.1 mg benzalkonium chloride as a preservative; water for 
injection), supplied in a sterile 5 mL dropper bottle; Gentocin® Du-
rafilm®; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Gentamicin 0.3% Ophthalmic Solution (containing gentamicin sul-
fate equivalent to 3 mg/mL gentamicin base; benzalkonium chloride; 
edetate disodium; polyvinyl alcohol 1.4%; purified water; NaCl; so -
dium phosphate, dibasic; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust the pH in an 
aqueous, buffered solution with a pH of 6.5 to 7.5), in 5 mL ophthal-
mic dropper bottles; Genoptic®, Gentak®; (Rx)
Gentamicin 0.3% Ophthalmic Ointment (containing gentamicin 
sulfate equivalent to 3 mg/mL of gentamicin in a base of white pet -
rolatum and mineral oil, with methylparaben and propylparaben as 
preservatives), in a 3.5 g ophthalmic ointment tube; generic; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED COMBINATION PRODUCTS: 
Gentamicin and Prednisolone Acetate Ophthalmic Ointment 
0.3%/0.6% (containing gentamicin sulfate equivalent to 0.3% genta-
micin base; prednisolone acetate 0.6%; chlorobutanol (chloral deriv-
ative) 0.5%; mineral oil; petrolatum (and) lanolin alcohol; purified 
water; white petrolatum), in a sterile 3.5 g ophthalmic tube; Pred-G®; 
(Rx)
Gentamicin and Prednisolone Acetate Ophthalmic Suspension 
0.3%/1% (containing gentamicin sulfate equivalent to 0.3% genta -
micin base; prednisolone acetate (microfine suspension) 1%; benzal-
konium chloride 0.005%; edetate disodium; hypromellose; polyvinyl 
alcohol 1.4%; polysorbate 80; purified water; sodium chloride; sodi-
um citrate dehydrate; NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH (5.4 to 6.6), in 
a sterile 5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Pred-G®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Hydrocortisone Ophthalmic
(hye-droe-kor-ti-zone)
Corticosteroid Anti-inflammatory Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Ophthalmic corticosteroid used to treat ocular surface 
 inflammation
 ▶ Only commercially available formulation is in combination 
with neomycin/polymyxin B +/-bacitracin
 ▶ NOT effective for deep corneal or intraocular inflammation 
(uveitis)
 ▶ Contraindications include a hypersensitivity to dexamethasone; 
an existing or suspected bacterial, viral, or fungal ocular infec-
tion; and in the presence of a corneal abrasion or ulceration.
 ▶ Use with caution in avian species due to risk for systemic corti-
costeroid effects.

===== PDF_PAGE_1399 =====
1372    Idoxuridine
Uses/Indications
Hydrocortisone is used in combination with topical antibiotics (eg, 
neomycin, polymyxin, ± bacitracin) for inflammatory conjunctivitis. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Hydrocortisone is a naturally occurring corticosteroid that is pro -
duced by the adrenal glands. Corticosteroids have broad immuno -
modulatory and anti-inflammatory actions, which are mediated via 
direct effects on gene expression, as well as by non-genomic effects 
on cell membranes and receptors. Ultimately, corticosteroids de -
crease pro-inflammatory gene transcription, production of pro-in -
flammatory prostaglandins and leukotrienes, B- and T-cell number 
and function, cell-mediated immunity, and humoral immunity. 1 
Specific mechanisms involved in controlling ocular inflammatory 
conditions are not definitively known. Hydrocortisone has a relative 
glucocorticoid potency of 1 (versus 4 for prednisolone and 30 for 
dexamethasone and betamethasone), which correlates with weak 
clinical efficacy.
Hydrocortisone is a weak base steroid with poor intraocular pen-
etration; therefore, it is ineffective for treating intraocular inflamma-
tion (uveitis). 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Hydrocortisone is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Due to 
inhibition of epithelial wound healing and potentiation of infection, 
hydrocortisone ophthalmic is also contraindicated when corneal ul-
ceration is suspected or present, or in the presence of corneal infec -
tion (bacterial, fungal, or viral). 2,3 Topical administration of gluco -
corticoids may produce systemic effects. For more information, refer 
to Glucocorticoid Agents, General Information. Use hydrocortisone 
ophthalmic with caution in patients with endocrine diseases (eg, 
diabetes mellitus, acromegaly), infectious diseases, chronic kidney 
disease, congestive heart failure, systemic hypertension, or gastric 
ulceration. When use of hydrocortisone ophthalmic is necessary 
to treat a patient with these conditions, the minimal effective dose 
should be administered for the shortest possible time. Ophthalmic 
steroids should be used with extreme caution in avian species due to 
increased risk for systemic adverse effects.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include burning, 
stinging, and irritation upon application to the eye. 3 Systemic ab -
sorption may result in suppression of the hypothalamus-pitu -
itary-adrenal axis. The use of corticosteroids may result in posterior 
subcapsular cataract formation, glaucoma, and secondary ocular 
infections due to bacteria, fungi, or viruses. 4 With the chronic use 
of hydrocortisone, intraocular pressure (IOP) may increase in some 
animals; however, most reports suggest the change is reversible.5–7 
Dosages
Inflammatory conjunctivitis (extra-label): ¼ – ½ inch strip in the 
affected eye(s) up to 4 times daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Resolution of signs of inflammation
 ■ Intraocular pressure (IOP; especially in cats) and ocular surface 
integrity (eg, fluorescein stain)
 ■ Blood or urine glucose changes based on clinical signs (eg, poly -
uria, polydipsia) in diabetic animals
Client Information
 ■ Available only as an ointment form, in combination with antibiotics.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine as directed on the product label. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Discard this medicine if the color change occurs.
Storage/Stability
Store at controlled room temperature (68°F-77°F [20°C-25°C]), away 
from moisture and sunlight.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Hydrocortisone ophthalmic should not be mixed directly (in vitro) 
with any other drugs. Instruct caregivers to wait for 5 minutes after 
applying this medication before applying any other medications to 
the eye.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
No ophthalmic products containing only hydrocortisone are available; 
available commercially in combination with antimicrobial agents. 
Neomycin/Bacitracin/Polymyxin/Hydrocortisone Ophthalmic Oint-
ment (containing neomycin sulfate equivalent to 3.5 mg neomycin 
base, polymyxin B sulfate equivalent to 10,000 polymyxin B units, 
bacitracin zinc equivalent to 400 bacitracin units, hydrocortisone 
10  mg/g, and white petrolatum), in a 3.5 g ophthalmic ointment 
tube; Vetropolycin HC®, (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Neomycin/Bacitracin/Polymyxin/Hydrocortisone Ophthalmic Oint-
ment (containing neomycin sulfate equivalent to 3.5 mg neomycin 
base, polymyxin B sulfate equivalent to 10,000 polymyxin B units, 
bacitracin zinc equivalent to 400 bacitracin units, hydrocortisone 
10  mg/g, and white petrolatum), in a 3.5 g ophthalmic ointment 
tube; generic, (Rx)
Neomycin/Polymyxin/Hydrocortisone Ophthalmic Ointment (con-
taining neomycin sulfate equivalent to 3.5 mg neomycin base, poly-
myxin B sulfate equivalent to 10,000 polymyxin B units, hydrocorti-
sone 10 mg/g, and white petrolatum), in a 3.5 g ophthalmic ointment 
tube; generic, (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Idoxuridine Ophthalmic
(eye-docks-yoor-uh-deen) 
Antiviral (Nucleoside Analogue)
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Topical antiviral agent used in cats with feline herpesvirus-1 
(FHV-1)
 ▶ Must be used 4 to 5 times daily
 ▶ In vitro efficacy is less than trifluridine and comparable to or 
greater than other antivirals. 
 ▶ No longer commercially available; must be compounded as an 
ointment, solution, or suspension
Uses/Indications
Idoxuridine is used topically in cats to treat conjunctivitis and ker -
atitis associated with feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) infections. Idox-
uridine has also demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of canine 
herpesvirus-1 (CHV-1) keratitis. 1 Although relative efficacy versus 
other antiviral agents is not known and direct causation of clinical 
effect is difficult to determine, idoxuridine was associated with im -
provement in keratoconjunctivitis caused by equine herpesvirus-2 
(EHV-2) in foals.2

===== PDF_PAGE_1400 =====
Irrigating Solutions, Ophthalmic    1373
Pharmacology/Actions
Idoxuridine is chemically similar to thymidine, and its substitution 
into viral DNA causes misreading of the viral genetic code, there -
by inhibiting viral replication. Because idoxuridine is a nonspecific 
inhibitor of DNA synthesis, it affects any cellular function requir -
ing thymidine and is not suitable for systemic use. Even with topical 
therapy, corneal toxicity can occur. Idoxuridine is virustatic. Idoxu-
ridine’s in vitro efficacy is less than trifluridine, comparable to ganci-
clovir, greater than cidofovir, and much greater than acyclovir.3,4
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Idoxuridine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include acute ocular 
irritation, including burning, corneal stippling, vascularization, and 
clouding. Following prolonged use of idoxuridine, ocular irritation 
characterized by follicular conjunctivitis, blepharitis with punc -
tal swelling, bulbar conjunctival hyperemia, and corneal epithelial 
staining has also been reported. Treatment with idoxuridine should 
be discontinued if adverse effects occur.
Dosages
Keratitis caused by feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1), canine herpes -
virus-1 ( CHV-1), or equine herpesvirus-2 (EHV-2) (extra-label): 
1 drop in affected eye(s) every 2 to 3 hours for 48 hours, then 4 to 5 
times daily for a week beyond the resolution of clinical signs
Monitoring
 ■ Resolution of clinical signs of herpetic keratitis (eg, corneal ulcer-
ation, corneal vascularization, conjunctivitis)
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine to your animal as directed by your  veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication as directed on the product label. Do not 
freeze and protect from light. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in solutions.
Storage/Stability
Because this compound must be compounded (in the United States), 
storage recommendations can vary; follow storage requirements list-
ed on the packaging. Do not freeze.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Idoxuridine should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any other 
drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
No ophthalmic dosage form of idoxuridine is approved for use; 
however, Idoxuridine may be compounded as a 0.1% to 0.5% solu -
tion, suspension, and/or ointment by a qualified compounding 
 pharmacist. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Irrigating Solutions, Ophthalmic
BSS®, Collyrium®
Ocular Irrigant
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Available for either intraocular or extraocular use
 ▶ Extraocular (eyewashes) products should NOT be used intra-
ocularly.
Uses/Indications
Extraocular eyewash preparations are used to irrigate the nasolacri-
mal duct system, remove debris from the eye, and remove the excess 
stain after diagnostic staining (eg, fluorescein) of the cornea. 
Intraocular irrigation solutions are used during intraocular sur -
gery (eg, cataract removal, vitreal surgery) to maintain the shape of 
the anterior chamber, cool phacoemulsification handpieces, and la -
vage emulsified lens and surgical byproducts from the eye. 
Pharmacology/Actions
OTC extraocular eyewash preparations are sterile isotonic solutions 
that contain preservatives and are intended to be used for general 
external ophthalmic use only. 
Intraocular sterile irrigating solutions are sterile, preservative-free, 
physiologically balanced salt solutions that mimic the composition 
of the aqueous humor in terms of physiologic pH, osmolality, and 
ion composition; they contain electrolytes required for normal cel -
lular metabolic functions. Some intraocular irrigating solutions also 
contain glutathione, which is responsible for stabilizing endothelial 
cell junctions and intraocular pumping functions.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Extraocular eyewash preparations are contraindicated for intraocu -
lar use, as preservative components are toxic to the corneal endothe-
lium. They are also contraindicated if the patient is hypersensitive to 
any component of the formulation. Adding drugs or other fluids to 
intraocular irrigating solutions may damage intraocular tissue.
In humans with diabetic mellitus who are undergoing vitrecto -
my, caution is recommended with the use of intraocular irrigating 
solutions, as intraoperative lens changes have been noted in some 
patients; the same recommendation may apply to diabetic animals. 
Caution should be used in diabetic animals undergoing vitrectomy 
for other causes (eg, trauma, neoplasia, endophthalmitis).
Adverse Effects
Intraocular irrigation solutions have caused corneal clouding and 
edema in some patients due to endothelial damage. In humans, lens 
changes have been noted in some diabetic patients who are undergo-
ing vitrectomy. A study evaluating cooled versus room temperature 
irrigating solutions demonstrated no significant adverse effects be -
tween the 2 temperatures.1  
Dosages
Extraocular eyewash (extra-label): Flush affected eye(s) as needed; 
control rate of flow by exerting pressure on the bottle 
Intraocular use during surgery  (extra-label): Use a sterile, preser -
vative-free balanced salt solution (NOT an OTC eyewash) according 
to the established practices for each surgical procedure.
Monitoring
 ■ When intraocular solutions are used, monitor for development or 
worsening of corneal clouding or edema or opacification of the lens.
 ■ In diabetic patients, monitor for lens changes post-vitrectomy.
Client Information
 ■ If you are using an over-the-counter eyewash solution, use proper 
administration techniques to avoid eye injury or contamination 

===== PDF_PAGE_1401 =====
1374    Itraconazole Ophthalmic
of the product. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after using the eyewash before applying any med-
ications to the eye.
 ■ Store this product at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Discard this product if the color changes or the solution becomes 
cloudy.
Storage/Stability
Store OTC eyewash products as labeled, usually at controlled room 
temperature away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze.
Store solutions for intraocular use at 8°C to 30°C (46°F-86°F); 
avoid excessive heat, and do not freeze. Discard solution after 6 
hours. Store BSS Plus® solutions at 2°C to 25°C (36°F-77°F); do not 
freeze. Discard prepared solution after 6 hours. Do not use unfin -
ished solutions on a different patient.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
It is not recommended to add any other solutions or drugs to in -
traocular or extraocular irrigating solutions; however, extra-label 
additives in some protocols have included heparin, epinephrine, an-
tibiotics, or local anesthetics.
For reconstituting BSS Plus® solutions: Reconstitute solution just 
prior to use in surgery. Follow the same strict aseptic reconstitution 
procedures used for IV solution additives. Remove the blue flip-off  
seal from the part 1 (480 mL) bottle. Remove the blue flip-off seal 
from the part 2 (20 mL) vial. Clean and disinfect the rubber stoppers 
on both containers by using sterile alcohol wipes. Transfer the con -
tents of the part 2 vial to the part 1 bottle using the vacuum transfer 
device (provided). An alternative method of solution transfer may 
be accomplished by using a syringe to remove precisely 20 mL of 
the part 2 solution and transfer to the part 1 container through the 
outer target area of the rubber stopper. NOTE: An excess volume of 
the part 2 solution is provided in each vial; discard unused solution. 
Gently agitate the contents to mix the solutions. Place a sterile cap on 
the bottle if the solution is not going to be used immediately. Remove 
the tear-off portion of the label. Record the time and date of reconsti-
tution and the patient’s name on the bottle label.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Several products are marketed as eye washes or rinses for animal pa-
tients, including Clear Eyes®, Conquer Hy-Optic®, Nutri-Vet® Dog Eye 
Rinse, and Vetericyn® Plus Eye Wash . Ingredients vary significant -
ly, and some are labeled only as tear stain removers. None of these 
products appear to be FDA-approved, and they should NOT be used 
for intraocular procedures.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Irrigating Solutions, Intraocular
Balanced Salt Solution Irrigating Solution in 15 mL, 18 mL, 30 mL, 250 
mL, or 500 mL; preservative-free containing 0.64% NaCl, 0.075% KCl, 
0.03% magnesium chloride, 0.048% calcium chloride, 0.39% sodium 
acetate, 0.17% sodium citrate, and NaOH or HCl; BSS®, generic; (Rx)
Balanced Salt Solution Plus; in 2 parts in 10 mL (part 1) and 240 mL 
(part 2) in a 250 mL bottle; preservative-free containing 0.0154% cal-
cium chloride, 0.714% sodium chloride, 0.038% potassium chloride, 
0.02% magnesium chloride, 0.42% sodium phosphate, 0.2% sodium 
bicarbonate, 0.092% dextrose, 0.0184% glutathione disulfide; BSS 
Plus®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Itraconazole Ophthalmic
(it-ruh-kon-uh-zohl) Sporanox®
Azole Antifungal Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used as a treatment for ocular surface fungal infections
 ▶ Not commercially available as an ophthalmic preparation; 
must be compounded
 ▶ Compounded forms contain 10% to 30% DMSO, which may be 
irritating when administered.
 ▶ Warn caregivers to wear nitrile gloves when applying this 
medication to protect them from DMSO exposure.
Uses/Indications
Itraconazole ophthalmic preparations are primarily used to treat 
fungal keratitis in horses 1,2; however, they have successfully been 
used in dogs with fungal keratitis.3 
Pharmacology/Actions
Itraconazole interacts with 14 alpha-sterol demethylase, a cytochrome 
P-450 enzyme involved in the conversion of lanosterol to ergosterol. 
Ergosterol is an essential component of the fungal cell membrane, 
and preventing its synthesis may increase cellular permeability and 
cause leakage of cellular contents. Other possible effects of itracon -
azole include inhibition of endogenous respiration, purine uptake and 
yeast to mycelial transformation, and impairment of triglyceride and 
phospholipid biosynthesis. Targeted oxidative enzymes of fungal spe-
cies, rather than mammalian cells, increase efficacy and decrease host 
toxicity. Itraconazole is usually effective against Aspergillus spp, with 
variable efficacy versus Candida spp and consistently lower efficacy 
against Fusarium spp.1,2 Identification of fungal species prior to treat-
ment is critical to the success of  treatment.4  
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Itraconazole is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Com -
pounded itraconazole 1% in DMSO 30% may cause irritation to the 
cornea. A solution of DMSO 1% is commonly used as a control for 
corneal irritation in ophthalmic drug studies.5 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include stinging and 
irritation from the DMSO component. Although systemic absorp -
tion of topically applied ointments is unlikely, systemic exposure 
to itraconazole has resulted in hepatotoxicity and hearing loss in 
humans. Compared with miconazole and natamycin, itraconazole 
demonstrates lower toxic effects on corneal epithelial cells in vitro.6 
Dosages
Fungal keratitis (extra-label): 1 – 2 drops, ½ inch strip, or 0.1 mL 
in the subpalpebral lavage (SPL) catheter to the affected eye(s) every 
2 to 3 hours initially, followed by tapering of frequency based on 
clinical response 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: corneal scrapings with cytology and cultures to 
determine the clearing of fungal organisms
 ■ Resolution of clinical signs of infection
 ■ Toxicity: monitor for ocular irritation (eg, corneal edema, chemo-
sis, blepharospasm) from DMSO
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian. 
 ■ A garlic-like odor is normal (from the DMSO solvent).
 ■ Wear nitrile gloves when applying to prevent absorption of DMSO 
solvent found in the medicine.

===== PDF_PAGE_1402 =====
Ketorolac Ophthalmic   1375
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store as directed on package labeling away from moisture and sun-
light Do not freeze. Discard if the color or consistency  changes.
Storage/Stability
Store this product as directed on the label from the compounding 
pharmacy. Keep this product away from moisture and sunlight; do 
not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Itraconazole ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed direct -
ly with any other ophthalmic medications. Itraconazole ophthalmic 
preparations are not commercially available, but a compounded 
preparation containing 30% DMSO has been described.7,8 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Itraconazole ophthalmic products are not commercially available 
and must be prepared (compounded) by a qualified compounding 
pharmacist. Itraconazole has been compounded into a 1% ophthal -
mic ointment in a base containing 10% to 30% DMSO or into a 1% 
ophthalmic solution containing 30% DMSO. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Ketorolac Ophthalmic
(kee-toe-role-ak) Acular®, Acular LS®, Acuvail®
Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drug (NSAID)
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to control anterior segment inflammation, particularly in 
association with seasonal allergic conjunctivitis
 ▶ May cause transient increases in intraocular pressure (IOP)
 ▶ May delay ocular wound healing and increase risk for intraoc-
ular bleeding
Uses/Indications
Ketorolac ophthalmic is indicated for controlling anterior segment 
inflammation (eg, conjunctivitis, keratitis, anterior uveitis), inducing 
mydriasis during cataract-removal surgery, and for providing anal -
gesia following surgical removal of cataracts. In diabetic patients, 
ketorolac may be useful to avoid the systemic effects of topically ap-
plied corticosteroids. Ketorolac is also indicated to alleviate the signs 
of allergic conjunctivitis. Ketorolac did not decrease corneal sensi -
tivity in the eyes of normal dogs, 1 suggesting that its use as an oph -
thalmic analgesic may be limited; however, analgesic effects might 
improve in the presence of ocular pain.
Pharmacology/Actions
Ketorolac is an NSAID that blocks prostaglandin synthesis by in -
hibiting cyclooxygenase 1 and 2. Prostaglandins mediate many of 
the adverse effects of intraocular inflammation, including disrup -
tion of the blood-aqueous humor barrier, vasodilation, increased 
vascular permeability, leukocytosis, and increased intraocular pres -
sure. Blocking prostaglandin production, therefore, minimizes the 
adverse short- and long-term effects of intraocular inflammation. 
Prostaglandins also appear to play a role in the miotic response pro-
duced during ocular surgery by constricting the iris sphincter inde -
pendently of cholinergic mechanisms. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Ketorolac is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. The po -
tential for cross-sensitivity to acetylsalicylic acid, phenylacetic acid 
derivatives, and other NSAIDs exists.2 In humans that have either a 
known hypersensitivity to aspirin or NSAIDs or a past medical his -
tory of asthma, there have been reports of bronchospasm or exacer-
bation of asthma associated with the use of ketorolac tromethamine 
ophthalmic solution. Therefore, caution should be used when treat-
ing individuals that have previously exhibited sensitivities to these 
drugs. Topical NSAIDs may result in corneal epithelial breakdown, 
delayed corneal wound healing, and corneal thinning, erosion, or ul-
ceration. As such, ketorolac ophthalmic should be used with caution 
in patients with complicated or repeated ocular surgeries, corneal 
denervation, corneal epithelial defects, diabetes mellitus, and cor -
neal surface diseases (eg, KCS). 2 As topical corticosteroids are also 
known delay healing, concomitant use with topical NSAIDs may in-
crease the potential for delayed or impaired healing. Due to interfer-
ence with thrombocyte aggregation, ophthalmic NSAIDs may cause 
increased bleeding of ocular tissues (eg, hyphema) in conjunction 
with ocular surgery. It is recommended that ketorolac ophthalmic 
solution be used with caution in patients with known bleeding ten -
dencies (eg, severe liver disease) or in those receiving anticoagulant 
medications (eg, heparins, rivaroxaban), which may prolong bleed -
ing time.1  
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include transient 
stinging and burning on instillation, corneal edema, iritis, ocular in-
flammation, ocular irritation, superficial keratitis, and superficial oc-
ular infections.1 Ocular bleeding may occur because of interference 
with thrombocyte aggregation. Other adverse effects that have rarely 
occurred in humans include corneal infiltrates, corneal ulcers, eye 
dryness, headaches, and visual disturbance (blurry vision).
Although unlikely, systemic adverse effects may occur with the 
use of topical NSAIDs, including increased risk for gastric ulcer -
ation, decreased platelet aggregation, worsening of asthma and car -
diac disease, and renal toxicity. Concurrent use of systemic NSAIDs 
and corticosteroids increases the risk for systemic adverse effects.
Dosages
Allergic conjunctivitis: 1 drop to the affected eye(s) 2 to 4 times 
daily
Anterior segment inflammation (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected 
eye(s) 2 to 4 times daily
Postoperative analgesia: 1 drop to the surgical eye 2 to 4 times  daily, 
beginning one day prior to surgery and continuing for 2 weeks post-
operative
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy (eg, decreased or absent anterior segment inflam-
mation)
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, delayed wound healing)
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in solutions.
 ■ Ketorolac ophthalmic may cause burning or stinging on admin -
istration. It may also increase the risk for bleeding and may slow 
down healing in the eye.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.

===== PDF_PAGE_1403 =====
1376    Ketotifen Ophthalmic
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine in the refrigerator or at room temperature 
away from moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is tak-
ing this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
Storage/Stability
Store as directed on package labeling (15°C-25°C [59°F-77°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Ketorolac should not be mixed directly with any other drugs. Ke -
torolac is not available as an ophthalmic ointment. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Ketorolac Tromethamine 0.5% Ophthalmic Solution (containing ke-
torolac tromethamine 5 mg/mL; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; ede-
tate disodium 0.1%; octoxynol 40; purified water; NaCl; HCl and/or 
NaOH to adjust the pH to 7.4 and osmolality of 290 mOsm/kg), in a 
5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Acular®, generic; (Rx)
Ketorolac Tromethamine 0.4% Ophthalmic Solution (containing ke-
torolac tromethamine 0.4%; benzalkonium chloride 0.006%; edetate 
disodium 0.015%; octoxynol 40; purified water; NaOH; HCl and/or 
NaOH to adjust pH to ≈7.4), 5 mL in a 10 mL sterile ophthalmic 
dropper bottle; Acular LS®, generic; (Rx)
Ketorolac Tromethamine 0.45% Ophthalmic Solution (contain -
ing ketorolac tromethamine 0.45%; carboxymethylcellulose; NaCl; 
 sodium citrate dehydrate; purified water; NaOH and/or HCl to ad -
just pH), in 30 single-use vials of 0.4 mL each; Acuvail®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Ketotifen Ophthalmic
(kee-toe-tye-fin) Alaway®, Zaditor® 
Antihistamine Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Relatively selective H1 blocker used to treat allergic 
 conjunctivitis
 ▶ Use up to 2 times daily
Uses/Indications
In veterinary patients, ketotifen is used to provide temporary relief 
of the clinical signs associated with allergic conjunctivitis. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Ketotifen is a relatively selective, noncompetitive histamine antago-
nist (H1 receptor) and mast cell stabilizer. Ketotifen inhibits the re -
lease of mediators (eg, histamine, leukotrienes C4 and D4 [SRS-A], 
platelet-activating factor) from mast cells, during hypersensitivity 
reactions; ketotifen also decreases chemotaxis and activation of eo -
sinophils. Evaluation of the effectiveness of the topical ocular appli-
cation of ketotifen in veterinary species has not been performed.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Ketotifen is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hyper-
sensitivity to it or any component of the formulation.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include conjunctival injection, 
rhinitis, ocular allergic reactions, burning or stinging of the eye, con-
junctivitis, eye discharge, dry eye, eye pain, eyelid disorder, itching 
eye, keratitis, lacrimation disorder, mydriasis, photophobia, rash, 
and pharyngitis.
Dosages
Allergic conjunctivitis  (extra-label):  1 drop in the affected eye(s) 
twice daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Resolution or relief of signs of allergic conjunctivitis (pruritus, 
tearing, squinting, erythema)
Client Information
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 to 10 minutes after applying this medication before ap-
plying any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication in the refrigerator or at room temperature 
away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. Do not use this 
medication if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, or if there 
are particles in solutions.
Storage/Stability
Store this medication in the refrigerator or at controlled room tem -
perature away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Ketotifen should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any other 
drugs. Ketotifen is not available as an ophthalmic ointment. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Ketotifen Fumarate 0.025% Ophthalmic Solution (containing: ke -
totifen fumarate equivalent to 0.25 mg ketotifen per milliliter; ben -
zalkonium chloride 0.01%; glycerol; NaOH/HCl to adjust pH to  
4.4 to 5.8; water for injection; with an osmolality of 210 to  
300 mOsm/kg), in a 5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Alaway®, Za-
ditor®, generic; (OTC)
Ketotifen Fumarate 0.035% Ophthalmic Solution (containing: keto-
tifen fumarate equivalent to 0.25 mg ketotifen per milliliter; benzal-
konium chloride 0.01%; glycerol; NaOH/ HCl to adjust pH to 4.4 to 
5.8; water for injection; with an osmolality of 210 – 300 mOsm/kg), 
in a 5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Alaway®, generic; (OTC)
Latanoprost Ophthalmic
(la-ta-noe-prost) Rocklatan®, Vyzulta®, Xalatan®, Xelpros®
Prostaglandin Analogue 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to decrease intraocular pressure (IOP) in patients with 
primary glaucoma or ocular hypertension
 ▶ Not effective for most cases of feline or equine glaucoma
 ▶ Do not use if IOP inflammation is present, as it may worsen 
inflammation or lead to pupillary block glaucoma.
 ▶ Twice-daily dosing results in less fluctuation of IOP .
 ▶ Preservatives may cause ocular irritation. 
Uses/Indications
In dogs, latanoprost is used to reduce intraocular pressure (IOP) 
to manage primary glaucoma. Up to 60% reduction in IOP can be 
achieved with either once-daily 1 or twice-daily administration in 
dogs, with twice-daily administration resulting in lower and less 

===== PDF_PAGE_1404 =====
Levobunolol Ophthalmic   1377
variable IOP .2 When it is administered in combination with a topical 
NSAID to normotensive canine eyes, latanoprost’s ocular hypoten-
sive effects are lessened,3 whereas administration with a topical corti-
costeroid to normotensive canine eyes does not adversely impact the 
ocular hypotensive effects.4 
Latanoprost is generally not indicated for use in cats with glauco-
ma, as it does not lower IOP in normal feline eyes,1 and glaucoma in 
cats is frequently secondary to uveitis (latanoprost is contraindicated 
in the presence of uveitis). Although encountered uncommonly in 
clinical practice, primary congenital glaucoma in cats may be effec -
tively managed with latanoprost, with an IOP reduction of up to 60% 
initially and efficacy decreasing over 3 weeks of treatment.5 
Use in horses is generally not indicated due to relatively poor 
IOP-lowering effect and an association with a high incidence of ad -
verse effects (eg, ocular discomfort)6; however, concurrent adminis-
tration of topical latanoprost and diclofenac to normal equine eyes 
has demonstrated IOP reduction and reduced signs of discomfort.7  
Pharmacology/Actions
Prostaglandin analogues are chemically modified versions of pros -
taglandin F2-alpha, an endogenous inflammatory molecule that 
mediates ocular hypotensive effects by increasing outflow of aque -
ous humor through both the trabecular meshwork and uveoscleral 
outflow routes. In addition to reducing intraocular pressure (IOP), 
latanoprost leads to miosis. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Latanoprost is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Latanoprost 
should be used with caution in the presence of anterior uveitis and sec-
ondary glaucoma, particularly in cases already exhibiting significant 
miosis, as this treatment may exacerbate miosis, promote synechiae 
formation, and worsen glaucoma. Latanoprost should also be used 
with caution in dogs with primary anterior lens luxation, as the mio-
sis that results may trap the lens and/or vitreous within the pupillary 
aperture, thus creating pupillary block glaucoma. Latanoprost is not 
contraindicated in dogs with secondary posterior lens luxation, as the 
miosis may (favorably) trap the lens in the posterior segment.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include blurred vi -
sion, burning and stinging, conjunctival hyperemia, foreign body 
sensation, itching, increased pigmentation of the iris, and punctate 
epithelial keratopathy. Latanoprost may worsen intraocular inflam-
mation. Latanoprost may cause darkening of the iris through direct 
stimulation of iris melanocytes, and it may also cause eyelash chang-
es (eg, increased length, thickness, pigmentation, and the number of 
lashes) and eyelid skin darkening. Macular edema, including cystoid 
macular edema, has been reported after the use of latanoprost in hu-
mans. Horses develop conjunctival hyperemia, epiphora, and bleph-
arospasm with latanoprost’s administration.8
Dosages
Glaucoma (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) once to twice 
daily
Monitoring
 ■ Confirm maintenance of intraocular pressure (IOP) within the 
normal range for the species being treated
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as indicated by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store unopened bottle(s) under refrigeration. Do not freeze. Once 
a bottle is opened for use, it may be stored at room temperature 
(up to 25°C [77°F]), protected from light, for up to for 6 weeks. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in solutions.
Storage/Stability
Protect this product from light. Store unopened bottle(s) under re -
frigeration at 2°C to 8°C (36°F-46°F) 9; do not freeze. During ship -
ment to the owner, the bottle may be maintained at temperatures 
up to 40°C (104°F) for a period not exceeding 8 days. Once a bottle 
is opened for use, it may be stored at room temperature up to 25°C 
(77°F) for 6 weeks. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Latanoprost ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Latanoprost 0.005% Ophthalmic Solution (containing 50 µg of lata-
noprost per milliliter; benzalkonium chloride 0.02%; NaCl; sodium 
dihydrogen phosphate monohydrate; disodium hydrogen phosphate 
anhydrous; water for injection, with a pH of ≈6.7 and an osmolality 
of ≈267 mOsm/kg), in 2.5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; Xalatan®, 
generic; (Rx)
Latanoprost 0.005% Ophthalmic Solution (containing 50 µg of lata-
noprost; potassium sorbate 4.7 mg; castor oil; sodium borate; boric 
acid; propylene glycol; edetate disodium; polyoxyl 15 hydroxystea -
rate; sodium hydroxide; hydrochloric acid; water for injection), in 
2.5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; Xelpros® (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED COMBINATION PRODUCTS:
Netardusil 0.02% and latanoprost 0.005% Ophthalmic Solution 
(containing netarsudil 0.285 mg; latanoprost 0.050 mg; benzalkoni -
um chloride 0.20 mg; mannitol; boric acid; sodium hydroxide to ad-
just pH; water for injection), in 2.5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; 
Rocklatan® (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb.
Levobunolol Ophthalmic
(lee-voe-byoon-uh-lol) Akbeta®, Betagan® 
Nonselective Beta-Adrenergic Blocker
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Decreases aqueous humor production to lower intraocular 
pressure (IOP) as a treatment for glaucoma
 ▶ May delay onset of glaucoma in the normal eye of dogs with 
unilateral glaucoma
 ▶ Use with caution in asthmatic patients due to the potential to 
induce bronchospasm. 
Uses/Indications
Levobunolol is used to reduce intraocular pressure (IOP) in prima -
ry glaucoma and as prophylaxis to prevent glaucoma in the normal 
eye of animals with unilateral glaucoma. In dogs, the magnitude of 
reduction in IOP is less with levobunolol alone as compared with 
the combination of levobunolol and dorzolamide, 1 and timolol and 
dorzolamide.2 
Pharmacology/Actions
Levobunolol is a nonselective beta-adrenergic blocking agent with 
associated intrinsic sympathomimetic activity but without signifi -

===== PDF_PAGE_1405 =====
1378    Levofloxacin Ophthalmic
cant membrane-stabilizing activity; the significance of which is not 
fully understood in ophthalmic use. Blockade of ciliary body beta 
receptors, particularly beta-2 receptors, reduces intraocular pressure 
(IOP) by decreasing aqueous humor production. The exact mecha -
nism of the ocular hypotensive effect of beta-blockers is not clear. 
Several mechanisms have been postulated for this effect, including 
beta-blockade of norepinephrine-induced tonic sympathetic stimu-
lation, leading to decreased activation of cAMP in the ciliary body, 
inhibition of Na+K+ATPase activity, or vasoactive mechanisms on 
the iris and ciliary body. Topically administered beta-blockers also 
inhibit glutamine-induced increases in intracellular calcium and 
sodium, thereby providing a potential protective effect against isch-
emic insult to the retina.3 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Levobunolol is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Levobun -
olol should be used cautiously, if at all, in patients with heart block, 
bradycardia, heart failure, asthma, chronic bronchitis, or other car -
diopulmonary conditions.1
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include transient 
burning, stinging, and irritation upon application to the eye. Topi -
cally applied levobunolol led to a significant reduction in heart rate 
in healthy dogs, thus supporting its limited use in dogs with cardio-
pulmonary conditions.
Dosages
Glaucoma (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) twice daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Confirm maintenance of intraocular pressure (IOP) within the 
normal range for the species being treated
 ■ Observe asthmatic and diabetic patients for respiratory difficulty 
or acute hypoglycemia, respectively.
 ■ Heart rate
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 to 10 minutes after applying this medicine before apply-
ing any other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in solutions.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (15°C-25°C 
[59°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Levobunolol ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Levobunolol 0.25% Ophthalmic Solution (containing levobunolol 
HCl 0.5%; benzalkonium chloride 0.004%; polyvinyl alcohol 1.4%; 
edetate disodium; sodium metabisulfite; sodium phosphate, dibasic; 
potassium phosphate, monobasic; NaCl; HCl or NaOH to adjust the 
pH; purified water), in 5, 10, and 15 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; 
Akbeta®, Betagan®; (Rx)
Levobunolol 0.5% Ophthalmic Solution (containing benzalkonium 
chloride 0.004%; polyvinyl alcohol 1.4%; edetate disodium; sodi -
um metabisulfite; sodium phosphate, dibasic; potassium phosphate, 
monobasic; NaCl; HCl or NaOH to adjust the pH; purified water), 
in 5, 10, and 15 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; Akbeta®, Betagan®, 
generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Levofloxacin Ophthalmic
(lev-oh-flocks-a sin) 
Third-Generation Fluoroquinolone Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat confirmed bacterial conjunctivitis or keratitis 
based on culture and susceptibility; prophylactic use is not 
recommended.
 ▶ Physically incompatible with many drugs; therefore, it should 
not be directly mixed with other ophthalmic medications.
 ▶ Crystalline drug precipitates may be noted in the superficial 
portion of corneal defects when levofloxacin is used on the 
eye.
Uses/Indications
Levofloxacin ophthalmic may be used to treat bacterial conjuncti -
vitis or keratitis caused by susceptible strains of Staphylococcus spp, 
Streptococcus spp, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Chlamydophila spp, and 
Haemophilus spp.1 Levofloxacin is effective against other gram-pos-
itive and gram-negative organisms; however, its potency is not con-
sidered significantly greater than that of second-generation fluoro -
quinolones (eg, ciprofloxacin), particularly versus Staphylococcus 
spp.1,2 The increased clinical efficacy of levofloxacin may be afforded 
by increased penetration to ocular tissues.3 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated levoflox-
acin as a Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobial in hu -
man medicine.2
Pharmacology/Actions
Levofloxacin is a third-generation fluoroquinolone antibiotic that 
acts via the inhibition of bacterial topoisomerase II (DNA gyrase), 
leading to impaired DNA replication and repair. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Levofloxacin should not be used prophylactically and is contraindi-
cated in patients that have a history of hypersensitivity to it, other 
fluoroquinolones, or any component of the formulation. It should 
only be used as a topical ophthalmic. It should not be injected sub -
conjunctivally or into the anterior chamber of the eye. Fluoroquino-
lone-induced retinal toxicity in domestic cats has not been demon -
strated with this product.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include blurred vi -
sion, tearing, eye pain, redness, itching, and a bad taste in the mouth. 
Crystalline drug precipitates may be noted in the superficial portion 
of corneal defects when levofloxacin is used.4
Dosages
Conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop in affected eye(s) every 2 to 8 
hours
Keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop in affected eye(s) every 2 to 8 hours, or 
0.1 mL in the subpalpebral lavage (SPL) catheter every 2 to 8 hours. 
May precipitate when mixed with other ophthalmic medications; 
therefore, it is important to flush SPL catheter well with air between 
medications.

===== PDF_PAGE_1406 =====
Lidocaine Ophthalmic   1379
Monitoring
 ■ Corneal cytology and culture to evaluate for the presence of bacteria
 ■ Clinical efficacy: improvement and resolution of clinical signs as-
sociated with bacterial infection
 ■ If blepharospasm, uveitis, worsening of ulceration, or no im -
provement in infection occur within 7 days, reassess microbial 
susceptibility.
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Crystals may appear on the surface of the eye during treatment 
with levofloxacin ophthalmic.
 ■ Do not mix this medicine with other eye medications. 
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is 
receiving this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up 
visits.
 ■ Store this medication in the refrigerator or at room temperature. 
Do not freeze.
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in the solutions.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the at controlled room temperature (15°C-25°C 
[59°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics interact with many other drugs, includ-
ing those containing cations (eg, iron, aluminum, magnesium, cal -
cium). Levofloxacin should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any 
other drugs. Levofloxacin is not available as an ophthalmic ointment. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Levofloxacin 0.5% ophthalmic solution (containing levofloxacin 
5 mg/mL, benzalkonium chloride 0.005%, NaCl, and water. May also 
contain HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH to 6.5 with an osmolality of 
≈300 mOsm/kg), in a 5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Lidocaine Ophthalmic
(lye-doe-kane) 
Topical Ocular Anesthetic
For other uses of lidocaine, see Lidocaine, Systemic; Lidocaine, Local 
Anesthetic; Lidocaine, Topical
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Injectable local anesthetic that may be used for analgesia for 
ocular diagnostic and therapeutic procedures
 ▶ Should never be prescribed for at-home administration
 ▶ Dose- and species-dependent duration, with maximal effect 
generally between 1 and 5 minutes in dogs, cats, and horses
Uses/Indications
Lidocaine is a local anesthetic available as an injectable solution or 
an ophthalmic topical gel that can be administered topically to facil-
itate ophthalmic diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, including 
measurement of intraocular pressure (tonometry), corneal and con-
junctival sampling for cytology and culture, ocular ultrasonography, 
and gonioscopy. Lidocaine is indicated as an adjunctive anesthetic 
for performing therapeutic procedures in the hospital, including 
removal of foreign bodies and sutures from the cornea, eyelid and 
conjunctival surgeries, corneal grafting procedures, and cataract ex-
traction. Lidocaine demonstrates maximal effect generally between  
1 and 5 minutes, lasting around 20 to 25 minutes in dogs 1,2 and ≈45 
to 55 minutes in horses.3–5 The degree of anesthesia in normal canine 
eyes was comparable to that of topically applied bupivacaine and 
ropivacaine.6 Due to the likelihood of developing ocular surface tox-
icities with prolonged or repeated use, it should never be prescribed 
for use as an ocular analgesic.
Pharmacology/Actions
Lidocaine induces local anesthesia by inhibiting neuronal depolar -
ization, thus preventing the generation of an action potential. This 
action occurs due to the binding of the local anesthetic molecule to 
the intracellular portion of the voltage-gated sodium channel within 
the neuron, thus inhibiting the intracellular movement of sodium. 
Variations in the structure of different local anesthetics influence 
their relative potencies. All local anesthetics have increased efficacy 
in alkaline environments due to improved intracellular penetration; 
efficacy is decreased in the acidic environment of inflammation. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Lidocaine is contraindicated in patients with a history of hypersen -
sitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Prolonged use of 
a topical ocular anesthetic will likely produce significant corneal ep-
ithelial and stromal disease, as well as tear film instability, and may 
result in loss of vision.7 
Adverse Effects
Instillation of lidocaine may result in local irritation (eg, blepharo -
spasm, conjunctival hyperemia) several hours after administration.  
Patients sensitive to other local anesthetics may be less likely to re -
act to proparacaine; however, local or systemic sensitivity may still 
occur and manifest as a pseudo-allergic (anaphylactoid) reaction 
mimicking an IgE-mediated vasodilatory event. Cardiovascular, re -
spiratory, and CNS depressant effects that may result from other lo-
cal anesthetics are extremely rare with the appropriate use of topical 
anesthetics. Care should be exercised, however, when administering 
to small veterinary patients (ie, puppies, kittens, “pocket pets” , am-
phibians) that may be more susceptible to the effects of systemical -
ly absorbed drug. Use as a therapeutic analgesic leads to superficial 
punctate keratitis, which may progress to diffuse necrotizing kerati-
tis, severe infiltrative keratitis, persistent epithelial defects, or dam -
age to Descemet’s membrane. Application of the topical ophthalmic 
and nonophthalmic gels in normal dog 1,2 and horse 3 eyes induced 
conjunctival hyperemia and punctate epithelial damage.
Dosages
Ophthalmic procedures requiring local anesthesia in small ani -
mal species  (extra-label): 1 – 2 drops in the target eye(s) prior to 
examination or procedure. May repeat 1 drop every 5 to 10 minutes 
for 2 to 3 additional times. Additional doses should be avoided in 
small patients (puppies, kittens, “pocket pets” , amphibians). 
Ophthalmic procedures requiring local anesthesia in horses  (ex-
tra-label): Using an ophthalmic topical gel, 0.2 mL in the target eye(s) 
prior to examination or procedure.3,5,8 Onset of analgesia is within 1 
to 5 minutes and duration is ≈45 to 55 minutes.
Monitoring 
 ■ Clinical effect. The onset of action indicated by an awake patient 
that is permitting diagnostic procedures to be performed and by 
a reduction in anesthetic requirements when administered pre -
operatively

===== PDF_PAGE_1407 =====
1380    Lissamine Green Ophthalmic
Client Information
 ■ Animal owners must not administer lidocaine in the home. Its 
use is limited to diagnostic procedures performed in the veteri -
nary clinical setting.
Storage/Stability
Store at controlled room temperature 15°C to 25°C (59°F-77°F) and 
protected from sunlight; do not freeze. Discard single-use containers 
after use. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Lidocaine should not be mixed directly with any other ophthalmic 
drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Lidocaine HCl 3.5% ophthalmic gel (containing 35 mg lidocaine 
HCl per mL; hypromellose; NaCl; purified water; HCl, and/or NaOH 
to adjust pH), in 1 mL tubes and 5 mL in a 10 mL round plastic drop-
per bottle; Akten® (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Lissamine Green Ophthalmic
(lis-ah-meen) Green Glo®
Ocular Diagnostic Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Vital dye that demonstrates corneal and conjunctival epithelial 
cell damage, as well as deficiency in ocular surface mucins
 ▶ Less stinging on administration than is associated with rose 
bengal
 ▶ Requires broader interpretive experience than fluorescein 
staining
 ▶ Unapproved drug with periodic market shortages
Uses/Indications
Lissamine green is used as a diagnostic agent when superficial cor -
neal or conjunctival epithelial damage is suspected. Lissamine green 
does not sting on application like rose bengal, but interpretation of 
the results requires broader evaluative experience than that for rose 
bengal and fluorescein. A grading scale that implements slit-lamp 
biomicroscopy to evaluate the regions of uptake is used in humans, 
and lissamine green has recently been demonstrated to be an effec -
tive adjunctive diagnostic test for the evaluation of qualitative and 
quantitative tear film deficiencies in dogs.1,2 
Pharmacology/Actions
Lissamine green stains the cornea and conjunctiva blue upon in -
stillation, resulting in speckling of the cornea and conjunctiva if ul -
cerations or dry patches from muco-deficient or damaged epithelial 
cells are present. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Lissamine green is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Lissamine 
green has demonstrated antimicrobial activity against gram-positive 
and gram-negative organisms; thus, samples for bacterial culture 
should be collected before administration of lissamine green.3
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects of lissamine green reported in humans or animals 
include stinging on instillation.
Dosages
Detection of corneal change: Wet the surface of the lissamine green 
strip with 1 to 2 drops of normal saline solution. Apply moistened tip 
to the conjunctiva or fornix as required. Allow the patient to blink sev-
eral times after application to disperse the dye across the surface of the 
eye. Wait 60 seconds, then read with a white light source. Blue speck-
ling will be evident for areas of the damaged or muco-deficient cornea. 
Monitoring
 ■ Lissamine green ophthalmic is a diagnostic agent. Monitoring is 
not required.
Client Information
 ■ Lissamine green is not used at home by animal caregivers.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in a well-ventilated place protected from moisture 
and light; do not freeze.4 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Lissamine green ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed di -
rectly with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Lissamine Green 1.5 mg Strips (containing 1.5 mg of lissamine green 
per strip), in individually wrapped strips in containers of 100 strips; 
Green Glo®; (Rx). There are no FDA-approved forms of lissamine 
green strips.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Lodoxamide Ophthalmic
(loe-doks-a-mide) Alomide®
Mast Cell Stabilizer
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Topical mast cell stabilizer used to treat seasonal conjunctivitis 
Uses/Indications
Lodoxamide may be used to treat allergic conjunctivitis. No studies 
describing the efficacy and safety of lodoxamide after topical admin-
istration have been performed in veterinary patients.
Pharmacology/Actions
Lodoxamide is a mast cell stabilizer with efficacy in treatment of 
type I hypersensitivity reactions (IgE-mediated). Mast cell inhibition 
decreases vascular permeability, thus diminishing the signs associ -
ated with conjunctivitis. It does not possess vasoconstrictor, anti -
histaminic, cyclooxygenase inhibition, or other anti-inflammatory 
 activity. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Lodoxamide is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation.1 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include transient burning, sting-
ing, or discomfort on instillation. 1 Additional adverse effects that 
were infrequently reported include ocular itching, blurred vision, 
dry eye, tearing, discharge, hyperemic, crystalline deposits, foreign 
body sensation, corneal erosion/ulcer, lid/lash scales, eye pain, oc -
ular edema/swelling, ocular warming sensation, ocular fatigue, che-
mosis, anterior chamber cells, keratopathy/keratitis, blepharitis, al -
lergy, stick sensation, and epitheliopathy. Nonocular adverse events 
that were infrequently reported include headache, heat sensation, 
dizziness, somnolence, nausea, stomach discomfort, sneezing, dry 
nose, and rash. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1408 =====
Loteprednol Ophthalmic    1381
Dosages
Conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) 4 times 
daily for up to 3 months
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolution of conjunctival redness, itching, and 
discomfort
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying 
any other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store at room temperature away from moisture and sunlight. Do 
not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes or if there are par -
ticles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C 
[68°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Lodoxamide ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Lodoxamide Tromethamine Ophthalmic Solution 0.1% (containing 
lodoxamide tromethamine 1.78 mg, equivalent to 1 mg lodoxam -
ide; benzalkonium chloride 0.007%; mannitol; hypromellose 2910; 
sodium citrate; tyloxapol; citric acid; edetate disodium; NaOH and/
or HCl to adjust pH; purified water), in sterile 10 mL ophthalmic 
dropper bottle; Alomide®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Loteprednol Ophthalmic
(lote-uh-pred-nole) Lotemax®, Alrex®, Zylet®, Eysuvis®, Inveltys® 
Corticosteroid Anti-Inflammatory Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ A topical corticosteroid used to treat ocular surface and anteri-
or segment inflammatory conditions
 ▶ Do not use in bacterial, fungal, or viral keratitis or if corneal 
abrasion or ulceration are suspected.
 ▶ Use with caution in avian species due to risk for systemic corti-
costeroid effects.
Uses/Indications
Loteprednol ophthalmic is used to treat inflammatory conditions of 
the palpebral and bulbar conjunctiva, cornea, and anterior segment 
of the globe (eg, blepharitis, conjunctivitis, keratitis, anterior uveitis). 
In humans with dry eye syndrome, loteprednol has demonstrated 
benefit in the initial management of the condition before initiation 
or in conjunction with topically administered cyclosporine. 1,2 No 
studies describing the efficacy and safety of loteprednol after topical 
administration have been performed in veterinary patients.
Pharmacology/Actions
Corticosteroids have broad immunomodulatory and anti-inflamma-
tory actions, which are mediated via direct effects on gene expression, 
as well as by nongenomic effects on cell membranes and receptors. 
Ultimately, corticosteroids decrease pro-inflammatory gene transcrip-
tion, production of pro-inflammatory prostaglandins and leukot -
rienes, B- and T-cell number and function, cell-mediated immunity, 
and humoral immunity.3 The specific mechanisms involved in regulat-
ing ocular inflammation are not known. Loteprednol is a “soft” steroid 
(a metabolically labile moiety that undergoes hydrolysis to its active 
form within the cornea, thus allowing local anti-inflammatory effects 
to predominate relative to harmful adverse effects). 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Loteprednol is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Topical 
corticosteroids are contraindicated in known or suspected corneal 
ulceration or corneal infection (eg, bacterial, fungal, or viral). Use 
loteprednol with caution in patients with diabetes mellitus or other 
endocrine diseases, infectious diseases, chronic renal failure, conges-
tive heart failure, systemic hypertension, or gastric ulceration. When 
use of loteprednol is necessary in these conditions, the minimal ef -
fective dose should be administered for the shortest possible time.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include development of cata -
racts (via altered glucose or lenticular metabolic effects), increased 
intraocular pressure (IOP; via activation of glucocorticoid receptors 
in the trabecular meshwork), infection (via immunosuppression), 
decreased wound healing (via increased collagenolytic activity), 
mydriasis, and calcific keratopathy. Increased IOP and development 
of cataracts are minimized with loteprednol relative to other topically 
administered corticosteroids.4–6  Systemic effects are rare but include 
hepatopathy, suppression of endogenous glucocorticoid production, 
and focal alopecia. Concurrent use of systemic steroids increases the 
risk for these adverse effects.
Dosages
Conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop or ¼ inch strip in the affected 
eye(s) every 4 to 8 hours, then gradually decrease the dosage, provid-
ed clinical improvement is maintained
Keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop or ¼ inch strip in the affected eye(s) 
every 4 to 8 hours, then gradually decrease the dosage, provided clin-
ical improvement is maintained
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) 
4 times daily for 2 weeks
Anterior uveitis (extra-label): 1 drop or ¼ inch strip in the affected 
eye(s) every 4 to 8 hours, then gradually decrease the dosage, provid-
ed clinical improvement is maintained
Perioperative cataract removal (extra-label): 1 drop in the surgical 
eye(s) 4 times daily, beginning 24 hours after surgery, continuing for 
2 weeks
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolution of inflammation
 ■ Monitor intraocular pressure (IOP) and observe for signs of in -
fection or delayed wound healing
 ■ Monitor for blood and/or urine glucose changes in diabetic an -
imals
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Shake suspensions well before using.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. 
 ■ Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying 
any other medicines to the eye.

===== PDF_PAGE_1409 =====
1382    Miconazole Ophthalmic
 ■ Store this medicine at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes or if there are parti-
cles in the solutions.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at room temperature (15°C-25°C [59°F-77°F]) 
away from moisture and sunlight. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Loteprednol ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Loteprednol Etabonate 0.2% Ophthalmic Suspension (containing 
loteprednol etabonate 2 mg, edetate disodium, glycerin, povidone, 
purified water, tyloxapol, HCl and/or NaOH may be added to adjust 
the pH, and benzalkonium chloride 0.10%, as an isotonic suspension 
of 250 – 310 mOsm/kg), in 10 mL sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; 
Alrex®; (Rx)
Loteprednol Etabonate 0.25% Ophthalmic Suspension (containing 
loteprednol etabonate 2.5 mg, glycerin, sodium citrate dihydrate, 
sodium chloride, poloxamer 407, edetate disodium dihydrate, cit -
ric acid, water for injection, and benzalkonium chloride 0.01%), in 
10 mL sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; Eysuvis®; (Rx)
Loteprednol Etabonate 0.38% Ophthalmic Gel (containing lotepre -
dnol etabonate 3.8 mg, boric acid, edetate disodium dihydrate, glyc-
erin, hypromellose, poloxamer, polycarbophil, propylene glycol, so-
dium chloride, water for injection, sodium hydroxide to adjust pH, 
and benzalkonium chloride 0.003%), in 10 mL ophthalmic dropper 
bottle; Lotemax SM®; (Rx)
Loteprednol Etabonate 0.5% Ophthalmic Gel (containing lotepred -
nol etabonate 5 mg, boric acid, edetate disodium dehydrate, glycerin, 
polycarbophil, propylene glycol, NaCl, tyloxapol, water for injection, 
NaOH to adjust pH to 6 to 7, and benzalkonium chloride 0.003%), 
in sterile 5 g ophthalmic tube; Lotemax®; (Rx)
Loteprednol Etabonate Ophthalmic Ointment 0.5% (containing 
loteprednol etabonate 5 mg, white petrolatum, and mineral oil), in a 
sterile 3.5 g ophthalmic tube; Lotemax®; (Rx)
Loteprednol Etabonate 0.5% Ophthalmic Suspension (contain -
ing loteprednol etabonate 5 mg, edetate disodium, glycerin, po -
vidone, purified water, tyloxapol, HCl and/or NaOH to adjust the 
pH, and benzalkonium chloride 0.01%, as an isotonic suspension of  
250 – 310 mOsm/kg), in 5 mL, 10 mL, and 15 mL ophthalmic drop-
per bottles; Lotemax®, generic; (Rx)
Loteprednol Etabonate 1% Ophthalmic Suspension (containing 
loteprednol etabonate 10 mg, glycerin, sodium citrate dihydrate, 
poloxamer 407, sodium chloride, edetate disodium dihydrate, cit -
ric acid, water for injection, and benzalkonium chloride 0.01%), in 
2.8 mL sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; Inveltys®; (Rx)
Loteprednol Etabonate 0.5% and Tobramycin 0.3% Ophthalmic Sus-
pension (containing loteprednol etabonate 5 mg, tobramycin 3 mg, 
edetate disodium, glycerin, povidone, purified water, tyloxapol, sul-
furic acid and/or NaOH to adjust the pH, and benzalkonium chlo -
ride, as an isotonic suspension of 260  – 320 mOsmol/kg), in sterile 
5 mL and 10 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; Zylet®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Loteprednol Ophthalmic
Miconazole Ophthalmic
(mye-kon-uh-zohl) 
Azole Antifungal Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat ocular surface fungal infections
 ▶ Not commercially available as an ophthalmic preparation; 
must be compounded
 ▶ Penetrates the cornea more efficiently than natamycin
Uses/Indications
Miconazole ophthalmic solution is primarily used to treat fungal 
keratitis in horses; however, it has been successfully used to treat ker-
atomycosis in a dog. 1 Miconazole has a broad antifungal spectrum 
against most fungi and yeasts of veterinary interest. Sensitive organ-
isms include Blastomyces dermatitidis, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, 
Histoplasma capsulatum, Candida spp, Coccidioides immitis, Crypto-
coccus neoformans, and Aspergillus fumigatus. Some Aspergillus spp 
and Fusarium spp are only marginally sensitive.
Pharmacology/Actions
Miconazole interacts with 14-alpha-sterol demethylase, a cyto -
chrome P-450 enzyme involved in the conversion of lanosterol to 
ergosterol. Ergosterol is an essential component of the fungal cell 
membrane; preventing its synthesis increases cellular permeability 
and causes leakage of cellular contents. Other antifungal effects of 
miconazole include inhibition of endogenous respiration, purine up-
take, the transformation of yeasts to mycelial forms, and impairment 
of triglyceride and phospholipid biosynthesis. 
Miconazole has a wide antifungal spectrum against most fungi 
and yeasts of veterinary interest; however, susceptibility of isolates 
of normal ocular surface microflora and isolates from horses with 
fungal keratitis indicates variable efficacy. Thus, culture and suscep-
tibility testing should be performed in horses with cytologically con-
firmed or suspected fungal keratitis.1–5 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Miconazole is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include transient 
burning or stinging on application. Miconazole may cause local irri-
tation if it is injected subconjunctivally. Although systemic absorp -
tion of topically applied solutions is unlikely, systemic exposure to 
miconazole has resulted in hepatotoxicity and hearing loss in hu -
mans. Miconazole had more cytotoxic effects on cultured corneal 
epithelial cells than itraconazole, but miconazole had less cytotoxic 
effects than natamycin.6 
Dosages
Equine fungal keratitis  (extra-label):  1 – 2 drops to the affected 
eye(s) or 0.1 mL in the subpalpebral lavage (SPL) catheter every 2 to 
3 hours initially, then taper the frequency based on clinical response 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: improvement and resolution of clinical signs as-
sociated with the fungal infection
 ■ Corneal scrapings with cytology and cultures to determine the 
clearing of fungal organisms
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.

===== PDF_PAGE_1410 =====
Mitomycin Ophthalmic   1383
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is 
receiving this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up 
visits.
 ■ Store this medication as directed on the product label. Do not 
freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in solutions.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]) or at 
controlled room temperature (20°C- 25°C [68°F-77°F]); check indi-
vidual labels for details, as recommendations vary by product. Do 
not freeze. Keep product away from moisture and sunlight.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Miconazole should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any other 
drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Miconazole has been compounded into a 1% ophthalmic solution 
that mimics the formerly commercially available Monistat IV® . 
Miconazole topical creams and ointments for dermatological use 
should NOT be used in the eye.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Mitomycin Ophthalmic
(mye-toe-mye-sin) Mitosol®, Mitomycin C
Cytotoxic Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Antifibrotic agent used adjunctively in periocular surgeries 
(most commonly used in glaucoma implant procedures) 
 ▶ Antineoplastic agent used for susceptible periocular and ocu-
lar surface tumors
 ▶ Product is normally blue in color.
 ▶ May cause periocular alopecia following treatment
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies mitomycin as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Because of its ability to reduce fibroblastic proliferation and pre -
vent subsequent scarring, mitomycin is used adjunctively in ocular 
surgeries, particularly to treat glaucoma by placement of drainage 
shunts or alternation of the natural aqueous humor outflow tracts;  
however, efficacy is unknown. 1–3 Mitomycin is also used as an ad -
junct to surgical removal for treatment of cutaneous and ocular sur-
face neoplastic conditions (eg, squamous cell carcinoma, hemangio-
sarcoma) to prevent recurrence.4–8
Pharmacology/Actions
Mitomycin binds DNA, which leads to cross-linking of DNA and 
subsequent inhibition of DNA synthesis and function. Evidence sug-
gests that at high concentrations of the drug, cellular RNA and pro-
tein synthesis are also suppressed. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Mitomycin is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Mitomycin 
is contraindicated in patients with thrombocytopenia, coagulation 
disorder, or an increase in bleeding tendency due to other causes. 
Pregnant women or women attempting to become pregnant should 
avoid contact with this drug.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies mitomycin as a hazardous drug; personal protec-
tive equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure. Refer to the Occupational Safety and Health Asso-
ciation (OSHA) website for more information.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include burning and 
stinging on application, corneal irritation, and edema formation. 4 
Periocular alopecia has been reported in horses after topical appli -
cation.5 Topical administration in the presence of corneal epithelial 
defects has been associated with stromal ulceration and bullous ker-
atopathy.5 The systemic use of mitomycin has been associated with 
myelosuppression, particularly thrombocytopenia and leukopenia, 
nephrotoxicity, and pulmonary toxicity, although these effects are 
unlikely with topical therapy.
Dosages
Equine periocular squamous cell carcinoma  (extra-label): ½ inch 
strip of a 0.04% ointment to the affected site 3 times daily for 21 days 
in a cycle of 7 days of drug application, followed by a 7-day drug va-
cation.5,6 If using a subpalpebral lavage (SPL) system, instill 0.1 mL of 
a 0.04% solution 3 times daily for 21 days in a cycle of 7 days of drug 
application, followed by a 7-day drug vacation; maintain catheter pa-
tency by flushing the line with air after each dose.
Adjunctive antifibrotic agent for glaucoma implant surgery  
(extra-label): A single, 5-minute intraoperative application of  
0.5 mg/mL solution at the filtration site following surgical placement 
of the shunt.1 NOTE: Multiple protocols exist for use during surgical 
procedures for correcting glaucoma, varying with the type of proce-
dure and other patient parameters. As these procedures should be 
performed by board-certified veterinary ophthalmologists, the pro -
tocols are not detailed here.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy depending on indication:
• Maintenance of patency of the glaucoma implant, leading to 
control of intraocular pressure (IOP)
• Cell or tissue samples for evaluation to confirm remission of 
 neoplasia
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is a chemotherapy drug. Pregnant women and sick 
or immunocompromised individuals should avoid contact with 
this medicine.
 ■ Personal protective equipment (eg, gloves, mask) should be worn 
when giving this medicine to your animal. Dispose of any waste 
in a doubled plastic bag, then place the bag in a secure disposal 
location that children and animals cannot access.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying 
any other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine in the refrigerator. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes (it is normally blue), 
if it becomes cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution.
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined 
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH). Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the use 
of personal protective equipment when handling this  medicine.

===== PDF_PAGE_1411 =====
1384    Morphine Ophthalmic
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]), away 
from moisture and sunlight. Store compounded products as stated 
on product label.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Mitomycin ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed direct -
ly with any other ophthalmic medications. Mitomycin ophthalmic 
solution is not commercially available, but mitomycin lyophilized 
powder for injection can be compounded into appropriate ophthal-
mic solutions as follows: 
 ■ If using the 5 mg vial, reconstitute vial with 12.5 mL sterile 0.9% 
sodium chloride injection to make a 0.4 mg/mL (0.04%) solution.
 ■ If using the 20 mg vial, reconstitute with 50 mL sterile 0.9% 
 sodium chloride injection to make a 0.4 mg/mL (0.04%) solution. 
NOTE: Commercially available mitomycin 20 mg vials may not con-
tain 50 mL volume. Use caution when reconstituting, and when vol-
ume restrictions require, aseptically transfer contents into a 50 mL 
empty sterile vial.
Mitomycin ophthalmic ointments are not commercially available 
but may be prepared by qualified compounding pharmacists.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Mitomycin ophthalmic topical solution for multi-use is not com -
mercially available, but mitomycin lyophilized powder for injection 
(5 mg or 20 mg vial) can be compounded into a suitable ophthalmic. 
A commercially available kit for mitomycin ophthalmic topical (sin-
gle use) as an adjunct to ab externo glaucoma surgery is available; 
Mitosol®, generic; (Rx).
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Morphine Ophthalmic
(mor-feen) 
Opioid 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Opioid analgesic that may be beneficial in the treatment of 
ocular pain
 ▶ Must be compounded by a qualified compounding pharmacist, 
as no ophthalmic dosage forms are commercially  available
 ▶ Do not use in animals receiving naloxone, nalbuphine, or 
nalorphine, as these drugs have opioid antagonist properties.
 ▶ DEA Schedule II (C-II) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Morphine ophthalmic solution may be used to manage ocular pain. 
Dogs with experimentally induced corneal ulcers that received mor-
phine solution 3 times daily experienced a reduction in signs of ocular 
pain without prolonged healing times1; however, in a clinical trial of 
dogs and cats with naturally occurring corneal ulcers, a single drop of 
morphine solution did not improve clinical signs of pain.2 Combined 
topical administration and subconjunctival injection did not appear to 
provide ocular pain relief (as evaluated by changes in blepharospasm, 
conjunctival hyperemia, blinking rates, tearing) in dogs following 
phacoemulsification surgery.3 Topical morphine did not affect corneal 
sensitivity when it was administered to normal equine eyes.4,5 
Pharmacology/Actions
Morphine is primarily an opioid mu receptor agonist that interacts 
with mu binding sites located in the brain, as well as within the spinal 
cord and on peripheral sensory nerves. They are present in the cor -
nea in smaller numbers than delta receptors in the canine cornea. 1 
The analgesic effects on the cornea can be variable. It is possible that 
receptor specificity and localization, frequency of administration, 
and location of pain stimulus relative to drug penetration all impact 
clinical efficacy. Topical ocular morphine administration to eyes of 
normal horses results in measurable intraocular and systemic mor -
phine concentrations, without local or systemic adverse effects.4
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Morphine ophthalmic is contraindicated in patients with a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Adverse 
effects may occur following concomitant use with monoamine oxi -
dase inhibitors (eg, amitraz, linezolid, selegiline) or within 14 days of 
such treatment. Because of potential systemic absorption, morphine 
ophthalmic should be used with caution in patients with respiratory 
insufficiency or depression; severe CNS depression; bronchocon -
strictive disorders (eg, asthma); heart failure secondary to pulmo -
nary hypertension; arrhythmias; increased intracranial or cerebro -
spinal pressure (eg, head injury, brain tumor); or seizures.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include stinging and 
burning on application. Although systemic adverse effects are un -
likely with topical administration, they could occur. See Morphine. 
Dosages
Corneal ulcers: 1 drop of a morphine 1% solution in the affected 
eye(s) every 8 hours
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: control of signs of ocular discomfort (eg, bleph-
arospasm, conjunctival hyperemia, tearing)
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ This medicine is a controlled substance and may not be refilled 
without a new prescription. 
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying 
any other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine as directed on package label. Keep product 
away from moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product as directed on the package labeling away from 
moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Morphine ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE 
Morphine sulfate ophthalmic solution is not commercially available; 
it must be compounded. Preservative-free morphine sulfate injec -
tion may be aseptically diluted with sterile 0.9% sodium chloride 
injection to achieve a 1% (10 mg/mL) aseptic ophthalmic solution.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb

===== PDF_PAGE_1412 =====
Moxifloxacin Ophthalmic   1385
Moxifloxacin Ophthalmic
(mox-ih-flox-uh-sin) Vigamox®, Moxeza®
Fourth-Generation Fluoroquinolone Antimicrobial
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat confirmed bacterial conjunctivitis or keratitis 
based on culture and susceptibility; prophylactic use is not 
recommended
 ▶ Physically incompatible with many drugs; therefore, it should 
not be directly mixed with other ophthalmic medications
 ▶ Crystalline drug precipitates may be noted in the superficial por-
tion of corneal defects when moxifloxacin is used on the eye.
Uses/Indications
Moxifloxacin ophthalmic may be used to treat bacterial conjuncti -
vitis or keratitis caused by susceptible strains of Staphylococcus spp, 
Streptococcus spp, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Chlamydophila spp, and 
Haemophilus spp. Moxifloxacin is effective against other gram-posi-
tive and gram-negative organisms. Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates 
from dogs with bacterial keratitis showed slightly greater resistance 
in vitro to moxifloxacin than to other fluoroquinolones, 1 whereas 
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius isolates from dogs with bacterial 
keratitis demonstrated lower rates of resistance in vitro to moxiflox-
acin than to other fluoroquinolones. 2 Penetration of topical oph -
thalmic moxifloxacin into the tears, cornea, and aqueous humor of 
horses with normal eyes was significantly greater than with the sec -
ond-generation fluoroquinolone ciprofloxacin.3,4 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated moxi -
floxacin as a Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobial in 
human medicine.2
Pharmacology/Actions
Moxifloxacin is a fourth-generation fluoroquinolone antibiotic that 
acts via inhibition of bacterial topoisomerase II (DNA gyrase) and 
topoisomerase IV , leading to impaired DNA replication and repair. 
The inhibition of both enzymes decreases the rates of resistance as 
compared to earlier generations of fluoroquinolones. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Moxifloxacin is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to moxifloxacin, to other fluoroquinolones, or to 
any of the components of this medication. This medication should 
only be used as a topical ophthalmic; it should not be injected sub -
conjunctivally or into the anterior chamber of the eye. Moxifloxacin 
should not be used prophylactically. Fluoroquinolone-induced ret -
inal toxicity in domestic cats has not been demonstrated with this 
product.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include blurred vi -
sion, tearing, eye pain, redness, itching, and a bad taste in the mouth. 
Crystalline drug precipitates may be noted in the superficial portion 
of corneal defects when moxifloxacin is used.
Dosages
Conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) every 2 to 
8 hours
Keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s), or 0.1 mL in the 
subpalpebral lavage (SPL) catheter, every 2 to 8 hours. May precipi-
tate when mixed with other ophthalmic medications; therefore, it is 
important to flush SPL catheter well with air between medications
Monitoring
 ■ Corneal cytology and culture to evaluate for the persistence of 
bacteria
 ■ Clinical efficacy: improvement and resolution of clinical signs as-
sociated with bacterial infection
 ■ If blepharospasm, uveitis, worsening of ulceration, or no im -
provement in infection occur within 7 days, reassess microbial 
susceptibility.
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian. 
 ■ Crystals may appear on the surface of the eye during treatment 
with moxifloxacin ophthalmic.
 ■ Do not mix this medicine with other eye medications.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is re-
ceiving this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
 ■ Store this medication in the refrigerator or at room temperature 
away from moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in solutions.
 ■ Dispose of unused medication in regular trash; do not put it into 
the sewer system.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]) or at 
controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]); check indi -
vidual labels for details as recommendations vary by product. Do not 
freeze. Keep product away from moisture and sunlight. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics interact with many other drugs, includ-
ing those containing cations (eg, iron, aluminum, magnesium, or 
calcium). Moxifloxacin should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with 
any other drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Moxifloxacin 0.5% Ophthalmic Solution (containing moxiflox -
acin HCl 5.45 mg, boric acid, NaCl, purified water, and HCl and/
or NaOH to adjust pH), 3 mL in sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; 
 Vigamox®, generic; (Rx)
Moxifloxacin 0.5% Ophthalmic Solution (containing NaCl, xanthan 
gum, boric acid, sorbitol, tyloxapol, purified water, and HCl and/
or NaOH to adjust pH), 3 mL in sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; 
Moxeza®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Nalbuphine Ophthalmic
(nal-byoo-feen) Nubain®
Opioid Agonist/Antagonist Analgesic Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to provide ocular analgesia in patients
 ▶ Do not use in combination with other opioid ocular analgesics 
(eg, morphine sulfate).
Uses/Indications
Nalbuphine may be compounded as an ophthalmic preparation to 
provide ocular surface analgesia. In dogs, nalbuphine 1% adminis -
tered 3 times daily after the creation of a corneal epithelial wound 

===== PDF_PAGE_1413 =====
1386    Natamycin Ophthalmic
was not effective as an analgesic,1 whereas nalbuphine 0.8% admin-
istered 3 times daily following phacoemulsification reduced corneal 
sensitivity and signs of ocular discomfort. 2 Corneal sensitivity was 
not decreased in normal horses following a single administration of 
1.2% nalbuphine.3 Additionally, 1.2% nalbuphine did not decrease 
corneal sensation in rabbits.4 
Pharmacology/Actions
Nalbuphine is a synthetic opioid agonist/antagonist analgesic of the 
phenanthrene series. Nalbuphine’s analgesic potency is essentially 
equivalent to that of morphine on a milligram basis. The opioid an-
tagonist activity of nalbuphine is one-fourth as potent as nalorphine 
and 10 times as potent as pentazocine. Nalbuphine, by itself, has 
potent opioid antagonist activity at doses equal to or lower than its 
analgesic dose. When nalbuphine is administered following or con-
currently with mu-agonist opioid analgesics (eg, morphine, oxymo-
rphone, fentanyl), it may partially reverse or block opioid-induced 
respiratory depression from the mu-agonist analgesic.5 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Nalbuphine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Nalbuphine 
is a partial opioid antagonist and should not be used in patients 
receiving other opioid agents as analgesia may be reversed by nal -
buphine. When nalbuphine is used systemically, it has potential to 
depress respiratory and cardiac systems; however, these effects are 
unlikely when the drug is used topically.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include burning, 
stinging, and irritation on application. Systemic adverse effects, al -
though unlikely following topical use, include respiratory and car -
diovascular depression, somnolence, and ataxia.
Dosages
Corneal analgesia (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) every 
8 hours
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy as demonstrated by adequate ocular analgesia
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wear gloves when administering the medicine to avoid inadver -
tent contact with it.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine as directed on the package labeling, away 
from moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solutions.
Storage/Stability
Because this medication must be compounded, storage recommen -
dations can vary; follow storage requirements listed on the packag -
ing, away from moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Nalbuphine ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. Nalbuphine is not commer-
cially available and must be compounded by a qualified compound-
ing pharmacist. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Nalbuphine is not commercially available as an ophthalmic prepa -
ration but may be compounded by qualified compounding pharma-
cists into 0.8% to 1.2% ophthalmic solution. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Natamycin Ophthalmic
(nat-uh-mye-sin)  Natacyn® 
Polyene Antifungal 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Commercially available ophthalmic suspension used to treat 
fungal keratitis, primarily associated with Fusarium spp 
 ▶ Poorly soluble and does not efficiently penetrate corneal epi-
thelium following topical administration 
 ▶ Well tolerated following topical administration
 ▶ Natamycin suspensions may block subpalpebral lavage (SPL) 
catheters; therefore, ensure catheter patency by flushing the 
line with air after each dose. 
 ▶ Expensive
Uses/Indications
Natamycin is primarily used to treat equine fungal keratitis caused by 
Fusarium spp. As natamycin is not as effective for deep stromal lesions, 
efficacy may be enhanced by creation of superficial ulceration (ie, ther-
apeutic penetrating keratoplasty) to increase transcorneal penetration.1 
Pharmacology/Actions
Natamycin is a tetraene polyene antibiotic derived from  Streptomy-
ces natalensis. It possesses in vitro activity against various yeasts and 
filamentous fungi, including Candida spp, Aspergillus spp, Cepha-
losporium spp, Fusarium spp, and Penicillium spp; culture and sus -
ceptibility testing is recommended to ensure appropriate therapy.2–4 
The mechanism of action appears to be through binding to the sterol 
moiety of the fungal cell membrane, thus altering membrane perme-
ability and allowing leakage of essential fungal intracellular constit -
uents. Although the activity against fungi is dose-related, natamycin 
is predominantly fungicidal.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Natamycin is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation.5
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include corneal opaci-
ty, eye discomfort, eye edema, eye hyperemia, foreign body sensation, 
paresthesia, and tearing.5 Allergic reactions, dyspnea, and chest pain 
have been reported in humans that were administered  natamycin.
Dosages
Equine fungal keratitis  (extra-label): 0.1 mL to the affected eye(s) 
every 2 to 6 hours, depending upon the severity of infection (can 
be used more frequently initially). If administering via subpalpebral 
lavage (SPL) catheter, maintain catheter patency by flushing the line 
with air after each dose.
Monitoring
 ■ Corneal scrapings with cytology and culture and susceptibility 
testing to determine the clearance of fungal organisms 
 ■ Resolution of clinical signs of infection
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine to your animal as directed by your  veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.

===== PDF_PAGE_1414 =====
Nedocromil Ophthalmic    1387
 ■ Shake the medication well before using.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication at room temperature away from moisture 
and sunlight; do not freeze. 
 ■ Avoid exposure to light and excessive heat.
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes.
Storage/Stability
Store this medication at 2°C to 24°C (36°F-75°F) away from moisture 
and sunlight (dispensed in a brown bottle to minimize exposure to 
light); do not freeze.5 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Natamycin should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any other drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Natamycin 5% Ophthalmic Suspension (containing natamycin 
50 mg/mL, benzalkonium chloride 0.02%, NaOH and/or HCl to ad-
just the pH to 5 to 7.5, and purified water), in a 15 mL amber glass 
dropper bottle; Natacyn®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Nedocromil Ophthalmic
(ne-doe-krow-mill) Alocril®
Mast Cell Stabilizing Ophthalmic Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Topical mast cell stabilizer used to treat allergic conjunctivitis
Uses/Indications
Nedocromil may be used for the treatment of ocular itching associat-
ed with allergic conjunctivitis. The efficacy of nedocromil in animals 
following topical ocular administration has not been evaluated.
Pharmacology/Actions
Nedocromil is a mast cell stabilizer and inhibits histamine release 
from mast cells. Decreased chemotaxis and decreased activation of 
eosinophils (anti-inflammatory effects) have also been demonstrat -
ed following administration of nedocromil.1
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Nedocromil is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include ocular burning, irrita -
tion and stinging, unpleasant taste, and nasal congestion. Approx -
imately 40% of humans report headaches and a bad taste in their 
mouths after use.2 Other less common adverse effects associated with 
nedocromil administration include asthma, conjunctivitis, eye red -
ness, photophobia, and rhinitis. 
Dosages
Allergic conjunctivitis  (extra-label):  1 drop in the affected eye(s) 
twice daily. Treatment should be continued throughout exposure (ie, 
until exposure to the offending allergen is terminated), even when 
clinical signs are absent.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolution of signs of allergic conjunctivitis 
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying 
any other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine in the refrigerator or at room temperature 
away from moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [35.6°F-46.4°F]) or at 
controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) 2 away from 
moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Nedocromil ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Nedocromil 2% Ophthalmic Solution (containing nedocromil 
20 mg/mL; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; edetate disodium 0.05%; 
purified water; NaCl 0.5%, buffered to a pH of 4 to 5.54 with an os -
molality range of 270 – 330 mOsm/kg), in a 5 mL ophthalmic drop-
per bottle; Alocril®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Nepafenac Ophthalmic
(ne-paf-en-ak) Nevanac®, Ilevro®
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug (NSAID)
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to control anterior segment inflammation, particularly in 
association with surgical removal of cataracts
 ▶ Prodrug to amfenac, which is bioavailable to the posterior 
segment
 ▶ May increase risk for intraocular bleeding, inhibit corneal 
wound healing, and promote corneal melting
Uses/Indications
Nepafenac is used to decrease inflammation following cataract sur -
gery. It may also be used to control other anterior segment inflamma-
tory conditions (eg, conjunctivitis, keratitis, anterior uveitis).1 Studies 
evaluating efficacy in veterinary patients have not been  performed. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Nepafenac is an NSAID and analgesic prodrug. After topical ocu -
lar dosing, nepafenac penetrates the cornea, where it is converted 
by ocular tissue hydrolases to amfenac, which inhibits the action of 
prostaglandin H synthase (cyclooxygenase), an enzyme required 
for prostaglandin production. Prostaglandins mediate many of the 
adverse effects of intraocular inflammation, including disruption of 
the blood-aqueous humor barrier, vasodilation, increased vascular 
permeability, leukocytosis, and alterations in intraocular pressure 
(IOP). Blocking prostaglandin production, therefore, minimizes the 
adverse short- and long-term effects of intraocular inflammation.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Nepafenac is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hyper-
sensitivity to it or any component of the formulation or other NSAIDs. 
Caution should be employed when using nepafenac in patients that 
have previously exhibited sensitivity to other NSAID drugs, as there 

===== PDF_PAGE_1415 =====
1388    Ocular Lubricants
is potential for cross-sensitivity. Nepafenac has been associated with 
increased bleeding of ocular tissues (including hyphema) in conjunc-
tion with ocular surgery due to interference with platelet aggregation. 
All topical NSAIDs may slow or delay epithelial wound healing. Con-
comitant use with topical steroidal agents may increase the potential 
for delayed healing. Nepafenac should be used cautiously in patients 
receiving systemic anticoagulants (eg, aspirin, clopidogrel, warfarin, 
and heparin), as concomitant use may increase the risk for intraocular 
bleeding. Use of topical NSAIDs may result in keratitis due to epithe-
lial breakdown, corneal thinning, corneal erosion, corneal ulceration, 
or corneal perforation. It should be discontinued immediately in pa-
tients exhibiting evidence of corneal epithelial breakdown. 
Postmarketing experience with topical NSAIDs suggests that use 
more than 24 hours before surgery or beyond 14 days after surgery 
may increase patient risk for the occurrence of corneal adverse  effects.2
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include capsular 
opacity, decreased visual acuity, foreign body sensation, increased 
intraocular pressure (IOP), and sticky sensation. 2 Other ocular ad -
verse effects include conjunctival edema, corneal edema, dry eye, lid 
margin crusting, ocular discomfort, ocular hyperemia, ocular pain, 
ocular pruritus, photophobia, tearing, and vitreous detachment. 
Some of these effects may be the consequence of the cataract surgical 
procedure.3 Nonocular adverse effects reported by humans include 
headache, hypertension, nausea, vomiting, and sinusitis. 2 Increased 
bleeding time, delayed corneal wound healing, keratitis, and corneal 
weakening have also been reported.
Although unlikely, systemic adverse effects may occur with the 
use of topical NSAIDs, including increased risk for gastric ulcer -
ation, decreased platelet aggregation, worsening of asthma and car -
diac disease, and renal toxicity. Concurrent use of systemic NSAIDs 
and corticosteroids increases the risk for systemic adverse effects.
Dosages
Perioperative for cataract surgery (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected 
eye(s) 1 to 3 times daily for up to 2 weeks following cataract surgery
Anterior segment inflammation (extra-label): 1 drop in the affect-
ed eye(s) every 8 hours 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: decreased or absent inflammation. Monitor for 
delayed wound healing
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Shake this medicine well before using.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store in the refrigerator or at room temperature away from mois-
ture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes.
Storage/Stability
Store in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [35.6°F-46.4°F]) or controlled 
room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) 2 away from moisture 
and sunlight; do not freeze.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Nepafenac ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Nepafenac 0.1% Ophthalmic Solution (containing nepafenac  
1 mg/mL; mannitol; carbomer 974P; NaCl; tyloxapol; edetate diso -
dium; benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; NaOH and/or HCl to adjust 
pH to 7.4; purified water, USP , with an osmolality of 305 mOsm/kg), 
3 mL in a sterile 4 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Nevanac®; (Rx)
Nepafenac 0.3% Ophthalmic Suspension (containing nepafenac 
0.3%; boric acid, propylene glycol; carbomer 974P; NaCl; guar gum; 
carboxymethylcellulose sodium; edetate disodium; benzalkonium 
chloride 0.005%; NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH; purified water, 
USP), 1.7 mL in a sterile 4 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle, or 3 mL in 
a sterile 4 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Ilevro®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Ocular Lubricants
Tear Replacement and Ocular Lubricating Agents
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used in the temporary enhancement of the quality and quan-
tity of precorneal tear film
 ▶ Hyaluronate/hyaluronic acid-containing preparations may 
exert a beneficial effect on corneal ulcer healing.
 ▶ Most artificial tears and ocular lubricants are labeled for hu-
mans and are available OTC.
 ▶ Preservative-free solutions are less likely to cause stinging or 
corneal damage with long-term use.
 ▶ Petroleum-based ocular products should not be used in proce-
dures where combustion may occur (eg, electrocautery, laser) 
or when contact with the intraocular environment is possible 
(eg, penetrating corneal wound).
 ▶ Basic components of an artificial tear/ocular lubricant include 
demulcent (soothing agent), emollient (a fat-based agent that 
softens and protects tissues), inactive ingredients (impact 
viscosity, tonicity, and pH), and preservatives (to prevent 
bacterial growth).
Uses/Indications
Artificial tear solutions and ocular lubricants are used when there 
is a decrease in tear production, an increase in tear loss through 
evaporation, and a decrease in the tear film’s break up time, such 
as in the presence of qualitative and quantitative keratoconjunctivi-
tis sicca (KCS)1, buphthalmos (enlarged globe that adversely affects 
the ability to blink), or lagophthalmos (inability to blink due to the 
conformational or functional abnormality of the eyelid). Ocular lu -
bricants are also beneficial during sedation and anesthesia to prevent 
corneal desiccation2 and as a vehicle for compounding water-soluble 
medications for ocular application. Although the evidence is vari -
able, preparations containing hyaluronic acid/sodium hyaluronate 
may accelerate the healing of corneal ulcers.3,4
Pharmacology/Actions
Improving the quality (eg, viscosity, osmolarity, retention time) of 
the precorneal tear film results in improvement in comfort for pa -
tients with tear film deficiencies, as well as reduction in ocular sur -
face inflammation and damage. Preparations include a demulcent 
that acts as a soothing and anti-inflammatory agent, an emollient to 
protect tissues and prevent drying, inactive ingredients to stabilize 
the preparation for ocular administration, and preservatives to pre -
vent contamination.5 
Demulcents may include polyethylene glycol (PEG), propylene 
glycol (PG), glycerin, cellulose derivatives, hydroxymethylcellulose 
(HMC), hydroxypropylcellulose (HPC), hydroxypropylmethylcellu-
lose (HPMC), and polyvinyl alcohol (PV A). Although each demul-

===== PDF_PAGE_1416 =====
Ocular Lubricants   1389
cent varies slightly in a specific function, broadly, they are all respon-
sible for increasing viscosity of the preparation, decreasing viscosity 
and osmolarity of the tear film, protecting mucous membranes, re -
lieving inflammation, and improving the stability of the tear film.6
Emollients may include lanolin, mineral oil, petrolatum, paraffin, 
and wax. Although each emollient varies slightly in a specific func -
tion, broadly, they are all responsible for lubrication and soothing, 
stabilizing the lipid layer of the tear film, and sealing in moisture.6 
Inactive ingredients may include sorbitol, hyaluronic acid (HA), 
sodium hyaluronate, L-carnitine and erythritol, hydroxypropyl guar, 
polyacrylic acid, tyloxapol, and tromethamine. Although each inactive 
ingredient varies slightly in a specific function, they are responsible for 
lowering the osmolarity of the tear film, stabilizing the viscosity of the 
tear film, prolonging contact time of active ingredients, promoting ap-
propriate corneal epithelial metabolism, and maintaining hydration.6
Preservatives may include benzalkonium chloride, polyquad, so -
dium perborate, stabilized oxychloro complex, edetate disodium, and 
chlorobutanol. Although each preservative varies in a specific func-
tion, broadly, they are responsible for decreasing bacterial contami-
nation of the preparation, increasing drug penetration, and increasing 
shelf life.6 Some preservatives (eg, benzalkonium chloride) are known 
ocular irritants and cause destabilization of the tear film, which is ben-
eficial in some conditions to allow for improved penetration of active 
ingredients. Although this action may be beneficial for some ocular 
conditions (eg, glaucoma), the resulting epithelial cell damage can be 
harmful in ocular surface diseases (eg, corneal ulceration). Thus, pre-
servatives have been developed that are stable in solution but degrade 
upon contact to minimize ocular surface damage.
The combination of demulcent and emollient, as well as other in-
active ingredients and preservatives, decreases friction on the ocu -
lar surface and increases tear retention and tear film moisture while 
minimally impacting ocular clarity. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Artificial tear solutions are contraindicated in patients that have a 
history of hypersensitivity to any component of the formulation. In-
teractions between topical ocular lubricants and other ocular prepa-
rations may occur, leading to alterations in viscosity of the lubricant, 
decreased efficacy in stabilizing the precorneal tear film, precipitate 
formation, or patient irritation or discomfort.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in animals include eye pain, burning or 
stinging on instillation, and redness. Preservative-free solutions may 
decrease these adverse effects. Blurred vision is commonly report -
ed in humans after the application of ocular ointments; thus, many 
OTC preparations are formulated as solutions with varied demulcent 
and emollient proportions. Sticky eyelashes and increased sensitivity 
to light are commonly reported by humans using solutions contain-
ing hydroxypropyl cellulose. 
Dosages
Tear replacement (extra-label): 1 drop or a ¼ – ½ inch strip to the 
affected eye(s) every 2 to 3 hours or as often as possible 
Ocular lubrication during anesthetic procedures  (extra-label):  
½ – 1 inch strip to each eye every 90 minutes. Do not use in proce -
dures where the combustion of petroleum-based ocular lubricants or 
contact of the lubricant with the intraocular environment may occur. 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Monitor corneal surface for signs of damage, as chronic use of 
preserved solutions may cause corneal damage. 
Client Information
 ■ Place these drops in your animal’s eye(s) as often as possible 
during the day. Administer longer-acting ointments at bedtime. 
 ■ If you notice any increase in squinting, eye discharge, or ocular 
redness, discontinue use and contact your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination 
of the medication. To prevent contamination, do not touch the 
dropper tip (or ointment) or allow it to touch your animal’s eye or 
any other surface.
 ■ Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is not in use.
 ■ If applying multiple medications to your animal’s eye(s), apply 
lubricating medications last, at least 5 minutes following adminis-
tration of other eye medications.
 ■ Store this medicine at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if the solution be -
comes cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Artificial tears and ocular lubricants are often used as vehicles when 
compounding topical ocular medications. Check to ensure compati-
bility of all ingredients and preservatives before compounding.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
None are FDA-approved.
Hyaluronic Acid-Containing Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
water for injection; sodium chloride; 0.25% 
viscoadaptive hyaluronan; glycerin; sodium 
phosphate; potassium sorbate; EDTA
OTC; 10 mL in a sterile ophthal-
mic dropper bottle
I-Drop® Vet Plus Lubricant
NOTE: There is also a 0.3% gel, I-Drop® Vet Gel.
sterile water; sorbitol; carbomer; sodium hy-
droxide; disodium EDTA; cetrimide
OTC; 0.7 oz tube OptixCare® Eye Lube
sterile water; sorbitol; carbomer; hyaluron; 
sodium hydroxide; disodium EDTA; cetrimide
OTC; 0.7 oz tube OptixCare® Eye Lube Plus
water; 0.4% Hyasent–S (modified, cross-linked 
HA); sodium chloride; disodium; phosphate; 
potassium chloride; potassium phosphate
Rx; 10 mL in a sterile ophthalmic 
dropper bottle
Remend® Eye Lubricating Drops
NOTE: There is also a 0.75% gel that is market-
ed as a corneal repair gel for superficial corneal 
ulcers: Remend® Corneal Repair Gel.

===== PDF_PAGE_1417 =====
1390    Ocular Lubricants
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
There are many products marketed, and this list is not  comprehensive:
Polyvinyl Alcohol-Containing Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
polyvinyl alcohol 1%; polyethylene glycol 400 1%; benzal-
konium chloride 0.1 mg/mL; dextrose; edetate disodium; 
purified water; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH
OTC; 15 mL in a sterile ophthalmic 
dropper bottle
HypoTears®
polyvinyl alcohol 0.5%; povidone 0.6%; benzalkonium 
chloride; dextrose; edetate disodium; potassium chloride; 
purified water; sodium bicarbonate; sodium chloride; sodi-
um citrate; sodium phosphate (mono- and dibasic)
OTC; 15 mL in a sterile ophthalmic 
dropper bottle
Murine Tears®
Polyvinylpyrrolidone-Containing Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
polyvinyl pyrrolidone 2%; polyvinyl alcohol 2.7%; boric 
acid; disodium edetate dihydrate; ethanol; glycerin; leci-
thin; polixetonium; polysorbate-80; potassium chloride; 
purified water; sodium chloride
OTC; 15 mL in a sterile ophthalmic 
dropper bottle
Freshkote®
Carboxymethylcellulose-Containing Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
sodium carboxymethylcellulose 1%; borate buffers; calcium 
chloride; magnesium chloride; potassium chloride; puri-
fied water; sodium bicarbonate; NaCl; sodium phosphate
OTC; 0.6 mL single-use vials TheraTears® Liquid Gel
sodium carboxymethylcellulose 0.25%; borate buffers; 
calcium chloride; Dequest®; potassium chloride; purified 
water; sodium bicarbonate; sodium borate; sodium 
chloride; magnesium chloride; sodium perborate; sodium 
phosphate; trehalose
OTC; 15 mL in a sterile ophthalmic 
dropper bottle
TheraTears® Lubricant Eye Drops
Hydroxypropyl Methylcellulose-Containing Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
dextran 70 0.1%; hydroxypropyl methylcellulose 2910 0.3%; cal-
cium chloride; magnesium chloride; potassium chloride; purified 
water; sodium bicarbonate; NaCl; zinc chloride; HCl and/or NaOH 
and/or carbon dioxide to adjust pH
OTC; 0.4 mL single-use con-
tainers in cartons of 28
Bion Tears®
dextran 70 0.1%; glycerin 0.2%; hypromellose 0.3%; boric acid; 
calcium chloride; glycine; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH; magne-
sium chloride; POLYQUAD (polyquaternium-1) 0.002% preser-
vative; polysorbate 80; potassium chloride; purified water; sodium 
chloride; zinc chloride
OTC; 15 mL in a sterile oph-
thalmic dropper bottle
Genteal® Moderate Lubricating 
Liquid
NOTE: Many other Genteal® 
formulations exist.
glycerin 0.2%; hydroxypropyl methylcellulose 0.2%; polyethylene 
glycol 400 1%; ascorbic acid; benzalkonium chloride; boric acid; 
dextrose; disodium phosphate; glycine; magnesium chloride; po-
tassium chloride; purified water; sodium borate; sodium chloride; 
sodium citrate; sodium lactate
OTC; in a sterile 15 mL or 
30 mL ophthalmic dropper 
bottle
Visine Tears® Dry Eye Relief
NOTE: Many other Visine® 
formulations exist.
Hydroxypropyl Guar-Containing Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
hydroxypropyl methylcellulose 0.3%; carbopol 980; phosphonic 
acid; purified water; sodium perborate; sorbitol
OTC; 10 g in sterile ophthal-
mic dropper bottles
Systane®Lubricant Eye Gel
NOTE: Many other Systane® 
formulations exist.

===== PDF_PAGE_1418 =====
Ofloxacin Ophthalmic   1391
Polyethylene Glycol/Hyaluronate-Containing Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
polyethylene glycol 400 0.25%; boric acid; calcium chloride; mag-
nesium chloride; potassium chloride; purified water; sodium bo-
rate; sodium chloride; sodium chlorite (Ocupure® brand); sodium 
hyaluronate
OTC; 15 mL in a sterile 
 ophthalmic dropper bottle
Blink® Gel Tears
NOTE: Many other Blink® 
formulations exist.
Petroleum-Based Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
mineral oil 15%; white petrolatum 85% OTC; 3.5 g ophthalmic 
 ointment tube
Genteal® Night-Time Ointment
light mineral oil 1%; mineral oil 4.5% OTC; 15 mL ophthalmic 
 dropper bottle
Soothe XP®
mineral oil 20%; white petrolatum 80% OTC; 3.5 g ophthalmic 
 ointment tube
Tears Again®
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Ofloxacin Ophthalmic
(o-flocks-uh-sin) Ocuflox®
Second-Generation Fluoroquinolone Antimicrobial
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat bacterial conjunctivitis or keratitis
 ▶ Physically incompatible with many drugs; therefore, it should 
not be directly mixed with other ophthalmic medications.
 ▶ Crystalline drug precipitates may be noted in the superficial 
portion of corneal defects during use.
Uses/Indications
Ofloxacin ophthalmic may be used for the treatment of bacterial con-
junctivitis or keratitis caused by susceptible strains of Staphylococcus 
spp, Streptococcus spp, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Chlamydophila spp, 
and Haemophilus spp.1 Ofloxacin achieves greater aqueous humor 
concentrations than ciprofloxacin following topical administration 
to dogs.2 In the UK, horses with bacterial keratitis did not demon -
strate increased resistance to ofloxacin.3  
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated fluoro -
quinolones as a Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobial 
in human medicine.4 
Pharmacology/Actions 
Ofloxacin is a bactericidal and concentration-dependent fluoro -
quinolone antibiotic that is believed to act by inhibiting bacterial 
DNA-gyrase (a type-II topoisomerase), thereby preventing DNA 
supercoiling and DNA synthesis. The activity of ofloxacin is great -
er against gram-negative organisms than gram-positive organisms. 
Staphylococcus spp demonstrates lower susceptibility to second-gen-
eration fluoroquinolones than most other gram-positive agents.1 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Ofloxacin is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hyper-
sensitivity to ofloxacin, to other fluoroquinolones, or to any of the 
components of this medication. Ofloxacin should only be used as a 
topical ophthalmic. Do not inject ofloxacin subconjunctivally or into 
the anterior chamber of the eye. Fluoroquinolone-induced retinal tox-
icity in domestic cats has not been demonstrated with this product.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include blurred vi -
sion, tearing, eye pain, redness, and itching. 5 Crystalline drug pre -
cipitates may be noted in the superficial portion of corneal defects 
during use. The arthropathy that occurs in immature animals asso -
ciated with oral administration of quinolones has not been noted 
following topical ophthalmic administration.5 Alterations in ocular 
surface microflora, with the increased population of resistant organ-
isms, have been documented in dogs during 6 weeks of topical oflox-
acin therapy following cataract surgery.6 
Dosages
Conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) every 2 to 
8 hours
Keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s), or 0.1 mL in the 
subpalpebral lavage (SPL) catheter, every 2 to 8 hours. It may precip-
itate when mixed with other ophthalmic medications; therefore, it is 
important to flush the SPL catheter well with air between medications.
Monitoring
 ■ Corneal cytology and culture to evaluate for the persistence of 
bacteria
 ■ Evaluation for clinical signs suggestive of continued infection
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Do not touch the dropper tip or allow it to touch 
your animal’s eye or any other surface to prevent contamination.
 ■ Crystals may appear on the ocular surface after initiation of treat-
ment with ofloxacin.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication is not in use. 
Store this medication in the refrigerator or at room temperature 
away from moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this medication in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [35.6°F-46.4°F]) 
or at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze.5

===== PDF_PAGE_1419 =====
1392    Olopatadine Ophthalmic
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics interact with many other drugs, includ-
ing those containing cations (eg, iron, aluminum, magnesium, or 
calcium). Ofloxacin should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any 
other drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Ofloxacin 0.3% Ophthalmic Solution (containing ofloxacin  
3 mg/mL; benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; NaCl; HCl and/or NaOH 
to adjust pH to a range of 6 to 6.8; purified water; with an osmolality 
of 300 mOsm/kg), in a 5 mL and 10 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; 
Ocuflox®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Olopatadine Ophthalmic
(o-la-pat-a-deen) Pataday®, Patanol®, Pazeo®
H1 and H2 Receptor Antagonist Antihistamine Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to relieve pruritus caused by allergic conjunctivitis
 ▶ Longer duration of action allows once- to twice-daily dosing
Uses/Indications
Olopatadine ophthalmic is used to relieve pruritus caused by allergic 
conjunctivitis. Evaluation of olopatadine’s clinical efficacy in veteri-
nary species has not been performed.
Pharmacology/Actions
Olopatadine is a selective, noncompetitive H1 and H2 receptor antag-
onist and a mast cell stabilizer. It is also an inhibitor of proinflamma-
tory mediators such as leukotrienes and thromboxane.1 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Olopatadine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include transient burning or 
stinging on instillation in the eye, although instillation was more 
comfortable compared with other ophthalmic antihistamines.1
Dosages
Allergic conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) 
once daily (Pataday®, Pazeo®) or twice daily (Pataday®, Patanol®)
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolution of pruritus and conjunctivitis
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine in refrigerator or at room temperature away 
from moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solutions.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [35.6°F-46.4°F]) or 
at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away from 
moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Olopatadine ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Olopatadine 0.1% Ophthalmic Solution (containing 1.11 mg ol -
opatadine HCl equivalent to 1 mg olopatadine per mL; povidone; 
dibasic sodium phosphate; NaCl; edentate disodium; benzalkonium 
chloride 0.01%; HCl/NaOH to adjust pH to ≈7; purified water, with 
an osmolality of ≈300 mOsm/kg), in 2.5 mL ophthalmic dropper 
bottles; Pataday®, Patanol®; generic; (Rx)
Olopatadine 0.2% Ophthalmic Solution (containing 2.22 mg ol -
opatadine HCl equivalent to 2 mg olopatadine per mL; povidone; 
dibasic sodium phosphate; NaCl; edentate disodium; benzalkonium 
chloride 0.01%; HCl/NaOH to adjust pH to ≈7; purified water, with 
an osmolality of ≈300 mOsm/kg), in 2.5 mL ophthalmic dropper 
bottles; Pataday®; generic; (Rx)
Olopatadine 0.7% Ophthalmic Solution (containing 7.76 mg ol -
opatadine HCl equivalent to 7 mg olopatadine per mL; povidone; 
hydroxypropyl-gamma-cyclodextrin; polyethylene glycol 400; hy -
droxypropyl methylcellulose; boric acid; mannitol; benzalkonium 
chloride 0.015%; HCl/NaOH to adjust pH; purified water), in 2.5 mL 
ophthalmic dropper bottles; Pataday®, Pazeo®; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Oxytetracycline/Polymyxin B  
Ophthalmic
(ocks-ih-tet-rih-sye-kleen/pol-lee-mix-in) Terramycin®
Combination Antibiotic
For information related to systemic use, see Oxytetracycline  
and Polymyxin B
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat superficial ocular bacterial infections in dogs, 
cats, horses, cattle, and sheep
 ▶ Frequently effective for treating Chlamydia spp and 
 Mycoplasma spp conjunctivitis in cats
 ▶ Chlamydia spp infections should be treated for 3 to 4 weeks 
beyond resolution of clinical signs to disrupt Chlamydia spp 
reproductive cycle.
 ▶ Some cats experience local irritation or more severe anaphy-
lactic reactions that necessitate discontinuation of treatment.
 ▶ Used to decrease keratomalacia induced by matrix metallo-
proteinases in response to corneal infections
 ▶ May accelerate corneal epithelial wound healing in dogs
Uses/Indications
Oxytetracycline/Polymyxin B is used to prevent or treat superficial 
ocular infections involving the conjunctiva and/or cornea caused by 
gram-positive, gram-negative, and intracellular bacteria. It is com -
monly used to treat known or suspected Chlamydia spp and Myco-
plasma conjunctivitis in cats. 
Following a single dose of topical oxytetracycline/polymyxin B 
administered to normal canine eyes, tear film concentrations sur -
pass MICs for common ocular pathogens.1 Topical tetracyclines have 
variable effects on the rate of corneal epithelial wound healing in 
dogs without bacterial ocular surface infections. 2,3 Topical tetracy -
clines are useful in decreasing keratomalacia occurring due to bacte-

===== PDF_PAGE_1420 =====
Phenylephrine Ophthalmic   1393
rial infections of corneal ulcers4; however, the twice-daily dosing ad-
vised by the manufacturer may not be sufficient to achieve sustained 
collagenolytic activity within the tear film of normal canine eyes.1
Pharmacology/Actions
The reversible binding of tetracyclines to the 30S ribosomal sub -
units of susceptible organisms inhibits the binding of the tRNA and 
its associated amino acid to the mRNA-ribosome complex, which 
disrupts protein synthesis. Tetracyclines demonstrate good activity 
against Rickettsia spp, Borrelia spp, Chlamydia spp, Mycoplasma spp, 
Moraxella spp, and Brucella spp, with variable activity against Staph-
ylococcus spp and Streptococcus spp. Tetracyclines are not effective 
against Pseudomonas spp. 
The increased healing rate of uninfected corneal ulcers in dogs 
treated with topical tetracyclines is thought to be due to upregulation 
of transforming growth factor-beta.2 Oxytetracycline is also a potent 
inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-9 and a moderate inhibitor of 
matrix metalloproteinase-2. The reduction of keratomalacia occur -
ring in infected corneal ulcers is due to inhibition of matrix metallo-
proteinases (MMP), which is induced by tetracyclines binding calci-
um and zinc (cofactors necessary for MMP activity).5 
Polymyxin B sulfate, one of a group of related antibiotics derived 
from Bacillus polymyxa, is rapidly bactericidal. This action is exclu -
sively effective against gram-negative organisms, particularly Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa.6 Polymyxin B sulfate interacts with the lipo -
polysaccharide of the cytoplasmic outer membrane of gram-negative 
bacteria, altering membrane permeability and causing cell death; it 
does not need to enter the cell. Polymyxin B sulfate has a bactericid-
al action against almost all gram-negative bacilli except the Proteus 
group. It is ineffective against gram-positive bacteria, gram-negative 
cocci, or obligate anaerobes. It lacks activity against viral, fungal, or 
parasitic pathogens. Pus and cellular debris reduce effectiveness.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Oxytetracycline and polymyxin are contraindicated in patients that 
have a history of hypersensitivity to either drug, drugs in the same 
class, or any component of the formulation.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals are rare. Oxytetracy-
cline with polymyxin B sulfate is well tolerated by the epithelial mem-
branes and other tissues of the eye. Allergic or inflammatory reactions 
due to individual hypersensitivity are rare; however, some cats may 
have an anaphylactic reaction to the polymyxin B  component.6,7
Dosages
Conjunctivitis, keratitis (label dosage; FDA approved): ¼ inch strip 
in the affected eye(s) 2 to 4 times daily6 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Resolution of conjunctivitis or keratitis
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Do not touch the dropper tip or allow it to touch 
your animal’s eye or any other surface to prevent contamination.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicine to your animal’s eye(s).
 ■ Crystals may appear on the surface of your animal’s eye during 
treatment. This change is not harmful and will go away once treat-
ment is complete.
 ■ Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication is not in use. 
Store this medication at room temperature away from moisture 
and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes.
Storage/Stability
Store at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]), with 
excursions between 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F), away from moisture 
and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Oxytetracycline should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any oth-
er drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Oxytetracycline HCl and Polymyxin B Ophthalmic Ointment (con-
taining oxytetracycline 5 mg/g; polymyxin B sulfate 10,000 units/g; 
white petrolatum; liquid petrolatum), in 3.5 g ointment tubes; Ter-
ramycin®; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Phenylephrine Ophthalmic
(fen-il-ef-rin) Cyclomydril®
Alpha Agonist Vasoconstrictor 
For systemic use, refer to Phenylephrine
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Direct-acting sympathomimetic agent (alpha-1 agonist)
 ▶ Used to augment mydriasis, most commonly during intraoc-
ular surgical procedures and to limit bleeding during minor 
ocular surface procedures
 ▶ Not an effective mydriatic in cats or horses when used alone 
but may increase mydriatic effect when combined with atro-
pine
 ▶ Used to differentiate second- from third-order Horner 
 syndrome
 ▶ Local discomfort may occur after application.
 ▶ Cardiovascular adverse effects are more likely in small dogs 
and cats and following use of 10% concentrations.
Uses/Indications
Phenylephrine is most commonly used to induce mydriasis prior 
to phacoemulsification for cataract removal. It is also used prior to 
minor ocular surface procedures (eg, conjunctival biopsy) to lim -
it bleeding. Phenylephrine is also used to distinguish second- from 
third-order lesions in Horner syndrome because of the phenomenon 
of denervation hypersensitivity. In dogs, maximal pupillary dilation 
occurs in 55 minutes 1; however, phenylephrine alone does not lead 
to mydriasis in cats2 and horses.3 
Pharmacology/Actions
Phenylephrine is a direct alpha-1-adrenergic receptor agonist with 
potent local vasoconstrictor effects. Mydriatic effects are variable 
and are achieved through direct stimulation of the radial iris dilator 
muscle. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Phenylephrine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Phenyl-
ephrine should be used cautiously in patients with thyrotoxicosis or 
hypertension, as adverse cardiovascular effects may occur. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include eye pain and 
stinging on instillation, temporary blurred vision and photopho -
bia, and conjunctival sensitization. Cardiovascular effects following 
topical administration have been reported in dogs 3 and cats4 due to 

===== PDF_PAGE_1421 =====
1394    Pilocarpine Ophthalmic
systemic absorption, which may result in adverse cardiovascular ef-
fects (eg, marked increase in blood pressure, syncope, myocardial 
infarction, bradycardia, and ventricular and supraventricular ar -
rhythmias) that could require therapeutic intervention. 4–6 The sys -
temic effects can be severe and may require intervention. The effects 
of phenylephrine will be increased when it is administered after top-
ical local anesthetic agents because of epithelial damage induced by 
topical local anesthetic agents. In normal dogs, phenylephrine leads 
to a statistically (but not necessarily clinically) significant increase in 
intraocular pressure (IOP) following topical administration.1 
Dosages
Diagnosis of Horner syndrome (extra-label): 1 drop of phenyleph-
rine 0.25% solution in each eye. Patients suffering from third-order 
Horner syndrome will experience mydriasis from this low concen -
tration, whereas healthy patients will not. If there is no response 
in 20 to 30 minutes, apply 1 drop of a 2.5% solution to each eye. If 
mydriasis occurs, second-order Horner syndrome is likely.
Preoperative cataract removal  (extra-label): 1 drop of phenyleph -
rine 2.5% or 10% in the affected eye(s) as a single dose or every 15 
minutes for 2 hours. Severe cardiovascular adverse effects are more 
likely with small dogs and cats and following use of the 10% solution, 
thus caution should be exercised both with the concentration and 
the frequency of administration. Effects are augmented when it is 
administered following topical anesthetic agents.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Monitor degree of pupillary dilation
 ■ Monitor bleeding after minor ocular surface surgical procedures
 ■ Monitor heart rate and blood pressure
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is rarely (if ever) indicated for administration to 
animals at home.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine as directed on package labeling away from 
moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product as directed on package labeling either in the re -
frigerator (2°C-8°C [35.6°F-46.4°F]) for 10% concentration or at 
controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) for 2.5% con-
centration; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Phenylephrine ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed direct-
ly with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Phenylephrine HCl 2.5% Ophthalmic Solution (containing phenyl -
ephrine hydrochloride 25 mg (2.5%); sodium phosphate monobasic; 
sodium phosphate dibasic; boric acid; water for injection; hydro -
chloric acid and/or sodium hydroxide (to adjust pH); benzalkonium 
chloride), in a sterile 15 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; generic; (Rx)
Phenylephrine HCl 10% Ophthalmic Solution (containing phenyl -
ephrine hydrochloride 100 mg (10%); sodium phosphate monoba -
sic; sodium phosphate dibasic; boric acid; water for injection; hydro-
chloric acid and/or sodium hydroxide (to adjust pH); benzalkonium 
chloride), in a sterile 10 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; generic; (Rx)
Phenylephrine HCL 1% and Cyclopentolate HCl 0.2% Ophthalmic 
Solution (containing cyclopentolate hydrochloride 0.2%; phenyl -
ephrine hydrochloride 1%; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; edetate 
disodium; boric acid; hydrochloric acid and/or sodium carbonate 
(to adjust pH); purified water), in sterile 5 mL ophthalmic dropper 
bottle; Cyclomydril®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Pilocarpine Ophthalmic
(pye-loe-kar-peen) Isopto Carpine®
Cholinergic Miotic Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Primarily used to treat neurogenic keratoconjunctivitis sicca 
(KCS). It may also be used to treat primary glaucoma in dogs 
but has largely been replaced by other treatments.
 ▶ Contraindicated in cases of secondary glaucoma (eg, caused 
by uveitis or lens luxation) because of the risk for pupillary 
block
 ▶ Ophthalmic solution may be administered to the affected eye 
or be given orally on food as a treatment for neurogenic KCS.
 ▶ Monitor for ocular and systemic toxicity.
Uses/Indications
The primary use of pilocarpine in veterinary patients is for the 
treatment of neurogenic keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), which is 
caused by interrupted neurologic signaling to the otherwise nor -
mal lacrimal glands. In dogs with coinciding xeromycteria (dryness 
of the nasal mucous membranes), pilocarpine also increases nasal 
secretions. Oral administration and topical ocular administration, 
alone or in combination, increases tear production in dogs. 1–3 Pi -
locarpine, administered topically to the eye, may also be used to 
diagnose parasympathetic denervation of the iris sphincter caused 
by lesions of or trauma to the oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III). 
Pilocarpine may also be used topically to treat primary glaucoma 
in dogs,4 but it has largely been replaced by beta-blockers, carbonic 
anhydrase inhibitors, and prostaglandin agents. Pilocarpine does not 
reduce intraocular pressure (IOP) in horses and is therefore not used 
to treat equine glaucoma.5 
Pharmacology/Actions
Pilocarpine mimics acetylcholine and acts as a direct-acting cholin -
ergic agonist at the neuromuscular junctions. In the eye, this cho -
linergic stimulation leads to lacrimal secretion, and can therefore be 
used to treat neurogenic keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS; ie, lacrimal 
gland tissue is normal, but innervation is interrupted). Cholinergic 
stimulation also leads to ciliary body muscle contraction, which 
places posteriorly directed tension on the base of the iris to mechan-
ically pull open the iridocorneal angle, increasing aqueous humor 
outflow in dogs with elevated intraocular pressure (IOP). 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Pilocarpine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hyper-
sensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Avoid its use in 
dogs with glaucoma secondary to uveitis or lens luxation, as the induc-
tion of miosis may lead to blockage of aqueous humor flow through 
the pupil, thus worsening glaucoma (pupillary block  glaucoma). 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include significant 

===== PDF_PAGE_1422 =====
Pimecrolimus Ophthalmic    1395
irritation (due to the low pH) upon application, which may result in 
inflammation of the uveal tract.1,6 Local irritation has been reported 
in dogs within the first 2 days of treatment, but it appears to improve 
and cause minimal problems thereafter.7 Long-term use may result 
in irreversible miosis due to dilator muscle atrophy and sphincter 
muscle fibrosis. Systemic absorption of pilocarpine, which occurs 
when the medication is administered orally, may result in vomit -
ing, diarrhea, increased salivation, increased urination, bronchiolar 
spasm, and pulmonary edema. 
Dosages
Diagnosis of ocular parasympathetic denervation (oculomotor 
nerve [cranial nerve III]) lesions (extra-label): 1 drop of diluted pi-
locarpine (0.1-0.2%) solution in the affected eye(s)8
Neurogenic keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS; extra-label): 1 drop of 
pilocarpine 0.25% solution in the affected eye(s) 4 times daily, alone 
or in combination with 2 drops/9.1 kg (20 lb) of a pilocarpine 2% 
solution in food to be consumed orally twice daily. 9 The dose is in -
creased weekly until signs of toxicity occur or until clinical signs are 
controlled. If signs of toxicity develop, the dose must be decreased.
Primary glaucoma  (extra-label): 1 drop of pilocarpine 1% or 2% 
solution in the affected eye(s) 3 times daily. NOTE: Topical pilocar-
pine is not recommended for first-line or chronic therapy. 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy (neurogenic keratoconjunctivitis sicca [KCS]): 
improved tear production as assessed by Schirmer tear test, pa -
tient comfort, and decreased ocular redness and irritation 
 ■ Clinical efficacy (primary glaucoma): decrease in/control of intra-
ocular pressure (IOP) 
 ■ Observe for signs of systemic toxicosis, including vomiting, diar-
rhea, increased salivation, increased urination, bronchiolar spasm 
(coughing), and pulmonary edema, which may occur with both 
oral and topical administration.
 ■ Monitor for signs of ocular irritation (eg, redness, squinting, 
cloudiness) when the drug is administered topically.
Client Information
 ■ Give this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Observe your animal for signs of toxicity, including vomiting, di-
arrhea, increased salivation, increased urination, and coughing. 
Contact your veterinarian if any of these signs occur.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solutions.
Storage/Stability
Store this medication at controlled room temperature (15°C-25°C 
[59°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Pilocarpine should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any other 
drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Pilocarpine HCl 1%, 2%, or 4% Ophthalmic Solution (containing pi-
locarpine 10 mg/mL, 20 mg/mL, or 40 mg/mL, respectively; benzal-
konium chloride 0.01%; monobasic sodium phosphate; hypromel -
lose; edetate disodium; dibasic sodium phosphate, purified water; 
NaOH and/or HCl may be added to adjust pH to 3.5 to 5.5), in a 
15 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Isopto Carpine®, generic; (Rx).
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Pimecrolimus Ophthalmic
(pi-mek-kroe-li-mus) 
T-cell Immunosuppressive Lacromimetic Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat dogs with keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), chron-
ic superficial keratitis (CSK), and other immune-mediated 
ocular surface inflammatory conditions
 ▶ Useful for cyclosporine-resistant cases of KCS
 ▶  Not commercially available, must be compounded. Elidel® 
topical (skin) pimecrolimus ointment should NOT be used in 
the eye.
 ▶ Advise caregivers to wear gloves when handling 
 pimecrolimus.
Uses/Indications
Pimecrolimus is used to stimulate tear production in dogs with 
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) that do not respond to topical cy -
closporine. Pimecrolimus 1% administered 3 times daily to patients 
with KCS and chronic superficial keratitis (CSK) produced favorable 
improvement in clinical signs.1 A prospective study in dogs compar-
ing pimecrolimus 1% with cyclosporine 0.2% over an 8-week period 
found significantly greater improvement in clinical signs that were 
treated with pimecrolimus rather than cyclosporine. 2 Topical oph-
thalmic pimecrolimus has not been evaluated in cats or horses. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Pimecrolimus is a calcineurin inhibitor (like cyclosporine) that 
reversibly inhibits T-cell proliferation and prevents the release of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines. Pimecrolimus binds to intracellular 
macrophilin, forming a complex that subsequently binds to and in -
hibits calcineurin. In blocking calcineurin, translocation of the cyto-
plasmic component of the nuclear factor of activated T cells to the 
nucleus is prevented. This prevention of translocation impairs tran-
scription of the genes encoding IL-2 and other cytokines, thereby 
suppressing T-cell proliferation and normal immune function. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Pimecrolimus is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
 hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Caregiv-
ers should be advised to avoid contact with pimecrolimus, as skin 
contact with pimecrolimus has been associated with the develop -
ment of cancer in humans.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects to ocular use of pimecrolimus are rare but include or-
bital alopecia, which may be related to oil vehicles used to compound 
pimecrolimus solutions.
Dosages
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) (extra-label): 1 drop of a pimecro-
limus 1% solution in affected eye(s) 2 to 3 times daily
Chronic superficial keratitis (CSK) (extra-label): 1 drop of a 
 pimecrolimus 1% solution in affected eye(s) 2 to 3 times daily
Monitoring
 ■ Baseline and periodic Schirmer tear test, as well as reduction in mu-
coid ocular discharge and conjunctival hyperemia. Evaluate for lack 

===== PDF_PAGE_1423 =====
1396    Povidone-Iodine Ophthalmic
of progression (and possibly regression) of chronic inflammatory 
changes, such as corneal pigmentation, vascularization, and fibrosis
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ This is a lifelong medicine and must be given daily. Missed doses 
may cause return of keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) or chronic 
superficial keratitis (CSK).
 ■ Wear gloves when handling pimecrolimus. Use proper adminis -
tration techniques to avoid contamination of the medicine. Keep 
the cap tightly closed when the medicine is not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine as directed on the package labeling away from 
moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if particles are seen in solutions.
Storage/Stability
Store this product as directed on the package labeling away from 
moisture and sunlight. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Pimecrolimus ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Pimecrolimus ophthalmic preparations are not commercially avail -
able but have been prepared (compounded) by qualified compound-
ing pharmacists in 1% solutions in oil vehicles including olive oil, 
corn oil, and medium-chain triglyceride oil. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Povidone-Iodine Ophthalmic
(poe-veh-done eye-oh-dyne) Betadine®
Ocular Disinfectant 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Primarily used as a component of preoperative periocular 
surface preparation
 ▶ An inexpensive alternative to traditional antifungal, antibacte-
rial, or antiviral ophthalmic agents
 ▶ May be used to debride nonvital corneal epithelium from 
indolent ulcers
 ▶ Solutions greater than 1% must be thoroughly lavaged from 
the eye within 5 minutes of administration to avoid corneal 
toxicity.
 ▶ Topical administration causes discomfort.
Uses/Indications
Povidone-iodine ophthalmic solutions (1% to 5%) are used as a com-
ponent of periocular surface preparation for all surgical procedures. 
Additionally, they may be used to chemically debride loose epithelium 
associated with superficial chronic corneal epithelial defects (SCCED; 
also called indolent ulcer), or as treatment for bacterial, fungal, and vi-
ral infections of the ocular surface. Contrary to what may be expected, 
lower concentrations (less than 1%) of povidone-iodine demonstrate 
greater bactericidal activity than higher (10%) concentrations.1 Povi-
done-iodine 1.25% led to comparable clinical improvement relative 
to topical neomycin/polymyxin B/gramicidin and ciprofloxacin in 
human patients with bacterial keratitis caused by various organisms.2 
Pharmacology/Actions
Povidone-iodine is an iodophor that damages bacterial cell walls 
and organelle membranes through interactions with fatty acid dou -
ble bonds. Additionally, povidone-iodine induces oxidative damage 
to amino acids and nucleotides. These actions lead to formation of 
pores in membranes, producing bactericidal and virucidal, and, po-
tentially, fungicidal and sporicidal activity, depending on organism 
and contact time.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Povidone-iodine is contraindicated in patients with a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include local burn -
ing and stinging on application, as well as chemosis and conjunctival 
hyperemia; however, concentrations less than 1% are better tolerated 
than more concentrated preparations. Some patients may experience 
a local hypersensitivity reaction. Solutions of 0.25% to 10% demon -
strate varying degrees of toxicity to ocular surface cells in vitro.3 
Dosages
Periocular preoperative preparation  (extra-label): Saturate sterile 
swabs or ocular gauze with povidone-iodine solution and apply to 
surgical area as disinfectant component of presurgical preparation; 
irrigate the ocular surface with sterile saline solution, leaving it in 
contact with the surgical area for 2 minutes. Residual solution should 
be removed via irrigation with sterile saline solution.
Fungal, bacterial, or herpesvirus keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop of a 
5% solution to the affected eye(s) once every 24 hours. Treated eye(s) 
must be thoroughly lavaged with sterile saline solution not more 
than 5 minutes after administration to avoid corneal damage. 
Debridement of nonvital epithelium in superficial chronic corneal 
epithelial defects (SCCED) ulcers (extra-label): 1 – 2 drops of a 5% 
solution to the affected eye(s) once. Irrigate thoroughly with sterile sa-
line solution to remove all povidone-iodine not more than 5 minutes 
after application to avoid damage to the healthy corneal epithelium.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy 
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as recommended by your veterinarian.
 ■ Rinse the animal’s eyes thoroughly with sterile eyewash solution 
within 5 minutes of application.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Store at room temperature away from moisture and sunlight. Do 
not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if particles are seen in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Povidone-iodine preparations should not be mixed directly with any 
other medications. Sterile povidone-iodine ophthalmic preparation 
is available as a 5% solution intended for application to the eyes, but 
solutions of 0.5% to 1% may be prepared by diluting this solution 
with sterile normal saline. Nonsterile povidone-iodine solutions 
should not be administered to the eye.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE

===== PDF_PAGE_1424 =====
Prednisolone Ophthalmic    1397
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Povidone-Iodine 5% Ophthalmic Prep (containing povidone-iodine 
5%, with 0.5% available iodine; purified water; citric acid; glycerin; 
nonoxynol-9; NaCl; NaOH; and dibasic sodium phosphate) in a ster-
ile 30 mL bottle; Betadine Sterile Ophthalmic Prep®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Prednisolone Ophthalmic
(pred-niss-oh-lone)  Pred Forte®, Omnipred®, Blephamide®,   
Pred G®
Corticosteroid 
For systemic use, refer to Prednisolone/Prednisone
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Topical corticosteroid used to treat ocular surface and intraoc-
ular inflammatory conditions
 ▶ Superior penetration into the anterior segment compared 
with other topical corticosteroids, particularly in acetate for-
mulation (versus phosphate)
 ▶ Use cautiously in small diabetic patients to avoid blood glu-
cose dysregulation.
 ▶ Contraindications include a hypersensitivity to prednis(ol)one; 
an existing or suspected bacterial, viral, or fungal ocular infec-
tion; and the presence of a corneal abrasion or ulceration.
Uses/Indications
Prednisolone ophthalmic is used to treat inflammatory conditions 
of the palpebral and bulbar conjunctiva, the cornea, and the anterior 
segment of the globe (eg, blepharitis, conjunctivitis, keratitis, ante -
rior uveitis). Greater intraocular penetration (and therefore poten -
tial clinical efficacy) is achieved with acetate formulations relative 
to phosphate. Administration of prednisolone acetate to the eyes of 
cats reduced experimentally induced uveitis more significantly than 
dexamethasone, flurbiprofen, and diclofenac.1
Prednisolone is available in combination with antimicrobial 
agents for topical ophthalmic use.
Pharmacology/Actions
Corticosteroids have broad immunomodulatory and anti-inflam -
matory actions, which are mediated via direct effects on gene ex -
pression, as well as by nongenomic effects on cell membranes and 
receptors. Ultimately, corticosteroids decrease pro-inflammatory 
gene transcription, production of pro-inflammatory prostaglandins 
and leukotrienes, B- and T-cell number and function, cell-mediated 
immunity, and humoral immunity.2 Specific mechanisms involved in 
controlling ocular inflammatory conditions are not known. Prednis-
olone has a relative glucocorticoid potency of 4 (versus 1 for hydro-
cortisone and 25 for dexamethasone); however, its superior intraoc-
ular penetration when in the acetate formulation leads to increased 
clinical efficacy relative to dexamethasone ophthalmic formulations.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Prednisolone is contraindicated in patients with a history of hypersen-
sitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Due to inhibition of 
epithelial wound healing and potentiation of infection, prednisolone 
ophthalmic is contraindicated when corneal ulceration is suspected 
or present or in the presence of corneal infection (bacterial, fungal, or 
viral),3 infectious diseases, chronic renal failure, congestive heart fail-
ure, systemic hypertension, or gastric ulceration. When use of pred-
nisolone is necessary in these conditions, the minimal effective dose 
should be administered for the shortest possible time.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include development of cataracts 
(via altered glucose or lenticular metabolic effects), increased intraocular 
pressure (IOP; via activation of glucocorticoid receptors in the trabecu-
lar meshwork), infection (via immunosuppression), decreased wound 
healing (via increased collagenolytic activity), mydriasis, and calcific 
keratopathy. Increased IOP may occur in some animals with long-term 
use of prednisolone; however, most reports suggest the change is revers-
ible.4,5 Systemic effects are rare but include hepatopathy, suppression of 
endogenous glucocorticoid production, and focal alopecia. Concurrent 
use of systemic steroids increases risk for these adverse effects. 
Dosages
Conjunctivitis (extra-label): 1 drop or ¼ inch strip in the affected 
eye(s) every 6 hours until clinical improvement occurs, then gradu -
ally decrease, provided clinical improvement is maintained
Keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop or ¼ inch strip in the affected eye(s) 
every 6 hours until clinical improvement occurs, then gradually de -
crease, provided clinical improvement is maintained
Anterior uveitis (extra-label): 1 drop or ¼ inch strip in the affected 
eye(s) every 6 hours until clinical improvement occurs, then gradu -
ally decrease, provided clinical improvement is maintained
Post-cataract removal (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) 
 every 6 hours
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Resolution or development of signs of inflammation
 ■ Intraocular pressure (IOP; especially in cats) and ocular sur -
face integrity (eg, fluorescein stain) as needed based on clinical 
 presentation
 ■ Blood or urine glucose changes based on development of clinical 
signs (eg, polyuria, polydipsia) in diabetic animals
Client Information
 ■ This medicine can be given for various lengths of time. Be sure 
you understand how often and for how long your animal should 
be given this medicine.
 ■ Shake suspensions well before using.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian as soon as possible if your animal’s eye 
condition worsens or does not improve while using this medicine.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal’s eye condition 
while taking this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up 
visits.
 ■ Store this medicine as directed on the product label. Do not freeze.
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are visible particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Storage recommendations can vary; follow storage requirements list-
ed on packaging. Most commonly, this product is recommended to 
be stored at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) 
away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Prednisolone ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Prednisolone Acetate 0.12% Ophthalmic Suspension (containing 

===== PDF_PAGE_1425 =====
1398    Proparacaine Ophthalmic
prednisolone acetate [microfine suspension] 0.12%, benzalkonium 
chloride, boric acid, edetate disodium, hypromellose, polysorbate 
80, purified water, sodium bisulfite, sodium chloride, and sodium 
citrate) in 10 mL sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; Pred Mild®; (Rx)
Prednisolone Acetate 1% Ophthalmic Suspension (containing pred-
nisolone acetate [microfine suspension] 1%; benzalkonium chloride; 
boric acid; edetate disodium; hypromellose; polysorbate 80; purified 
water; sodium bisulfite; NaCl; and sodium citrate, with a pH of 5 to 
6) in 5 mL and 10 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; Pred Forte 1%, 
Omnipred® generic; (Rx)
Prednisolone Sodium Phosphate 1% Ophthalmic Solution (containing 
prednisolone sodium phosphate 10 mg/mL [equivalent to 9.1 mg/mL 
prednisolone phosphate] in a buffered isotonic solution; hypromellose; 
monobasic and dibasic sodium phosphate; NaCl, edetate disodium and 
purified water; NaOH and/or HCl may be added to adjust the pH to 6.2 
to 8.2) in 5 mL and 10 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; generic; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED COMBINATION PRODUCTS:
Gentamicin and Prednisolone Acetate Ophthalmic Ointment 
0.3%/0.6% (containing gentamicin sulfate equivalent to 0.3% gentami-
cin base, prednisolone acetate 0.6%, chlorobutanol [chloral derivative] 
0.5%, mineral oil, petrolatum [and] lanolin alcohol, purified water, 
and white petrolatum) in a sterile 3.5 g ophthalmic tube; Pred-G®; (Rx)
Gentamicin and Prednisolone Acetate Ophthalmic Suspension 
0.3%/1% (containing gentamicin sulfate equivalent to 0.3% genta -
micin base, prednisolone acetate [microfine suspension] 1%, benzal-
konium chloride 0.005%, edetate disodium, hypromellose, polyvinyl 
alcohol 1.4%, polysorbate 80, purified water, sodium chloride, sodi-
um citrate dehydrate, NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH [5.4 to 6.6]) in 
a sterile 5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Pred-G®; (Rx)
Sulfacetamide Sodium and Prednisolone Acetate Ophthalmic Oint-
ment (10%/0.2%) (containing sulfacetamide sodium 10%, prednis -
olone acetate 0.2%, phenylmercuric acetate 0.0008%, white petro -
latum, mineral oil, and petrolatum and lanolin alcohol) in a sterile 
3.5 g ophthalmic tube; Blephamide S.O.P .®; (Rx)
Sulfacetamide Sodium and Prednisolone Acetate Ophthalmic Suspen-
sion (10%/0.2%) (containing sulfacetamide sodium 10%, prednisolone 
acetate 0.2%, benzalkonium chloride 0.004%, edetate disodium, poly-
sorbate 80, polyvinyl alcohol 1.4%, potassium phosphate monobasic, 
purified water, sodium phosphate dibasic, sodium thiosulfate, and HCl 
and/or NaOH to adjust the pH [6.6 to 7.2]); Blephamide®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Proparacaine Ophthalmic
(proe-pare-a-kane) Alcaine®, Flucaine®
Topical Ocular Anesthetic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Rapid-acting topical anesthetic used for ocular diagnostic 
procedures
 ▶ Should never be prescribed for therapeutic administration
 ▶ Dose- and species-dependent duration, with maximal effect 
generally between 5 and 15 minutes in dogs, cats, and horses
 ▶ Long-term use results in tear film instability and globe-threat-
ening corneal epithelial and stromal damage.
 ▶ Some products must be stored in the refrigerator; consult 
product label.
Uses/Indications
Proparacaine is indicated for use in ophthalmic diagnostic proce -
dures, including measurement of intraocular pressure (tonometry), 
corneal and conjunctival sampling for cytology and culture, ocu -
lar ultrasonography, and gonioscopy. Proparacaine is indicated as 
an adjunctive anesthetic for performing therapeutic procedures in 
the hospital, including removal of foreign bodies and sutures from 
the cornea; eyelid and conjunctival surgeries; corneal grafting pro -
cedures; and cataract extraction. Proparacaine has dose- and spe -
cies-dependent duration of action, with maximal effect between 
≈5 and 15 minutes in dogs, cats, and horses, and duration of effect 
lasting around 30 minutes.1–5 The degree of maximal effect of propa-
racaine is less than that of viscous tetracaine in dogs. 2 Favorably, 
administration of topical proparacaine has not been associated with 
decreased positive bacterial or fungal cultures in dogs, cats, or hors-
es.6,7 Because of the likelihood of developing ocular surface toxicities 
with prolonged or repeated use, proparacaine should never be pre -
scribed for use as an ocular analgesic.
Pharmacology/Actions
Proparacaine induces local anesthesia by inhibiting neuronal depolar-
ization, which prevents generation of an action potential. This action 
occurs due to binding of the local anesthetic molecule to the intracellu-
lar portion of the voltage-gated sodium channel within the neuron, thus 
inhibiting intracellular movement of sodium. Variations in the struc-
ture of different local anesthetics influence their relative potencies. All 
local anesthetics have increased efficacy in alkaline environments due 
to improved intracellular penetration; efficacy of local anesthetics is de-
creased in acidic environments, such as when there is inflammation. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Proparacaine is contraindicated in patients with a history of hyper -
sensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Prolonged use 
of a topical ocular anesthetic will likely produce significant corneal 
epithelial and stromal disease, as well as tear film instability, and may 
result in loss of vision.8 
Adverse Effects
Instillation of proparacaine may result in local irritation several 
hours after administration. Although patients that are sensitive to 
other local anesthetics may be less likely to react to proparacaine, 
local or systemic sensitivity may manifest as a pseudo-allergic (ana-
phylactoid) reaction mimicking an IgE-mediated vasodilatory event. 
Cardiovascular, respiratory, and CNS depressant effects that may re-
sult from other local anesthetics are extremely rare with appropriate 
use of topical anesthetics. Care should be exercised, however, when 
proparacaine is administered to small veterinary patients (ie, pup -
pies, kittens, “pocket pets”), or those more susceptible to systemic 
absorption (ie, amphibians). Use of proparacaine as a therapeutic 
analgesic leads to superficial punctate keratitis, which may progress 
to diffuse necrotizing keratitis, severe infiltrative keratitis, persistent 
epithelial defects, or damage to the Descemet membrane. 
Dosages
Ophthalmic procedures requiring local anesthesia  (extra-label):  
1 – 2 drops in the target eye(s) prior to examination or procedure. 
May repeat 1 drop every 5 to 10 minutes 2 to 3 additional times. 
With additional applications, the duration of corneal anesthesia 
can be extended to 55 minutes in dogs. Additional doses should be 
avoided in small patients (ie, puppies, kittens, “pocket pets”). 
Monitoring 
 ■ Clinical effect: Onset of action is indicated by awake patient per -
mitting diagnostic procedures to be performed, and by a reduction 
in anesthetic requirements when administered  preoperatively.
Client Information
 ■ Proparacaine is not administered by pet owners in the home. It 
is reserved for diagnostic procedures in the veterinary practice.

===== PDF_PAGE_1426 =====
Rose Bengal Stain, Ophthalmic    1399
Storage/Stability
Store this product in a refrigerator or at controlled room tempera -
ture (depending on the product label) away from moisture and sun-
light; do not freeze.9 
Discard this product if the solution changes color, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if it develops particles. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Proparacaine should not be mixed directly (in vitro) with any other 
drugs. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Proparacaine HCl 0.5% ophthalmic solution (containing 5 mg/mL 
proparacaine; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; glycerin; HCl and/or 
NaOH to adjust pH; purified water) in 15 mL ophthalmic dropper 
bottles; Alcaine®, generic; (Rx)
Proparacaine HCl 0.5% with Fluorescein Sodium Ophthalmic  
Solution (containing proparacaine 5 mg/mL; fluorescein sodium  
2.5 mg/mL; povidone; boric acid; water for injection; NaOH and/or 
HCl to adjust pH; methylparaben), 5 mL, in sterile plastic or glass 
ophthalmic dropper bottles; Flucaine®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Rose Bengal Stain, Ophthalmic
(rose ben-gall) Glostrips® 
Ocular Diagnostic Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Vital dye that demonstrates corneal and conjunctival epithelial 
cell damage, as well as deficiency in ocular surface mucins
 ▶ Full-thickness loss of corneal epithelium is not necessary to cause 
rose bengal uptake by epithelial cells (in contrast to fluorescein). 
 ▶ Very toxic to cornea; irrigate eye(s) well after use
 ▶ Stings upon application
Uses/Indications
Rose bengal stain is used to detect epithelial cell damage prior to 
full-thickness epithelial cell loss (ulceration), as most commonly oc-
curs with viral infections. Rose bengal staining may also be used as 
an adjunctive diagnostic procedure for nonulcerative epithelial and 
subepithelial keratomycosis in horses.1 Rose bengal uptake also oc -
curs in patients with qualitative (mucin) tear deficiency syndromes. 
Rose bengal stain has recently been demonstrated to be an effective 
adjunctive diagnostic test for evaluation of quantitative tear film de-
ficiencies in dogs.2 
Pharmacology/Actions
Rose bengal stains both the nuclei and cell walls of dead or degen -
erated epithelial cells of the cornea and conjunctiva. In contrast to 
fluorescein stain, rose bengal does not require full-thickness loss of 
corneal epithelium to indicate damage to the cornea. Rose bengal 
uptake is decreased in cells that are covered appropriately by mucin, 
a component of the tear film. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Rose bengal is contraindicated in patients with a history of hyper -
sensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Topical anes -
thetic agents may be indicated to prevent stinging on application. 
Rose bengal is very toxic to the cornea, and treated eye(s) should 
be thoroughly irrigated after exposure. Rose bengal is virucidal and 
may confound results of diagnostic tests for viral keratitis; therefore, 
culture samples should be obtained prior to application of the stain.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include burning and 
stinging upon application. 
Dosages
Detection of corneal and conjunctival cell damage (extra-label; 
NOT FDA-approved): Wet the surface of the rose bengal strip with 
1 – 2 drops of normal saline solution. Apply moistened tip of strip 
or instill 1 drop of rose bengal 1% solution to conjunctival fornix. 
Examine the eye with white light or with a red-free absorption filter. 
Degenerated or dead epithelial cells will appear red in color. Flush 
eye(s) after exposure.
Monitoring
 ■ Evaluate corneas for signs of toxicity (eg, ulceration)
Client Information
 ■ Rose bengal strips should not be used by pet owners at home.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the refrigerator or at controlled room tempera-
ture (below 30°C) away from moisture and sunlight as directed on 
packaging or by compounding pharmacist; do not freeze. Unpre -
served solutions of rose bengal carry a high risk of contamination 
with bacteria. Store this product as directed and observe all assigned 
beyond-use dates. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Rose bengal ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed direct -
ly with any other ophthalmic medications. Rose bengal solution is 
no longer commercially available but may be compounded as a 1% 
solution either with or without preservatives; however, preservation 
systems are strongly recommended to prevent microbial and fungal 
contamination.3
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Rose Bengal 0.13% Strips (containing rose bengal 1.3 mg/strip) 
as individually wrapped strips in containers of 100 sterile strips; 
Glostrips®, generic; (Rx). No FDA-approved dosage forms of rose 
bengal are currently available. 
Rose bengal may be prepared (compounded) by qualified compound-
ing pharmacists into a 1% sterile solution in sterile water for injection. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Silver Sulfadiazine (SSD)  
Ophthalmic
(sil-ver sul-fa-dye-ahy-zeen) Silvadene®, SSD®, Thermazene®
Broad-Spectrum Antibacterial; Antifungal Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Antibacterial and antifungal dermatologic topical cream used 
as treatment for fungal keratitis in horses
 ▶ Long-term use may result in discoloration of the sclera due to 
argyrism.
 ▶ Do not use this medication in subpalpebral lavage (SPL) cathe-
ters, as occlusion will result.
 ▶ Best dispensed in 1 mL sterile tuberculin syringes with sterile 
tip caps for administration to the ocular surface
 ▶ Warn caregivers with sulfonamide allergies to avoid contact 
with this medication.

===== PDF_PAGE_1427 =====
1400    Sodium Chloride (Hypertonic) Ophthalmic
Uses/Indications
Silver sulfadiazine is used as a broad-spectrum antibacterial and an-
tifungal ophthalmic agent. It is used most commonly as a less expen-
sive alternative to conventional therapy for fungal keratitis in horses. 
Silver sulfadiazine was found to be superior to natamycin in sensitiv-
ity testing for fungal isolates in horses with fungal keratitis.1 
Pharmacology/Actions
A specific mechanism of action has not been determined for silver 
sulfadiazine’s antibacterial and antifungal activity; however, its ef -
fectiveness may be from either synergistic interactions between the 
silver and sulfadiazine components, or actions of each component 
individually. Silver is a biocide that binds to a broad range of targets, 
thus exerting a variety of effects, such as enzyme inhibition, protein 
denaturation, or membrane leakage, depending upon the target 
bound. Sulfadiazine interferes with microbial folic acid synthesis via 
competitive inhibition of bacterial dihydropteroate synthetase. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Silver sulfadiazine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. It should 
not be administered through subpalpebral lavage (SPL) catheters as 
occlusion will result. The package labeling of the topical cream clear-
ly states that it is NOT for use in the eye. As such, it is recommended 
to obtain informed consent from owners before prescribing.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include argyrism 
(bluish discoloration of the skin and sclera due to silver accumula -
tion), pain, burning, and itching. Although rare, systemic effects that 
may occur in association with the sulfonamide component include 
transient leukopenia, skin rashes and inflammation, blood dyscra -
sias, GI reactions, hepatitis, and toxic nephrosis. 
Dosages
NOTE: All dosages are extra-label, and the package insert of the topical 
cream clearly states that it is NOT for use in the eye. As such, it is rec-
ommended to obtain informed consent from owners before prescribing.
Bacterial or fungal keratitis: ¼ – ½ inch strip or  0.1 – 0.2 mL in 
the conjunctival sac of the affected eye(s) every 1 to 2 hours initially, 
then tapered to every 4 hours and then per clinical response. Avoid 
long-term use.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolution of keratitis as evidenced by cytology 
and cultures 
 ■ Sclera: discontinue use if sclera becomes blue or gray in color 
 (argyrism)
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Do not use this medicine in subpalpebral lavage (SPL) catheters.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this product at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C 
[68°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Silver sulfadiazine should not be mixed directly with any other oph-
thalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Silver sulfadiazine is NOT approved for ophthalmic use. The pack -
age insert of all brands of silver sulfadiazine topical creams warns 
against use in the eye. As such, it is recommended to obtain in -
formed consent from owners before prescribing. It is available as a 
topical cream, silver sulfadiazine 10 mg/g in a water miscible base 
in 20 g, 50 g, 400 g, and 1000 g containers. It is optimally dispensed 
in sterile, single-use tuberculin syringes tipped with a sterile tip cap 
(needle removed) for administration in the conjunctival sac. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Sodium Chloride (Hypertonic) 
Ophthalmic
(soe-dee-um klor-ide [hye-per-ton-ik])  Muro 128®,  Altachlore®, 
Sochlor®
Hyperosmotic Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for temporary reduction of corneal edema
 ▶ Ointment forms have longer contact time and are preferred 
relative to solution forms.
 ▶ Available without prescription
 ▶ Compromise of the corneal surface (eg, corneal ulcer) may 
diminish the benefits of hypertonic sodium chloride due to 
loss of a functional epithelial barrier.
Uses/Indications
Hypertonic sodium chloride ophthalmic is used for the temporary 
reduction of corneal edema and associated bullous keratopathy, su -
perficial corneal erosions, and chronic corneal edema that develop 
due to endothelial dysfunction induced by a variety of causes. Re -
duction of edema is short-lived; however, the reduction may be suf-
ficient to favorably impact corneal clarity. Topical administration of 
5% sodium chloride ophthalmic ointment to normal canine corneas 
resulted in decreased corneal thickness.1 Although topical hyperton-
ic saline has been administered to dogs with spontaneous chronic 
corneal epithelial defects (SCCEDs) undergoing various debride -
ment techniques,2 use of 5% sodium chloride ophthalmic did not 
significantly change the rate of corneal healing, and even prolonged 
healing time in some cases.3 
Pharmacology/Actions
Tear film and aqueous humor are continuously absorbed by the hy-
drophilic corneal stroma; fluid balance is controlled by a normally 
functioning corneal epithelium and endothelium. When this balance 
is disrupted because of endothelial dysfunction, fluid accumulates in 
the corneal stroma and migrates to the surface of the cornea, causing 
opacification, bullae formation, ulceration, and visual impairment. 
The use of topical hypertonic saline may reduce the fluid accumula-
tion in the corneal stroma.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Hypertonic sodium chloride is contraindicated in patients with a 
history of hypersensitivity to any component of the formulation. It 
may have lesser efficacy in the presence of corneal ulceration, as in -
tact corneal epithelium is required to create the concentration gradi-
ent by which fluid is drawn from the bullae. Application of hyperton-
ic sodium chloride may further increase discomfort associated with 
ulcerative keratitis.

===== PDF_PAGE_1428 =====
Sulfacetamide Ophthalmic    1401
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include temporary burn-
ing and stinging upon application. Short-term application of hypertonic 
sodium chloride to normal canine eyes did not induce signs of toxicity.1 
Dosages
Corneal Edema (extra-label): 1 – 2 drops or a ¼ – ½ inch strip in the 
affected eye(s) every 3 to 4 hours
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Observe for resolution of corneal edema. Treatment should be 
discontinued if discomfort or corneal ulceration develop.
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ This medication is available without a prescription. Only use 
products recommended by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 to 10 minutes after applying this medication before apply-
ing any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication as directed on the product label. Do not 
freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are visible particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. Discard this medication 
if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, or if particles are observed 
in the solution. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Hypertonic sodium chloride should not be mixed directly (in vitro) 
with any other drugs to avoid dilution of the active ingredient. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Sodium Chloride 5% Ophthalmic Ointment (containing sodium 
chloride 50 mg/mL, lanolin oil, mineral oil, water for injection and 
white petrolatum) in a 3.5 g ophthalmic ointment tube; Muro 128®, 
Altachlore®, Sochlor®; (OTC)
Sodium Chloride 2% or 5% Ophthalmic Solution (containing  sodium 
chloride 20 mg/mL or 50 mg/mL, methylparaben 0.023%, propylpar-
aben 0.01% boric acid, hypromellose, propylene glycol, purified water, 
sodium borate, NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH) in a 15 mL ophthal-
mic dropper bottle; Muro 128®, Altachlore®, Sochlor®; (OTC)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Sulfacetamide Ophthalmic
(sul-fa-seet-uh-mide) Bleph-10®, Blephamide®
Sulfonamide Antimicrobial Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Topical antimicrobial used to treat ocular surface bacterial 
infections
 ▶ Warn caregivers with sulfonamide allergies to avoid contact 
with this medication.
 ▶ Some sulfacetamide ophthalmic products are combined with 
prednisolone; do not use these formulations in patients with 
bacterial, viral, or fungal keratitis.
Uses/Indications
Sulfacetamide is used to treat conjunctivitis and other superficial 
ocular infections due to susceptible microorganisms. Sulfacetamide 
is considered active against Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, 
Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus viridans, Haemophilus, 
Klebsiella, and Enterobacter. Sulfacetamide has no activity when it is 
applied topically for Neisseria spp, Serratia marcescens, or Pseudomo-
nas aeruginosa. A significant percentage of staphylococcal isolates 
are completely resistant to sulfa drugs. Sulfacetamide is also found in 
combination products with prednisolone (eg,  Blephamide®).
Pharmacology/Actions
All sulfonamides are bacteriostatic agents with a similar spectrum of 
activity. Sulfonamides inhibit bacterial synthesis of dihydrofolic acid 
via competitive inhibition of dihydropteroate synthetase. Resistant 
strains have altered dihydropteroate synthetase with reduced affinity 
for sulfonamides or produce increased quantities of aminobenzoic 
acid.1 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Sulfacetamide is contraindicated in patients that have a history of 
hypersensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Sulfac -
etamide may induce serious allergic reactions and blood dyscrasias, 
but this is rare following topical ophthalmic administration. 1 Pa -
tients with corneal infections due to bacterial, viral, or fungal or -
ganisms should not receive corticosteroid-containing sulfacetamide 
products.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals following ocular 
administration include local irritation, stinging, and burning. 1 Al -
though rare, systemic effects that may occur in association with the 
sulfonamide component include transient leukopenia, skin rashes 
and inflammation, toxic epidermal necrolysis, blood dyscrasias, GI 
reactions, fulminant hepatic necrosis, and toxic nephrosis. 
In dogs, systemic sulfonamides are known to cause keratocon -
junctivitis sicca (KCS) due to a direct toxicity to the lacrimal acinar 
cells; however, there have been no reports of topical sulfacetamide 
causing KCS. This toxic effect to the lacrimal acinar cells is caused 
by the nitrogen-containing pyridine and pyrimidine rings in sulfon-
amides and is dose-related. The estimated incidence of KCS is 15% to 
25% in dogs treated with sulfonamides and may be latent in onset. 2 
Dogs exhibiting blepharospasm or excess mucus ocular discharge 
should be evaluated for KCS. This condition may be reversible if sul-
fonamide use is discontinued in time. See Monitoring.
Dosages
Susceptible bacterial conjunctivitis and ocular infections  (ex -
tra-label): 1 drop or ¼ – ½ inch strip on the affected eye(s) every 2 
to 3 hours initially and then tapered according to clinical response. 
Duration of therapy is usually 7 to 10 days.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolution of bacterial conjunctivitis as evi -
denced by cytology and cultures 
 ■ Baseline and periodic Schirmer tear testing, especially in predis -
posed breeds. Dogs should be observed for signs of developing 
KCS (eg, mucus ocular discharge, blepharospasm).
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Caregivers with sulfa allergies should avoid contact with this 
medicine. 
 ■ Observe dogs for signs of dry eye (eg, squinting, excessive mucus 
eye discharge, redness of the whites of the eyes) and consult your 
veterinarian if this occurs.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 

===== PDF_PAGE_1429 =====
1402    Tacrolimus Ophthalmic
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if it becomes cloudy, or if particles are 
seen in the solutions. Sulfacetamide solutions will darken over 
time. The medicine should be thrown away if this occurs.
Storage/Stability
Store this product at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C 
[68°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Sulfacetamide ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Sulfacetamide Sodium 10% Ophthalmic Solution (containing sul -
facetamide sodium 10%; benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; edetate 
disodium; polysorbate 80; polyvinyl alcohol 1.4%; purified water; 
sodium phosphate dibasic; sodium phosphate monobasic; sodium 
thiosulfate; and HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH to 6.8 to 7.5), 5 mL 
in sterile 10 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; Bleph-10®, generic; (Rx)
Sulfacetamide Sodium 10% Ophthalmic Ointment (containing sul -
facetamide sodium USP 100 mg; white petrolatum; mineral oil) in 
3.5 g tubes; generic; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED COMBINATION PRODUCTS:
Sulfacetamide Sodium 10% and Prednisolone Acetate 0.2% Oph -
thalmic Suspension (containing sulfacetamide sodium 10%; pred -
nisolone acetate 0.2%; benzalkonium chloride 0.004%; edetate diso-
dium; polysorbate 80; polyvinyl alcohol 1.4%; potassium phosphate 
monobasic; purified water; sodium phosphate dibasic; sodium thio-
sulfate; and HCl and/or NaOH to adjust the pH to 6.6. to 7.2), 5 mL 
in 10 mL bottle, and 10 mL in 15 mL bottle; Blephamide®; (Rx)
Sulfacetamide Sodium 10% and Prednisolone Sodium Phosphate 
0.23% Ophthalmic Suspension (containing sulfacetamide sodium 
100 mg; prednisolone sodium phosphate 2.5 mg, equivalent to pred-
nisolone phosphate 2.3 mg; poloxamer 407; boric acid; edetate diso-
dium; purified water; NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH to 6.5 to 7.5) 
in 5 mL and 10 mL; generic; (Rx)
Sulfacetamide Sodium 10% and Prednisolone Acetate 0.2% Oph -
thalmic Ointment (containing sulfacetamide sodium 10%, prednis -
olone acetate 0.2%, phenylmercuric acetate 0.0008%, white petrola -
tum, mineral oil, petrolatum (and) lanolin alcohol) in sterile 3.5 g 
ophthalmic tube; Blephamide®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Tacrolimus Ophthalmic
(ta-kroe-li-mus) 
T-cell Inhibitor Immunosuppressive Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat dogs with keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), chron-
ic superficial keratitis (CSK), and other immune-mediated 
ocular surface inflammatory conditions 
 ▶ Useful for cyclosporine-resistant cases of KCS
 ▶ It is not commercially available; it must be compounded 
(Protopic® topical dermal tacrolimus ointment should NOT be 
used in the eye).
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies tacrolimus as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Tacrolimus is used to stimulate tear production in dogs with quan -
titative and qualitative keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS). Tacrolimus 
0.03% has been demonstrated to be equally efficacious as cyclospo -
rine 2% for canine KCS.1 Concentrations of 0.01% to 0.03% have 
been reported to be successful in controlling canine KCS.1–4 Tacroli-
mus can also manage other ocular surface inflammatory conditions, 
such as chronic superficial keratitis (CSK). Tacrolimus topical oph -
thalmic use has not been evaluated in cats or horses.
Pharmacology/Actions
Tacrolimus is a macrolide antibiotic that has a T-cell suppressant activ-
ity similar to that of cyclosporine, but the potency is ≈100 times that 
of cyclosporine. Reversible T-cell suppression results from inhibition 
of calcineurin by tacrolimus. Within T cells, the binding of tacrolimus 
with the intracellular protein (FK-506) forms a complex that subse-
quently binds to and inhibits intracellular calcineurin. Inhibition of 
calcineurin prevents transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokines and 
T-cell signal transduction, resulting in immunosuppressive effects. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tacrolimus is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. The degree 
of systemic absorption from ophthalmic preparations is not known; 
use with caution in small-sized animals.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies tacrolimus as a hazardous drug; personal protec-
tive equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects associated with the ocular use of tacrolimus are rare 
but include orbital alopecia, which may be related to oil vehicles used 
to compound tacrolimus solutions.
Dosages
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) (extra-label): 1 drop in each eye 
2 times daily
Chronic superficial keratitis (CSK) (extra-label): 1 drop in each eye 
2 times daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: baseline and periodic Schirmer tear test, reduc -
tion in mucoid ocular discharge and conjunctival hyperemia, and 
lack of progression (and possibly regression) of chronic inflam -
matory changes, such as corneal pigmentation, vascularization, 
and fibrosis
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.

===== PDF_PAGE_1430 =====
Tafluprost Ophthalmic   1403
 ■ This is a lifelong medication and must be given daily to be effec -
tive. Missed doses may cause rapid (within days) return of kerato-
conjunctivitis sicca (KCS).
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine as directed on the package labeling away from 
moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze.
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solutions.
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined by 
the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). 
Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the use of personal 
protective equipment when handling this medicine.
Storage/Stability
Store this product as directed on the package labeling away from 
moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Tacrolimus ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
It is not commercially available and must be prepared (com -
pounded) by a qualified compounding pharmacist.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Tacrolimus ophthalmic preparations are not commercially available 
but may be compounded by qualified compounding pharmacists in 
concentrations varying from 0.01% to 0.03% in oil vehicles including 
olive oil, corn oil, and medium-chain triglyceride oil. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Tafluprost Ophthalmic
(ta-floo-prost) Zioptan®
Prostaglandin Analogue
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used as a treatment for primary glaucoma in dogs
 ▶ Unlikely to be effective for feline or equine glaucoma
 ▶ Twice-daily dosing of tafluprost may result in less fluctuation 
of intraocular pressure (IOP).
 ▶ Preservative-free and may be better tolerated than preserva-
tive-containing prostaglandin analogues
 ▶ May worsen intraocular inflammation through prostaglan-
din-mediated mechanisms
Uses/Indications
Tafluprost is indicated to reduce intraocular pressure (IOP) in ca -
nine glaucoma. It has not been evaluated as a treatment for feline or 
equine glaucoma; however, other prostaglandin analogues are mini-
mally effective in those species.
Pharmacology/Actions
Prostaglandin analogues are chemically modified versions of pros -
taglandin F2-alpha. Prostaglandin F2-alpha, an endogenous inflam-
matory mediator, mediates ocular hypotensive effects, presumably 
by increasing the outflow of aqueous humor through the trabecular 
meshwork and uveoscleral routes. In addition to lowering intraoc -
ular pressure (IOP), tafluprost induces miosis by activating prosta -
glandin receptors. In normal canine eyes, tafluprost significantly de-
creased IOP and induced miosis following a single administration. 1 
When combined with betaxolol or timolol, a single administration of 
tafluprost to normal canine eyes produced a greater IOP reduction 
than tafluprost alone.2 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tafluprost is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Tafluprost 
should be used with caution in the presence of anterior uveitis and 
secondary glaucoma, particularly in cases already exhibiting signif -
icant miosis, as this treatment may exacerbate miosis, promote syn-
echiae formation, and worsen glaucoma. Also, in dogs with primary 
anterior lens luxation, tafluprost should be used with caution, as the 
resulting miosis may trap the lens and/or vitreous within the pupil -
lary aperture, thus creating pupillary block glaucoma. Tafluprost is 
not contraindicated in dogs with secondary posterior lens luxation, 
as the miosis may (favorably) trap the lens in the posterior segment.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects associated with tafluprost reported in humans or 
animals include blurred vision, burning and stinging, conjunctival 
hyperemia, foreign body sensation, itching, increased pigmenta -
tion of the iris, and punctate epithelial keratopathy. Tafluprost may 
cause darkening of the iris through direct stimulation of iris mela -
nocytes, and it may cause increased eyelash growth. Tafluprost may 
worsen intraocular inflammation. Macular edema, including cystoid 
macular edema, has also been reported after the use of tafluprost in 
 humans. 
Dosages
Glaucoma (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) 1 to 2 times daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: maintenance of normal intraocular pressure 
(IOP)
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicines to the eye.
 ■ The solution from one individual unit is to be used immediately 
in one or both eyes. Because sterility cannot be maintained after 
the individual unit is opened, the remaining contents should be 
discarded immediately after administration.
 ■ Store this medicine in the original pouch in the refrigerator. After 
opening the pouch, the unopened single-use containers may be 
stored in the opened foil pouch for up to 28 days at room tem -
perature. Protect this medicine from light and moisture. Discard 
any unused containers 28 days after first opening the pouch. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solutions.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the original pouch in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C 
[36°F-46°F]). After opening the pouch, the unopened single-use 
containers may be stored in the opened foil pouch for up to 28 days 
at room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]). Protect this product 
from light and moisture. Discard any unused containers 28 days after 
first opening the pouch. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Tafluprost ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1431 =====
1404    Tetracaine Ophthalmic
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Tafluprost 0.0015% Ophthalmic Solution (containing tafluprost 
0.015 mg/mL; glycerol; sodium dihydrogen phosphate dihy -
drate; disodium edetate; polysorbate 80; water for injection; HCl 
and/or NaOH to adjust pH to 5.5 to 6.75 and an osmolality of  
260 – 300 mOsm/kg), in 0.3 mL single-use containers in boxes of 30 
or 90 pouches; Zioptan®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Tetracaine Ophthalmic
(teh-trah-kane) Altacaine®, Tetravisc®
Topical Ocular Anesthetic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Rapid-acting topical anesthetic for ocular diagnostic proce-
dures; it should not be prescribed for therapeutic administra-
tion, as it will cause ocular surface toxicity
 ▶ Anesthetic duration of the solution is 20 to 30 minutes; viscous 
forms have a longer duration of action.
 ▶ Comparable efficacy to oxybuprocaine, as evaluated in dogs; 
increased efficacy relative to proparacaine, as evaluated in 
horses
 ▶ Increased ocular surface irritation as compared with propara-
caine and oxybuprocaine
 ▶ Long-term use results in tear film instability and corneal epi-
thelial and stromal damage, and it may progress to vision loss.
Uses/Indications
Tetracaine is indicated for use in ophthalmic diagnostic procedures, 
including measurement of intraocular pressure (tonometry), corne-
al and conjunctival sampling for cytology and culture, ocular ultra -
sonography, and gonioscopy. Tetracaine is indicated as an adjunc -
tive anesthetic for therapeutic procedures in the hospital, including 
removal of foreign bodies and sutures from the cornea; eyelid and 
conjunctival surgeries; corneal grafting procedures; and cataract ex-
traction. In veterinary patients, tetracaine may produce a more rapid 
and deeper plane of local anesthesia relative to proparacaine.1 A sin-
gle application of 1% solution in dogs induces anesthesia for a du -
ration of 30 minutes,2 whereas viscous tetracaine has a significantly 
longer duration of action than proparacaine solution and lidocaine 
gel.3 With a single application of 0.5% in horses, the anesthesia is 20 
to 30 minutes long; additional applications of 1% solution prolongs 
anesthesia up to 1 hour.4 A formulation of viscous tetracaine decreas-
es corneal sensitivity and has a longer duration of action (1 hour) in 
horses compared with proparacaine or nonviscous tetracaine.1 
Because of the likelihood of developing ocular surface toxicities 
with prolonged, repeated use, tetracaine should never be prescribed 
for use as an ocular analgesic. See Adverse Effects.
Pharmacology/Actions
Tetracaine induces local anesthesia by inhibiting neuronal depolar -
ization, which prevents the generation of an action potential. This 
action occurs due to the binding of tetracaine to the intracellular 
portion of the voltage-gated sodium channel within the neuron, thus 
inhibiting the intracellular movement of sodium. Variations in the 
structure of different local anesthetics influence their relative poten-
cies; however, all local anesthetics have increased efficacy in alkaline 
environments due to improved intracellular penetration (efficacy is 
decreased in the acidic environment of inflammation). 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tetracaine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hyper-
sensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Prolonged use 
of a topical ocular anesthetic leads to significant corneal epithelial 
and stromal disease, as well as tear film instability, and may result in 
loss of vision.5
Adverse Effects
Upon initial administration, instillation of tetracaine in the eye, at 
recommended concentration and dosage, may produce mild irrita -
tion, conjunctival redness, lacrimation, or squinting; however, some 
local irritation may occur several hours after the instillation, and this 
irritation may be greater than that seen with proparacaine. 2 Tetra-
caine appears safe for use in patients that are sensitive to other local 
anesthetics, but local or systemic sensitivity occasionally occurs and 
rarely may manifest as a pseudo-allergic (anaphylactoid) reaction 
mimicking an IgE-mediated vasodilatory event. Cardiovascular, 
respiratory, and CNS depressant effects that may result from other 
local anesthetics are rare with the appropriate use of topical anes -
thetics. Care should be exercised when administering tetracaine to 
small patients (ie, puppies, kittens, “pocket pets”) or animals known 
to have increased absorption of the drug (ie, amphibians). The use 
of tetracaine as a therapeutic analgesic leads to superficial punctate 
keratitis, which may progress to diffuse necrotizing keratitis, severe 
infiltrative keratitis, persistent epithelial defects, or damage to the 
Descemet membrane. In horses, reduction in the tear film breakup 
time has been reported, which is indicative of decreased stability of 
the precorneal tear film.6
Dosages
Ophthalmic procedures requiring local anesthesia  (extra-label): 
1 – 2 drops in the target eye(s) before examination or procedure. 
May repeat 1 drop every 5 to 10 minutes for 2 to 3 additional times. 
With a single application of tetracaine 0.5% in horses, the duration 
of anesthesia is 20 to 30 minutes; additional applications, application 
of 1% solution, or application of viscous formulation may prolong 
anesthesia for as long as 1 hour in horses.  Additional doses should 
be avoided in small patients (ie, puppies, kittens, and “pocket pets”).
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical effect. The onset of action is indicated by awake patients 
permitting diagnostic procedures to be performed and by a re -
duction in anesthetic requirements when tetracaine is adminis -
tered preoperatively.
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is only given in the veterinary clinic for use on your 
animal’s eye to allow for examination.
Storage/Stability
Storage recommendations can vary; follow storage requirements list-
ed on packaging. Most commonly, this product is recommended to 
be stored at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) 
away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. Discard the medi -
cation if the solution changes color, if it becomes cloudy, or if it de -
velops particles. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Tetracaine ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Tetracaine HCl 0.5% Viscous Ophthalmic Solution (containing tet -
racaine HCl 0.5%; benzalkonium chloride; boric acid; edetate disodi-
um; hypromellose; potassium chloride; sodium borate; NaCl; water 

===== PDF_PAGE_1432 =====
Timolol Ophthalmic   1405
for injection) in 0.6 mL single unit dose plastic containers and 5 mL 
ophthalmic dropper bottles; Tetrav isc®; (Rx) (not US FDA-approved)
Tetracaine HCl 0.5% Ophthalmic Solution (containing tetracaine 
HCl 5 mg; boric acid; potassium chloride; edetate disodium; puri -
fied water; NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH to 3.7 to 6; chlorobutanol 
0.4%) in 15 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Timolol Ophthalmic
(tim-oh-lol) Timoptic®, Betimol®, Istalol®, Combigan®, Cosopt®
Nonselective Beta-Blocker
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Beta-blocker that decreases aqueous humor production to 
decrease intraocular pressure (IOP) in patients with glaucoma
 ▶ Although less effective than 0.5% concentrations, 0.25% 
concentrations of timolol are associated with fewer systemic 
adverse effects.
 ▶ Delays onset of glaucoma in the normal eye of dogs with 
unilateral glaucoma
 ▶ Use with caution in asthmatic patients due to the potential to 
induce bronchospasm.
Uses/Indications
Timolol is used to reduce intraocular pressure (IOP) in primary 
glaucoma and to prevent glaucoma in the normal eye of animals with 
unilateral glaucoma. The 0.25% concentration has minimal ocular 
hypotensive effects in animals and the 0.5% concentration is prefer-
entially employed; however, the potential for systemic adverse effects 
is greater with the 0.5% solution.1, 2 The maximal IOP-lowering effect 
is ≈20% to 25% in normotensive dogs3, 4 and horses,5 and 10% in cats.6 
Gel-forming 0.5% solutions of timolol (meant to increase ocular sur-
face residence time by utilizing the interaction of xanthum gum with 
tears) reduce IOP by a mean of 5.3 mm Hg in dogs. 7 However, IOP 
reduction in glaucomatous cats is less consistent.8 Reduction of IOP 
following the administration of timolol 0.5% in combination with 
dorzolamide 2% twice daily in normal eyes of horses is variable but 
has been reported to be as high as 17%. 5, 9, 10  Although timolol may 
also be combined with alpha-adrenergic agonists (eg, brimonidine) 
to potentiate ocular hypotensive effects through the increased out -
flow of aqueous humor and decreased aqueous humor production, 
the adverse effects of brimonidine decrease its utility in small animal 
patients. This combination does not produce a clinically significant 
IOP reduction in normal horses.11
Pharmacology/Actions
Timolol is a nonselective beta-adrenergic receptor blocking agent 
with intrinsic sympathomimetic activity, but it lacks membrane-  
stabilizing activity. Blockade of ciliary body beta-receptors, partic -
ularly beta-2 receptors, reduces intraocular pressure (IOP) by de -
creasing aqueous humor production. The exact mechanism of the 
ocular hypotensive effect of beta-blockers has not been definitively 
demonstrated; however, several mechanisms have been postulated 
for this effect including beta blockade of norepinephrine-induced 
tonic sympathetic stimulation, leading to decreased cAMP activa -
tion in the ciliary body, inhibition of Na+K+ATPase activity, or va -
soactive activity on the iris and ciliary body. Topically administered 
beta-blockers also inhibit glutamine-induced increases in intracel -
lular calcium and sodium thereby providing a potential protective 
effect against ischemic insult to the retina.12 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Timolol is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Timolol 
should be used cautiously, if at all, in patients with atrioventricu -
lar block, bradycardia, heart failure, asthma, chronic bronchitis, or 
other cardiopulmonary conditions. Use this product cautiously in 
diabetic patients, as timolol can mask clinical signs associated with 
 hypoglycemia.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include transient 
burning, stinging, and irritation upon application to the eye. In dogs, 
cats, and horses, the administration of timolol may cause slight mi -
osis. It may trigger attacks in cats with asthma. Timolol produces 
significant reductions in heart rate in healthy cats, thus supporting 
its limited use in patients with known cardiopulmonary disease.1 
Dosages
Glaucoma or prophylaxis in the normal eye of unilateral glauco -
ma (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) twice daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Intraocular pressure (IOP) and disease progression
 ■ Respiratory rate in asthmatic patients; blood glucose in diabetic 
patients; heart rate and resting respiratory rate in cardiac patients 
(especially cats)
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ This medication may delay the onset of glaucoma in the normal 
eye of dogs with glaucoma in their other eye.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Tell your veterinarian about any conditions or diseases your an -
imal may have now or has had in the past, especially asthma or 
diabetes.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Do not touch the dropper (or ointment) tip or 
allow it to touch your animal’s eye or any other surface to prevent 
contamination. 
 ■ Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication is not in use.
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in solutions.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal’s eye condi-
tion while taking this medicine. Do not miss these important fol-
low-up visits.
Storage/Stability
Store this medication at controlled room temperature (15°C-25°C 
[59°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. Dis -
card this medication if the solution color change, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in the solution. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Timolol maleate ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed di -
rectly with any other ophthalmic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Timolol 0.25% Ophthalmic Solution (containing 2.56 mg timolol 
hemihydrate equivalent to 2.5 mg timolol; monosodium and disodi-
um phosphate dehydrate to adjust pH; water for injection; benzalko-
nium chloride 0.01%), in 5 mL, 10 mL, and 15 mL sterile ophthalmic 
dropper bottles; Betimol®; (Rx)
Timolol 0.5% Ophthalmic Solution (containing 5.12 mg timolol 
hemihydrate equivalent to 5 mg timolol; monosodium and disodium 

===== PDF_PAGE_1433 =====
1406    Tobramycin Ophthalmic
phosphate dehydrate to adjust pH; water for injection; benzalkoni -
um chloride 0.01%), in 5 mL, 10 mL, and 15 mL sterile ophthalmic 
dropper bottles; Betimol®, Istalol®; (Rx)
Timolol 0.25% Ophthalmic Solution (containing 3.4 mg timolol ma-
leate equivalent to 2.5 mg timolol; monobasic and dibasic sodium 
phosphate; NaOH to adjust pH; purified water; benzalkonium chlo-
ride 0.01%), in sterile 5 mL and 10 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; 
Timoptic®, generic; (Rx)
Timolol 0.5% Ophthalmic Solution (containing 6.8 mg timolol ma -
leate equivalent to 5 mg timolol; monobasic and dibasic sodium 
phosphate; NaOH to adjust pH; purified water; benzalkonium chlo-
ride 0.01%), in sterile 5 mL and 10 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; 
Timoptic®, generic; (Rx).
Timolol 0.25% Gel-Forming Solution (containing 3.4 mg of timo -
lol maleate equivalent to 2.5 mg timolol; gellan gum; tromethamine; 
mannitol; water for injection; benzododecinium bromide 0.012%), in 
sterile 5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; Timoptic-XE®, generic; (Rx)
Timolol 0.5% Gel-Forming Solution (containing 6.8 mg of timolol 
maleate equivalent to 5 mg timolol; gellan gum; tromethamine; man-
nitol; water for injection; benzododecinium bromide 0.012%), in ster-
ile 5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; Timoptic-XE®, generic; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED COMBINATION PRODUCTS:
Timolol 0.5% and Dorzolamide 2% Ophthalmic Solution (contain -
ing 20 mg/mL dorzolamide (22.26 mg of dorzolamide HCl) and 
5  mg/mL timolol (6.83 mg timolol maleate); benzalkonium chlo -
ride 0.0075%; sodium citrate; hydroxyethyl cellulose; NaOH; man -
nitol; water for injection, with a pH of ≈5.65 and an osmolarity of  
242 – 323 mOsm/kg), in 10 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; Cosopt®; 
(Rx)
Timolol 0.5% and Dorzolamide 2% Ophthalmic Solution (con -
taining 20 mg/mL dorzolamide (22.3 mg of dorzolamide HCl) and  
5 mg/mL timolol (6.8 mg timolol maleate); hydroxyethyl cellulose; 
mannitol; sodium citrate; NaOH (to adjust pH); water for injection), 
supplied in a foil pouch containing 15 low-density polyethylene  
0.2 mL single-use containers; Cosopt PF®; (Rx)
Brimonidine Tartrate 0.2% and Timolol Maleate 0.5% Ophthalmic 
Solution (containing brimonidine tartrate 0.2%; timolol maleate 
0.5%; benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; citric acid; polyvinyl alcohol; 
NaCl; sodium citrate; purified water; HCl and/or NaOH added to 
adjust pH to 5.6 to 6.6, with an osmolality of 280 – 330 mOsm/kg), 
in a 10 mL dropper bottle; Combigan®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Tobramycin Ophthalmic
(tobe-ra-mye-sin)  Tobrex®, AkTob®, Tobradex®, Tobradex ST®, 
Zylet®
Aminoglycoside Antimicrobial Agent
For systemic use, see Tobramycin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used as a treatment for susceptible bacterial infections of the 
ocular surface
 ▶ Do not confuse pure tobramycin ophthalmic preparations 
with preparations containing glucocorticoids.
 ▶ Fortified solutions of tobramycin greater than 13.5 mg/mL 
may be compounded for use in susceptible infections where 
commercially available products are not concentrated enough 
to achieve inhibitory concentrations. 
Uses/Indications
Tobramycin ophthalmic is primarily used to treat ocular surface in-
fections caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa; however, susceptibility 
of Pseudomonas spp isolates may be decreasing.1 Preparations of to-
bramycin in combination with a glucocorticoid are used primarily in 
the management of inflammatory conditions of the conjunctiva that 
are associated with or at risk for developing a superficial bacterial in-
fection2; it may also be used postoperatively following ocular surface 
or intraocular surgical procedures.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated tobramy-
cin as a Critically Important, High Priority antimicrobial for human 
medicine.3 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) has desig -
nated tobramycin as a Veterinary Critically Important Antimicrobial 
(VCIA) Agent in equine species.4
Pharmacology/Actions
Tobramycin is actively transported into bacteria and binds to a spe-
cific aminoglycoside receptor on the 30S subunit of bacterial ribo -
somes and interferes with an initiation complex between mRNA 
and the 30S subunit to inhibit protein synthesis. Aminoglycosides 
are bactericidal, whereas most other antibiotics that interfere with 
protein synthesis are bacteriostatic. Tobramycin’s spectrum of activ-
ity includes coverage against many aerobic gram-negative bacteria, 
including most species of Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp, Proteus spp, 
Pseudomonas spp, Salmonella spp, Enterobacter spp, Serratia spp, 
and Shigella spp. Efficacy against Staphylococcus spp is limited, and 
efficacy against Streptococcus spp is negligible.5,6
The antimicrobial activity of the aminoglycosides is enhanced in 
an alkaline environment; the acidic nature of pus or cellular debris 
can reduce efficacy. 
The aminoglycoside antibiotics are inactive against fungi, viruses, 
and anaerobic bacteria.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tobramycin is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Cross sen-
sitivity of tobramycin with other aminoglycosides has been known 
to occur.7
Commercially available tobramycin solutions and ointments may 
not achieve inhibitory concentrations in the eye and may be either 
compounded in fortified concentrations (greater than or equal to 
13.5 mg/mL) or injected subconjunctivally.8,9
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects associated with tobramycin reported in humans or 
animals include ocular burning and irritation upon drug instillation, 
nonspecific conjunctivitis, conjunctival epithelial defects, and con -
junctival hyperemia. 
When tobramycin is used systemically, it can cause nephrotoxic-
ity and neurotoxicity (ototoxicity and vestibular toxicity). 7 Because 
cats are more susceptible to these toxic effects of aminoglycosides, it 
is recommended that all cats receiving topical tobramycin be moni-
tored for systemic toxicity.
Dosages
Susceptible ocular surface infections (extra-label): 1 drop or ¼ – 
½ inch strip in the affected eye(s) 4 to 6 times daily. The frequency 
may be increased to every 30 to 60 minutes for treating significant 
infections.
Management of inflammatory conditions of the conjunctiva asso-
ciated with or at risk for developing a superficial bacterial infection 
| Postoperative ocular surface or intraocular procedures (extra-la-
bel): Using a tobramycin/glucocorticoid combination preparation, 1 
drop or ¼ – ½ inch strip in the affected eye(s) 3 to 4 times daily. The 
frequency is decreased following control of ocular surface inflamma-
tion, with a corresponding reduced risk for infection. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1434 =====
Travoprost Ophthalmic   1407
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: corneal cytology with culture and susceptibility 
testing to evaluate for the persistence of bacteria. Evaluate clinical 
signs suggestive of continued infection.
 ■ Baseline and periodic urinalysis with sediment evaluation to 
check for casts, which may be an early indicator for renal toxicity
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicines to the eye.
 ■ Store this medicine in the refrigerator or at room temperature 
away from moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the refrigerator or at controlled room tempera-
ture (2°C-25°C [46°F-77°F]) as directed in product labeling, away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Tobramycin ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed directly 
with any other ophthalmic medications. Tobramycin may be com -
pounded into a fortified ophthalmic solution in concentrations of 
greater than or equal to 13.5 mg/mL by aseptically adding tobramy-
cin injection in appropriate amounts to commercially available to -
bramycin ophthalmic solution.8 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Tobramycin 0.3% Ophthalmic Solution; Tobrex®; Aktob®; generic; 
(Rx)
Tobramycin 0.3% Ophthalmic Ointment; Tobrex®; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED COMBINATION PRODUCTS:
Tobramycin and Dexamethasone Ophthalmic Ointment (containing 
tobramycin 0.3% (3 mg), dexamethasone 0.1% (1 mg), chlorobuta -
nol 0.5% (5 mg), mineral oil, white petrolatum), in a sterile 3.5 g 
tube; Tobradex®; (Rx)
Tobramycin and Dexamethasone Ophthalmic Suspension (con -
taining tobramycin 0.3% (3 mg), dexamethasone 0.1% (1 mg), ben -
zalkonium chloride 0.01%, tyloxapol, edetate disodium, NaCl, hy -
droxyethyl cellulose, sodium sulfate, sulfuric acid and/or NaOH to 
adjust pH, purified water), in a sterile 2.5 mL ophthalmic dropper; 
Tobradex®, generic; (Rx)
Tobramycin and Dexamethasone Ophthalmic Suspension (con -
taining tobramycin 0.3% (3 mg), dexamethasone 0.05% (0.5 mg), 
xanthan gum, tyloxapol, disodium edetate, NaCl, propylene glycol, 
sodium sulfate, benzalkonium chloride 0.01%, NaOH and/or HCl 
to adjust pH, purified water), in a sterile 5 mL ophthalmic dropper; 
Tobradex ST®; (Rx)
Tobramycin 0.3% and Loteprednol 0.5% Ophthalmic Suspension in 
5 mL and 10 mL; Zylet®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Travoprost Ophthalmic
(trav-oh-prost) Travatan Z®
Prostaglandin Analogue 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to decrease intraocular pressure (IOP) in dogs with pri-
mary glaucoma or ocular hypertension
 ▶ Based on receptor differences, it is not effective in feline glau-
coma and unlikely to be effective in equine glaucoma.
 ▶ Do not use it if intraocular inflammation is present, as it may 
worsen inflammation or lead to pupillary block glaucoma.
 ▶ Twice-daily dosing of travoprost results in less fluctuation of 
IOP .
 ▶ Preservative systems may cause ocular irritation and 
 discomfort. 
Uses/Indications
Travoprost is used in dogs to reduce intraocular pressure (IOP) to 
manage primary glaucoma. It has not been evaluated for efficacy in 
either cats or horses. In normotensive canine eyes, once-daily ad -
ministration of travoprost reduced IOP comparably to latanoprost. 
It also resulted in miosis and conjunctival hyperemia.1 In glaucoma-
tous canine eyes, once- and twice-daily administration of travoprost 
0.004% significantly reduced IOP , 2 whereas concentrations above 
0.0001% were necessary to mediate ocular hypotension and miosis 
in a dose-response study.3 
Pharmacology/Actions
Prostaglandin analogues are chemically modified versions of prosta-
glandin F2-alpha, an endogenous inflammatory mediator that medi-
ates ocular hypotensive effects by increasing outflow of aqueous hu-
mor through both the trabecular meshwork and uveoscleral routes. 
In addition to reducing intraocular pressure (IOP), travoprost leads 
to miosis. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Travoprost is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. Travoprost 
should be used with caution in the presence of anterior uveitis and 
secondary glaucoma, particularly in cases already exhibiting sig -
nificant miosis, as this treatment may exacerbate miosis, promote 
synechiae formation, and worsen glaucoma. In addition, in dogs 
with primary anterior lens luxation, travoprost should be used with 
caution, as the resulting miosis may trap the lens and/or vitreous 
within the pupillary aperture, thus creating pupillary block glauco -
ma. Travoprost is not contraindicated in dogs with secondary poste-
rior lens luxation, as the miosis may (favorably) trap the lens in the 
posterior segment.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects associated with travoprost reported in humans or 
animals include blurred vision, burning and stinging, conjunctival 
hyperemia, foreign body sensation, itching, increased pigmentation 
of the iris, increased eyelash growth, and punctate epithelial kera -
topathy. Travoprost may cause darkening of the iris through direct 
stimulation of iris melanocytes, and it may worsen intraocular in -
flammation. Macular edema, including cystoid macular edema, has 
been reported after the use of travoprost in humans.
Dosages
Glaucoma (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) once to twice 
daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: sustained reduction of intraocular pressure 
(IOP)

===== PDF_PAGE_1435 =====
1408    Trifluridine Ophthalmic
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medicine before applying any 
other medicines to the eye. 
 ■ Store this medicine in the refrigerator or at room temperature. 
Do not freeze.
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solution.
Storage/Stability
Store this product in the in the refrigerator or at room temperature 
(2°C-25°C [36°F-77°F]) away from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Travoprost preparations should not be mixed directly with any other 
medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Travoprost 0.004% Ophthalmic Solution (containing travoprost 
0.04  mg; benzalkonium chloride 0.015%; polyoxyl 40 hydrogenat -
ed castor oil; tromethamine; boric acid; mannitol; edetate disodi -
um; NaOH and/or HCl to adjust pH; water for injection), in sterile 
2.5 mL and 5 mL ophthalmic dropper bottles; generic; (Rx)
Travoprost 0.004% Ophthalmic Solution (containing travoprost 
0.04  mg; polyoxyl 40 hydrogenated castor oil; sofzia® [boric acid, 
propylene glycol; sorbitol; zinc chloride]; NaOH and/or HCl to ad -
just pH; purified water), in a sterile 2.5 mL ophthalmic dropper bot-
tle; Travatan Z®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Trifluridine Ophthalmic
Trifluorothymidine (TFT) 
(try-floor-ih-deen) Viroptic®
Antiviral (Nucleoside Analogue)
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Topical antiviral agent used in cats with feline herpesvirus-1 
(FHV-1)
 ▶ Effective as treatment of dogs with experimentally induced 
canine herpesvirus-1 (CHV-1) infection
 ▶ Must be used 4 to 5 times daily
 ▶ In vitro efficacy of trifluridine is greater than that of acyclovir 
and idoxuridine. 
 ▶ May cause more irritation and pain upon administration as 
compared with other topical antiviral agents
 ▶ Trifluridine is a corneal toxin and should not be used for more 
than 3 weeks at a time.
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies trifluridine ophthalmic as a hazardous drug; 
use appropriate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Trifluridine is used for topical treatment of feline herpesvirus-1 
(FHV-1) keratitis. It may also be used for canine herpesvirus-1 
(CHV-1) keratitis.1,2 Evaluation of trifluridine’s efficacy for equine 
herpesvirus-2 (EHV-2) keratitis has not been performed.
Pharmacology/Actions
Trifluridine interferes with DNA synthesis; however, its antiviral 
mechanism of action is not completely known. It is believed that tri-
fluridine incorporates into viral DNA, as well as reversibly inhibits 
thymidylate synthetase, an essential enzyme in DNA synthesis. Tri -
fluridine’s in vitro efficacy is consistently greater than that of acyclo-
vir and idoxuridine.3,4 Trifluridine is virustatic. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Trifluridine is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy -
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies trifluridine ophthalmic as a hazardous drug; 
personal protective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to 
minimize the risk for exposure. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include acute ocular 
irritation, including burning, corneal stippling, vascularization, and 
clouding. The irritation associated with administration of trifluridine 
may be more intense than the inflammation caused by FHV-1. Fol -
lowing prolonged use of trifluridine, ocular irritation characterized 
by follicular conjunctivitis, blepharitis with punctal swelling, bulbar 
conjunctival hyperemia, and corneal epithelial staining have also 
been reported. In any of these cases, the drug should be  discontinued.
Dosages
Keratitis caused by feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) or canine her -
pesvirus-1 (CHV-1) (extra-label): 1 drop in the affected eye(s) every 
2 to 3 hours for 48 hours and then 4 to 5 times daily for a week be -
yond the resolution of clinical signs. Trifluridine is a corneal toxin 
and should not be used for greater than 3 weeks at a time.
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolution of clinical signs (eg, corneal ulcer -
ation, corneal vascularization, conjunctivitis)
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine to your animal as directed by your  veterinarian.
 ■ Do not use this medication for more than 3 consecutive weeks.
 ■ Trifluridine may cause stinging upon administration.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying 
any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication in the refrigerator away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in the solutions.
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined 
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH). Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the use 
of personal protective equipment when handling this  medicine.
Storage/Stability
Store in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]) away from moisture 
and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Trifluridine should not be mixed directly with any other ophthalmic 
medications. Trifluridine is not available as an ophthalmic ointment.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Trifluridine aqueous 1% Ophthalmic Solution (containing trifluri -

===== PDF_PAGE_1436 =====
Triple Antibiotic Ophthalmic   1409
dine 10 mg in an aqueous solution with glacial acetic acid and sodi-
um acetate (buffers); NaCl; thimerosal 0.001%), in a 7.5 mL ophthal-
mic dropper bottle; Viroptic®; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Triple Antibiotic Ophthalmic
 (Neomycin/Polymyxin B/Bacitracin;  
Neomycin/Polymyxin B/Gramicidin) 
Double Antibiotic Ophthalmic  
(Bacitracin/Polymyxin B)
Broad-Spectrum Antimicrobial Combination Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ First choice for prophylactic antimicrobial coverage in dogs 
and horses with ocular surface inflammatory conditions, 
including ulcerative keratitis
 ▶ First choice for therapeutic antimicrobial coverage in dogs 
and horses with ulcerative keratitis until culture and sensitivity 
results are available
 ▶ Available as an ointment (neomycin/polymyxin B/bacitracin; 
polymyxin B/bacitracin) or solution (neomycin/polymyxin B/
gramicidin)
 ▶ Some animals, particularly cats, may be hypersensitive to neo-
mycin or polymyxin components in ointments.
 ▶ Do not confuse hydrocortisone-containing triple antibiotic 
ophthalmic ointment with those that lack corticosteroids.
 ▶ Prolonged use of antibiotic preparations may result in over-
growth of nonsusceptible organisms, including fungi.
Uses/Indications
Triple antibiotic ophthalmic products are used for topical treatment 
of superficial infections of the external eye and its adnexa caused 
by susceptible bacteria. Triple antibiotic ophthalmic is often used 
as prophylactic antimicrobial treatment prior to and following oph-
thalmic surgery. Triple antibiotic ophthalmic is also used for antimi-
crobial prophylaxis of corneal injuries and wounds. Triple antibiotic 
ophthalmic ointments may also contain a corticosteroid; thus, it is 
important to ensure that the appropriate formulation is selected. 
Specifically, corticosteroid-containing preparations should not be 
administered in patients with ulcerative keratitis. Triple antibiotic 
ophthalmic solutions substitute gramicidin for bacitracin. Double 
antibiotic ophthalmic preparations do not contain neomycin.
Pharmacology/Actions
Neomycin sulfate, an aminoglycoside, is actively transported into 
the bacterial cell and binds a specific receptor protein on the 30S 
subunit of bacterial ribosomes. It consequently interferes with the 
initiation complex between messenger RNA (mRNA) and the 30S 
subunit, inhibiting protein synthesis by inducing misreading of 
the mRNA. Aminoglycosides are bactericidal, whereas most other 
antibiotics that interfere with protein synthesis are bacteriostatic. 
Aminoglycosides are used primarily in infections involving aerobic, 
gram-negative bacteria, such as Pseudomonas spp, Acinetobacter spp, 
and Enterobacter spp. Infections caused by gram-positive bacteria, 
such as Staphylococcus spp and Streptococcus spp, are significantly 
less susceptible to neomycin.1–4 Aminoglycosides are mostly ineffec-
tive against anaerobic bacteria, fungi, and viruses. 
Polymyxin B increases the permeability of the bacterial cell mem-
brane by interacting with the phospholipid components of the mem-
brane for a variety of gram-negative organisms, with lesser efficacy 
versus gram-positive organisms such as Streptococcus spp. 1–4 It is 
bactericidal. 
Bacitracin, a polypeptide antibiotic, inhibits bacterial cell wall 
synthesis by preventing transfer of mucopeptides into the grow -
ing cell wall. It has bactericidal activity in vitro against a variety of 
gram-positive organisms and a few gram-negative organisms. In 
practice however, topical bacitracin is most useful for gram-pos -
itive bacillus infections. Importantly, bacitracin is effective against 
beta-hemolytic Streptococcus equi ocular infections, whereas efficacy 
against Pseudomonas aeruginosa is negligible. 2–4 Bacitracin poorly 
penetrates the cornea and therefore is of limited value in deep corne-
al or intraocular infections. 
In combination, neomycin sulfate, polymyxin B sulfate, and bac-
itracin zinc are considered active against Staphylococcus aureus; 
streptococci, including Streptococcus pneumoniae; Escherichia coli; 
Haemophilus influenzae; Klebsiella spp; Enterobacter spp; Neisseria 
spp; and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 
Gramicidin has activity against gram-positive organisms (not 
gram-positive bacilli) and some gram-negative organisms. Its mech-
anism of action is to bacterial cell wall permeability to inorganic cat-
ions.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Triple antibiotic combinations are contraindicated in patients that 
have a history of hypersensitivity to any component of the formu -
lation. Some cats are hypersensitive to the neomycin or polymyxin 
component of triple antibiotic ointments.5 This hypersensitivity has 
not been associated with steroid-containing triple antibiotic products. 
Although there is concern that prolonged use of antibiotic prepara -
tions may result in overgrowth of nonsusceptible organisms, including 
fungi, minimal impact on the ocular surface microbiome of dogs or 
horses was noted after 7 days of administration to normal eyes.6,7 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include irritation and 
swelling upon instillation. Ophthalmic antibiotics, especially those 
containing neomycin sulfate and polymyxin B, may cause cutaneous 
sensitization and anaphylaxis, particularly in cats.5 Clinical signs as-
sociated with sensitization to topical antibiotics can include itching, 
reddening, and edema of the conjunctiva and eyelid but may prog -
ress to anaphylaxis. Clinical signs usually subside quickly on with -
drawing the medication, and death has been rarely reported.8 
Dosages
Ulcerative conjunctivitis or keratitis: 1 drop of solution or ¼ inch 
strip of ointment in the affected eye(s) 3 to 4 times daily until reso -
lution of ulceration and infection or until microbial susceptibilities 
necessitate a change to another antimicrobial agent
Nonulcerative conjunctivitis or keratitis:  1 drop of solution or ¼ 
inch strip of ointment in the affected eye(s) 3 to 4 times daily until 
resolution of infection and inflammation
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy. Resolution of conjunctivitis or keratitis as evi -
denced by cytology, cultures, or remission of clinical signs
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Cats may have a severe allergic reaction to one of the components 
of this medication. Contact your veterinarian immediately if your 
cat has difficulty breathing or has facial swelling after receiving 
this medication.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Do not touch the dropper/ointment tip or allow 
it to touch animal’s eye or any other surface to prevent contami-
nation.

===== PDF_PAGE_1437 =====
1410    Tropicamide Ophthalmic
 ■ Wait for 5 to 10 minutes after applying any other medicine to your 
animal’s eye.
 ■ Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication is not in use. 
Store this medicine at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes or becomes cloudy.
Storage/Stability
Store at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Triple antibiotic ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed di -
rectly with any other ophthalmic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Neomycin/Polymyxin B/Bacitracin Ophthalmic Ointment (contain-
ing neomycin sulfate equivalent to 3.5 mg neomycin base, polymyx-
in B sulfate equivalent to 10,000 polymyxin B units, bacitracin zinc 
equivalent to 400 bacitracin units, and white petrolatum and mineral 
oil, q.s.), in a 3.5 g ophthalmic ointment tube; Vetropolycin®; (Rx)
Neomycin/Polymyxin B/Bacitracin with Hydrocortisone Ophthal -
mic Ointment; each gram contains bacitracin zinc USP 400 units, 
neomycin sulfate 0.5% (equivalent to 3.5 mg neomycin base), poly -
myxin B sulfate USP 10,000 units, and hydrocortisone acetate USP 
1% in a base of white petrolatum and mineral oil; Vetropolycin HC®; 
(Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Neomycin/Polymyxin B/Bacitracin Ointment (containing neomy -
cin sulfate equivalent to 3.5 mg neomycin base, polymyxin B sul -
fate equivalent to 5,000 or 10,000 polymyxin B units, bacitracin zinc 
equivalent to 400 bacitracin units, and white petrolatum, q.s.), in a 
3.5 g ophthalmic ointment tube; Neosporin®, Lumi-Sporyn®, generic; 
(Rx)
Neomycin/Polymyxin B/Gramicidin Ophthalmic Solution (con -
taining polymyxin B equivalent to 1.75 mg polymyxin B base, poly -
myxin B sulfate equivalent to 10,000 polymyxin B units, gramicidin 
0.025  mg/mL, alcohol 0.5%, thimerosal 0.001%, propylene glycol, 
polyoxyethylene polyoxypropylene compound, NaCl, and water 
for injection), in a 10 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Neosporin®, 
 generic; (Rx)
Bacitracin and Polymyxin B Sulfate Ophthalmic Ointment (contain-
ing polymyxin B sulfate equivalent to 10,000 polymyxin B units, bac-
itracin zinc equivalent to 500 bacitracin units, and white petrolatum, 
q.s.), AK-Poly-Bac®, generic; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED COMBINATION PRODUCTS:
Neomycin and Polymyxin B Sulfates and Dexamethasone Ophthal-
mic Suspension (containing neomycin sulfate equivalent to neomy-
cin 3.5 mg, polymyxin B sulfate 10,000 units, dexamethasone 0.1%, 
benzalkonium chloride 0.004%, hypromellose 2910 0.5%, sodium 
chloride, polysorbate 20, HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH, and pu -
rified water), in a 5 mL sterile ophthalmic dropper bottle; Maxitrol®, 
Dexasporin®; (Rx) 
Neomycin and Polymyxin B Sulfates and Dexamethasone Ophthal-
mic ointment (containing neomycin sulfate equivalent to neomy -
cin 3.5 mg, polymyxin B sulfate 10,000 units, dexamethasone 0.1%, 
methylparaben 0.05%, propylparaben 0.01%, white petrolatum, and 
anhydrous liquid lanolin), in a sterile 3.5 g tube; Maxitrol®, generic; 
(Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Tropicamide Ophthalmic
(troe-pik-uh-myde) Mydriacyl®, Paremyd®, Tropicacyl®
Anticholinergic Mydriatic; Cycloplegic Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Mydriatic agent with mild cycloplegic action
 ▶ Used to produce short-term dilation for funduscopic exam-
ination or to prevent synechiae formation following cataract 
surgery 
 ▶ More rapid onset and shorter duration of mydriasis compared 
with atropine 
 ▶ Poor cycloplegic ability compared with atropine, resulting in 
minimal control of ciliary body muscle spasm
 ▶ Good corneal penetration due to lack of ionization at physio-
logical pH
 ▶ May increase intraocular pressure (IOP); use with caution in 
patients with glaucoma
Uses/Indications
Tropicamide is used to produce rapid- and short-acting mydriasis 
for funduscopic evaluation. Tropicamide has also been used to break 
down synechiae in uveitis and to prevent synechiae formation fol -
lowing cataract surgery. It is not as effective as atropine in inducing 
cycloplegia and is consequently a poor choice for controlling ocular 
pain caused by ciliary spasm. Tropicamide has been demonstrated to 
overcome the miosis induced by topical ophthalmic latanoprost1 and 
parenteral butorphanol2 administration in dogs with normal eyes, 
without leading to elevated intraocular pressure, and thus can be 
used to facilitate posterior segment examination.
Pharmacology/Actions
Tropicamide causes anticholinergic effects by blocking the musca -
rinic receptors of the sphincter muscle of the iris and the ciliary body 
muscle, which produces pupillary dilation (mydriasis) and, to a less-
er degree, paralysis of accommodation (cycloplegia). Tropicamide 
induces mydriasis in about 15 to 30 minutes, and the pupil returns to 
normal in 6 to 12 hours. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tropicamide is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. It should 
not be used in patients with primary glaucoma as it can induce in -
creases in intraocular pressure (IOP).3 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans include sensitivity to bright light, 
burning and irritation upon application, and superficial punctate ker-
atitis. Dry mouth, tachycardia, headache, nausea, vomiting, pallor, 
psychotic reactions, CNS disturbances, muscle rigidity, behavioral 
disturbance, and vasomotor and cardiorespiratory collapse have also 
been reported. Hypersalivation has been reported in cats and dogs 
due to bitter taste. Tear production may be decreased for several hours 
after application of tropicamide ophthalmic in cats and horses,4,5 and 
intraocular pressure (IOP) may increase in cats and dogs.3,6 
Dosages
Mydriasis (extra-label): 1 to 2 drops repeated in 5 minutes in the eye 
to be examined to achieve pupillary dilation7 
Mydriasis post-cataract removal surgery (extra-label): 1 to 2 drops 
into the affected eye(s) once to twice daily postoperatively to facili -
tate pupil mobility
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Confirm continued pupillary dilation
 ■ Intraocular pressure (IOP)

===== PDF_PAGE_1438 =====
Vancomycin Ophthalmic   1411
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Do not touch the dropper (or ointment) tip or 
allow it to touch your animal’s eye or any other surface to prevent 
contamination.
 ■ Dogs and cats may drool excessively after administration of this 
medication due to the bitter taste.
 ■ Wash your hands after application to prevent accidentally getting 
the medicine into your eyes, which can cause pupil dilation.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication is not in use. 
Store this medicine at room temperature away from moisture and 
sunlight; do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in solutions.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal’s eye condi-
tion while taking this medicine. Do not miss these important fol-
low-up visits.
Storage/Stability
Store at controlled room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) away 
from moisture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Tropicamide should not be mixed directly with any other ophthal -
mic medications.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Tropicamide 0.5% Ophthalmic Solution, USP (containing tropi -
camide 5 mg/mL; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; NaCl; edetate diso-
dium; purified water; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH to 4 to 5.8), in 
3 mL and 15 mL dropper bottles; Tropicacyl®, generic; (Rx)
Tropicamide 1% Ophthalmic Solution, USP (containing tropicamide 
10 mg/mL; benzalkonium chloride 0.01%; NaCl; edetate disodium; 
purified water; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH to 4 to 5.8), in 3 mL 
and 15 mL dropper bottles; Mydriacyl®, generic; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED COMBINATION PRODUCTS:
Hydroxyamphetamine hydrobromide 1% and Tropicamide 0.25% 
Ophthalmic Solution (containing hydroxyamphetamine 1%; tropi -
camide 0.25%; benzalkonium chloride 0.005%; edetate disodium 
0.015%; NaCl; HCl and/or NaOH to adjust pH to 4.2 to 5.8; purified 
water), in sterile 15 mL ophthalmic dropper bottle; Paremyd®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Vancomycin Ophthalmic
(van-kohe-mye-sin) 
Glycopeptide Antimicrobial Agent
For systemic use, refer to Vancomycin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Topical use reserved for treatment of ocular surface and intra-
ocular infections caused by methicillin-resistant gram-positive 
organisms
 ▶ Not effective against gram-negative bacteria
 ▶ Not approved in an ophthalmic dosage form in the United 
States, although ocular dosage forms are approved in other 
countries
Uses/Indications
Vancomycin can be used for treating ocular surface infections caused 
by methicillin-resistant microorganisms, such as methicillin-resis -
tant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) or Staphylococcus pseudinterme-
dius (MRSP). Vancomycin compounded into 0.3% to 1% ophthalmic 
ointment has been shown to be effective in treating methicillin-resis-
tant Staphylococcus aureus keratitis in a dog, 1 rabbits,2 and humans; 
however, it has also been demonstrated that vancomycin is not nec-
essary for all MRSA ocular infections, as chloramphenicol, rifampi -
cin, and tetracyclines, among others, show varied in vitro efficacy.3,4 
Vancomycin can also be administered intravitreally for severe cases 
of methicillin-resistant endophthalmitis. Intracameral injection of 
vancomycin nanoparticles has also demonstrated good prophylactic 
activity against MRSA in rabbits with minimal adverse effects.5
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated vanco -
mycin as a Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobial for 
human medicine.6 
Pharmacology/Actions
The bactericidal action of vancomycin results from inhibition of 
cell wall biosynthesis, which is induced by binding of the antibiotic 
to cell wall precursor molecules. Vancomycin is not active in vitro 
against gram-negative bacteria (due to different mechanisms for cell 
wall formation), mycobacteria, or fungi. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Vancomycin is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include burning or 
stinging on application, ocular discharge, regional pruritus, and 
conjunctival hyperemia. Nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity, dermal toxici -
ties, vasculitis, and severe gram-negative colitis have been associated 
with systemic use of vancomycin; however, these adverse effects are 
not likely to occur following ophthalmic use. 
Dosages
Methicillin-resistant bacterial conjunctivitis or keratitis  (extra-  
label): 1 drop of solution or ¼ inch strip of ointment applied to the 
affected eye(s) 4 to 5 times daily
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: corneal cytology and culture to evaluate for bac-
teria. Evaluate clinical signs suggestive of progressive infection.
Client Information
 ■ Use this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medicine. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medicine is 
not in use.
 ■ Wait for 5 to 10 minutes after applying this medicine before apply-
ing any other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this product as directed on the package labeling away from 
moisture and sunlight. Do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medicine if the color changes, if it becomes cloudy, 
or if there are particles in the solutions.
Storage/Stability
Store this product as directed on package labeling away from mois -
ture and sunlight; do not freeze. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Vancomycin preparations should not be mixed directly with any 
other medications. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE

===== PDF_PAGE_1439 =====
1412    Voriconazole Ophthalmic
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Vancomycin ophthalmic preparations are not commercially avail -
able in the United States, but vancomycin ointments and ophthalmic 
solutions (0.3% to 1%) have been prepared (compounded) by quali-
fied compounding pharmacists. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Voriconazole Ophthalmic
(vohr-uh-kon-uh-zohl) VFend®
Azole Antifungal Agent
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used as a treatment for ocular surface fungal infections
 ▶ Although this medication is not commercially available as an 
ophthalmic preparation, the commercially available IV form 
may be administered topically to the eye.
 ▶ Penetrates cornea efficiently and achieves effective concentra-
tions in the aqueous humor
 ▶ Considerably more effective against filamentous fungal organ-
isms than polyene or other azole antifungal agents
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies voriconazole ophthalmic as a hazardous 
drug; use appropriate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Ocular administration of voriconazole is primarily used to treat fun-
gal keratitis, most commonly in horses but also in other species. 1,2 
Voriconazole 1% solution for IV injection, prepared according to the 
package instructions, achieves effective antifungal concentrations in 
the aqueous humor while causing minimal to no irritation when it is 
administered to normal eyes of horses.3 The same or higher concen-
trations have been associated with treatment success following intra-
corneal and subconjunctival injection in horses.4–6 Voriconazole was 
associated with successful control of keratomycosis due to both fila-
mentous and yeast organisms in dogs2,7,8 and filamentous organisms 
in a cat.1,9 Intravitreal administration is used in humans as treatment 
for fungal endophthalmitis.10 
Pharmacology/Actions
Voriconazole interacts with 14-alpha-sterol demethylase, a cyto -
chrome P-450 enzyme involved in the conversion of lanosterol to 
ergosterol. Ergosterol is an essential component of the fungal cell 
membrane and preventing its synthesis may increase cellular per -
meability and cause leakage of cellular contents. Other possible ef -
fects of voriconazole include inhibition of endogenous respiration, 
purine uptake and the transformation of yeasts to mycelial forms, 
and impairment of triglyceride and phospholipid biosynthesis. Be -
cause voriconazole specifically targets oxidative enzymes of fungal 
species, it has higher efficacy and lower host toxicity. Voriconazole 
has a broad antifungal spectrum against most fungi and yeasts of 
veterinary interest. Sensitive organisms include Aspergillus spp, Can-
dida spp, Fusarium spp, and Aspergillus spp.11–13
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Voriconazole is contraindicated in patients that have a history of hy-
persensitivity to it or any component of the formulation. 
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies  voriconazole ophthalmic as a hazardous drug; 
personal protective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to 
minimize the risk for exposure. 
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects reported in humans or animals include transient 
burning or stinging on application. Although not reported following 
topical administration, neurologic signs have resulted in cats follow-
ing oral administration of voriconazole.14 
Dosages
Fungal keratitis (extra-label): 1 drop to the affected eye(s) or 0.1 mL 
in the subpalpebral lavage (SPL) catheter, every 2 to 3 hours ini -
tially, followed by tapering of frequency based on clinical response. 
Voriconazole may be administered through a SPL catheter; however, 
its use with constant-rate infusion pumps in conjunction with a SPL 
catheter is not advised due to crystallization of voriconazole within 
the unit.4 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: corneal scrapings with cytology and cultures to 
determine to clear fungal organisms; resolution of clinical signs 
of infection 
Client Information
 ■ Use this medication up to 10 to 12 times daily initially, with a re-
duction in frequency occurring as the infection resolves.
 ■ Use proper administration techniques to avoid contamination of 
the medication. Keep the cap tightly closed when the medication 
is not in use.
 ■ Wait 5 minutes after applying this medication before applying any 
other medications to the eye.
 ■ Store this medication in the refrigerator; do not freeze. 
 ■ Do not use this medication if the color changes, if it becomes 
cloudy, or if there are particles in the solutions.
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined 
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH). Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the use 
of personal protective equipment when handling this  medicine.
Storage/Stability
Store this medication in the refrigerator (2°C-8°C [35.6°F-46.4°F]); 
do not freeze. Reconstituted solutions (see Compatibilty/Com-
pounding Considerations) are stable for 14 days (in the absence of 
sterility testing) when refrigerated.15
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Voriconazole ophthalmic preparations should not be mixed direct -
ly with any other ophthalmic medications. Voriconazole is not ap -
proved in an ophthalmic dosage form. A 1% ophthalmic solution 
can be created by aseptically reconstituting the powder in a 200 mg 
vial for injection with 19 mL of sterile water for injection or normal 
saline, according to the package instructions.16 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Voriconazole is available as a 200 mg lyophilized powder ( VFend®, 
generic) for reconstitution to a 1% solution following the addition 
of 19 mL water for injection. This reconstituted solution can be safe-
ly used for topical ophthalmic administration. Voriconazole may be 
compounded to a 1% ointment by a qualified, licensed compound -
ing pharmacist.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb

===== PDF_PAGE_1440 =====
Betamethasone, Topical   1413
Dermatologic Agents, Topical
SANDRA KOCH, DVM, MS, DACVD
University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN
The following section lists many of the active ingredients and examples of corresponding preparations used topically for their local action 
in veterinary medicine. The list includes both veterinary-labeled products and some useful human-labeled dermatologic products. In the 
marketplace, the drug sponsor, availability, and formulation of these products tend to change rapidly, so this listing should be used as a basic 
guide; always refer to the specific product label. Active ingredients are listed by therapeutic class. Products that are applied topically but are 
absorbed systemically and used primarily for their systemic effects are found in the systemic monograph section. 
Portions of this section are adapted from Koch SN, Torres SMF , Plumb, DC. Canine and Feline Dermatology Drug Handbook. John Wiley & 
Sons, 2012. This reference provides additional detail on these and other compounds and products.
Anti-Inflammatory/Anti-Pruritic Agents, Topical
Corticosteroid Agents, Topical
NOTE: There are at least 20 chemical entities (plus a variety of salts) used in humans for topical corticosteroid therapy. The following section 
includes many veterinary topical products and some human products that may be of use in veterinary medicine. See also Otic Agents for more 
products.
Betamethasone, Topical
(bet-ah-meth-ah-zone)
For systemic use, refer to Betamethasone.
For otic use, refer to Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic.
Indications/Actions
Betamethasone is considered a high-potency topical corticosteroid. It may be beneficial for adjunctive treatment of localized pruritic or 
inflammatory conditions. Because risks associated with betamethasone (eg, HPA axis suppression, systemic corticosteroid effects, skin at -
rophy) are higher than with hydrocortisone, betamethasone products are generally reserved for severe localized pruritic conditions or con-
ditions for which hydrocortisone is not efficacious. Most veterinary-labeled topical betamethasone products also contain gentamicin, and 
labeled indications are for treating infected superficial lesions caused by bacteria sensitive to gentamicin. Additional otic products that 
contain an antimicrobial (eg, gentamicin) and an antifungal (eg, clotrimazole) are available. See Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic. 
These products can be used extra-label for treating localized mixed bacterial and yeast infections when potent anti-inflammatory activity is 
also desired. Topical dosage forms containing betamethasone as a sole ingredient are only available in products labeled for humans.
Glucocorticoids are nonspecific anti-inflammatory agents. They likely act by inducing phospholipase A2 inhibitory proteins (lipocortins) 
in cells, thereby reducing the formation, activity, and release of endogenous inflammatory mediators (eg, histamine, prostaglandins, kinins). 
Glucocorticoids also mitigate DNA synthesis via an antimitotic effect on epidermal cells. Topically applied corticosteroids also inhibit the 
migration of leukocytes and macrophages to the area, thereby reducing erythema, pruritus, and edema.
Ointments are the most potent vehicle, as they are the most occlusive, whereas creams tend to be less potent than ointments of the same 
medication/strength, followed by lotions and gels.1
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Betamethasone formulations are best suited for focal (eg, pedal) or multifocal lesions for relatively short durations (ie, less than 2 months). 
See Precautions/Adverse Effects. Initially, topical glucocorticoids are used sparingly 1 to 4 times per day, and then the frequency is tapered 
when control is achieved. Long-term, frequent use can cause HPA axis suppression; risk can be reduced by treating for only as long as nec-
essary on as small an area as possible. Refer to the individual product label for specific dosing recommendations.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Several veterinary topical products list pregnancy as a contraindication. Systemic glucocorticoids can be teratogenic or induce parturition 
during the third trimester of pregnancy in animals. If considering use during pregnancy, weigh the respective risks with treating versus the 
potential benefits. Owners should wash their hands after application or wear gloves when applying. Avoid contact with eyes. Do not allow the 
animal to lick or chew at affected sites for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application. Occlusive dressings increase glucocorticoid penetration 
and can increase the risk for systemic side effects. 
 ■ Reactions to allergen intradermal skin tests may be suppressed by glucocorticoids.2,3 A 2-week (14-day) withdrawal time before intradermal 
skin testing is recommended for dogs and cats4,5; no withdrawal time is required before serum IgE testing to identify sensitizing allergens in cats.5
Use care when treating large areas or when using on small-sized patients. Higher potency, increased concentration, or long duration of 
use increases risks for HPA axis suppression, immune suppression, systemic glucocorticoid effects (eg, PU/PD, polyphagia, vomiting, diar-
rhea), and complications caused by skin atrophy (eg, skin fragility, alopecia, localized pyoderma, comedones, weakened barrier function). 
Betamethasone may delay wound healing, primarily if used longer than 7 days. Vomiting and diarrhea have been reported after ingestion of 
topical products containing betamethasone. Local skin reactions (eg, burning, itching, redness) are possible but uncommon. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
NOTE: There are no veterinary-labeled topical products in the United States that contain betamethasone as a single active ingredient.

===== PDF_PAGE_1441 =====
1414    Hydrocortisone, Topical 
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Gentamicin 0.57 mg/mL, betamethasone 
valerate 0.284 mg/mL (spray) 
Other ingredients: propylene glycol, 
 isopropyl alcohol, parabens
Labeled for dogs Rx; depending on the prod-
uct: 60 mL, 72 mL, 120 mL, 
and 240 mL
Gentocin®; GentaCalm®; GentaSpray®; 
Betagen®; Gentamicin®; Gentaved®; 
 GentaSoothe®; GenOne®; Relifor®
Human-Labeled Products
NOTE: This is a partial listing. Do not confuse products containing augmented betamethasone dipropionate (eg, Diprolene®) with 
betamethasone dipropionate. Augmented betamethasone dipropionate is more potent than betamethasone dipropionate. For more informa-
tion on human-labeled betamethasone products, refer to a comprehensive human drug reference or contact a pharmacist.
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% (ointment) Rx; 15 g, 45 g generic
Betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% (cream) Rx; 15 g, 45 g generic
Betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% (lotion) Rx; 60 mL generic
Betamethasone valerate 0.1% (ointment) Rx; 30 g, 45 g generic
Betamethasone valerate 0.1% (cream) Rx; 15 g generic
Betamethasone valerate 0.1% (lotion) Rx; 60 mL generic
Betamethasone valerate 0.12% (foam) Rx; 300 g Luxic®; generic
Clotrimazole 1%, betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% (lotion) Rx; 30 mL generic
Clotrimazole 1%, betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% (cream) Rx; 15 g, 45 g Lotrisone®
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Hydrocortisone, Topical 
(hye-droe-kor-ti-zone)
Indications/Actions
Hydrocortisone is a topical corticosteroid that may be useful for adjunctive treatment of localized pruritic and/or inflammatory conditions. 
Due to its low potency, hydrocortisone is a reasonable first choice for larger focal areas or for small-sized patients. Some products contain 
additional ingredients (eg, Burow’s solution [aluminum acetate], pramoxine) that may have additional antipruritic effects.
Topical glucocorticoids are nonspecific anti-inflammatory agents. They are thought to act by inducing phospholipase A2 inhibitory pro-
teins (lipocortins) in cells, thereby reducing the formation, activity, and release of endogenous inflammatory mediators (eg, histamine, pros-
taglandins, kinins). Glucocorticoids also reduce DNA synthesis via an antimitotic effect on epidermal cells. Topically applied glucocorticoids 
also inhibit the migration of leukocytes and macrophages to the area, reducing erythema, pruritus, and edema.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Hydrocortisone formulations are best suited for focal (eg, pedal) or multifocal lesions for relatively short durations (ie, less than 2 months; 
see Precautions/Adverse Effects). 
Initially, topical glucocorticoid creams and ointments are applied 1 to 4 times daily, and then the frequency is tapered after control is 
achieved. In contrast to some more potent topical corticosteroids, hydrocortisone can be applied more frequently and over a greater surface 
area, with less risk for local or systemic adverse effects; however, long-term frequent use can still cause HPA axis suppression. Risk can be 
reduced by treating patients for only as long as necessary on the smallest area possible. 
Shampoos containing hydrocortisone are generally used from once a week up to once a day. They typically should remain in contact with 
the skin for at least 10 minutes before rinsing. 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Several veterinary topical products list pregnancy as a contraindication. Owners should wash their hands after application or wear gloves 
when applying. Avoid contact with eyes. Do not allow the animal to lick or chew at affected sites for at least 20 to 30 minutes after applica -
tion. Occlusive dressings increase glucocorticoid penetration and can increase the risk for systemic adverse effects. The risks associated with 
hydrocortisone are significantly less when compared with higher potency corticosteroids (eg, betamethasone).
Local skin reactions are possible but uncommon. Atrophy associated with skin fragility, superficial follicular cysts (milia), and comedones 
may be seen with long-term frequent use, but these conditions occur more commonly when using more potent topical corticosteroids (eg, 
betamethasone). Although systemic absorption is rare with hydrocortisone, long-term use may lead to HPA axis suppression. Accidental 
ingestion may cause GI signs such as nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea.1 
Reactions to allergen intradermal skin tests may be suppressed by glucocorticoids.2,3 A 2-week (14-day) withdrawal time before intrader-
mal skin testing is recommended for dogs and cats4,5; no withdrawal time is required before serum IgE testing to identify sensitizing allergens 
in cats.5

===== PDF_PAGE_1442 =====
Hydrocortisone, Topical    1415
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Refer to the individual product labeling for specific dosing recommendations and inactive ingredients.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Hydrocortisone 0.5% (lotion) Labeled for dogs OTC; 4 oz Dogswell®
Hydrocortisone 1% (lotion) Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 8 oz Vetergen Hydrocortisone; AtopiCream 
HC
Hydrocortisone 0.5% (cream) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 1 oz Zymox®
Hydrocortisone 1% (cream) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 1 oz Zymox®
Hydrocortisone 0.5% (spray) Labeled for dogs OTC; 5 oz Hartz®
Hydrocortisone 1% (spray) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 2 oz Zymox®
Hydrocortisone 1%, chlorhexidine 4%, 
(spray)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 8 oz TrizCHLOR® 4HC
Hydrocortisone 1%, pramoxine 1% (spray) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz Comfort HC®; Vetraseb® HC
Hydrocortisone 1%, acetic acid 1%,  boric 
acid 2%, ketoconazole 0.15% (spray)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 8 oz MalAcetic® ULTRA
Hydrocortisone 1%, Burow’s solution 2% 
(solution)
Labeled for dogs and/or cats OTC or Rx; 1 oz, 2 
oz, and 16 oz bottle
Cort/Astrin®; Corti-Derm®; Bur-O-
Cort 2:1®; Hydro-B 1020®; Hydro-Plus®
Hydrocortisone 0.5%, chlorhexidine 2%, 
ketoconazole 1% (salve)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 4 oz EquiShield® CK HC
Hydrocortisone 1%, chlorhexidine 4%
(shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and/or 
horses
OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz TrizCHLOR 4HC; Chlorhexidine  
4% HC
Hydrocortisone 1%, chlorhexidine 2%,
ketoconazole 1% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 12 oz EquiShield® CK HC
Hydrocortisone 1%, acetic acid 1%, boric 
acid 2%, ketoconazole 0.15% (shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz MalAcetic® ULTRA
Hydrocortisone 1%, acetic acid 1%, boric 
acid 1% (wipes)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 25 count jar MalAcetic® HC
Human-Labeled Products
NOTE: Partial listing; there are many branded products available with hydrocortisone. For more information on human-labeled hydrocor-
tisone products, refer to a comprehensive human drug reference (eg, Facts and Comparisons) or contact a pharmacist.
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Hydrocortisone 0.5%, hydrocortisone  
1% (ointment)
OTC/Rx; 25 g, 28 g, 28.35 g, 28.4 g, 30 g, 56 g, 110 g, 430 g, 
and 454 g
Status determined  
by labeling
Hydrocortisone 2.5% (ointment) Rx; 20 g, 28.35 g, 435.6 g, and 454 g
Hydrocortisone 0.5%, hydrocortisone  
1% (cream)
OTC/Rx; 1 g, 1.5 g packets, 14 g, 14.2 g, 15 g, 20 g, 26 g, 28 g, 
28.3 g, 28.35 g, 28.4 g, 30 g, 42 g, 56 g, 120 g, and 454 g
Status determined  
by labeling
Hydrocortisone 2.5% (cream) Rx; 15 g, 20 g, 28 g, 28.35 g, 30 g, and 454 g
Hydrocortisone 1% (lotion) OTC/Rx; 30 mL, 59 mL, 60 mL, 88.7 mL, 99 mL, 113 mL,  
114 mL, 118 mL, and 120 mL
Status determined  
by labeling
Hydrocortisone 2%, hydrocortisone  
2.5% (lotion)
Rx; 29.6 mL (2% only), 59 mL and 118 mL (2.5% only) Ala Scalp®; Scalacort®; 
generic
Hydrocortisone 1% (gel) OTC; 28 g, 30 g, 42.53 g, and 56 g
Hydrocortisone 2.5% (gel) Rx; 43 g
Hydrocortisone 10% (gel compounding kit) Rx; 60 g jar First-Hydrocortisone®
Hydrocortisone 1%, hydrocortisone  
2.5% (solution)
OTC/Rx; 30 mL, 44 mL, 59 mL, and 120 mL
Hydrocortisone 1% (foam) OTC; 88.7 mL Itch-X®
Hydrocortisone 1% (applicator) OTC; 36 mL Cortizone-10 Easy Relief®
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb

===== PDF_PAGE_1443 =====
1416    Isoflupredone Combinations, Topical
Isoflupredone Combinations, Topical
(eye-soe-floo-preh-dohn)
Indications/Actions
Isoflupredone is a high-potency topical corticosteroid. In combination with neomycin and tetracaine, isoflupredone is indicated in dogs as a 
dressing for minor cuts and abrasions, as a postsurgical therapy, and for treating anal gland infections and moist dermatitis.1 It is indicated 
in cats and horses as a dressing for minor cuts and abrasions and as postsurgical therapy.1,2 
Because risks associated with isoflupredone (eg, HPA axis suppression, systemic corticosteroid effects, skin atrophy) are higher than with hydro-
cortisone, these products are generally reserved for severe localized pruritic conditions or for conditions when hydrocortisone is not efficacious. 
Corticosteroids are nonspecific anti-inflammatory agents. They are thought to act by inducing phospholipase A2 inhibitory proteins 
(lipocortins) in cells, thereby reducing the formation, activity, and release of endogenous inflammatory mediators (eg, histamine, prostaglan-
dins, kinins). Corticosteroids also mitigate DNA synthesis via an anti-mitotic effect on epidermal cells. Topically applied corticosteroids also 
inhibit the migration of leukocytes and macrophages to the area, reducing erythema, pruritus, and edema.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Clean the affected area prior to application of isoflupredone. Apply a small amount of ointment or powder 1 to 3 times daily as needed and 
continue based on clinical response.1,2
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Topical corticosteroids are often considered contraindicated in patients that are pregnant or have tuberculosis of the skin. Systemic cortico-
steroids can be teratogenic or induce parturition during the third trimester of pregnancy in animals. If isoflupredone is being considered for 
use during pregnancy, weigh the risks for treating versus the potential benefits. 
Residual activity may affect intradermal or allergy serum tests; it is recommended to discontinue use of isoflupredone 2 weeks before 
allergy testing.3 Isoflupredone may delay wound healing, particularly when used longer than 7 days.
Isoflupredone products may be harmful if swallowed; prevent treated animals from licking or chewing at affected sites for at least 20 to 30 
minutes after application. Powdered formulations may cause allergy or asthma symptoms if inhaled.2
Wear gloves or wash hands after application. Avoid contact with eyes. 
Use isoflupredone cautiously on large treatment areas and on small-sized patients. Treat the smallest area possible for the minimum duration. 
The prolonged use of corticosteroid products increases the risk for HPA axis suppression, systemic corticosteroid effects (eg, polydipsia, polyuria, 
iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism, skin atrophy). Local skin reactions (eg, burning, itching, redness) or hypersensitivity reactions are possible. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; 
size(s) Trade names/additional information
Isoflupredone acetate 0.1%, neomycin sulfate 
0.5%, tetracaine HCl 0.5% (ointment)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
Rx; 10 g tube Neo-Predef®with Tetracaine; Tritop® 
Isoflupredone acetate 0.1%, neomycin sulfate 
0.5%, tetracaine HCl 0.5% (powder) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
Rx; 15 g insuf-
flator bottle
Neo-Predef®with Tetracaine
Store in a dry place. Do not allow the tip 
of the bottle to contact moisture.
Human-Labeled Products
None
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Mometasone, Topical 
(moe-met-a-zone)
For otic use, see Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic.
Indications
Mometasone is a high-potency topical corticosteroid. It may be beneficial for adjunctive treatment of pruritic and inflammatory conditions. 
Mometasone products are generally reserved for severe pruritic conditions or for hydrocortisone treatment failures, as the risks associated 
with mometasone (eg, HPA axis suppression, skin atrophy) are higher than with hydrocortisone.
Mometasone is found in several veterinary-labeled otic suspensions in combination with antibiotics and antifungals. These otic combi -
nation products have been used topically extra-label for yeast and bacterial skin infections when a potent anti-inflammatory effect is needed 
but should only be used when there is evidence of bacterial or yeast infections. 
Corticosteroids are non-specific anti-inflammatory agents. They are thought to induce phospholipase A2 inhibitory proteins (lipocortins) 
in cells, thereby reducing the formation, activity, and release of endogenous inflammatory mediators (eg, histamine, prostaglandins, kinins). 
Corticosteroids also reduce DNA synthesis via an anti-mitotic effect on epidermal cells. Topically applied corticosteroids also inhibit the 
migration of leukocytes and macrophages to the area, reducing erythema, pruritus, and edema.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Mometasone should be applied sparingly, initially 1 to 2 times daily then less frequent as clinical signs improve. Mometasone formulations 

===== PDF_PAGE_1444 =====
Triamcinolone, Topical    1417
are best suited for focal (eg, pedal) or multifocal lesions that require relatively short treatment durations (ie, less than 2 months). Frequency 
of application and duration of treatment should be based on the severity of clinical signs. For veterinary-labeled products, refer to the specific 
product label for additional usage information.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Safe use of mometasone during pregnancy is not established; it should only be used when the benefits outweigh the risks. Use cautiously on 
large treatment areas or in small-sized patients due to risk for systemic absorption. Treat only for as long as necessary on as small of an area 
as possible to reduce the risk for toxicities such as HPA axis suppression, systemic corticosteroid effects (eg, polydipsia, polyuria, iatrogenic 
Cushing’s, adverse GI effects), and cutaneous atrophy associated with skin fragility. Other potential adverse effects that occur with increases 
in product concentrations and prolonged duration of use include alopecia, localized pyoderma, superficial follicular cysts (milia), and come-
dones. Local skin reactions (eg, burning, pruritus, erythema) are possible but unlikely. Mometasone may delay wound healing, particularly if 
used longer than 7 days. Do not let treated animals lick or chew at affected areas for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application; ingestion may 
result in GI upset. Occlusive dressings increase steroid penetration and can increase the risk for systemic adverse effects.
Reactions to allergen intradermal skin tests may be suppressed by glucocorticoids. A 2-week (14-day) withdrawal time before intradermal 
skin testing is recommended for dogs and cats1; no withdrawal time is required before serum IgE testing to identify sensitizing allergens in cats.2
Wash hands after handling or wear gloves during application. Avoid contact with eyes. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Mometasone 1 mg/g, gentamicin 3 mg/g, 
clotrimazole 10 mg/g (suspension) 
Labeled for otic use in dogs Rx; 7.5 g, 15 g, 30 
g, and 215 g tubes
Mometamax®; Malmetazone®; 
Mometavet®; Maxi-Otic®; MotaZol®
Topical use is extra-label.
Mometasone 1 mg/g, orbifloxacin 
10 mg/g, posaconazole 1 mg/g 
(suspension) 
Labeled for otic use in dogs Rx; 7.5 g, 15 g, and 
30 g tubes
Posatex®
Topical use is extra-label.
Human-Labeled Products
NOTES: 
1. Mometasone furoate is the salt generally used in pharmaceutical products.
2. Many commercial products exist. Below is a representative list of available products. For more information on human-labeled 
mometasone products, refer to a comprehensive human drug reference or contact a pharmacist.
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Mometasone furoate 0.1% (cream) Rx; 15 g and 45 g generic
Mometasone furoate 0.1% (ointment) Rx; 15 g and 45 g generic
Mometasone furoate 0.1% (lotion) Rx; 30 mL and 60 mL Elocon®; generic
Mometasone furoate 0.1% (solution) Rx; 30 mL and 60 mL generic
Mometasone furoate 50 µg/100 mg (nasal spray) OTC; 10 mL and 17 mL bottle Nasonex®
Extra-label when used topically
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Triamcinolone, Topical 
(trye-am-sin-oh-lone)
For systemic use, see Triamcinolone.
For otic use, see Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic.
Indications/Actions
Triamcinolone is generally considered a medium potency corticosteroid at concentrations less than 0.5%. It may be beneficial for adjunctive 
treatment of pruritic or inflammatory conditions. Triamcinolone products are typically reserved for severe pruritic conditions or for con -
ditions when hydrocortisone is not efficacious, as the risk for HPA axis suppression and skin atrophy are higher than with hydrocortisone. 
Triamcinolone can be found as a sole agent in some veterinary creams or sprays, although most of these contain an antibiotic and/or anti-
fungal agent. These products can be used for treating localized mixed bacterial and yeast infections when potent anti-inflammatory activity is 
also desired. Additional otic products that contain an antibiotic and an antifungal are available. See Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic.
Corticosteroids are non-specific anti-inflammatory agents. They are thought to induce phospholipase A2 inhibitory proteins (lipocortins) 
in cells, thereby reducing the formation, activity, and release of endogenous inflammatory mediators (eg, histamine, prostaglandins, kinins). 
Corticosteroids also mitigate DNA synthesis via an anti-mitotic effect on epidermal cells. Topically applied corticosteroids also inhibit the 
migration of leukocytes and macrophages to the area, reducing erythema, pruritus, and edema.

===== PDF_PAGE_1445 =====
1418    Triamcinolone, Topical 
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Topical triamcinolone is best suited for focal (eg, pedal) or multifocal lesions for relatively short durations (ie, less than 2 months). Triam -
cinolone ointment should be applied sparingly, initially 1 to 4 times daily and then tapered when control is achieved. Triamcinolone spray is 
labeled for use twice daily for 7 days, then once daily for 7 days, then every other day for 14 days. For veterinary products, refer to the specific 
product label for dosing recommendations.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Systemic corticosteroids can be teratogenic or induce parturition during the third trimester of pregnancy in animals. If considering use 
during pregnancy, weigh the risks of treating versus potential benefits. Wear gloves when applying and wash hands after application. Spray 
should be applied in a well-ventilated area. Avoid contact with eyes. Do not allow animals to lick or chew at affected sites for at least 20 to 30 
minutes after application; oral ingestion may result in GI upset.
Reactions to allergen intradermal skin tests may be suppressed by glucocorticoids. A 2-week (14-day) withdrawal time before intradermal 
skin testing is recommended for dogs and cats1; no withdrawal time is required before serum IgE testing to identify sensitizing allergens in cats.2
Long-term, frequent use can cause HPA axis suppression. Treat for only as long as necessary on as small of an area as possible using the 
lowest effective concentration to reduce the risk for HPA axis suppression, cutaneous effects (eg, skin atrophy, skin fragility, alopecia, local-
ized pyoderma, comedones), and other systemic corticosteroid effects (eg, polydipsia, polyuria, iatrogenic Cushing’s, GI effects). Use with 
caution when treating small-sized patients or large areas. Triamcinolone may delay wound healing, mainly if used longer than 7 days. Local 
skin reactions (eg, burning, itching, redness) are also possible.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; 
size(s) Trade names/additional information
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.015% 
(spray)
Labeled for dogs Rx; 8 oz, 16 oz 
bottle
Genesis®
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% 
(cream)
Labeled for dogs Rx; 7.5 g, 15 g Medalone®; Vetalog®
Although these products are still listed in the FDA 
Green Book of approved animal drugs, they may no 
longer be commercially available.
Triamcinolone acetonide 1 mg/g, 
neomycin 2.5 mg/g, thiostrepton 
2500 units/g, nystatin 100,000 
units/g (cream) 
Labeled for dogs and cats Rx; 7.5 g, 15 g 
tube
Animax®; Derma-Vet®; Panalog®
Although these products are still listed in the FDA 
Green Book of approved animal drugs, they may no 
longer be commercially available.
Triamcinolone acetonide 1 mg/mL, 
neomycin 2.5 mg/mL, thiostrepton 
2500 units/mL, nystatin 100,000 
units/mL, (ointment)
Labeled for dogs and cats Rx; 7.5 mL, 15 
mL, 30 mL, 
and 240 mL
Animax®; Derma-Vet®; Dermalog®; Dermalone®; 
 EnteDerm®; Quadritop®; Quadruple®; Resortin®; 
 VetaDerm Tetrafect®
Human-Labeled Products
NOTE: For more information on human-labeled triamcinolone products, refer to a comprehensive human drug reference or contact a 
pharmacist.
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.025% (ointment) Rx; 15 g, 80 g, 454 g generic
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.05% (ointment) Rx; 430 g Trianex®; generic
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% (ointment) Rx; 15 g, 80 g, 454 g generic
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.5% (ointment) Rx; 15 g generic
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.025% (cream) Rx; 15 g, 85.2 g, 454 g Triderm®; generic
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% (cream) Rx; 28.4 g, 85.2 g Triderm®; generic
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.5% (cream) Rx; 15 g, 454 g Triderm®; generic
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.025% (lotion) Rx; 60 mL generic
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% (lotion) Rx; 60 mL generic
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.147 mg/g (spray) Rx; 63 g, 100 g Kenalog®; generic
10.3% alcohol
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.1%, nystatin 100,000 units/g (cream) Rx; 15 g, 30 g, 60 g generic
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.1%, nystatin 100,000 units/g (ointment) Rx; 15 g, 30 g, 60 g generic

===== PDF_PAGE_1446 =====
Aluminum Acetate Solution, Topical   1419
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Non-Corticosteroid Agents, Topical
Aluminum Acetate Solution, Topical
Burow’ s Solution
(ah-loo-mi-num ass-ih-tate)
Astringent
For otic use, see Corticosteroid Agents, Otic.
Indications/Actions
Aluminum acetate solution (Burow’s solution, modified Burow’s solution) is an astringent antipruritic agent that can be used for adjunctive 
treatment of minor skin irritations, such as insect bites and localized inflamed and exudative skin conditions (eg, acute moist dermatitis, 
fold dermatitis [intertrigo], contact dermatitis). This solution can also be used to reduce inflammation associated with otitis externa (see 
Corticosteroid Agents, Otic). In addition to astringent and antipruritic actions, aluminum acetate solution also has acidifying effects and it is 
mildly antiseptic. The exact mechanisms of action for each of these effects is not fully understood; it was shown to have an antibacterial effect 
against Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa through alterations and damage to the cell wall and bacteriolysis.1  
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Topical use of aluminum acetate as a single agent is usually via a wet compress, dressing, or soak. Application for 15 to 30 minutes is gener-
ally recommended, and the affected area is air-dried between applications. Use can be as often as necessary, but every 4 to 6 hours is often 
employed. As aluminum acetate solution products come in various dosage forms (powder or tablets for dissolving, liquid), refer to package 
directions for proper dilutions; dilutions of 1:40, 1:20, or 1:10 are commonly used. Various generic products exist. NOTE: The commercially 
prepared, veterinary-labeled products that also contain hydrocortisone may be directly applied without dilution. See Hydrocortisone, Topical.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Do not cover application site with plastic or occlusive dressing to try to prevent product evaporation. Use cool or warm2 water for dissolving 
powder/tablets. Avoid contact with eyes. Pet owners should wash their hands after application. Aluminum acetate solution may cause dry 
skin or skin irritation in some patients. For products containing hydrocortisone, prolonged use should be avoided or limited to 1 to 2 weeks 
at a time to prevent potential skin atrophy and systemic absorption. A minimum of a 2-week withdrawal period is recommended for these 
products before intradermal or allergy serum testing. See Hydrocortisone, Topical.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Aluminum acetate 2%, hydrocortisone 1% (solution) 
Other ingredients: water, propylene glycol
OTC; 1 oz, 2 oz, 16 oz Cort/Astrin®; Corti-Derm®; 
 Hydro-B 1020
Human-Labeled Products 
NOTE: In some products, aluminum acetate solution may be listed as aluminum sulfate and calcium acetate combined in water.
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Aluminum sulfate tetradecahydrate, 1347 mg; calcium 
acetate monohydrate, 952 mg (powder)
OTC; packets of various 
concentrations (12/box)
Domeboro® 
Dilute as directed. When combined with water, the 
active ingredient (aluminum acetate) is formed. 
Aluminum acetate 0.5% (gel) OTC; 3 oz Domeboro®
Aluminum acetate 0.2% (gel) 
Other ingredients: dehydroacetic acid, 
 ethylhexylglycerin, glycine, hexylene glycol,  
malic acid
OTC; 2 oz TriCalm®
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb

===== PDF_PAGE_1447 =====
1420    Camphor/Menthol/Phenol, Topical 
Camphor/Menthol/Phenol, Topical 
(kam-for; men-thol; fee-nol)
Indications/Actions
When used in low concentrations, camphor/menthol/phenol products can be used as counterirritants; they may be added to proprietary or 
compounded products, primarily as antipruritics. Camphor and phenol may also have some antiseptic properties. Camphor and menthol act 
by stimulating and desensitizing nociceptors.1 Camphor produces a warming sensation, whereas menthol produces a cooling effect.2 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
These compounds may cause local irritation and should not be used around or in the eyes. Products containing phenol should NOT be used 
on cats.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
NOTE: There are also several over-the-counter (OTC) products containing menthol, phenol, or camphor; these products are not listed below 
and are used primarily on equine patients for overexertion, soreness, or stiffness. These include a variety of liniments (eg, white liniment, 
Choate’s liniment) or gels (eg, Cool Gel®, Ice-O-Gel®, Shin-O-Gel®).
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Menthol 7.5 mg/mL, oil of camphor 7.5 mg/mL, oil 
of eucalyptus 7.5 mg/mL, oil of pine 7.5 mg/mL, oil 
of thyme 2.8 mg/mL, Peru balsam 1.5 mg/mL, phe-
nol 7.5 mg/mL, biebrich scarlet red 100 ppm (spray)
Labeled for superficial  
cuts, wounds, and burns  
for horses and mules
OTC; 500 mL Many trade names
Shake well
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Colloidal Oatmeal, Topical
(ko-loyd-al ote-meel)
Indications/Actions
Colloidal oatmeal is made from oat grains (Avena sativa) and is used topically as an anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, and emollient agent. It 
ameliorates and provides soothing effects in pruritic, inflamed, and dry and/or scaly skin disorders, such as atopic dermatitis and irritant 
skin reactions. Although colloidal oatmeal’s mechanism of action is not completely understood, avenanthramides, one of its antioxidant 
phenolic compounds, have been shown to exert anti-inflammatory effects in the skin by inhibiting activities of pro-inflammatory cytokines 
in human epidermal keratinocytes.1 Avenanthramides were also shown to inhibit histamine release, prostaglandin biosynthesis, and cleavage 
of arachidonic acid from phospholipids in keratinocytes. In animal models, avenanthramides also reduced scratching and inflammatory 
cytokines implicated in pruritus; the antipruritic effect appears to increase as the oatmeal concentration increases. Colloidal oatmeal also 
forms a hydrophilic film that retains and replenishes moisture in the stratum corneum, and it also helps to normalize the skin’s pH. Moreover, 
colloidal oatmeal was found to improve the epidermal skin barrier by inducing and upregulating the expression of important skin barrier 
markers in human equivalent keratinocytes.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Spray formulations can be used 2 to 3 times per day or as needed for itching or pain. Shampoo or conditioner is usually used once a day to 
once a week. Shampoo should be in contact with the skin for at least 5 to 10 minutes and then rinsed well. Refer to each product’s label for 
further details.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Colloidal oatmeal has been known to be very safe. In humans, there are some reports of contact dermatitis associated with its use; however, 
most data indicate a low potential for oatmeal-containing products to cause irritation or allergic sensitization. Some animals might develop 
sensitivity (eg, pruritus, erythema) to some of these topical agents, in which case the product should be discontinued. Because colloidal oat-
meal has a potential antihistamine effect, a minimum of a 2-week withdrawal period is recommended before intradermal testing.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
NOTE: Products listed are representative of those containing only colloidal oatmeal as the principal active ingredient. 
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Colloidal oatmeal (leave-on 
spray)
Other ingredients:  ceramides, 
safflower oil
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 8 oz, 12 oz,  
and 1 gallon
Dermallay®

===== PDF_PAGE_1448 =====
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Colloidal oatmeal 1% (cream 
rinse)
Other ingredients: lactic acid, 
propylene glycol
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz,  
and 1 gallon
Epi-Soothe®
Colloidal oatmeal 
 (conditioner); other 
 ingredients vary
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 16 oz, 17 oz,  
1 gallon
Aloe & Oatmeal Skin and Coat; Aloe & Oatmeal®
Colloidal oatmeal (shampoo); 
other ingredients vary
Labeled for dogs and cats; 
some products labeled for 
horses
OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz, 12 oz, 
16 oz, 17 oz, 1 gallon
Aloe & Oatmeal®; Dermallay®(soap free); Epi-
Soothe®; Vet Solutions Aloe & Oatmeal®; Simply 
Pure®; Aloe and Oatmeal (soap and alcohol-free); 
Aloe Oatmeal (soap-free)
Human-Labeled Products
NOTE: There are several human products available containing colloidal oatmeal, including creams, lotions, and products, to be added to the 
bath. Common trade names include Aveeno®, Geri Silk®, and Actibath®.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Diphenhydramine, Topical
(dye-fen-hye-dra-meen) Benadryl®
For systemic use, see Diphenhydramine.
Indications/Actions
Diphenhydramine is a first-generation antihistamine that has some local anesthetic activity. This activity is probably its primary antipruritic 
mechanism of action. Diphenhydramine may be absorbed in small amounts transdermally but is unlikely to cause systemic adverse effects 
with typical use.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Topical creams, ointments, gels, lotions, or sprays are usually applied 1 to 3 times a day as needed. The shampoos and conditioners are gen-
erally used once a week to once a day after bathing, respectively. Shampoos should remain in contact with the skin for at least 10 minutes 
before being rinsed. Check product label for specific instructions.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Avoid contact with eyes or mucous membranes. Do not apply to blistered or oozing areas of the skin. Fatalities have rarely been reported in 
children after excessive exposure (ie, application to a large percentage of body surface area with open sores); veterinary significance is uncer-
tain. Pet owners should wash their hands after application or wear gloves when applying.
Prolonged use could potentially cause local irritation and/or hypersensitization. Residual activity may affect intradermal or allergy serum 
tests. It has been suggested to stop using this product 2 weeks before allergy intradermal testing. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Diphenhydramine 1%,  
pramoxine 1%,  
(conditioner spray) 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz Benasoothe®
Other ingredients: ceramides, phytosphingosine, 
safflower oil, Aloe barbadensis, glycerin, lanolin 
 cholesterol, glycerin, lanolin
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Diphenhydramine 2% (spray), diphenhydramine 2% (gel), 
 diphenhydramine 1% (cream), diphenhydramine 2% (cream), 
diphenhydramine 2% (ointment), diphenhydramine 2% 
(stick), diphenhydramine 12.5 mg (strip)
OTC; various sizes  
available
Benadryl®; Banophen®; CareOne®;  
Allergy Relief®
Other ingredients may include calamine, zinc 
oxide, acetate, pyrilamine, tripelennamine, 
menthol, camphor.
Diphenhydramine, Topical   1421

===== PDF_PAGE_1449 =====
1422    Fatty Acids (Omega), Topical
Fatty Acids (Omega), Topical
For systemic use, see Fatty Acids, Omega-3
Indications/Actions
Essential fatty acids are polyunsaturated fatty acids that are not synthesized by the body and must be obtained from external sources. The 
2 main types of essential fatty acids are omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids. Essential fatty acids are indicated primarily for pruritic and in -
flammatory conditions (eg, atopic dermatitis, sebaceous adenitis) and keratinization disorders (eg, seborrhea). They may also be used to 
improve coat quality and dry skin. Some products may contain other active ingredients and natural oils, and therefore, may have additional 
indications.
The exact mechanism of action of essential fatty acids is not well understood; however, essential fatty acids affect the arachidonic acid 
concentrations in plasma lipids and platelet membranes. They decrease the production of inflammatory prostaglandins in the body, thereby 
reducing inflammation and pruritus. Essential fatty acids may also play a role in restoring the skin barrier.
Suggested Uses/Dosages
Sprays, wipes, and mousses are typically applied up to 2 to 3 times daily as needed. Spot-on treatments vary from weekly to every 2 weeks. 
Shampoos and crème rinses can be applied daily to weekly. Shampoos should generally be left in contact with the skin for 5 to 10 minutes 
before rinsing. 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
No specific precautions or adverse effects are described for topical essential fatty acids; however, sensitivity reactions are possible. If signs 
such as pruritus or erythema occur, discontinue use. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Below is a representative sample of the products available. NOTE: Refer to specific product labels for details on inactive ingredients and 
instructions for use.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Essential fatty acids from 
safflower oil (shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs and 
cats; some products 
labeled for horses
OTC; 4 oz, 12 oz, 16 oz, 1 gallon HyLyt®; DermaLyte®; EFA Essential Fatty 
Acid®
Soap-free
Essential fatty acids from 
safflower oil with oatmeal 
(shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, 
and horses
OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon DermAllay®
Soap-free
Essential fatty acids from 
safflower oil (creme rinse) 
Labeled for dogs and 
cats; some products 
labeled for horses
OTC; 8 oz, 1 gallon HyLyt®; generic
Essential fatty acids from 
hemp seed oil (spot-on) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, 
horses, and small 
mammals
OTC; boxes of 4 pipettes in the 
following sizes:
Dogs:
Under 10 kg (22 lb): 0.6 mL
10 - 20.5 kg (22-45 lb): 1.2 mL
20.5 - 40.9 kg (45-90 lb): 2.4 mL
Cats: 0.4 mL
Small mammals: 0.6 mL
Horses: 30 mL bottles
Essential 6®
Directions: Initially, 1 dose weekly for 2 
months, then 1 dose every 2 weeks for 
maintenance. 
Do not bathe within 2 days before and 2 
days after application. Brush application 
site 24 hours after applying to remove 
product residue.
Essential fatty acids from 
hemp seed oil and tamanu  
oil (spot-on)
Labeled for dogs OTC; boxes of 4 pipettes in the 
following sizes:
Dogs:
under 10 kg (22 lb): 0.6 mL
Dogs 10 - 20.4 kg (22-45 lb): 1.2 mL
20.4 - 40.8 kg (45-90 lb): 2.4 mL
PYOspot®
Directions: 1 pipette weekly
Do not bathe during 2 days before and 2 
days after application. Brush application 
site 24 hours after applying to remove 
product residue.
Essential fatty acids from 
hemp seed oil (mousse)
Labeled for dogs, cats, 
and small mammals
OTC; 150 mL Essential 6®
Soap-free and rinse-free. Shake before 
use. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1450 =====
Lidocaine/Lidocaine Combinations, Topical   1423
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Essential fatty acids from 
soybean oil (balm)
Labeled for dogs OTC; 1.67 oz jar BIO BALM®
Occlusive and water-resistant 
Essential fatty acids from 
hemp seed oil (wipes)
Labeled for dogs and 
cats
OTC; pack of 20 wipes PYOClean®
Soap-free and alcohol-free 
Essential fatty acids from 
safflower oil (spray) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, 
and horses
OTC; 8 oz, 12 oz, and 1 gallon Dermallay®
Soap-free, oatmeal spray conditioner
Human-Labeled Products
NOTE: Several human over-the-counter products are available in the United States but may contain additional ingredients and generally 
are not used in dogs and cats.
Lidocaine/Lidocaine Combinations, Topical
(lye-doe-kane)
For systemic use of lidocaine, please refer to Lidocaine (Intravenous; Systemic). For local anesthetic use, please refer to Lidocaine, Local 
Anesthetic.
Indications/Actions
Lidocaine is used topically as a dermal anesthetic or antipruritic. It is included in several products used for acute moist dermatitis, pruritic 
lesions, and painful skin conditions. When combined with prilocaine, it may provide dermal anesthesia before painful or invasive procedures 
such as catheter placements.
Lidocaine exerts its anesthetic properties by altering sodium ion permeability across the cell membrane, thereby inhibiting conduction 
from sensory nerves.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Lidocaine can be applied in a thin layer every 3 to 4 hours as needed. For veterinary-labeled products, refer to the specific product label for 
details on use.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Although topical lidocaine may be absorbed systemically, systemic toxicity is unlikely. Applying to a significant percentage of body area, us-
ing for prolonged times, using high concentrations, applying to irritated or broken skin, or covering the application site may increase the risk 
for systemic absorption and subsequent toxicity. Use with caution in patients receiving Class-I antiarrhythmics such as systemic lidocaine or 
mexiletine. Patches can cause serious adverse effects if chewed.1
Possible adverse effects include hypersensitivity reactions or skin irritation such as burning or tenderness. Products containing prilocaine 
may be more likely to cause methemoglobinemia or systemic toxicity; however, these effects occur rarely.2 Some products may also contain 
antiseptics, such as chlorhexidine and povidone-iodine. 
Wear gloves when applying and wash hands after handling. Avoid contact with eyes. Do not use in ears unless the product is explicitly 
labeled for otic use. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Lidocaine 2.4% (spray) Labeled for dogs and horses OTC; 2 oz Silver L®; BioCalm®
Lidocaine 2.4%, benzalkonium chloride 
0.1% (spray)
Labeled for dogs OTC; 4 oz Allercaine® with Bittran® II 
Lidocaine 2.46%, benzalkonium chloride 
0.2% (spray) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 4 oz Hexa-Caine®
Lidocaine 0.5%, chlorhexidine 0.2% 
(solution) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 4 oz Dermachlor Flush Plus®
These products may no longer be 
 commercially available.
Lidocaine 2%, povidone-iodine 2% 
(solution) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 16 oz Barrier® II
Human-Labeled Products
NOTE: Many commercial products exist. Below is a representative list of available products.
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Lidocaine 2% (cream) OTC; various Xolido®

===== PDF_PAGE_1451 =====
1424    Phytosphingosine, Topical 
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Lidocaine 4% (cream) OTC; various Anecream®; Bengay®; Aspercreme®; LC-4; 
LMX-4
Lidocaine 5% (cream) OTC; various Anecream® 5; LC-5; generic
Lidocaine 3% (lotion) Rx; 4 oz, 6 oz Lidosorb®; generic
Lidocaine 5% (ointment) Rx; 30 g, 35.44 g, or 50 g tube, 50 g, 150 g, or 
250 g jar
Xylocaine®; generic
Lidocaine 1.8% (patch) Rx; box of 30 patches ZTlido®
Lidocaine 4% (patch) OTC; various Aspercreme®; generic
Lidocaine 5% (patch) Rx; box of 30 patches Dermalid®; Lidoderm®; generic
Lidocaine 0.5% (spray) OTC; various Burnamycin®; generic
Lidocaine 4% (spray) OTC; various Aspercreme®; generic
Lidocaine 2% (gel/jelly) Rx; 6 mL or 11 mL prefilled syringes; 5 mL, 
10 mL, or 20 mL Uro-Jet® syringes; 5 mL or 
30 mL tube
Xylocaine®; generic
Lidocaine 4% (gel/jelly) OTC; various Alocane®; Topicaine®; generic
Lidocaine 5% (gel/jelly) OTC; various Topicaine®; generic
Lidocaine 2.5%, prilocaine 2.5% (cream) Rx; 5 g, 15 g, and 30 g EMLA®; generic
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Phytosphingosine, Topical 
(fye-tos-fin-goh-seen)
Indications/Actions
Phytosphingosine products are indicated for localized and generalized inflammatory conditions of the skin associated with pruritus and 
dryness, including allergic diseases such as atopic dermatitis. Some products are also indicated for use as a liquid wound dressing for local-
ized inflammation and after surgery (could be sprayed on sutures). Some products are marketed for seborrheic conditions. There is some 
evidence supporting the role of phytosphingosine on skin barrier restoration in dogs.1 
Phytosphingosine acts as a ceramide precursor, and it is a salient molecule in the natural defense mechanism of the skin. Ceramides com-
prise 40% to 50% of the main lipids responsible for maintaining the cohesion of the stratum corneum. Therefore, ceramides are essential for 
restoring the skin lipid barrier, controlling local flora, and maintaining the correct moisture balance. Phytosphingosine is also anti-inflam-
matory; it has anti-IL-1 activity, impairing the production of PGE2, and it inhibits kinase protein C.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Phytosphingosine spray should be applied every 3 days for 2 to 3 weeks. 2 Gel should be applied once daily as needed for itching relief. 3 
Mousse should be applied to dry hair and should be used every 3 days for 2 to 3 weeks. 4 Shampoo should be used 2 to 3 times weekly for 1 
to 2 weeks.5 Leave the shampoo in contact with the skin for at least 5 to 10 minutes before rinsing well. Shake products well before use. Refer 
to specific product label for details on use.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Discontinue use if skin redness or irritation occurs. Avoid contact with the eyes.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
NOTE: Be aware when selecting products that different combinations of active ingredients may be marketed under similar trade names. For prod-
ucts containing other active ingredients, including Chlorhexidine, Topical and Pramoxine, Topical, please refer to their respective monographs.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Phytosphingosine salicyloyl 0.2% (gel) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 2 oz Douxo® Calm
Phytosphingosine salicyloyl 0.05% (micro-emulsion 
spray) 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 6.8 oz Douxo® Calm
Phytosphingosine salicyloyl 0.05%, chlorhexidine 
gluconate 3% (micro-emulsion spray)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 6.8 oz Douxo® Chlorhexidine
Phytosphingosine hydrochloride 0.2% (mousse) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz SkinGuard® Balance
Phytosphingosine salicyloyl 0.05%, chlorhexidine 
gluconate 3%, climbazole 0.5% (mousse)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 6.8 oz SkinGuard® Restore

===== PDF_PAGE_1452 =====
Pramoxine, Topical    1425
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Phytosphingosine salicyloyl 0.05%, pramoxine hydro-
chloride 1% (mousse)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 6.8 oz SkinGuard®Relieve
Phytosphingosine salicyloyl 0.05%, chlorhexidine 
gluconate 3%, climbazole 0.5% (pads)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 30 pads SkinGuard® Restore
Phytosphingosine hydrochloride 0.1% (shampoo) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz SkinGuard® Balance
Phytosphingosine hydrochloride 0.05%, benzoyl 
peroxide 3%, salicylic acid 2%, sodium thiosulfate 2% 
(shampoo)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz SkinGuard®Clear
Phytosphingosine salicyloyl 0.05%, chlorhexidine 
gluconate 3%, climbazole 0.5% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz SkinGuard® Restore
Phytosphingosine salicyloyl 0.05%, pramoxine hydro-
chloride 1% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz SkinGuard®Relieve
Human-Labeled Products
NOTE: There are several over-the-counter human cosmetic products containing phytosphingosine in the United States. These products 
mainly target lipid barrier restoration and are generally not used in dogs and cats.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Pramoxine, Topical 
(pra-moks-een)
Indications/Actions
Pramoxine is a topical anesthetic that is often combined with other topical medications to temporarily reduce pain and itching. 
Pramoxine affects peripheral nerves and has been shown to antagonize histamine-mediated pruritus; however, the mechanism of action 
is unknown. Pramoxine is not structurally related to procaine-type anesthetics. Peak local anesthetic effects occur within 3 to 5 minutes of 
application.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Pramoxine sprays are typically labeled for daily use as needed. Shampoos are typically labeled for use up to 2 to 3 times weekly and may be 
used as often as once daily. Allow shampoo to remain in contact with the skin for at least 5 to 10 minutes before rinsing well. Mousse products 
are labeled for use every 3 days and should be applied to dry hair, massaged in, and left to air dry. Rinses may be applied daily to once weekly, 
separately or after baths. Ointment is labeled for use every other day. Labeled doses may differ based on active ingredient combinations; refer 
to specific product labels for detailed use instructions.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Avoid contact with eyes; pramoxine is too irritating for ophthalmic use. Wear gloves when applying or wash hands after application. Adverse 
effects are uncommon; however, localized dermatitis is possible. Discontinue use if redness, irritation, swelling, or pain occurs or increases 
with use. 
Pramoxine shows an antagonizing impact on histamine-mediated pruritus. Therefore, at least a 2-week withdrawal period before intra -
dermal testing is recommended.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Pramoxine HCl 1% (spray) Labeled for dogs and cats; some 
products also labeled for horses
OTC; 8 oz, 12 oz Comfort; Micro-Pearls Advantage 
 Dermal-Soothe®; Pramox-1®; Relief®
Pramoxine HCl 0.5%,  
hydrocortisone 1% (spray)
Labeled for dogs and cats; some 
products labeled for horses
OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz Dermabliss®
Pramoxine HCl 1%,  
hydrocortisone 1% (spray) 
Labeled for dogs and cats; some 
products also labeled for horses
OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz Comfort HC; EquiShield® IR; Pramoxine 
HC; Suffusion® HC; VetraSeb® HC
Pramoxine HCl 1%, 
 phytosphingosine salicyloyl 0.05% 
(spray) 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz VetraSeb® P; Suffusion® P +PS
Pramoxine HCl 1%,  
diphenhydramine HCl 1% (spray) 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz Benasoothe®

===== PDF_PAGE_1453 =====
1426    Zinc Gluconate (Neutralized), Topical
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Pramoxine HCl 1% (shampoo) Labeled for dogs and cats; some 
products also labeled for horses
OTC; 8 oz, 12 oz,  
16 oz, 1 gallon 
BioCalm®; CeraSoothe®; Comfort  Shampoo; 
Dermabliss®; Micro-Pearls Advantage 
Dermal-Soothe®; Pramox-1®; Relief®; 
 Suffusion®P; VetraSeb® CeraDerm® P
Pramoxine HCl 1%, 
 diphenhydramine HCl 1%  (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 12 oz Benasoothe®
Pramoxine HCl 1%,  hydrocortisone 
1% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 12 oz EquiShield® IR
Pramoxine HCl 1%,  phytosphingosine 
salicyloyl 0.05% (shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs and cats; some 
products also labeled for horses
OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz Phyto P; Suffusion® P +PS; VetraSeb®P
Pramoxine HCl 1% (rinse) Labeled for dogs and cats; some 
products also labeled for horses
OTC; 12 oz, 16 oz,  
1 gallon
Comfort; Micro-Pearls Advantage Der-
mal-Soothe®; Pramox
Pramoxine HCl 1%, 
 phytosphingosine salicyloyl 0.05% 
(rinse)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz Phyto P
Pramoxine HCl 1% (mousse) Labeled for dogs and cats; some 
products also labeled for horses
OTC; 6.8 oz CeraSoothe®; Suffusion®P; VetraSeb® Cera-
Derm® P;
Pramoxine HCl 1%, 
 phytosphingosine salicyloyl 0.05% 
(mousse) 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 6.8 oz Phyto P; Suffusion® P +PS; VetraSeb®P
Pramoxine HCl 1% (ointment) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 15 g Deter-X®
Human-Labeled Products
NOTE: Partial listing; there are many branded combination products available that also contain pramoxine. For more information on 
 human-labeled products, refer to a comprehensive human drug reference (eg, Facts and Comparisons) or contact a pharmacist.
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Pramoxine 1% (lotion) OTC; 7.5 oz, 8 oz Sarna Sensitive®, generic
Pramoxine 1% (spray) OTC; 2 oz Itch-X®; generic
Pramoxine 1% (gel) OTC; 35.4 g Itch-X®
Pramoxine HCl 1% (wipes) OTC; 30 count generic
Zinc Gluconate (Neutralized), Topical
For otic use, see Cleaning/Drying Otic Agents.
Indications/Actions
Zinc gluconate can be used as a sole agent for mild pruritus or as an adjunct treatment for moderate to severe pruritic conditions, mild 
bacterial infections, or dry skin. It can also be used for minor skin irritations, such as insect bite reactions, acute moist dermatitis, acral lick 
dermatitis, fold dermatitis (intertrigo), feline acne, and postsurgical wounds.
The exact mechanism of action of topical zinc is unknown. Zinc plays a role in extracellular matrix remodeling, wound healing, connec-
tive tissue repair, inflammation, and cell proliferation. Zinc also has antiseptic and astringent properties.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Zinc gluconate may be applied to affected areas as needed up to twice daily to relieve itching and soothe the skin. For veterinary products, 
refer to specific product label for details on use. Do not let animals lick or chew at affected areas for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Avoid contact with eyes and mucous membranes.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Zinc gluconate (spray) Labeled for dogs, cats, horses, and 
some exotic pets
OTC; 2 oz, 4 oz Maxi/Guard® Zn7 Derm
Zinc gluconate (gel) Labeled for dogs, cats, horses, and 
some exotic pets
OTC; 1 oz, 2 oz Maxi/Guard® Zn7 Derm
Human-Labeled Products
There are a variety of human-labeled OTC zinc gluconate products, some in combination with other active ingredients.

===== PDF_PAGE_1454 =====
Bacitracin, Topical   1427
Antimicrobial Agents, Topical
Antibacterial Agents, Topical
See also: 
Sulfur, Precipitated, Topical (Keratolytic Agents)
Bacitracin, Topical
(bass-ih-trase-in)
Antibiotic
For ophthalmic use, see Triple Antibiotic Ophthalmic. 
Indications/Actions
Bacitracin is used topically to treat and prevent infection after dermal lacerations, scrapes, minor burns, and surgical procedures. Bacitracin 
acts by inhibiting cell wall synthesis of susceptible bacteria by preventing the formation of peptidoglycan chains. It is either bactericidal or 
bacteriostatic, depending on drug concentration and bacterial susceptibility. Bacitracin is primarily active against gram-positive bacteria, but 
Staphylococcus spp are becoming increasingly resistant; therefore, bacitracin ideally should be used only after confirmation of bacterial skin 
infections in dogs and cats. Bacitracin activity is not impaired by blood, pus, necrotic tissue, or large inocula. 
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Bacitracin may be applied up to 3 times daily and be covered by a suitable dressing. Administration of bacitracin is usually not recommended 
to continue for more than 1 week.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Bacitracin topical ointment should not be used in or around the eyes, for the treatment of ulcerated lesions, chronic canine dermatoses, or in 
patients that are known to be hypersensitive to it. There have been reports of cats developing fatal anaphylactic reactions after administration 
of triple-antibiotic ophthalmic ointment containing bacitracin. 1 Bacitracin is also well documented as causing allergic contact dermatitis 
after topical administration in humans with the potential for anaphylaxis. 2 Deep puncture wounds, animal bites, or deep cutaneous infec -
tions may require systemic antibiotic therapy. Although topical administration generally results in negligible systemic levels, if bacitracin is 
used over large areas of the body or on serious burns or puncture wounds, measurable absorption and potential toxicity may occur. Do not 
let animal lick or chew at affected areas for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application. Pet owners should wash their hands after application.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
None
Human-Labeled Products
Bacitracin ointment is available alone as 500 units/g in various tube sizes. There are many OTC human products available with various 
combinations of antibiotics. Some products may also contain pramoxine hydrochloride for soothing and pain relief.
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Bacitracin zinc 500 units/g (ointment)
Other ingredients (depending on the manufacturer):  
white petrolatum, mineral oil
OTC; 14 g, 14.2 g, 28 g, 28.4 g, 
and 120 g tubes; 454 g jar
 generic
Bacitracin zinc 500 units/g, polymyxin B sulfate  
10,000 units/g (ointment)
OTC; 28.3g tube Polysporin®
Bacitracin zinc 400 units/g, neomycin 3.5 mg/g,  
polymyxin B sulfate 5000 units/g (ointment)
OTC; 14.2g, 28.3g tube Neosporin®; generic
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Benzoyl Peroxide, Topical 
(ben-zoyl per-oks-ide)
Antibacterial
Indications/Actions
Benzoyl peroxide products are available as gels, shampoos, or cream rinses for topical use. Shampoos are generally used for oily dermatoses 
(eg, seborrhea oleosa), superficial and deep pyodermas, and furunculosis. Benzoyl peroxide shampoos can also be used as adjunctive therapy 
for generalized demodicosis and schnauzer comedo syndrome. Gels may be useful for treating localized superficial and deep pyodermas, 
chin acne, fold pyodermas, and localized lesions caused by Demodex spp.
Benzoyl peroxide is an antibacterial agent with comedolytic (“follicular flushing”), keratolytic, 1 and antiseborrheic actions. It also has 
some mild antipruritic activity and wound healing effects. Benzoyl peroxide is lipophilic and penetrates into the stratum corneum, where it 

===== PDF_PAGE_1455 =====
1428    Clindamycin, Topical
is converted to benzoic acid. The antibacterial activity of benzoyl peroxide is due to free radical formation that oxidizes bacterial proteins.2
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Gels are commonly administered once to twice daily; shampoos may be used anywhere from once daily to once weekly. Shampoos should 
remain in contact with the skin for 5 to 10 minutes before rinsing well. For veterinary products, refer to the product label for details on use.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Avoid contact with the eyes or mucous membranes. Benzoyl peroxide will bleach colored fabrics, jewelry, clothing, or carpets and might 
bleach the animal’s haircoat. Owners should be advised to keep treated animals away from fabrics during treatment. Do not let the animal 
lick or chew at treated areas for a few minutes after application.
In some animals, benzoyl peroxide can be drying or irritating. Adverse effects can include erythema, pruritus, or pain at the treated site, 
particularly when higher concentrations (greater than 5%) are used. Reducing the frequency of use, applying emollients after bathing, or 
using shampoos with moisturizing microvesicles may alleviate or prevent these effects. Benzoyl peroxide causes photosensitivity in humans.3 
Limit sun exposure for dogs with light or thin coats. NOTE: Benzoyl peroxide shampoos do not lather well.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
CREAM RINSE
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Benzoyl peroxide 2.5% Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 12 oz generic
GEL
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Benzoyl peroxide 5%
Other ingredients: propylene glycol, docusate sodium, DMDM hydantoin
Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC; 30 g bottle Micro BP
SHAMPOOS
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Benzoyl peroxide 2.5%
Other ingredients: Novasome® 
microvesicles
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon Micro-Pearls Advantage Benzoyl-Plus®
Benzoyl peroxide 2.5% Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon generic
Benzoyl peroxide 2.5%
Other ingredients: glycolic acid 1%
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz GlycoBenz®
Benzoyl peroxide 2.5%, salicylic 
acid 1%, sulfur 1% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 12 oz Sulfur Benz® 
Benzoyl peroxide 2.5%, sulfur 2% Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 16 oz generic
Benzoyl peroxide 3% Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 16 oz, 1 gallon BPO-3®
Benzoyl peroxide 3%, salicylic acid 
2%, sulfur 2%
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz, 12 oz, and 16 oz Oxibenz-3®; Peroxiderm®; generic
 
Human-Labeled Products
There are many human products available that contain benzoyl peroxide (2.5% to 10%); however, with the possible exception of the 5% gel 
products, the veterinary formulations would be more suitable for dogs or cats. Benzoyl peroxide 5% gel can be labeled as either Rx or OTC, 
depending on the product, and are available as generics or with the following trade names: Benzac®, Desquam-X®, or PanOxyl®.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Clindamycin, Topical
(klin-da-mye-sin) Cleocin®, ClinzGard®
 For systemic use, see Clindamycin.
Indications/Actions
Topical clindamycin may be used for treating feline acne or other localized skin infections caused by bacteria susceptible to it. It has been 
recommended by some veterinary dermatologists that topical clindamycin only be used when other topical antibiotics, such as gentamicin, 

===== PDF_PAGE_1456 =====
Gentamicin, Topical   1429
have failed. Ideally, treatment should be based on culture and susceptibility results. Clindamycin is a lincosamide antibiotic and inhibits bac-
terial protein synthesis by binding to the 50S ribosomal subunit. Its primary activity is against anaerobic and gram-positive aerobic bacteria. 
For more information on clindamycin pharmacology, see Clindamycin.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
When used for feline acne, topical clindamycin is generally applied in a thin film once to twice daily. ClinzGard® is used as a single dose ap-
plication in bite and puncture wounds, surgical incisions, and anal sacs after cleaning and debridement (when applicable).
Precautions/Adverse Effects
In patients with a history of hypersensitivity to clindamycin or lincomycin, topical clindamycin should not be used. Avoid contact with eyes. 
Clients should wash their hands after application or wear gloves when applying. Contact reactions (pain, burning, erythema, itching, drying, 
peeling) are possible. Clindamycin lotions and gels may cause less burning than topical solutions or foams. Because clindamycin can be ab-
sorbed through the skin, systemic adverse effects are possible. Although clindamycin-related diarrhea and colitis are rare in animals, severe 
diarrhea, bloody diarrhea, and severe colitis have been reported in humans with topical use.
Veterinary-Labeled Products 
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Clindamycin hydrochloride  
1% (gel)
Labeled for 
dogs and cats
Rx; sterile 1 or 2 mL single-dose 
syringes (box with 4 units)
ClinzGard®
Indicated for anal sac disease, tissue abscesses, bites, 
puncture wounds, and surgical incisions. Single-dose 
with a sustained release over 7 to 10 days. Must be 
applied to clean and debrided (if necessary) surfaces
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Clindamycin phosphate 1% (lotion) Rx; 60 mL Clindamax®; Cleocin T®; generic
Clindamycin phosphate 1% (gel) Rx; 30 g, 60 g, 40 mL, 
and 75 mL
Clindagel®; Clindamax®; Cleocin T®; generic
Clindamycin phosphate 1% (solution) Rx; 30 mL, 60 mL Cleocin T®; generic
Clindamycin phosphate 1% (aerosol foam) Other in-
gredients: cetyl alcohol, ethanol 58%, stearyl alcohol, 
 propylene glycol
Rx; 50 g, 100 g Evoclin®
Dispense into cap or onto a cool surface, then use 
fingertips to apply small amounts. Dispensing directly 
onto hands or affected area(s) will cause the foam to 
melt on contact. If the foam seems runny or warm, 
run canister under cold water.
Clindamycin phosphate 1% (pledgets) Other ingre-
dients: isopropyl alcohol, propylene glycol
Rx; 60 per box/jar Cleocin T®; Clindacin®; Clindacin®-P; Clindets®; generic 
Gentamicin, Topical
(jen-ta-mye-sin)
For systemic use, see Gentamicin.
For otic use, see Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic.
Indications/Actions
Topical gentamicin can be useful for treating both primary and secondary superficial bacterial skin infections caused by susceptible bacte-
ria. Some products indicate prophylactic use after lacerations, abrasions, or after minor surgery; however, dermatologists recommend using 
topical gentamicin only to treat confirmed bacterial skin infections, as resistance may occur. Therefore, the use of gentamicin solely for the 
treatment of yeast and/or inflammation without evidence of bacterial infection should also be avoided. In small animal medicine, topical 
gentamicin is frequently used in combination with a corticosteroid (typically betamethasone or mometasone) to treat superficial lesions, 
including “hot spots” (acute moist dermatitis and pruritic lesions).
Some products containing betamethasone or mometasone and clotrimazole are labeled for otic use but can also be used extra-label for 
bacterial and yeast skin infections that are sensitive to gentamicin and clotrimazole when an anti-inflammatory effect is also desired. For-
mulations containing a corticosteroid are best suited for focal (eg, pedal) or multifocal lesions for relatively short durations (ie, less than 2 
months). Initially, topical gentamicin/corticosteroid products are used 1 to 4 times daily until control is achieved, and then the frequency is 
tapered. Sole ingredient gentamicin sulfate topical forms are available with human labeling.
Gentamicin is an aminoglycoside antibiotic. It binds to the bacterial 30S ribosomal unit and inhibits protein synthesis. It has minimal 
activity against Streptococcus spp, variable activity against Staphylococcus spp, and good activity against gram-negative bacteria, including 

===== PDF_PAGE_1457 =====
1430    Honey, Topical
Klebsiella spp, Escherichia coli, and some strains of Pseudomonas spp. Gentamicin-resistant strains of Pseudomonas spp are an ongoing 
issue. 
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Topical gentamicin creams, ointments, or suspensions are generally applied to affected areas up to 4 times daily. Topical gentamicin/corti-
costeroid sprays are labeled for use 1 to 4 times daily for up to 7 days. Creams are typically used for infections associated with greasy skin, 
whereas ointments are typically used for infections associated with dry skin.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Topical gentamicin may be systemically absorbed if it is used on ulcerated, burned, or denuded skin. Creams are more likely to be absorbed 
than are ointments; however, systemic toxicity is unlikely to occur unless gentamicin is applied to a significant percentage of body surface 
area or is used for prolonged times. Do not let the animal lick or chew at treated areas for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application.
Products that contain corticosteroids can cause HPA axis suppression with long-term or frequent use, cutaneous atrophy that can be asso-
ciated with skin fragility, superficial follicular cysts (milia), reduced or lack of hair regrowth, and comedones. Risk can be reduced by only 
treating for as long as necessary on the smallest area possible. Mometasone is considered a “soft steroid” , delivering its potent anti-inflam-
matory effect close to its site of action while reducing the degree of systemic exposure and thus limiting the associated systemic and local 
adverse effects. Nevertheless, care should be taken to avoid excessive or prolonged use. Residual activity may affect intradermal or serum 
allergy tests, and it has been suggested to discontinue use of corticosteroid-containing products 2 weeks before allergy testing.1
Avoid contact with eyes. Clients should wash their hands after application or wear gloves when applying.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Refer to the individual product labeling for specific dosing recommendations and inactive ingredients.
NOTE: There are no topical gentamicin-only labeled veterinary products in the United States.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Gentamicin 3 mg/g, clotrimazole  
10 mg/g, mometasone 1 mg/g (sus-
pension) 
Approved for otic use in 
dogs
Rx; 7.5 g, 15 g, 30 g, and 215 
g tubes
Mometamax®; Mometavet®
Extra-label when used topically in 
dogs and cats
Gentamicin 3 mg/mL, 
 betamethasone 1 mg/mL (solution)
Approved for otic use in 
dogs and cats
Rx; 7.5 mL, 15 mL, 240 mL Vet Beta-gen®
Extra-label when used topically
Gentamicin 0.57 mg/mL,
betamethasone 0.284 mg/mL (spray)
Approved for use in dogs Rx; 15 g, 30 g, 60 mL, 72 mL, 
120 mL, and 240 mL
Betagen®; Gentacalm®; GentaSoothe®; 
GentaSpray®; GentaVed®; Gentocin® 
Gentamicin 3 mg/g, clotrimazole 
10 mg/g, betamethasone 1 mg/g 
(ointment) 
Approved for otic use in 
dogs 
Rx; 7.5 g, 10 g, 15 g, 20 g, 25 
g, 30 g, and 210 g bottles or 
tubes
MalOtic®; Otomax®; Tri-Otic®; Vetro-
max®
Extra-label when used topically in 
dogs and cats
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Gentamicin 0.1% (cream and ointment) Rx; 15g, 30 g tubes generic
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
 
Honey, Topical
Topical Antibacterial Agent HoneyCure®, Medihoney®
Indications/Actions
Honey is a natural product that is generally made from flower nectar by honey bees. Honey is composed of over 200 biologically active com-
pounds, including sugars, proteins, vitamins, minerals, phenols, and plant- and bee-derived enzymes. Medical-grade honey is honey that 
has been filtered to a higher level than food-grade honey and has been sterilized to kill, remove, or inactivate bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and 
spores. Medical-grade Manuka honey is commonly used for medicinal purposes and is produced by honey bees foraging only from flowers 
of the Manuka tree (Leptospermum scoparium) from Australia and New Zealand. Other monofloral (eg, honeydew, Scottish Heather) or re-
gionally derived (eg, Saudi, Italian, Portugese) honeys have also been studied for potential medicinal purposes. Medical-grade honey can be 
used as an alternative or adjunctive therapy for many dermatologic conditions (eg, traumatic wounds, burn wounds) in animals.
Honey is considered to be an effective broad-spectrum topical antibacterial agent, and unlike traditional antibiotics, resistance to its killing 

===== PDF_PAGE_1458 =====
Honey, Topical   1431
effects has not been reported. 1 Honey’s antimicrobial properties have been attributed to its osmotic action and low pH (3.4 to 6.1) as well 
as to the presence of hydrogen peroxide. Additionally, Manuka honey also has nonperoxide bacteriostatic properties due to the presence 
of methylglyoxal (MGO), which may inhibit bacterial protein synthesis. 1–3 In vitro studies have shown honey to have potent antimicrobial 
effects against important skin microbes, including Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus pseudintermedius, Acinetobacter baumannii, and 
Escherichia coli, in addition to antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria such as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa.3–8 It has also been demonstrated to be effective against fungal organisms such as Malassezia pachydermatis and Candida 
albicans and viruses.7,9 
Suggested Dosages/Uses
NOTE: Ensure that enough honey is in full contact with the wound bed and that honey dressings extend to cover any areas of inflammation 
surrounding the wound. If a nonadherent dressing is used between the honey dressing and the wound bed, it must be sufficiently porous to 
allow the honey to diffuse through.
Honey gels, ointments, or creams: Clean and dry wound. Apply product directly to the affected skin, beyond wound edges, as a thin layer once 
daily or more often according to the severity of the treated wounds or lesions. Cover with bandage if needed. 
Honey dressings: Commercially available honey-impregnated dressings facilitate the application of honey to wounds, especially those that 
need to be maintained in place or protected longer. Alternatively, honey dressings may be prepared in the clinic by applying medical-grade 
honey to a clean, dry dressing (eg, sterile gauze pad, adhesive bandage); apply the dressing to the skin, then apply a suitable secondary 
dressing, such as a semi-occlusive dressing, to prevent leakage of honey. Replace the dressing when drainage from the wound saturates the 
dressing. Change the dressings frequently enough to prevent the honey from being washed away or excessively diluted by wound exudate. 
The frequency of dressing change will vary but the typical interval is every 2 to 3 days. As the wound heals, the dressing changes will likely 
be less frequent. When using honey to debride hard eschar, softening the eschar by soaking with saline will allow better penetration of the 
honey. Owners may be instructed on how to replace the dressings so that it can be done at home. 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Honey is safe when applied to healthy skin and wounds. Although it is safe if ingested, if applying honey without a bandage, do not let the 
animal lick or chew affected areas for at least 20 to 30 minutes to prevent removing the honey from the treated area(s). An Elizabethan collar 
may be helpful. Do not use honey to control heavy bleeding, in third-degree burns, and in patients with known sensitivity to honey. Honey 
may crystalize, making it difficult to use. If crystalized, gently warm the honey, mix it well, and allow it to cool before use. Honey applied 
directly to the skin (instead of the bandage) may be “messy” (eg, ooze or leak from or around application site).
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Many different brands of medical-grade honey or medical-grade Manuka honey exist. Listed below are representative examples of products 
available. Refer to specific product labels for further details. 
Active ingredients Label status/sizes Trade names; other information
Manuka honey OTC; labeled for use on dogs; 1 oz and 2 oz tubes;  
2 oz, 4 oz, 16 oz, 32 oz jars
HoneyCure®
Manuka honey 10%, MicroSilver BG® 
0.1% (spray gel)
OTC; labeled for use on all animals; 8 oz bottle Silver Honey® Hot Spot and Wound Repair; 
Silver Honey® Rapid Wound Repair 
Manuka honey 11%, MicroSilver BG® 
0.2% (ointment)
OTC; labeled for use on all animals; 2 oz tube Silver Honey® Hot Spot and Wound Repair; 
Silver Honey® Rapid Wound Repair
Manuka honey 40% (gel) OTC; labeled for use on large and small animals; 
1.75 oz tube
L-Mesitran®
Untreated raw honey (cream) OTC; labeled for use on horses; 190 mL jar HoneyHeel®
Human-Labeled Products
Many different brands of medical-grade honey or medical-grade Manuka honey exist. Listed below are representative examples of products 
available. Refer to specific product label for further details.
Active ingredients Label status/sizes Trade names; other information
Manuka honey 30% (cream) OTC; 0.5 oz tube First Honey®
Manuka honey 63% impregnated hydrogel 
colloidal sheet (nonadhesive dressing)
OTC; 2.4" x 2.4" and 8" x 12" sheets of 1/pack, 10/
pack
MediHoney® HCS
Manuka honey 80% (gel) OTC; 1.5 oz tube MediHoney®
Manuka honey 100% (adhesive dressing) OTC; 1" x 3.25" adhesive dressings of 12/box,  
3" x 4" adhesive dressings of 6/box
FirstHoney®
Manuka honey 100% (gel) OTC; 0.5 oz and 1.5 tubes. Single-use, 10/box  
or individual tube
TheraHoney®

===== PDF_PAGE_1459 =====
1432    Mupirocin, Topical
Active ingredients Label status/sizes Trade names; other information
Manuka honey 100% (hydrocolloid paste) OTC; 0.5 oz, 1.5 oz, and 3.5 oz tubes. 1/pack,  
4/pack, 10/pack, 12/pack
MediHoney®
Manuka honey 100% (ointment) OTC; 0.5 oz tube First Honey®
Manuka honey 100% (impregnated in 
 calcium alginate pads)
OTC; single-use sheets: 2" x 2", 4" x 5",  
and ¾" x 12" sheets of 1/pack, 5/pack, 10/pack, 
and 100/case
MediHoney® Calcium Alginate Dressing
Calcium alginate provides wound fluid 
absorption capabilities.
Manuka honey 100% (impregnated in 
sheets [nonadhesive dressing])
OTC; single-use sheets; can be cut to fit within 
the wound edges. 2" x 2", 4" x 5" sheets of 10/box; 
rope: 1" x 12"; 4" x 4" flexible foams of 10/box
TheraHoney®; TheraHoney® HD; 
TheraHoney® Foam Flex
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Mupirocin, Topical
Pseudomonic Acid A 
(myoo-pye-roe-sin) 
Indications/Actions
Mupirocin is FDA-approved for the treatment of bacterial skin infections in dogs caused by susceptible strains of Staphylococcus aureus 
or Staphylococcus pseudintermedius, including beta-lactamase producing and methicillin-resistant strains . Mupirocin can be used to treat 
superficial pyoderma, fold pyoderma, interdigital cysts, draining tracts, acne, and pressure point pyodermas. It may also be used in other 
species for conditions such as feline acne or equine pyoderma. 
Mupirocin also has activity against other gram-positive pathogens, including strains of Corynebacterium spp, Clostridium spp, Proteus 
spp, and Actinomyces spp., Although it has activity against some gram-negative bacteria, it is not used clinically for gram-negative infections. 
Pseudomonas spp is particularly resistant to mupirocin. Mupirocin has anecdotally been reported to have some effect against Malassezia spp 
in dogs and cats. 
Mupirocin is an antibiotic isolated from the bacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens. It is unique in that it belongs to the monocarboxylic acid 
class and is structurally related to other commercially available antibiotics. Pseudomonic acid A represents 90% to 95% of the mixture and is 
the main compound of mupirocin. It acts by inhibiting bacterial protein synthesis by binding and inhibiting bacterial isoleucyl transfer-RNA 
synthetase. It is bacteriostatic at low concentrations or bactericidal at high concentrations. While bacterial resistance is rare in animals, resis-
tant strains of Staphylococcus spp have been identified. Resistance transference is thought to be plasmid-mediated and thought to occur more 
frequently when mupirocin is used on large areas of the skin for prolonged durations. Therefore, mupirocin may be best suited for short-term 
treatment on small, localized areas. Cross-resistance with other antimicrobials has not been identified. Because this antibiotic is a salient 
treatment used in humans with resistant infections, its use should be limited to select or resistant cases in veterinary patients.
Mupirocin is not significantly absorbed through the skin into the systemic circulation but does penetrate well into granulomatous and 
deep pyoderma lesions. It is not suitable for application to burns. 
Suggested Dosages/Uses
After cleansing the lesion, mupirocin should be applied to completely cover the affected area. It is labeled for twice daily application on dogs. 
It requires 10 minutes of contact time to be active. The maximum duration of treatment is 30 days.1  
In cats with chin acne, once- to twice-daily applications have been shown to be effective for treating secondary infections.2
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Mupirocin is contraindicated in patients with a history of hypersensitive reactions to it or other ointments containing polyethylene glycol. 
Use veterinary labeled products with caution on extensive deep lesions due to risk for nephrotoxicity from absorption of large quantities of 
polyethylene glycol.1 Do not let animals lick or chew treated areas for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application. Avoid contact with eyes; not 
for ophthalmic use.
Mupirocin is typically well tolerated. Contact reactions such as pain, erythema, and itching are possible. Overgrowth of non-susceptible 
organisms (superinfection) is also possible with prolonged use. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Mupirocin 2% (ointment) Labeled for use on dogs Rx; 15 g, 22 g Muricin®; generic
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Mupirocin 2% (ointment) Rx; 1 g, 15 g, 22 g, and 30 g Bactroban®; Centany®; generic
Mupirocin 2% (cream) Rx; 15 g, 30 g Bactroban®; generic
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 

===== PDF_PAGE_1460 =====
Nitrofurazone, Topical   1433
 
Nitrofurazone, Topical
(nye-troe-fur-ah-zone) Furazone®
Indications/Actions
Nitrofurazone is FDA-approved for prevention or treatment of surface bacterial infections of wounds, burns, and cutaneous ulcers in dogs 
and horses; some products are also approved for cats. 1 It is a synthetic nitrofuran with a broad-antibacterial spectrum. Nitrofurazone is 
bactericidal against many bacteria involved in surface infections, including gram-positive (eg, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus spp) and 
gram-negative (eg, Escherichia coli) bacteria; however, evidence supporting clinical efficacy is unavailable. Nitrofurazone has also anecdotally 
been used for the adjunctive treatment of myiasis. 
The mechanism of action of nitrofurazone is thought to be associated with inhibiting bacterial enzymes that primarily degrade glucose 
and pyruvate.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Nitrofurazone ointment should be applied directly to the affected area with a spatula or placed on gauze that is then applied to the lesion. 1 
Dressing may be changed several times a day or left in place for longer periods of time, but the ointment should remain in contact with the 
lesion for at least 24 hours. Nitrofurazone powder should be applied to the affected areas daily to several times per day. 2 Refer to specific 
product labels for details on use.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Nitrofurazone has been shown to cause mammary tumors when fed in high doses to rats and ovarian tumors in mice. Federal law prohibits 
the use of nitrofurazone products in or on food animals, including horses intended to be used for food . Wear gloves and wash hands 
after applying.
Ointments may contain polyethylene glycols. If used on large areas of denuded skin, significant amounts of polyethylene glycol could be 
absorbed, which can cause nephrotoxicity.3 Avoid contact with eyes and mucous membranes. Do not allow animals to lick or chew treated 
areas for at least 30 minutes. Avoid exposing products to sunlight, strong fluorescent lighting, excessive heat, or alkaline materials.
Topical nitrofurazone is typically well tolerated. Hypersensitivity reactions and skin reactions, including pain, erythema, and itching, are 
possible but uncommon. Discontinue use of this product if redness, irritation, or swelling persists or increases. Overgrowth of nonsuscepti-
ble organisms (superinfection) is also possible with the prolonged use of nitrofurazone.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; 
size(s) Trade names/additional information
Nitrofurazone 0.2% (ointment) Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 1 lb jars Fura-Septin®; NFZ® Wound Dressing; generic
Nitrofurazone 0.2% (ointment) Labeled for horses OTC; 1 lb jars Fura-Zone® 
Nitrofurazone 0.2% (powder) Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 45 g NFZ® Puffer; generic
Shake or rotate to loosen powder. Restricted drug 
in California
Human-Labeled Products
None. Nitrofurazone products are no longer available for humans in the United States.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Silver Sulfadiazine, Topical 
(sil-ver sul-fa-dye-ah-zeen)
Indications/Actions
Silver sulfadiazine (SSD) is used in veterinary medicine to treat localized bacterial skin infections, particularly those caused by Pseudomonas 
spp. In humans, topical SSD is labeled for prophylaxis and treatment of second- and third-degree burns.
SSD has extensive antimicrobial activity. It is bactericidal against many gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria and is also effective 
against yeasts. SSD disrupts microbial cell membranes and cell walls; this differs from the antibacterial actions of silver nitrate or sodium 
sulfadiazine. It can enhance epithelization but can impair granulation.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
For burns, silver sulfadiazine (SSD) is applied once to twice daily at a thickness of ≈1/16th of an inch (1 to 2 mm). Dressings may be applied 
over the cream. For localized bacterial infections, once- to twice-daily application is recommended. Apply to affected area(s) and massage 
the cream into the skin.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Use with caution in patients that are hypersensitive to sulfonamides, as they may also react to silver sulfadiazine (SSD). Patients with signifi-
cant hepatic or renal dysfunction have increased risk for drug accumulation, particularly when used over large areas. Because SSD can impair 

===== PDF_PAGE_1461 =====
1434    Clotrimazole, Topical 
granulation, avoid use in non-granulated wounds. Avoid contact with eyes. Wear gloves or wash hands after applying. Do not let animals lick 
or chew at affected areas for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application.
Adverse effects of systemic sulfonamides are possible, such as blood dyscrasias and keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS). Use over large areas 
or use for extended durations can increase the risk for systemic adverse effects. Refer to Sulfa-/Trimethoprim for more information. In 
humans, transient leukopenia has been reported with SSD treatment. However, leukocyte normalization occurs even with continuation of 
therapy. Other uncommon adverse effects in humans include skin necrosis, erythema multiforme, skin discoloration, rashes, and interstitial 
nephritis.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
There are no topical SSD products labeled for veterinary patients. An otic preparation (Baytril® Otic) contains silver sulfadiazine (SSD). See 
Antibacterials, Otic for more information.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Silver sulfadiazine 1%, enrofloxacin 
0.5% (emulsion)
Labeled for otic use in dogs Rx; 15 mL, 30 mL Baytril®
Extra-label when used topically
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Silver sulfadiazine 1% (cream) Rx; 20 g, 25 g, 50 g, 85 g, 400 g, and 1000 g Silvadene®; SSD®; Thermazene®
Antifungal Agents, Topical
Clotrimazole, Topical 
(kloe-trye-ma-zole) Lotrimin®
For otic products containing clotrimazole, see Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic.
Indications/Actions
Topical clotrimazole has activity against dermatophytes and yeasts; it may be useful for localized lesions associated with Malassezia spp. 
There is limited information regarding its efficacy for the treatment of dermatophytosis in cats and dogs. Most veterinary clotrimazole 
products also contain gentamicin and a glucocorticoid and are labeled for otic use; these products may be used in an extra-label manner for 
bacterial and yeast skin infections with concurrent inflamed, pruritic skin. 
Intranasal instillation of clotrimazole via sinus trephination or direct frontal sinuscopy may also be used for the treatment of sinonasal 
aspergillosis in dogs, with or without systemic antifungal therapy.1–3 
Clotrimazole is an imidazole antifungal that inhibits the biosynthesis of ergosterol, a component of fungal cell membranes, leading to 
increased membrane permeability and probable disruption of membrane enzyme systems.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
If sprays are prescribed, twice-daily applications are usually recommended. Ointments are generally applied to affected areas up to 4 times 
daily. For veterinary products, refer to the product label for details on individual use.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Avoid contact with eyes and mucous membranes. Clients should wash their hands after application or wear gloves when applying. Skin irri-
tation is possible but unlikely to occur with products containing only clotrimazole. Avoid contact with eyes. Do not allow the animal to lick 
or chew at affected sites for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application.
Cribriform plate damage has historically been suggested as a contraindication for topical antifungal treatment for sinonasal aspergillosis; 
however, small retrospective reviews of dogs with cribriform plate lysis cases found no neurologic adverse effects following infusion of clo-
trimazole 1% into the frontal sinuses.4,5
Products containing clotrimazole in combination with a glucocorticoid (eg, betamethasone):
Several veterinary topical products list pregnancy as a contraindication. Systemic glucocorticoids can be teratogenic or induce parturition 
during the third trimester of pregnancy in animals. If considering use during pregnancy, weigh the respective risks with treating versus 
potential benefits. Clients should wash their hands after application or wear gloves when applying. Avoid contact with eyes. Do not allow 
the animal to lick or chew at affected sites for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application. Residual activity from glucocorticoids may affect 
intradermal or serum allergy tests; it has been suggested to stop use 2 weeks prior to allergy testing.
Use care when treating large areas or when using on smaller patients. Risks can be reduced by treating for only as long as necessary on as 
small an area as possible. When higher concentrations of glucocorticoids are used or with longer durations of therapy (ie, longer than 7 days), 
there is an increased risk for HPA axis suppression, systemic glucocorticoid effects (eg, polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia), skin changes (eg, 
atrophy, skin fragility, alopecia, localized pyoderma, comedones), and delayed wound healing. Vomiting and diarrhea have been reported 
with the use of products containing betamethasone. Local skin reactions (burning, itching, redness) are possible but unlikely to occur. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1462 =====
Enilconazole, Topical    1435
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Clotrimazole 1% (ointment) Other ingredients: 
bentonite, jojoba oil, magnesium oxide, peppermint 
oil, silver oxide, tea tree oil, white wax, zinc oxide
Not specified OTC, not FDA ap-
proved; 100 g
Aardora®
Clotrimazole 1% (solution) Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC, not FDA ap-
proved or Rx; 30 mL
ClotrimaTop®
Clotrimazole 1% (spray or dropper) Other ingre-
dients: propylene glycol, SD alcohol 40, benzoyl 
alcohol, chloroxylenol
Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC, not FDA ap-
proved; 1 oz dropper,  
2 oz spray
Clotrimazole Antifungal®
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Clotrimazole 1% (solution) OTC/Rx (status determined by labeling); depending 
on the product: 10 mL, 30 mL
generic
Clotrimazole 1% (cream) OTC/Rx (status determined by labeling); depending 
on the product: 10 mL, 30 mL
Lotrimin AF®; Desenex®
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
 
Enilconazole, Topical 
(ee-nil-kon-a-zole) Imaverol®
Indications/Actions
Although no dosage forms are currently commercially available for topical use in the United States, compounded enilconazole is used topi-
cally for treating dermatophytosis in small animals and horses. In other countries, a commercially available topical rinse is available for ca-
nine, equine, and bovine species. The use of topical enilconazole on cats with dermatophytosis is somewhat controversial as no products are 
labeled for feline use; however, there are reports of successful use of enilconazole as a sole therapy or in combination with oral itraconazole 
for cats with dermatophytosis.
Intranasal instillation of enilconazole after plaque debridement has also been shown useful in treating nasal aspergillosis in small animal 
species.1
A poultry environmental disinfectant product (Clinafarm EC®) is available in the United States and has been used extra-label to treat der-
matophytosis; however, as this product is regulated by the EPA, it is illegal to use it in a manner inconsistent with its labeling.
Enilconazole, like other azoles, inhibits the biosynthesis of ergosterol, an essential component of fungal cell membranes, leading to in -
creased membrane permeability and allowing leakage of intracellular components.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
The commercial product should be diluted by adding 1 part of concentrated solution to 50 parts warm water, which yields a 2 mg/mL emul-
sion. Remove crusts with a hard brush that has been soaked in the diluted emulsion. It is highly recommended that the animal be sprayed 
entirely at the first treatment to reach subclinical lesions as well. 
Dogs: Clip longhaired dogs prior to treatment, and wash with the diluted emulsion 4 times at 3 to 4 day intervals. 2 During application, the 
hair should be brushed thoroughly in the opposite direction of hair growth to make sure that the skin is thoroughly wet. Alternatively, dogs 
may be dipped in a bath of the diluted emulsion.3
Horses: The lesions and surrounding skin are to be washed with the diluted emulsion 4 times at 3 to 4 day intervals.2 
Cattle: Wash with diluted emulsion or apply with a sprayer or high-pressure cleaning unit 3 to 4 times at 3-day intervals.3
Dispose of all unused diluted solutions. Refer to the product label for details on use.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Avoid contact with eyes. Clients should wear gloves and eye protection when applying.
When enilconazole is used topically in cats, hypersalivation, vomiting, anorexia, weight loss, muscle weakness, and a slight increase in 
serum ALT levels have been reported.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Enilconazole 10% (concentrate) Labeled for dogs and hors-
es; also labeled for cattle in 
some countries
50 mL, 100 mL, 1 L Imaverol®; Austrazole®
Not available in the United States. Refer to 
specific product labels for withdrawal periods.

===== PDF_PAGE_1463 =====
1436    Ketoconazole, Topical 
Human-Labeled Products
None
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Ketoconazole, Topical 
(kee-toe-kah-na-zole) Nizoral®, KetoChlor®
For systemic use, see Ketoconazole.
For otic use, see Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic.
Indications/Actions
Topical ketoconazole has activity against dermatophytes and yeasts, and ketoconazole shampoos can be an effective treatment for Malassezia 
spp dermatitis and dermatophytosis; however, topical ketoconazole shampoos are generally ineffective or minimally effective when used 
alone for dermatophytosis. Patients with severe, generalized infections may require additional systemic therapy.
Ketoconazole, like other azoles, inhibits the biosynthesis of ergosterol, an essential component of fungal cell membranes, leading to in -
creased membrane permeability and allowing leakage of intracellular components.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Sprays and wipes should be applied 1 to 2 times daily. Shampoos and conditioners can be used daily to weekly. Shampoo should typically be 
left in contact with the skin for at least 10 minutes prior to rinsing; see specific product label for details. 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Avoid contact with eyes; skin irritation is possible. Clients should wash their hands after application or wear gloves when applying. Do not 
allow animals to chew or lick application site for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 2%, 
TrisEDTA (spray)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz Mal-A-Ket® Plus
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 2%, phy-
tosphingosine 0.02% (spray)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz Vetraseb® CK
Ketoconazole 0.3%, chloroxylenol 0.3% 
(spray) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz Pharmaseb®
Ketoconazole 0.15%, hydrocortisone 1%, 
acetic acid 1%, boric acid 2% (spray) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz MalAcetic® ULTRA
Ketoconazole 0.15%, hydrocortisone 1%, 
acetic acid 1%, boric acid 2% (shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz MalAcetic® ULTRA
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 2%, acetic 
acid 2% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz, 1 
gallon
Mal-A-Ket®
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 2% 
(shampoo)
Labeled for dogs and cats; some 
products also labeled for horses
OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz, 
and 1 gallon
KetoHex®; Ceraven CHX+KET; 
VetraSeb® CeraDerm® CK
Ketoconazole 1%, 
chloroxylenol 2% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz, 
and 1 gallon
Pharmaseb®
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 2.3% 
(shampoo) 
Labeled for dog and cats OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz KetoChlor®
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 2%, phy-
tosphingosine 0.05% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz Phyto CHX+KET®; Ketoseb +PS®
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 2%, gly-
colic acid 1% (shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz GlyChlorK®
Ketoconazole 17 mg, chlorhexidine 20 mg, 
phytosphingosine 0.4 mg (wipes)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 50 count jar Ketoseb +PS
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 2% 
(wipes)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 50 count jar KetoHex®; VetraSeb®; CeraDerm® 
CK
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 2%, acetic 
acid 2% (wipes)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 50 count jar Mal-A-Ket®
Ketoconazole 0.3%, chloroxylenol 0.3% 
(wipes)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 50 count Pharmaseb®

===== PDF_PAGE_1464 =====
Lime Sulfur, Topical    1437
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Ketoconazole 1%, chloroxylenol 2% 
(mousse) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 7 oz Pharmaseb®
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 2% 
(mousse)
Labeled for dogs and cats; some 
products also labeled for horses
OTC; 6.8 oz Ceraven CHX+KET; VetraSeb®; 
CeraDerm® CK
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 2%, phy-
tosphingosine 0.05% (mousse)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 6.8 oz Ketoseb+PS
Ketoconazole 0.1%, TrisEDTA (flush) Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 4 oz, 12 oz T8 Keto®
Ketoconazole 0.15%, chlorhexidine 0.15%, 
TrisEDTA (flush)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 12 oz Mal-A-Ket® Plus
Ketoconazole 0.3%, chloroxylenol 0.3% 
(flush) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz Pharmaseb®
Ketoconazole 0.15%, TrisEDTA (flush) Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 4 oz, 12 oz TrizUltra® + Keto
Ketoconazole 0.2%, chlorhexidine 0.2% 
(flush)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 4 oz KetoHex®
Ketoconazole 0.1%, phytosphingosine 
0.01% (flush)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 16 oz VetraSeb® CeraDerm® Tris
Ketoconazole 0.2%, chlorhexidine 0.2%, 
phytosphingosine 0.02% (flush)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 16 oz Ketoseb+PS®
Human-Labeled Products  
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Ketoconazole 1% (shampoo) OTC; 4 oz, 7 oz Nizoral A-D®
Ketoconazole 2% (shampoo) Rx; 4 oz Nizoral®; generic
Ketoconazole 2% (cream) Rx; 15 g, 30 g, 60 g Nizoral®; generic
Ketoconazole 2% (foam) Rx; 50 g, 100 g Extina®; Ketodan®; generic
Ketoconazole 2% (gel) Rx; 45 g  Xolegel®
Lime Sulfur, Topical 
(lyme sul-fur)
Indications/Actions
Lime sulfur is used as a generalized topical treatment for dermatophytosis. It is considered one of the most effective agents against Micros-
porum canis. In addition, it is efficacious for treatment of demodicosis in cats.1 Lime sulfur can also be useful as an adjunctive treatment of 
Malassezia spp dermatitis, cheyletiellosis, chiggers, sarcoptic and notoedric mange, fur mites, lice, canine demodicosis, and sarcoptic mange, 
in addition to chorioptic mange in horses.
Lime sulfur has antibacterial and antifungal properties secondary to the formation of pentathionic acid and hydrogen sulfide after appli-
cation. Lime sulfur may also have keratolytic, keratoplastic, antiparasitic, and antipruritic effects.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Concentrated dips should be shaken well prior to use and must be diluted. Typically, 4 oz of concentrate should be diluted in 1 gallon of 
water, mixed well, and carefully applied to affected areas. 2 For chronic or resistant cases, 8 oz of concentrate may be diluted per gallon of 
water. Treatment may be repeated every 5 to 7 days. See specific product label for detailed dilution and application instructions. Do not rinse 
or blow-dry animals after application. Do not allow animals to ingest lime sulfur; apply a protective collar until dry if necessary to prevent 
ingestion. 
When used for dermatophytosis, twice-weekly treatments have been recommended if tolerated.3 Continue treatment until 2 consecutive 
negative cultures at weekly intervals are obtained. 
For confirmed cases of feline surface demodicosis, applications are recommended every 5 to 7 days for a total of 6 treatments. For surface 
demodicosis treatment trials, 3 applications should be performed; if a significant improvement in clinical signs is noted, 3 more applications 
should be performed to complete treatment. If no significant improvement is seen after 3 applications, demodicosis should be ruled out and 
other diagnoses should be considered.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Use caution when handling lime sulfur as adverse effects may occur after accidental dermal exposure, oral ingestion, or inhalation. Wear 
gloves and wash hands after handling. Avoid contact with eyes and mucous membranes; safety glasses are recommended.2 Lime sulfur can 
stain porous surfaces such as concrete and porcelain and can permanently discolor jewelry. Lime sulfur should only be used in a well-venti-
lated area, or a respirator should be worn during application. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1465 =====
1438    Miconazole, Topical 
Lime sulfur is safe to use on pregnant and nursing animals and kittens/puppies over 2 to 3 weeks of age.
Lime sulfur may cause skin irritation or drying. Lime sulfur can temporarily stain light-colored fur and can rarely cause hair loss on the 
pinnae in cats. The odor of lime sulfur may persist on treated animals after application but is generally tolerable after drying. Oral ingestion 
can rarely cause nausea and oral ulcers, particularly in cats; an Elizabethan collar can help prevent ingestion from licking and grooming. 
Systemic toxicosis secondary to dermal exposure of lime sulfur has been reported after improper dilution of the concentrate. 4 Therefore, 
detailed dilution instructions are important for owners when recommending this therapy.  
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Lime sulfur 97.8% (dip) Labeled for dogs, puppies, kittens, and 
cats; some products also labeled for 
horses
OTC; 4 oz, 16 oz,  
1 gallon
LimePlus®; generic
Shake well and dilute before use.
Human-Labeled Products
None
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Miconazole, Topical 
(mye-kah-nah-zole)
For ophthalmic use, see Miconazole Ophthalmic
For otic use, see Antifungal Agents, Otic and Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic
Indications/Actions
Topical miconazole is used for the treatment of Malassezia spp dermatitis and infections caused by Microsporum canis, Microsporum gypse-
um, and Trichophyton mentagrophytes.1 Lotions, sprays, and creams are generally used for localized lesions; patients with severe, generalized 
infections may require systemic antifungal therapy. Topical miconazole products are typically only minimally effective for dermatophytosis 
when used as a single agent; adjunctive systemic treatment is commonly required.
Miconazole is an imidazole antifungal with activity against dermatophytes and yeast. Its actions are a result of altering the permeability 
of fungal cellular membranes and interfering with peroxisomal and mitochondrial enzymes, leading to intracellular necrosis. Miconazole 
products are fungicidal with repeated application. Miconazole has been shown to be active against a series of gram-positive bacteria and to 
help repair the skin barrier function and mitigate some inflammatory cell reactions.2
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Sprays, creams, lotions, or wipes should be applied 1 to 2 times daily. Shampoos and conditioners may be used daily to weekly. Typically, 
shampoo should be left in contact with the skin for at least 10 minutes prior to rinsing. For veterinary products, refer to the specific product 
label for details on use.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Avoid contact with eyes. Wash hands thoroughly after application to prevent the spread of fungal infections.1 Do not allow treated animals 
to lick or chew at affected areas for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application.
Skin irritation is uncommon but possible. Wipes and sprays that contain alcohol may be severely irritating to inflamed, eroded, or ulcer-
ated skin.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
NOTE: Miconazole nitrate is the salt generally used in pharmaceutical products. Some products express concentration as base, others ex -
press concentrations of the salt.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Miconazole 1% (spray) Labeled for dogs and 
cats
Rx; 60 mL, 120 
mL, 240 mL
MicaVed®; Micazole®; 
Priconazole®; Conzol®
Miconazole nitrate 2% (spray) Labeled for dogs, cats, 
and horses
OTC; 4 oz, 16 oz generic
Miconazole nitrate 2%, chlorhexidine 2% (spray) Labeled for dogs, cats, 
and horses
Rx; 8 oz Malaseb®
Miconazole nitrate 2%, chlorhexidine 2%, TrisEDTA 
(spray) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, 
and horses
OTC; 8 oz, 12 oz, 
32 oz
MiconaHex+Triz®
Miconazole nitrate 0.2%, chlorhexidine 0.2% (flush) Labeled for dogs, cats, 
and horses
Rx; 4 oz, 12 oz Malaseb®
Miconazole 0.1% (flush) Labeled for dogs and 
cats
OTC; 4 oz, 16 oz BioTris®

===== PDF_PAGE_1466 =====
Nystatin/Nystatin Combinations, Topical    1439
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Miconazole 1% (lotion) Labeled for dogs and 
cats
Rx; 30 mL, 60 mL Conzol®; Priconazole®; MicaVed®; 
Miconosol®; Micazole®
Miconazole nitrate 2%, chlorhexidine 2%, TrisEDTA 
(wipes) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, 
and horses
OTC; 50 count jar MiconaHex+Triz®
Miconazole nitrate 15.1 mg/mL, gentamicin sulfate 
1.5 mg/mL, hydrocortisone aceponate 1.11 mg/mL 
(suspension)
Labeled for otic use 
in dogs 
Rx; 10 mL Easotic®
Topical use is extra-label.
Miconazole nitrate 23 mg/mL, polymyxin B sulfate
0.5293 mg/mL, prednisolone acetate 5 mg/mL (suspen-
sion)
Labeled for otic use 
in dogs 
Rx; 15 mL, 30 mL Surolan®
Topical use is extra-label.
Miconazole nitrate 2%, chlorhexidine 2% (shampoo) Labeled for dogs, cats, 
and horses
Rx; 8 oz, 16 oz Malaseb®
Miconazole nitrate 2%, chlorhexidine 2%, TrisEDTA 
(shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, 
and horses
OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz, 
1 gallon
MiconaHex+Triz®
Miconazole nitrate 2%, chloroxylenol 1%, salicylic acid 
2% (shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, 
and horses
OTC; 8 oz, 12 oz, 
1 gallon
Sebozole®
Miconazole 2% (shampoo) Labeled for dogs and 
cats
OTC; 12 oz generic
Miconazole nitrate 2%, colloidal oatmeal 2% (sham-
poo)
Labeled for dogs, cats, 
puppies, and kittens
OTC; 12 oz, 1 
gallon
generic
Miconazole nitrate 2%,
chlorhexidine 2% (shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs and 
cats
OTC; 8 oz, 12 oz, 
16 oz, 1 gallon
BioHex®; Micoseb®
Miconazole nitrate 2%, chlorhexidine 2%, TrisEDTA 
(mousse) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, 
and horses
OTC; 7.1 oz MiconaHex+Triz®
Human-Labeled Products
In addition to the products listed below, there are 2% topical vaginal creams, vaginal suppositories, 2% powders, and spray powders avail-
able. Most human-labeled products are OTC.
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Miconazole 2% (ointment) OTC; depending on the product: 4 g, 30 g, 57 g, 
56.7 g, 113 g, and 142 g packages
generic
Miconazole 2% (aerosol spray or powder) OTC; 30 g, 43 g, 85 g, 90 g, 113 g, and 133 g cans generic
Miconazole 2% (cream) OTC; many sizes available generic
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Nystatin/Nystatin Combinations, Topical 
(nye-sta-tin)
For systemic use, see Nystatin.
Indications/Actions
Nystatin is typically used in combination with antibiotics and glucocorticoids in small animal medicine; it is generally not used as a single 
agent due to limited dosage forms and alternative antifungal agents. Combination products containing neomycin, thiostrepton, and triam-
cinolone are FDA-approved in dogs and cats for treatment of inflammatory dermatologic disorders, particularly associated with bacterial 
or Candida albicans infections.1 Use for topical yeast infections without a bacterial component should be avoided to prevent antibiotic 
 resistance. 
Nystatin is active against many yeasts and yeast-like fungi, such as Malassezia spp and Candida spp. Nystatin binds to sterols in fungal cell 
membranes, thereby increasing membrane permeability and allowing leakage of intracellular components. Nystatin does not have activity 
against bacteria and is ineffective against other fungi.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Although nystatin is rarely used as a single topical agent, human products can be used if needed. In humans, creams are preferred to oint -
ments in intertriginous areas; topical powders are used for moist lesions. 
After cleaning affected areas, nystatin combination products should be applied sparingly in a thin film. Frequency of application is based 
on severity of infection and may range from once daily to once weekly for mild infections and up to 2 to 3 times daily for severe infections.1 
Frequency can be decreased as infection improves. Products that contain triamcinolone are best suited for focal (eg, pedal) or multifocal 

===== PDF_PAGE_1467 =====
1440    Selenium Sulfide, Topical 
lesions that require relatively short treatment durations (eg, less than 2 months). 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Avoid empiric use of combination products or use in the absence of concurrent bacterial infection to help prevent bacterial resistance.  
Avoid contact with eyes. Wear gloves or wash hands after application. Do not let the animal lick or chew at the treated area(s) for at least 
20 to 30 minutes after application.
Topical nystatin is considered nontoxic and is generally well-tolerated, although hypersensitivity reactions are possible.2 Potential adverse 
effects reported in humans include burning, itching, rash, and eczema.3 The combination veterinary products are usually well-tolerated when 
used on the skin; however, neomycin can cause localized sensitivity, and glucocorticoids can potentially cause cutaneous atrophy or HPA-ax-
is suppression.1 At least a 2-week withdrawal period is recommended prior to intradermal or allergy serum testing for products containing 
corticosteroids, such as triamcinolone.4
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Nystatin 100,000 units/g, neomycin 
 sulfate 2.5 mg/g, thiostrepton 2500 
units/g, triamcinolone acetate 1 mg/g 
(cream) 
Labeled for dogs and cats Rx; 7.5 g, 15 g Animax®
Nystatin 100,000 units/g, neomycin sulfate 
2.5 mg/g, thiostrepton 2500 units/g, triam-
cinolone acetonide 1 mg/g (ointment)
Labeled for dogs and cats Rx; 7.5 mL, 15 mL, 30 mL, 
and 240 mL
Animax®; Quadritop®; Derma-Vet®; 
Dermalog®; Dermalone®; EnteDerm®
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Nystatin 100,000 units/g (powder) Rx; 15 g, 30 g, and 60 g Nyamyc®; Nystop®; generic
Nystatin 100,000 units/g (ointment) Rx; 15 g, 30 g generic
Nystatin 100,000 units/g (cream) Rx; 15 g, 30 g generic
Nystatin 100,000 units/g, triamcinolone acetate 1mg/g 
(ointment)
Rx; 15 g, 30 g, and 60 g generic
Nystatin 100,000 units/g, triamcinolone acetate 1 mg/g 
(cream)
Rx; 15 g, 30 g, and 60 g generic
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
 
Selenium Sulfide, Topical 
(si-leen-ee-um sul-fide)
Indications/Actions
Selenium sulfide may be useful in dogs for treating seborrheic disorders (mainly for seborrhea oleosa) and for the adjunctive treatment of 
Malassezia dermatitis, particularly in dogs exhibiting signs of waxy, greasy, or scaly (seborrheic) dermatitis. 
Selenium sulfide possesses antifungal and sporicidal activity, keratolytic, keratoplastic, and degreasing properties. It alters epidermal turn-
over in cells of the epidermis and follicular epithelium and interferes with hydrogen bond formation of keratin, thereby reducing corneocyte 
production. The antifungal mechanism of action of selenium sulfide is not well understood.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Selenium sulfide shampooing frequency is patient dependent. In general, medicated shampoos should remain in contact with the skin for 
10 minutes. Alternatively, allow 3 to 5 minutes of contact time, rinse thoroughly, and then repeat the procedure. Thoroughly rinse off the 
shampoo to prevent skin irritation and excessive drying.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Selenium sulfide products should not be used on cats. Avoid contact with eyes and mucous membranes. Selenium sulfide can damage or 
discolor jewelry. Clients should wear gloves when using these products.
Selenium sulfide can be irritating, especially to the scrotal area. It can also cause excessive drying and hair-coat staining or discoloration. 
Do not use these products on broken or inflamed skin. After discontinuation, rebound seborrhea can occur and can be more severe than 
pretreatment presentation. 
GI effects such as nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea may occur if selenium sulfide is ingested orally. Neurologic signs are possible if large 
quantities are ingested. In case of substantial oral ingestion, consultation with a 24-hour poison consultation center specializing in providing 
veterinary-specific information is recommended. For general information related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact infor-
mation for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
There are no veterinary labeled products containing selenium sulfide currently available in the United States; products may be available in 

===== PDF_PAGE_1468 =====
Terbinafine, Topical   1441
other countries.
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Selenium sulfide 1% (shampoo) OTC; 11 oz Selsun Blue®, generic
Selenium sulfide 2.25% (shampoo) Rx; 6 oz generic
Selenium sulfide 2.3% (shampoo) Rx; 6 oz generic
Selenium sulfide 2.5% (lotion) Rx; 4 oz generic
Selenium sulfide 2.25% (foam) Rx; 2.5 oz Tersi®
Marketing status uncertain 
Terbinafine, Topical
(ter-bin-a-feen) 
For systemic use, see Terbinafine.
For otic use, see Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic.
Indications/Actions
Terbinafine is an allylamine antifungal agent that may be useful for localized lesions associated with Malassezia infections. In an in vitro 
study, topical 1% terbinafine was shown to have good efficacy as adjuvant focal therapy against Microsporum canis with good residual  activity.1 
Terbinafine inhibits the biosynthesis of ergosterol by inhibiting the fungal squalene epoxidase enzyme. The resultant depletion of ergos-
terol within the fungal cell membrane and the intracellular accumulation of squalene are believed to be responsible for the fungicidal effect 
of terbinafine. It is fungicidal against dermatophytes but may only be fungistatic against yeast organisms.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Topical terbinafine may be applied to skin areas affected with Malassezia once to twice a day. Based on in vitro data, less frequent application 
(ie, once daily to every other day) may be sufficient for adjuvant therapy of M canis skin infections due to the demonstrated residual activity 
of terbinafine.1 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Avoid contact with eyes and mucous membranes. Wash hands after application. Do not allow animals to lick or chew at the treated area(s) 
for at least 30 minutes after application. 
Local irritation is possible, including burning, pruritis, or rash.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
None labeled for use on skin.
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Terbinafine hydrochloride 1% (cream) OTC; 12 g, 15 g, 24 g, 30 g, 42 g Lamisil AT®; generic
Terbinafine hydrochloride 1% (spray) OTC; 125 mL Lamisil AT®
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Antiseptic Agents, Topical
Acetic Acid/Boric Acid, Topical 
(ah-see-tik ass-id; bor-ik assi-id)
For otic products, refer to Antiseptic Agents, Otic
Indications/Actions
Acetic and boric acids are indicated for the topical treatment of skin infections caused by bacteria, including Staphylococcus spp,1 Pseudomonas 
spp,2,3 and yeast, such as Malassezia spp. They are also indicated for fold dermatitis, acute moist dermatitis, pododermatitis, and seborrhea oleosa. 
Acetic and boric acids are potent antibacterial and antifungal agents with a rapid killing effect. They also possess ceruminolytic, keratolyt-
ic, keratoplastic, and astringent properties. 
Some products also contain other antimicrobials, such as chlorhexidine and ketoconazole, or anti-inflammatory agents, such as hydro -
cortisone for anti-pruritic effects.
Suggested Uses/Dosages 
Sprays and wipes may be applied up to 2 to 3 times a day. Shampoos and conditioners can be used daily to weekly, during or after routine 

===== PDF_PAGE_1469 =====
1442    Chlorhexidine, Topical 
bathing. Leave shampoos in contact with the skin for at least 10 minutes prior to rinsing. Refer to the product label for specific instructions.
Acetic acid and boric acid topical products have concentrations ranging from 1% to 2% for each acid. One study found that acetic acid and 
boric acid concentrations as low as 0.5% have bactericidal effects against Staphylococcus pseudintermedius in vitro.1 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Skin redness and irritation may occur. Do not let the animal lick or chew at affected areas for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application. For products 
that also contain hydrocortisone, caution should be used to avoid excessive or frequent use due to its potential cutaneous and systemic adverse effects.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
SHAMPOOS
Acetic acid 2%, boric acid 2% Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 12 oz, 16 oz, and 1 gallon MalAcetic®
Ketoconazole 0.15%, hy-
drocortisone 1%, acetic acid 
1%, boric acid 2%
Other ingredients: ceramide 
complex
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 8 oz MalAcetic®ULTRA
Ketoconazole 1%, acetic 
acid 2%, chlorhexidine 2% 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 8 oz and 1 gallon Mal-A-Ket®
Ketoconazole 1%, acetic 
acid 2%, chlorhexidine 2% 
OTC; 12 oz HexaChlor-K®
SPRAYS
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Acetic acid 2%, boric acid 2% Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz MalAcetic®
Ketoconazole 0.15%, hydrocortisone 1%, 
acetic acid 1%, boric acid 2%
Other ingredients: ceramide complex
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz MalAcetic® ULTRA
Ketoconazole 1%
acetic acid 2%, chlorhexidine 2% 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz HexaChlor-K®
WIPES
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Acetic acid 2%, boric acid 2% Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 25 count, 100 count jar MalAcetic®
Ketoconazole 1%, acetic acid 
2%, chlorhexidine 2%
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 50 count jar HexaChlor-K®; Mal-A-Ket® 
Hydrocortisone 1%, acetic acid 
1%, boric acid 1%; other ingre-
dients: ceramide complex
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 25 count jar MalAcetic®HC
Human-Labeled Products
There are several OTC human products available containing acetic acid or boric acid (alone or containing other ingredients). For more 
information on human-labeled acetic acid or boric acid products, refer to a comprehensive human drug reference or contact a pharmacist.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Chlorhexidine, Topical 
(klor-heks-ih-deen) Nolvasan®
Indications/Actions
Chlorhexidine is a synthetic phenol-related bisbiguanide that exists as acetate, gluconate, and hydrochloride salts. It is a topical antiseptic 
that has activity against many bacteria and fungi. It appears to have greater efficacy for bacterial infections, particularly  Staphylococcus spp, 
than for yeast or  dermatophyte infections. Chlorhexidine prevents the outgrowth of bacterial spores but does not prevent germination and 
is not sporicidal. It can be bacteriostatic or bactericidal depending on concentration.1 Chlorhexidine is a membrane-active agent that acts by 
damaging bacterial cytoplasmic membranes. Antifungal activity can be obtained with chlorhexidine concentrations of 2% or higher.
Because chlorhexidine causes less drying and is usually less irritating than benzoyl peroxide, it is sometimes used in patients that cannot 
tolerate benzoyl peroxide. However, it does not have the keratolytic, comedolytic, or degreasing effects of benzoyl peroxide. Chlorhexidine 
possesses some residual effects and can remain active on the skin after rinsing.

===== PDF_PAGE_1470 =====
Chlorhexidine, Topical   1443
In one study comparing in vitro efficacy of shampoos, chlorhexidine was shown to be the most effective biocide against Pseudomonas 
spp, methicillin-susceptible and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus spp, and Malassezia spp.2 Another controlled clinical study showed that 
bathing twice weekly with a 4% chlorhexidine-based shampoo for 4 weeks was as effective as systemic therapy with amoxicillin/clavulanic 
acid for the treatment of canine superficial pyoderma associated with susceptible and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus pseudintermedius.  
Another study found chlorhexidine 2% solution with alcohol had similar efficacy as povidone-iodine 7.5% in reducing total skin bacteria 
load and preventing surgical site infections in dogs.3
Chlorhexidine products may also contain other ingredients, such as antifungals (eg, ketoconazole, miconazole, climbazole), which pro -
vide superior antifungal activity as compared with chlorhexidine alone, salicylic acid, phytosphingosine, and hydrocortisone.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
For wound irrigation or foot soaking, diluting the chlorhexidine solution with water to 0.05% to 0.1% is recommended. Sprays, mousses, and 
wipes/pads are typically applied 1 to 2 times daily. Shampoos and conditioners are typically used daily to weekly. Shampoos should be left in con-
tact with the skin for at least 10 minutes prior to rinsing. For veterinary products, refer to the product label for details and specific instructions.
A nosocomial outbreak of chlorhexidine-resistant Serratia marcescens has been linked to improper disinfectant procedures in one veter-
inary hospital.4
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Keep chlorhexidine products away from the eyes. Chlorhexidine is safely used on cats, although irritation and corneal ulcers have been re -
ported. Chlorhexidine may impair wound healing; it is not recommended for long-term use, particularly on granulating lesions.
Hypersensitivity and local skin irritant reactions are possible. Clients should wash their hands after application or wear gloves when ap-
plying. The likelihood of irritation increases with increased concentrations. Do not let the animal lick or chew treated areas for at least 20 to 
30 minutes after application. Advise clients that blue chlorhexidine solutions can stain furniture, carpets, and the animal.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Several teat dip and udder wash products, a lubricant, and oral rinses are also available. Several trade names are used for chlorhexidine prod-
ucts, including Nolvasan®, Chlorhexiderm®, Dermachlor®, Chlorasan®, Chloradine®, Privasan®, and Chlorhex®.
OINTMENTS
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Chlorhexidine 1% OTC; 7 oz, 16 oz Chlorhex®; Nolvasan® 
Chlorhexidine 2% Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 7 oz, 16 oz
Chlorhexidine 4% Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 1 lb Vetasan®
SPRAYS
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Chlorhexidine (various 
 concentrations) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; various sizes Some products contain aloe.
Chlorhexidine 4%, TrizEDTA Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz TrizChlor 4®
Hydrocortisone 1%,  chlorhexidine 
4%, TrizEDTA 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz TrizChlor 4HC®
Avoid excessive or prolonged use 
due to product’s steroid content.
Ketoconazole 1%,  chlorhexidine 
2%, TrizEDTA 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz Mal-A-Ket®Plus
Miconazole 2%, chlorhexidine 2%, 
TrizEDTA 
Other ingredients: ceramide 
complex
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz, and 32 oz MiconaHex®
Ketoconazole 1%,  chlorhexidine 
2%,  phytosphingosine 0.02% 
Other ingredients: aloe 
 barbadenis, lactic acid
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz VetraSeb CK
Chlorhexidine 3%, 
 phytosphingosine 0.05% 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 6.8 oz DOUXO®
Chlorhexidine 4% 
Other ingredients: isopropyl 
alcohol 4%
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz Chlorhex®

===== PDF_PAGE_1471 =====
1444    Chlorhexidine, Topical
SHAMPOOS
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Chlorhexidine 4% Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz, 12 oz, 16 oz, 1 
gallon
ChlorhexiDerm®; Chlorhex®; Max 
Chlorhexidine®
Chlorhexidine 4%, TrizEDTA Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz, 1 gallon TrizCHLOR®
Hydrocortisone 1%, chlorhexidine 
4%, TrizEDTA 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz TrizCHLOR®4HC
Avoid excessive or prolonged use 
due to its steroid content.
Chlorhexidine 4% 
Other ingredients: ceramide III, 
microsilver 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz, and 1 
gallon
Hexaderm®
Soap-free
Chlorhexidine 2% OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz, and 1 
gallon
Chlorhexidine 3%, ophytrium 
0.5% 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 200 mL, 500 mL DOUXO S3® PYO
Ketoconazole 1%,
chlorhexidine 2%,
phytosphingosine salicyloyl 0.05% 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 6.8 oz Vetraseb CK®
Ketoconazole 1%, hydrocortisone 
1%, chlorhexidine 2%
Other ingredients: vitamin-rich 
emollients
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 16 oz EquiShield®
Ketoconazole 1%, acetic acid 2%, 
chlorhexidine 2% 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz, 1 gallon Mal-A-Ket®
Miconazole 2%, chlorhexidine 2%, 
TrizEDTA 
Other ingredients: ceramide 
complex
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz, and 1 
gallon
MiconaHex®
Ketoconazole 1%,  chlorhexidine 
2% 
Other ingredients: gylcerin, iso-
propyl alcohol
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz, and 1 
gallon
KetoHex®
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 
2.3% 
Other ingredients: alkyl polygluco-
side  (polysaccharide); chitosanide; 
D-mannose, D- galactose, L-rham-
nose (monosaccharides); Spherulite® 
microcapsules
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz, and 1 
gallon
KetoChlor®
Miconazole nitrate 2%, 
 chlorhexidine 2% 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 8 oz, 12 oz, 16 oz, 
and 0.5 gallon
Malaseb®
Miconazole nitrate 2%, 
 chlorhexidine 2% 
Other ingredients: ceramide III, 
microsilver 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz, and 1 
gallon
BioHex®
Soap-free

===== PDF_PAGE_1472 =====
Chlorhexidine, Topical   1445
SOLUTIONS, FLUSHES, AND SCRUBS
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Chlorhexidine 2% (solution) May be labeled for use on dogs, 
horses, cattle, and swine
OTC; 16 oz, 1 gallon
Chlorhexidine 20% (solution) OTC Chlorhexidine®
For 1%: Dilute 6 oz into 1 gallon of 
water or shampoo. For 2%: Dilute 
12 oz into 1 gallon of water or 
shampoo.
Chlorhexidine (flush) OTC; 4 oz, 12 oz
Chlorhexidine 0.2% (flush) 
Other ingredients: glycerin, isopro-
pyl alcohol
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz Chlorhexis®
Chlorhexidine 0.15%,  TrizEDTA 
(flush)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz TrizChlor®
Ketoconazole 0.15%, 
 chlorhexidine 0.15%,  TrizEDTA 
(flush)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 12 oz Mal-A-Ket®
A multi-cleanse flush to aid in the 
treatment of bacterial and fungal 
(dermatophytosis and Malassezia 
spp) infections
Chlorhexidine 0.2%, lidocaine 
0.5% (flush) 
Other ingredients: benzoic acid, 
glycerin, malic acid,  propylene 
glycol, salicylic acid
OTC; 4 oz Dermachlor®
Miconazole 2%, chlorhexidine 2% 
(flush)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 4 oz, 12 oz Malaseb®
Chlorhexidine 2% (flush) OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz, and 16 oz
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 
2%, phytosphingosine 0.02% 
(flush)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 16 oz Ketoseb®
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 
2%, phytosphingosine salicyloyl 
0.05% (flush)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 6.8 oz Vetraseb CK®
Chlorhexidine 2%, chlorhexidine 
4% (scrub)
OTC; 1 gallon
WIPES
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Chlorhexidine 3%, ophytrium 0.5% Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 30 count jar DOUXO S3® PYO
Alcohol-free
Ketoconazole 17 mg, chlorhexidine  
20 mg, phytosphingosine 0.4 mg 
Labeled for dogs and cats 
(Ketoseb+PS®) and horses 
(PhytoVet CK®)
OTC; 50 count jar Ketoseb+PS®; PhytoVet CK®
Ketoconazole 1%, chlorhexidine 2%, 
phytosphingosine salicyloyl 0.04% 
Other ingredients: glycerin, lactic acid, 
propylene glycol 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 60 count jar Vetraseb CK®
Ketoconazole 17 mg, chlorhexidine 
20 mg  
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 50 count jar KetoHex®

===== PDF_PAGE_1473 =====
1446    Chloroxylenol, Topical 
Ketoconazole 1%, acetic acid 2%, 
chlorhexidine 2% 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 50 count jar Mal-A-Ket®
Miconazole 2%, chlorhexidine 2%, 
TrizEDTA 
Other ingredients: ceramide complex
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 50 count jar MiconaHex®
Chlorhexidine 4%, TrizEDTA Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 50 count jar TrizChlor®
Climbazole, chlorhexidine 2% 
Other ingredients: ceramide III, mi-
crosilver
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 50 count jar BioHex®
MOUSSES
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Chlorhexidine 3%, ophytrium 0.5% Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 5 oz DOUXO S3® PYO
Water-based. Leave-on. To be used 
between bathing or when bathing 
is not practical
Miconazole 2%, chlorhexidine 2% Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 6.8 oz Ketoseb®
Water-based. Leave-on. To be used 
between bathing or when bathing 
is not practical
Chlorhexidine 4%, TrizEDTA Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 7.1 oz TrizChlor 4®
Miconazole 2%, chlorhexidine 2%, 
TrizEDTA 
Other ingredients: ceramide complex
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 7.1 oz Miconahex+Triz®
Climbazole 0.5%, ceramides III 0.05%, 
chlorhexidine 3%,  microsilver 1%  
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 6.8 oz BioHex®
Leave-on. To be used between 
bathing or when bathing is not 
practical
ORAL RINSES
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Chlorhexidine 0.12% Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz Dentahex®
For daily use after each meal. Avoid 
touching tip of bottle to gums.
Chlorhexidine 0.13% Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz Clenz-a-dent®
Orange flavored
Human-Labeled Products
There are several topical skin cleansers available in the 2% to 4% range. Trade names include Hibiclens®, Hibistat®, Betasept®, Exidine®, Dyna-
Hex®, and BactoShield®.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Chloroxylenol, Topical 
PCMX
(kloro-zye-len-ol)
For otic use, see Cleaning/Drying Agents, Otic and Antiseptic Agents, Otic.

===== PDF_PAGE_1474 =====
Chloroxylenol, Topical    1447
Indications/Actions
Chloroxylenol is an antiseptic with demonstrated efficacy against gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria, in addition to a wide variety of 
fungal organisms, and against RNA and DNA viruses. It is slower acting than other antiseptic agents1 and has minimal residual effects.2 It can 
be used in presurgical preparation of the skin; in cleaning wounds; and in the treatment of bacterial, fungal, and yeast skin infections. An in 
vitro study comparing the efficacy of antimicrobial shampoos showed that a shampoo containing chloroxylenol 2% was not effective against 
Pseudomonas spp and methicillin-susceptible and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus spp; however, it was effective against Malassezia spp.3 
Another in vitro study found that chloroxylenol was inferior to chlorhexidine against MRSA biofilms.4
Chloroxylenol, also known as PCMX, is a chlorinated phenolic antiseptic. Its antibacterial action is thought to be due to the disruption 
of bacterial membranes.
Suggested Uses/Dosages
Shampoos should be left in contact with the skin for at least 10 minutes prior to rinsing. Refer to product label for details on individual use. 
Sprays and wipes/pads can be applied 1 to 3 times daily according to the patient’s needs. Do not let the animal lick or chew at treated areas 
for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Chloroxylenol may cause skin irritation.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
This list represents only products where chloroxylenol is one of the main active ingredients. 
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Chloroxylenol 2% (scrub)
Other ingredients: deionized water, 
 hydroxyethylcellulose,  polysorbate-20, 
 polyquaternium-7, propylene glycol,  sodium 
laureth sulfate, sodium lauryl sulfate
OTC; 16 oz, 1 gallon Used for surgical scrub and preoperative 
skin preparation. Do not dilute.
Chloroxylenol 2%, salicylic acid 2%, sodium 
thiosulfate 2% (shampoo)
Other ingredients: citric acid,  propylene glycol
Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC; 16 oz, 1 gallon Has antiseborrheic effect
Miconazole nitrate 2%,  chloroxylenol 1% 
 (shampoo) 
Other ingredients: propylene glycol,  salicylic acid
Labeled for dogs, 
cats, and horses
OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz, 
and 1 gallon
Sebozole®
Has antibacterial, antifungal, and an-
tiseborrheic activity. Shake well.
Ketoconazole 1%, chloroxylenol 2%  (shampoo) Labeled for dogs, 
cats, and horses
OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz, 
and 1 gallon
Pharmaseb®
Ketoconazole 0.3%, chloroxylenol 0.3% (wipes) Labeled for dogs, 
cats, and horses
OTC; 60 count Pharmaseb®
Water-based
Ketoconazole 0.3%, chloroxylenol 0.3% (flush)
Other ingredients: benzyl alcohol,  propylene glycol
Labeled for dogs, 
cats, and horses
OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz Pharmaseb®
Water-based. Can be used as a cleansing 
agent for the skin and ears
Ketoconazole 0.33%, chloroxylenol 0.33% (flush)
Other ingredients: benzyl  alcohol,  propylene 
glycol, sodium borate  decahydrate
Labeled for dogs, 
cats, and horses
OTC; 8 oz Ketomax®
Contains sodium borate decahydrate to 
obtain pH of 8.5
Ketoconazole 0.3%, chloroxylenol 0.3% (spray)
Other ingredients: benzyl alcohol, propylene glycol
Labeled for dogs, 
cats, and horses
OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz Pharmaseb®
Water-based
Human-Labeled Products
There are several topical products available containing chloroxylenol that are usually combined with other ingredients, such as hydrocorti-
sone, menthol, pramoxine, and benzocaine. They are presented in different forms (creams, ointments, lotions, and shampoos) but are not 
commonly used in dogs and cats. Trade names include Aurinol®, Calamycin®, Cortamox®, Cortane-B®, Dermacoat®, and Foille®.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  

===== PDF_PAGE_1475 =====
1448    Enzymes, Topical (Lactoperoxidase, Lysozyme, Lactoferrin)
Enzymes, Topical (Lactoperoxidase, Lysozyme, Lactoferrin)
For otic use, see Cleaning/Drying Agents, Otic.
Indications/Actions
Lactoperoxidase, lysozyme, and lactoferrin are topical enzymes that work synergistically when combined and are reported to be effective 
against bacterial, fungal, and viral microorganisms. They are listed by the manufacturer to be effective against Staphylococcus spp, Pseudo-
monas spp, Malassezia spp, Candida albicans, and Microsporum spp. Lactoperoxidase combined with hydrogen peroxide, thiocyanate, and/
or iodide produces hypothiocyanite or hypoiodite ions that are bactericidal by oxidizing components of bacterial cell walls. Hypoiodite also 
is fungicidal. Lactoferrin acts as a bacteriostatic agent against many bacteria by depriving them of iron.
They can be used alone but are often used in combination with hydrocortisone for mild itching or as an adjunctive treatment for more 
severe itching, such as atopic dermatitis.
Suggested Uses/Dosages
Sprays and creams are labeled for use 1 to 2 times a day. Shampoos and conditioners should be used daily to weekly. Shampoo should be in 
contact with the skin for 3 to 5 minutes prior to rinsing well. Products are labeled as worry-free if licked, but animals should be prevented 
from licking or chewing treated areas for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application if possible. Refer to product label for details on individual 
product use.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Overall, these products appear to be safe. There are no reported adverse effects, but skin irritation is possible. Caution should be used to avoid 
excessive or long-term use of products containing glucocorticoids due to potential adverse effects such as cutaneous atrophy and systemic 
absorption. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Refer to each product label for details on use, inactive ingredients, and any precautions.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme 
(spray)
Labeled for all pets of all ages OTC; 2 oz Zymox®
Lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme, 
hydrocortisone 0.5% (spray)
Labeled for all pets of all ages OTC; 2 oz Zymox®
Lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme, 
hydrocortisone 1% (spray)
Labeled for all pets of all ages OTC; 2 oz Zymox®
Lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme 
(cream)
Labeled for companion ani-
mals
OTC; 1 oz Zymox®
Lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme, 
hydrocortisone 0.5% (cream)
Labeled for companion ani-
mals
OTC; 1 oz Zymox®
Lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme, 
hydrocortisone 1% (cream)
Labeled for companion ani-
mals
OTC; 1 oz Zymox®
Lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme 
(shampoo)
Labeled for all pets of all ages OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon Zymox®
Lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme 
(leave-on conditioner)
Labeled for all pets of all ages OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon Zymox®
Lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme 
(shampoo) 
Labeled for horses OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon Zymox®Equine Defense
Lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme 
(conditioner) 
Labeled for horses OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon Zymox® Equine Defense
Lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme 
(spray) 
Labeled for horses OTC; 8 oz Zymox® Equine Defense
Lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme 
(cream)  
Labeled for horses OTC; 2.5 oz Zymox® Equine Defense
Human-Labeled Products
None

===== PDF_PAGE_1476 =====
Hypochlorous Acid, Topical     1449
Hypochlorous Acid, Topical  
 (hye-poe-klor-us ass-id)
For ophthalmic use, see Irrigating Solutions, Ophthalmic.
For otic use, see Antiseptic Agents, Otic and Cleaning/Drying Agents, Otic.
Indications/Actions
Topical hypochlorous acid is used for the management of wounds, abscesses, cuts, abrasions, skin irritations, ulcers, postsurgical incision 
sites, burns, wound odors, and to accelerate healing. It may be used for the prevention or treatment of bacterial skin infections, including 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus spp and Pseudomonas spp; however, one small, controlled study investigating the efficacy of hypochlor-
ous acid 0.011% applied to the skin twice daily for 4 weeks for the treatment of canine superficial pyoderma showed no statistically significant 
difference as compared with placebo. Hypochlorous acid also has antifungal and antiviral properties and is reported to reduce inflammation, 
pain, and itching. 
Hypochlorous acid products act rapidly against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria and fungal/yeast organisms. Some products 
contain oxychlorine (bleach-like) compounds; many products have a neutral pH. 
The mechanism of action of hypochlorous acid is to disrupt the cellular membrane of single-cell organisms. Because the mechanism of 
action is primarily chemical in nature, resistance appears unlikely.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Clip hair if necessary and apply to affected areas up to 3 times daily; may be used with dressing applications on wounds or in combination 
with a cleanser. These products are generally safe to use around the eyes, nose, and mouth, and no rinsing is typically required; refer to spe-
cific product labels for details on use.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
No precautions or adverse effects have been reported. Hypochlorous acid products are generally non-toxic and safe if licked or ingested. Al-
though they do not sting or irritate the skin, the treated area may redden secondary to increased blood flow. Clients should be warned about 
possible bleaching/staining of carpets, clothing, and jewelry.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Below is a representative sample of the products available.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Hypochlorous acid 0.009% (liquid) Labeled for cats OTC; 2 oz Vetericyn Plus® Feline Facial Therapy
Hypochlorous acid 0.012% (spray) Labeled for all 
animals
OTC; 3 oz, 4 oz, 8 oz, 
and 16 oz
Vetericyn Plus® Reptile Wound and Skin Care; 
 Vetericyn Plus® Poultry Care; Vetericyn Plus® All 
 Animal Wound and Skin Care; Vetericyn Plus® 
Equine Wound and Skin Care
Hypochlorous acid 0.012% (spray 
gel) 
Labeled for all 
animals
OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz, and 
16 oz
Vetericyn Plus® Hydrogel; Vetericyn Plus® Feline 
Hydrogel
Hypochlorous acid 0.015% (spray) Labeled for all 
animals
OTC; 16 oz Vetericyn® Pink Eye Spray
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Hypochlorous acid 0.008%, sodium hypochlorite 0.002%  
(spray/gel/solution)
Depending on the labeling: 
OTC/Rx; 1.5 oz to 990 mL
Microcyn®
Hypochlorous acid 0.00025%, sodium hypochlorite 0.0036% 
(spray)
OTC; 2 oz Myclyns®
pH: 6.2 to 7.8.
Povidone Iodine, Topical 
(poe-vi-done eye-oh-dine) Betadine®
Indications/Actions
Povidone iodine is used as a topical first-aid agent and a presurgical skin antiseptic. It may be used for superficial pyoderma and Malassezia 
spp dermatitis; however, it is infrequently used in small animal dermatology due to its drying, irritating, and staining effects. 
Povidone iodine, an iodophor antiseptic, is rapidly bactericidal at low concentrations against both gram-positive and gram-negative bac-
teria. It is also fungicidal and sporicidal as a 1% aqueous solution. Povidone acts by slowly releasing iodine to tissues. It has prolonged activity 
(4-6 hours) but is not as long acting as chlorhexidine. Povidone iodine also has mild degreasing and debriding activity.

===== PDF_PAGE_1477 =====
1450    Amitraz Collar, Topical 
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Thoroughly wet affected area(s) to ensure complete coverage. For veterinary products, refer to the specific product label for details on use.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Povidone may be drying and irritating to skin and can be extremely irritating to the scrotal skin and external ears. Use with emollients may 
alleviate the drying effects. It may also stain skin, hair, and fabrics. Avoid contact with eyes. 
Wear gloves or wash hands after application. Use with caution on deep or puncture wounds or on serious burns. Systemic absorption can 
result in renal and thyroid dysfunction. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
NOTES:  
1. The following products are only representative and not meant to be all-inclusive. There are many available povidone iodine products, 
including hoof dressings, teat dips, boluses (to prepare a solution), and udder washes. Povidone iodine products are also available in 
combination with lidocaine and as a combination of povidone and potassium iodine. 
2. 10% povidone iodine yields 1% titratable iodine; labels may be confusing. Povidone iodine may also be listed as polyvinylpyrrolidone 
iodine. Products below are listed as povidone iodine.
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Povidone iodine 5% (shampoo) OTC; Depending on the manufacturer: 8 oz, 16 oz,  
32 oz, 1 gallon
Aloedine®, generic
Povidone iodine 5% (spray) OTC; 16 oz generic
Povidone iodine 7.5% (scrub) OTC; 32 oz, 1 gallon Vetadine®; Pivodine®; Povidine®; Poviderm®
Povidone iodine 10% (gel) OTC; 20 oz Biozide®
Povidone iodine 10% (solution) OTC; 32 oz, 1 gallon Poviderm®; Prodine®; Vetadine®
Human-Labeled Products
NOTE: There are a large number of povidone iodine products available. In addition to those listed, vaginal gels, swabs, sponges, and foaming 
skin cleansers are also available.
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Povidone iodine 5% (powder spray) OTC; 2 oz Betadine®
Povidone iodine 5% (spray) OTC; 3 oz Betadine®
Povidone iodine 7.5% (scrub) OTC; 4 oz, 16 oz, 32 oz, 1 gallon Betadine®; generic
Povidone iodine 10% (ointment) OTC; 1 g (packet), 28.4 g generic
Povidone iodine 10% (solution) OTC; 0.5 oz, 4 oz, 8 oz, 16 oz, 32 oz, 1 gallon Betadine®; generic
Antiparasitic Agents, Topical
For topical agents that are administered topically but absorbed systemically through the skin to treat ecto- and endoparasites (eg, Eprinomec-
tin, Fluralaner, Ivermectin, Moxidectin, Selamectin), refer to the respective monographs in the systemic section. 
Amitraz Collar, Topical 
(a-mi-traz) Preventic®
Indications/Actions
A water-resistant amitraz collar is available for dogs 12 weeks of age and older that is labeled to kill and detach ticks for up to 3 months1; the 
collar does not control fleas. It starts working within 24 hours of placement. Do NOT apply the amitraz collar to cats or rabbits as it will 
cause toxicity. 
Topical amitraz dip was FDA-approved for the treatment of generalized demodicosis in dogs; however, this product is no longer marketed. 
It was also used to treat canine sarcoptic mange, cheyletiellosis, and feline surface (Demodex gatoi) or follicular demodicosis (Demodex cati), 
and as a general insecticidal/miticidal agent in several other species.
Amitraz is thought to act through agonism of octopamine receptors in ectoparasites. Octopamine receptors are considered the inverte -
brate equivalent to adrenergic receptors in vertebrates. The overstimulation of octopamine receptors leads to overexcitation, paralysis, and 
death.2,3  
Suggested Dosages/Uses
DOGS:
Kill and detach ticks (label dosage; EPA-approved): Apply collar based on dog’s body weight. Dogs up to 27.3 kg (60 lb): 18-inch adjust-
able collar; dogs over 27.3 kg (60 lb): 25-inch adjustable collar. The collar must be worn tightly enough to make contact with the skin. 
Replace collar every 90 days.

===== PDF_PAGE_1478 =====
Crotamiton, Topical    1451
Precautions/Adverse Effects/Drug Interactions
Do not reuse the collar or container; wrap it in a newspaper and throw it in the trash. Do not use the collar on puppies under 12 weeks of age.  
Amitraz can be toxic to cats and rabbits and should not be used in these species. 
Amitraz collars may cause toxicity if swallowed (by either animals or humans). Treatment should consist of emesis, retrieval of the collar 
using endoscopy if possible, and administration of activated charcoal and a cathartic to remove any remaining collar fragments. Y ohimbine 
0.11 – 0.2 mg/kg IV (start with low dosage) may be of benefit to treat adverse effects associated with the overdose. Because yohimbine has 
a short half-life, it may need to be repeated, particularly if the animal has ingested an amitraz-containing collar that could has not been re -
trieved from the GI tract. See Y ohimbine. Atipamezole has also been used to treat amitraz toxicity; see Atipamezole. For patients that have 
experienced or are suspected to have experienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consultation center specializing in pro -
viding veterinary-specific information is recommended. For general information related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact 
information for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Veterinary-Labeled Products 
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Amitraz 9% (collar) Labeled only for dogs 12 
weeks of age and older
OTC (EPA); 18 inches (for dogs less 
than 27.2 kg [60 lb]), 25 inches (for 
dogs more than 27.2 kg [60 lb])
Preventic®
Adjustable (cut off excess). 
 Effective for 3 months
Human-Labeled Products
None
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Crotamiton, Topical 
(kroe-ta-mye-ton)
Indications/Actions
Crotamiton is a topical miticide/scabicide used primarily for adjunctive treatment (with ivermectin) of mite infections (eg, Knemidocoptes 
spp) in birds. Crotamiton has both miticidal and antipruritic actions. Its miticidal mechanism of action is unknown; however, its antipruritic 
effect is reported to be due to its inhibition of the transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 (TRPV4) channel that is expressed on the skin 
peripheral neurons and keratinocytes.1
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Once- to twice-daily application is usually recommended. Shake well before use.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Do not apply around the eyes or mouth. Little is known of the compound’s safety profile. Irritation or hypersensitivity reactions are possi-
ble; do not use on patients with a known hypersensitivity to it. 2 Discontinue if irritation or sensitization develops. Do not apply to acutely 
inflamed skin or raw, weeping skin.
Prevent grooming or preening after application, as oral ingestion can cause irritation of the buccal, esophageal, and gastric mucosa; nau-
sea; vomiting; and abdominal pain.
Adverse effects in humans include dermatitis, pruritis, and rash.2
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have experienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consultation 
center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information is recommended. For general information related to overdose and toxin 
exposures, as well as contact information for poison control centers. See Appendix.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
None
Human-Labeled Topical Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Crotamiton 10% (lotion) Other ingredients: cetyl  alcohol, 
emollient base
Rx; 60 g, 227 g, 454 g Crotan®, Eurax®
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Deltamethrin/Deltamethrin Combination Products, Topical 
(del-ta-meeth-rin)
Indications/Actions
In the United States, deltamethrin-impregnated collars are labeled for killing fleas (ie, Ctenocephalides spp) and ticks 1 (ie, Amblyomma 
americanum, Rhipicephalus sanguineus, Dermacentor variabilis, Ixodes scapularis, I pacificus) and repelling mosquitoes on dogs for up to 6 
months.2 Treatment with deltamethrin has been shown to be an effective strategy to reduce the incidence of leishmaniasis by repelling and 

===== PDF_PAGE_1479 =====
1452    Dinotefuran/Pyriproxyfen Combinations, Topical 
killing mosquitos and phlebotomine sandflies, which are important vectors.3 The mosquito repellent activity may also help reduce the inci-
dence of heartworm infection4; further research is needed.
Deltamethrin is a synthetic pyrethroid insecticide and acts by disrupting the sodium channel conduction in arthropod nerve cell mem-
branes, resulting in paralysis and death. Some collars are combined with pyriproxyfen, an insect growth regulator.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Collars should be worn continuously and be replaced every 6 months.1,2 Maximum effect may not occur until 2 to 3 weeks after collar place-
ment; therefore, it is recommended to apply the collar before the start of flea/tick season.5 Wipe the collar with a damp paper towel prior to 
application to remove dust. The collar is placed so that 2 to 3 fingers can easily fit between the collar and neck. The collar does not need to be 
removed for bathing or swimming. Follow specific product label for use instructions. 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Do not use deltamethrin on cats. Collars containing deltamethrin should not be used on dogs younger than 12 weeks. 1,2 Collars may cause 
irritation if placed too tightly. Skin reactions (erythema, localized dermatitis, pruritis) and hair loss at the application site are possible. 6 In 
extremely rare cases, neurologic signs such as tremor or lethargy have been reported. 6 Use with caution in debilitated, pregnant, nursing, 
geriatric, or medicated animals.1,2 
If a collar is ingested, uncoordinated movements, tremor, drooling, vomiting, or rigidity are possible. Treatment is supportive, and clinical 
signs usually subside within 48 hours. 6 For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have experienced an overdose, consultation 
with a 24-hour poison consultation center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information is recommended. For general informa-
tion related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Avoid contact with eyes, skin, or clothing. Wash hands after handling. Mammalian exposure to deltamethrin is classified as safe; however, 
deltamethrin is highly toxic to aquatic animals (especially fish) and should be used very carefully around water sources. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products 
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Deltamethrin 4% (collar) Labeled for dogs 12 weeks 
of age or older
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC (EPA) Activyl®; Adams®; PetArmor®; Proact®; Sentry®; 
Zodiac®
Adjustable (one size fits all). Water-resistant
Deltamethrin 4% (collar) Labeled for dogs 12 weeks 
of age or older
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC (EPA) Protect®; Salvo®; Sentry®
Available for small, medium, and large dogs. 
Water-resistant
Deltamethrin 4%, pyriproxyfen 
1% (collar)
Labeled for dogs 12 weeks 
of age or older
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC (EPA) PetArmor®
One size fits all. Waterproof
Human-Labeled Products
None
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Dinotefuran/Pyriproxyfen Combinations, Topical 
(die-noh-te-fyoor-an, pye-ri-proks-i-fen)
Indications/Actions
Dinotefuran/pyriproxyfen combinations are used in dogs and cats for the treatment and control of external parasites. The combination of 
dinotefuran and pyriproxyfen controls adult fleas and all immature flea stages, including eggs, larvae, and pupae. Some canine combination 
products also contain permethrin, which broadens the spectrum to also repel and kill ticks, mosquitos, lice, mites (excluding mange), biting 
flies, and sand flies. Some feline combination products contain fipronil, providing rapid speed of kill and added protection against ticks and 
chewing lice.
Dinotefuran is a nitroguanidine, neonicotinoid insecticide with a structure similar to acetylcholine. It permanently binds to the same 
insect receptor sites as acetylcholine and activates the nerve impulse at the synapse, which cause stimulation that results in tremors, incoor-
dination, and insect death. Dinotefuran does not bind to mammalian acetylcholine receptor sites.
Pyriproxyfen is a second-generation insect growth regulator that mimics insect juvenile growth hormone, halting development during 
metamorphosis and larval development. It also concentrates in female flea ovaries, which causes nonviable eggs to be produced. When di -
notefuran is combined with an adulticide (eg, permethrin, fipronil), all stages of the parasite are killed, and re-infestation is less likely. It is 
more resistant to UV light than is methoprene.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Dinotefuran/pyriproxyfen combination products are recommended once monthly for dogs and cats. Refer to the package labeling for specif-
ic dosages and application instructions.
Apparently, bathing or swimming does not interfere with efficacy of canine products; however, the authors do not recommend bathing 

===== PDF_PAGE_1480 =====
Fipronil/Fipronil Combinations, Topical    1453
the pet until 2 days after application. Cats should be completely dry before the Catego® product is applied and they should remain dry for 24 
hours after application.1
Precautions/Adverse Effects
The dog product containing permethrin (Vectra 3D®) must not be used on cats or on dogs that cohabitate with cats. The manufacturer rec-
ommends not using Vectra 3D® or Vectra® on debilitated, aged, medicated, pregnant, or nursing animals or on animals known to be sensitive 
to pesticide products. Mild transitory skin erythema may occur at the application site. Avoid eye and oral contact since dinotefuran can cause 
substantial but temporary eye irritation. Vectra 3D® was reported to be associated with the development of pemphigus foliaceus-like disease 
occurring at the site of application and at distant sites in 3 dogs.1
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Dinotefuran 22%, pyriproxyfen 
3% (spot-on solution)
Labeled for dogs and 
puppies 8 weeks of age 
or older
OTC (EPA) 
1.1 - 4.5 kg (2.5-10 lb): 1.3 mL/dose
5 - 9 kg (11-20 lb): 2 mL/dose
9.5 - 25 kg (21-55 lb): 4 mL/dose
25 - 45.4 kg (56-100 lb): 6 mL/dose
Vectra®
Dinotefuran 22%, pyriproxyfen 
3% (spot-on solution)
Labeled for cats and 
kittens 8 weeks of age 
or older
OTC (EPA)
0.9 - 4.1 kg (2-9 lb): 0.8 mL/dose
4.1 kg (9 lb) or over: 1.2 mL/dose
Vectra®
Dinotefuran 22%, pyriproxy-
fen 3%, fipronil 8.92% (spot-on 
solution)
Labeled for cats and 
kittens 8 weeks of age 
or older
OTC (EPA)
All cats weighing over 0.7 kg (1.5 lb): 
0.5 mL/dose
Catego®
Dinotefuran 4.95%, pyriproxyfen 
0.44%, permethrin 36.08%  
(spot-on solution)
Labeled only for dogs 
and puppies 8 weeks 
of age or older
OTC (EPA)
2.3 - 4.5 kg (5-10 lb): 0.8 mL/dose
5 - 9 kg (11-20 lb): 1.6 mL/dose
9.5 - 25 kg (21-55 lb): 3.6 mL/dose
25.4 - 43.1 kg (56-95 lb): 4.7 mL/dose
Over 43.1 kg (95 lb): 8 mL/dose
Vectra 3D®
Must NOT be used on cats. 
In households where a dog 
cohabitates with cats, keep cat 
separated from treated dog for 
24 hours.
Human-Labeled Products
None
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Fipronil/Fipronil Combinations, Topical 
(fip-roe-nil) Frontline®
See also Permethrin/Permethrin Combinations, Topical; Pyriproxyfen/Pyriproxyfen Combinations, Topical
Indications/Actions
In the United States, fipronil is indicated for the treatment of fleas, ticks, and chewing lice infestations in dogs and cats. It has also been used 
successfully for Trombicula autumnalis (chigger) infestation, sarcoptic mange, cheyletiellosis, and otoacariasis. 
Fipronil is a phenylpyrazole antiparasitic agent that interferes with the passage of chloride ions in GABA-regulated chloride channels in 
invertebrates, thereby disrupting CNS activity and causing death of the parasite. Fipronil collects in the oils of the skin and hair follicles and 
continues to be released over a period of time, which results in a long residual activity. When topically applied, the drug spreads over the 
body in ≈24 hours via translocation.
When fipronil is combined with the insect growth regulator (S)-methoprene, flea eggs and flea larvae are also killed. (S)-methoprene 
mimics flea juvenile growth hormone, which halts development during metamorphosis and larval development. It also concentrates in fe -
male flea ovaries, causing nonviable eggs to be produced. Additional combination products with permethrin, etofenprox, cyphenothrin, and 
pyriproxyfen (synthetic pyrethroids) or amitraz are available.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Spot-on solutions are generally applied in one or more spots on the back of the neck or between the shoulder blades. The hair should be 
parted so the solution can be applied directly to the skin.
When applying spray, use one gloved hand to ruffle the coat while spraying sides, back, legs, abdomen, shoulders, and neck. To apply this 
product to the head and eye area, spray a gloved hand and gently rub into the coat. Alternatively, a towel soaked with fipronil may be used to 
treat the face. Apply this product until coat is thoroughly wet.1
Fleas, ticks, or chewing lice:  Monthly treatments are generally recommended when fipronil is used for treatment and prevention of fleas, 
ticks, or chewing lice. See product labels for specific directions on administration and recommendations on bathing and swimming after 
administration. In some cases, for better efficacy, the interval between applications needs to be shortened to every 14 days. 
Trombicula autumnalis infestation: Monthly application of fipronil spray (0.25%) has been successful in dogs. Apply the spray to the entire 

===== PDF_PAGE_1481 =====
1454    Fipronil/Fipronil Combinations, Topical
body, thoroughly wetting the coat, with particular emphasis on the areas typically affected (eg, feet, ears, face, perineum, and tail). Monthly 
applications should be administered throughout the trombiculid season at the dose of 3 – 6 mL/kg. In some cases, application every 14 days 
may be required. Fipronil seemed to have a shorter duration of effect in cats, with reinfestation seen after 7 to 10 days.2
Sarcoptic mange: Fipronil spray (0.25%) is recommended for confirmed cases using 2 protocols: 
a) Apply once weekly for 4 weeks3
b) Apply every 2 to 3 weeks for 3 treatments4
Dosages ranging from 3 mL/kg to 39 mL/kg were used in these reports. Thoroughly wet the coat, paying special attention to the areas typi-
cally affected by the disease (eg, ears, face, ventrum, and extremities). A decrease in pruritus may be noticed as early as 7 days after the first 
application. Fipronil use is not recommended in treatment trials (ie, high clinical suspicion of mite infestation but mites not found on skin 
scrapings) because of anecdotal reports of treatment failures with this product.
Cheyletiellosis: Fipronil spray (0.25%) has been successfully used at a dose of 3 mL/kg to ensure complete and thorough body coverage, 
along with environmental permethrin treatment. Repeat fipronil treatment after 30 days.5 Fipronil use is only recommended for confirmed 
cases and is not recommended in treatment trials (ie, high clinical suspicion of mite infestation but mites not found on skin scrapings) be -
cause of anecdotal reports of treatment failures.
Otoacariasis: Instill 1 drop of fipronil solution inside each ear canal and apply the rest of the dosing tube between the shoulder blades. 6 
Fipronil needs to be applied in the ear canals to be effective. Resolution of clinical signs can be seen as early as 7 days posttreatment. Addi -
tional applications may be needed.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Do not use fipronil on puppies or kittens less than 8 weeks of age. Fipronil compounds are reported to be contraindicated in rabbits, as tox-
icity deaths have occurred with the spray. Do not apply fipronil to or spray in or near the eyes. Temporary irritation may occur at the site of 
administration. Hypersensitivity has rarely been reported; animals that have demonstrated hypersensitivity reactions to fipronil should not 
be retreated. Use fipronil with caution on debilitated, elderly, or medicated patients.
Dispose of containers properly to avoid contamination of food or water sources. Avoid human contact with skin, eyes, or clothing. Wash 
well with soap and water if skin contact occurs. Wear gloves when applying fipronil and wash hands thoroughly after handling. Use sprays 
only in a well-ventilated area. Avoid contact with treated animals until coat is dry. 
Most products are labeled as remaining effective after bathing, water immersion, or exposure to sunlight; however, avoid shampooing 
within 48 hours of application. Spotted areas may appear wet or oily for up to 24 hours after application.
Veterinary-Labeled Products 
NOTE: This is not an all-inclusive list but is representative of the types of products available.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Fipronil 0.29% (spray) Labeled for use on 
dogs, cats, puppies, 
and kittens 8 weeks of 
age or older
OTC (EPA); 8.5 oz, 17 oz Frontline®
Fipronil 0.29%, (S)-methoprene 
0.27% (spray)
Labeled for use on 
dogs, cats, puppies, or 
kittens 8 weeks of age 
or older
OTC (EPA); 8 oz, 16 oz Martin’s FLEE® Plus
Fipronil 9.7% (spot-on solution) Labeled for use on 
dogs, cats, puppies, 
and kittens 8 weeks of 
age or older 
OTC (EPA); various formulations 
and packages depending on each 
product
Hartz® First Defense®; Pronyl OTC®; 
Sentry Fiproguard®; Spectra Sure®
The indication may differ among 
these products.
Fipronil 9.7% (spot-on solution) Labeled for use on cats 
and kittens 8 weeks of 
age or older and over 
0.7 kg (1.5 lb)
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators 
0.5 mL in packages of 3 and 6
Adams Fortress®; Hartz® First De-
fense®; Sentry Fiproguard®
Fipronil 9.8%, (S)-methoprene 
11.8% (spot-on solution)
Labeled for use on cats 
or kittens 8 weeks of 
age or older and over 
0.7 kg (1.5 lb)
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators 
0.5 mL in packages of 3 and 6
Frontline® Plus; Martin’s FLEE® 
Plus; PetAction® Plus; PetArmor® 
Plus; Pronyl OTC Plus®; Sentry 
Fibroguard®; Spectra Sure® Plus
Fipronil 9.8%, (S)-methoprene 
8.8% (spot-on solution)
Labeled for dogs and 
puppies 8 weeks of age 
or older 
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators 
in packages of 3 and 6:
up to 10 kg (22 lb): 0.67 mL;
 10.4 - 20 kg (23-44 lb): 1.34 mL;
 20.4 - 39.9 kg (45-88 lb): 2.68 mL;
 40.4 - 59.9 kg (89-132 lb): 4.02 mL
EctoAdvance® Plus; Frontline®Plus; 
PetAction® Plus, PetArmor® Plus; 
Pronyl OTC®Plus; Spectra Sure® Plus

===== PDF_PAGE_1482 =====
Fipronil/Fipronil Combinations, Topical   1455
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Fipronil 9.8%, etofenprox 15% 
(spot-on solution)
Labeled for all cats 
over 12 weeks of age
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators 
0.5 mL in packages of 3
Mar tin’s FLEE® Prefurred
Fipronil 9.8%, cyphenothren 
5.2%, (S)-methoprene 8.8% 
(spot-on solution)
Labeled for use on dogs 
12 weeks of age or older 
and at least 1.8 kg (4 lb)
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators 
in packages of 3
Frontline® Trita® 
Fipronil 9.8%, etofenprox 15%,
 (S)-methoprene 11.8% (spot-on 
solution)
Labeled for use on cats 
or kittens 12 weeks of 
age or older
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators 
0.5 mL in packages of 3
Frontline® Tritak
Fipronil 9.8%, pyriproxyfen 
0.25%, (S)-methoprene 11.8% 
(spot-on solution)
Labeled for cats and 
kittens 8 weeks of age 
or older and less than 
or equal to 0.7 kg (1.5 
lb)
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators 
0.5 mL in packages of 3 and 6
Frontline®Gold
Fipronil 9.58%, pyriproxyfen 
11.65% (spot-on solution)
Labeled for cats and 
kittens 8 weeks of age 
or older and less than 
or equal to 0.7 kg (1.5 
lb)
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators 
0.5 mL in packages of 3
Effipro®
Fipronil 9.78%, pyriproxyfen 
2.94% (spot-on solution)
Labeled for dogs and 
puppies 8 weeks of age 
or older 
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators 
in packages of 3:
2.3 - 10.4 kg (5-22.9 lb): 0.67 mL;
10.4 - 20 kg (23-44.9 lb): 1.34 mL;
20.4 - 40.3 kg (45-88.9 lb): 2.68 mL;
40.4 - 59.9 kg (89-132 lb): 4.02 mL
Effipro®
Fipronil 9.8%, cyphenothrin 
5.2% (spot-on solution) 
Labeled for dogs and 
puppies 12 weeks of 
age or older 
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators 
in packages of 3:
up to 10 kg (22 lb): 0.67 mL;
10.4 - 20 kg (23-44 lb): 1.34 mL;
20.4 - 39.9 kg (45-88 lb): 2.68 mL;
40.4 - 59.9 kg (89-132 lb): 4.02 mL
Martin’s Prefurred®Plus; 
Parastar®Plus
Fipronil 9.8%, cyphenothrin 
5.2%, (S)-methoprene 8.8% 
(spot-on solution)
Labeled for use on 
dogs 12 weeks of age 
or older and at least 1.8 
kg (4 lb) 
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators 
in packages of 3:
up to 10 kg (22 lb): 0.67 mL;
10.4 - 20 kg (23-44 lb): 1.34 mL;
20.4 - 40.3 kg (45-88 lb): 2.68 mL;
40.4 - 59.9 kg (89-132 lb): 4.02 mL
Frontline® Tritak
Fipronil 6.01%, permethrin 
44.88% (spot-on solution)
Labeled for dogs and 
puppies at least 8 
weeks of age 
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators 
in packages of 3:
2.3 - 5 kg (5-10.9 lb): 0.5 mL;
5 - 10.4 kg (11-22.9 lb): 1 mL;
20.4 - 40.3 kg (45-88.9 lb): 4 mL;
40.4 - 59.9 kg (89-132 lb): 6 mL
Effitix®
Fipronil 6%, permethrin 44.8%, 
pyriproxyfen 1.8% (spot-on 
solution)
Labeled for dogs and 
puppies at least 8 
weeks of age 
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators 
in packages of 3:
2.3 - 5 kg (5-10.9 lb): 0.5 mL;
5 - 10.4 kg (11-22.9 lb): 1 mL;
20.4 - 40.3 kg (45-88.9 lb): 4 mL;
40.4 - 59.9 kg (89-132 lb): 6 mL
Effitix® Plus; Frontline® Shield
Fipronil 8.92%, dinotefuran 
22%, pyriproxyfen 3% (spot-on 
solution)
Labeled for cats and 
kittens over 0.7 kg (1.5 
lb) and over 8 weeks 
of age
OTC (EPA); packages of 3 and 6 Catego®
Fipronil 9.8%, (S)-methoprene 
8.8%; Amitraz 22.1% (spot-on 
solution)
Labeled for dogs and 
puppies 8 weeks of age 
or older and at least 2.3 
kg (5 lb) body weight 
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC (EPA); 1.7 mL, 2.14 mL, 4.28 
mL, and 6.42 mL per applicator
Certifect®

===== PDF_PAGE_1483 =====
1456    Imidacloprid/Imidacloprid Combinations, Topical 
Human-Labeled Products
None
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Imidacloprid/Imidacloprid Combinations, Topical 
(eye-mi-da-kloe-prid) Advantage®, Seresto®
For systemic use, see Imidacloprid, Systemic and Moxidectin/Moxidectin Combination Products
Indications/Actions
Imidacloprid topical solution is indicated for the prevention and treatment of flea infestations in cats and flea and lice infestations in dogs. 
Imidacloprid is effective against both adult fleas and flea larvae. 1 The combination of imidacloprid and pyriproxyfen is indicated for the 
prevention and treatment of all flea stages in dogs and cats and lice infestations in dogs. The combination of imidacloprid, pyriproxyfen, and 
permethrin is indicated in dogs only for the prevention and treatment of fleas, ticks, mosquitoes, biting flies, and lice. 
The combination of imidacloprid and flumethrin impregnated into a slow-release collar is indicated for the prevention and treatment of 
ticks, fleas, and lice in dogs and prevention and treatment of ticks and fleas in cats. It has also been shown to prevent babesiosis 2 and leish-
maniosis3 in dogs and is indicated for the prevention of leishmaniosis in some countries. 
Imidacloprid’s mechanism of action as an insecticide is to act on nicotinic acetylcholine receptors on the postsynaptic membrane, causing 
CNS impairment and death of the ectoparasite. Certain insect species are more sensitive to these agents than are mammalian receptors. This 
is a different mechanism of action than other insecticidal agents (organophosphates, pyrethrins, carbamates, insect growth regulators [IGRs], 
and insect development inhibitors [IDIs]). Imidacloprid is reported to be nonteratogenic, nonhypersensitizing, nonmutagenic, nonallergen-
ic, noncarcinogenic, and nonphotosensitizing. When applied topically, imidocloprid is not absorbed into the bloodstream or internal organs. 
Permethrin and flumethrin, found in some imidacloprid products, are neurotoxins that slow the movement of sodium ions through sodium 
channels in neuron membranes of the ectoparasite. Pyriproxyfen may also be found in some imidacloprid products; it mimics insect juvenile 
growth hormone, halting development during metamorphosis and larval development. It also concentrates in female flea ovaries, causing 
non-viable eggs to be produced.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Refer to the package information for product-specific application instructions. Imidacloprid products are generally administered once 
monthly; however, extra-label dosages, such as once weekly or every other week, have been used. Although swimming, bathing, and rain do 
not significantly affect the duration of action, animals that have been shampooed repeatedly may require additional treatment(s) before the 
next monthly dosing interval, not to exceed once weekly administration.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
When used as directed, imidacloprid topical solutions are usually well tolerated and adverse effects are minimal. Dermal irritation has been 
reported at the site of application.
Imidacloprid and pyriproxyfen combinations are contraindicated in puppies younger than 7 weeks, dogs weighing less than 3 lbs, and 
kittens younger than 7 or 8 weeks (depending on product). Use with caution in debilitated, older, pregnant, or nursing animals.
Combination products that contain permethrin must not be used on cats. They should be used with caution in households with cats, 
particularly if cats are in close contact with or will groom treated dogs.
Avoid contact with the eyes and mouth; oral contact may cause excessive salivation. If eye contact occurs in humans or animals, flush well 
with an ophthalmic irrigation solution or water. Wearing gloves is not required during administration but is recommended to avoid contact 
with human skin. Wash hands with soap and water after handling. Keep out of reach of children. Store products away from food sources to 
avoid the possibility of contamination. Carefully dispose of products in the trash.
Most toxicities are seen following oral dosing of topical products. In cats, clinical signs may include hypersalivation, vomiting, lethar -
gy, and hiding; oral ulcers have also been rarely reported in cats. In dogs, reported clinical signs include vomiting, hypersalivation, and 
 trembling. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Imidacloprid 9.1% (spot-on 
solution)
Dogs and puppies 7 weeks 
of age and older; cats and 
kittens 8 weeks of age and 
older
OTC (EPA); packages of 4 or 6 applicators:
Cats 4.1 kg (9 lb) and under: 0.4 mL 
Cats over 4.1 kg (9 lb): 0.8 mL 
Dogs under 4.5 kg (10 lb): 0.4 mL 
Dogs 5 - 9.1 kg (11-20 lb): 1 mL 
Dogs 9.5 - 25 kg (21-55 lb): 2.5 mL 
Dogs over 25 kg (55 lb): 4 mL
Advantage® (product no 
longer available in the 
United States)
Imidacloprid 10%, flumethrin 
4.5%, (collar)
Dogs and puppies 7 weeks 
of age and older; cats and 
kittens 10 weeks of age and 
older
OTC (EPA); available in 3 collar sizes:
Cat: 15 inches
Small dog (up to 8.2 kg [18 lb]): 15 inches
Large dog (over 8.2 kg [18 lb]): 27.5 inches
Seresto®

===== PDF_PAGE_1484 =====
Isopropyl Myristate, Topical    1457
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Imidacloprid 9.1%,  pyriproxyfen 
0.46% (spot-on solution)
Dogs and puppies 7 weeks 
of age and older; cats and 
kittens 8 weeks of age and 
older
OTC (EPA); packages of 4 or 6 applicators:
Cats 0.9 - 2.3 kg (2-5 lb): 0.23 mL
Cats 2.3 - 4.1 kg (5-9 lb): 0.4 mL
Cats over 4.1 kg (9 lb): 0.8 mL
Dogs 1.4 - 4.5 kg (3-10 lb): 0.4 mL
Dogs 5 - 9.1 kg (11-20 lb): 1 mL
Dogs 9.5 - 25 kg (21-55 lb): 2.5 mL
Dogs over 25 kg (55 lb): 4 mL
Advantage®II; Adventure 
Plus®
Imidacloprid 9.1%,  pyriproxyfen 
0.46% (spot-on solution)
Cats and kittens at least 7 
weeks of age
OTC (EPA); packages of 4 applicators: 
2.3 - 4.1 kg (5-9 lb): 0.4mL (red)
Over 4.1 kg (9 lb): 0.8 mL (purple)
Provecta® II
Imidacloprid 7.12%, permethrin 
35.6%, pyriproxyfen 0.36% 
(spot-on solution)
Dogs and puppies over 7 
weeks of age
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC (EPA); packages of 4 applicators for 
use on dogs ONLY:
1.8 - 4.5 kg (4-10 lb): 0.48 mL
5 - 9.1 kg (11-20 lb): 1.2 mL
9.5 - 25 kg (21-55 lb): 3 mL
Over 25 kg (55 lb): 4.8 mL
Activate®II
Imidacloprid 8.8%, permethrin 
44%, pyriproxyfen 0.44%  
(spot-on solution)
Dogs and puppies 7 weeks 
of age
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC (EPA); packages of 4 or 6 applicators 
for use on dogs ONLY:
1.8 - 4.5 kg (4-10 lb): 0.4 mL
5 - 9.1 kg (11-20 lb): 1 mL
9.5 - 25 kg (21-55 lb): 2.5 mL
Over 25 kg (55 lb): 4 mL
K9 Advantix® II; 
 Provecta® Advanced
Human-Labeled Products
None
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Isopropyl Myristate, Topical 
(eye-so-proe-pil meer-is-tate) Resultix®
Indications/Actions
Isopropyl myristate is a noninsecticidal product labeled for the removal and killing of attached and crawling ticks on dogs and cats. It acts by 
dissolving the outer wax layer covering the hard shell (cuticle) of the tick, resulting in uncontrollable water loss and death. Ticks generally 
die and fall off within 3 hours.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Spray tick until it is covered with solution, ≈2 sprays. Tick should be dead within 3 hours and will either fall off the animal or will be immobile 
when it is removed. If the tick has not fallen off after 3 hours, carefully remove it with gloves or tweezers. Dispose of the tick by placing it in 
a sealable plastic bag. Wash hands after handling product, and after any accidental exposure to ticks.
Isopropyl myristate can be used as often as needed.1
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Do not use near the eyes or on irritated skin. Discontinue use if skin irritation or skin infection develops.
Isopropyl myristate is toxic to invertebrates and fish. 1 Never dispose of product down any drain; do not discharge into lakes, streams, 
ponds, estuaries, oceans, or other waters where aquatic invertebrates or fish may be found.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Isopropyl myristate 50% (spray) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC (EPA); 20 mL Resultix®
Human-Labeled Products
None
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  

===== PDF_PAGE_1485 =====
1458    Methoprene/Methoprene Combinations, Topical 
Methoprene/Methoprene Combinations, Topical 
(meth-oh-preen)
Indications/Actions
Methoprene is an insect growth regulator that prevents the maturation of flea and mosquito eggs and larva. Methoprene mimics insect 
juvenile growth hormone, halting development during metamorphosis and larval development. It also concentrates in female flea ovaries, 
resulting in the production of nonviable eggs. 
Methoprene is typically combined with an adulticide to kill all stages of the parasites and prevent reinfestation. Fipronil and pyrethroids 
(eg, cyphenothrin, etofenprox, permethrin) are commonly used in combination with methoprene. These agents also provide coverage against 
additional parasites; see specific product labels for details on parasite activity.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
For use and dosage recommendations, refer to the specific product insert.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Methoprene is commonly found in products containing pyrethroids that are toxic to cats, especially small kittens. Only use products on 
cats that are specifically labeled for use on cats. Use pyrethroid-containing products cautiously on dogs that cohabitate with cats. 
Hypersensitivity reactions and skin irritation are possible with methoprene-containing products. Avoid eyes and mucous membranes 
during application. When used as a single agent, methoprene has low toxicity in mammals.
Additional precautions and adverse effects vary based on other active ingredients; refer to specific product insert.
Methoprene products should be protected from light as methoprene is broken down by UV light.
Veterinary-Labeled Products 
NOTES: 
1. Methoprene is available in a variety of combinations. Use caution selecting products labeled for different species as different combinations 
of active ingredients may be marketed under the same trade name.
2. There is an extensive number of products marketed, including collars, topical sprays, foggers, and spot-on solutions; the following prod-
ucts are only representative.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Methoprene 2.9% (spot-on 
solution)
Labeled for cats and kittens 12 
weeks of age and older
OTC (EPA); single-dose 1 mL 
applicators in packages of 3
Hartz® UltraGuard® OneSpot®
Methoprene 3%, permethrin 
45% (spot-on solution)
Labeled for dogs 6 months of 
age and older 
Do NOT use on cats. 
OTC (EPA); single-dose 
 applicators per weight in 
 packages of 4
Zodiac® Spot On® for Dogs
Methoprene 3.6%, etofenprox 
40% (spot-on solution)
Labeled for kittens 12 weeks of 
age and older
OTC (EPA); single-dose 1.8 mL 
applicators in packages of 3 for 
cats 2.3 kg (5 lb) and over
Hartz® UltraGuard Plus® for Cats; 
Hartz® UltraGuard Pro® for Cats
Methoprene 4.05%, etofenprox 
46%
Labeled for cats and kittens 12 
weeks of age and older
OTC (EPA); single-dose 
 applicators per weight in 
packages of 3
Adams® Plus for Cats
Methoprene 8.8%, fipronil 9.8% 
(spot-on solution)
Labeled for dogs or puppies 8 
weeks of age and older
OTC (EPA); single-dose 
applicators per weight in 
packages of 3 and 6
Frontline®Plus for Dogs; Onguard® 
Plus for Dogs; PetArmor®Plus for 
Dogs; Sentry® Fiproguard Plus for 
Dogs
Methoprene 8.8%, fipronil 
9.8%, cyphenothrin 5.2% (spot-
on solution) 
Labeled for use on dogs 12 
weeks of age and older
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC (EPA); single-dose 
applicators per weight in 
packages of 3
Frontline® Tritak® for Dogs
Methoprene 11.8%, fipronil 
9.8% (spot-on solution)
Labeled for use on cats or 
 kittens 8 weeks of age and older 
OTC (EPA); single-dose 
applicators of 0.5 mL in 
packages of 3 and 6
Frontline®Plus for Cats; Onguard® 
Plus for Cats; PetArmor® Plus for 
Cats; Sentry® Fiproguard Plus for 
Cats
Methoprene 11.8%, fipronil 
9.8%, etofenprox 15% (spot-on 
solution)
Labeled for use on cats or 
 kittens 12 weeks of age or older
OTC (EPA); single-dose 
applicators of 0.5 mL in 
packages of 3
Frontline® Tritak® for Cats

===== PDF_PAGE_1486 =====
Permethrin/Permethrin Combinations, Topical    1459
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Methoprene 8.8%, fipronil 
9.8%, pyriproxyfen 0.25% 
(spot-on solution)
Labeled for dogs and puppies 8 
weeks of age and older
OTC (EPA); single-dose 
applicators of 0.5 mL in 
packages of 3 and 6 per weight
Frontline® Gold for Dogs
Methoprene 11.8%, fipronil 
9.8%, pyriproxyfen 0.25% 
(spot-on solution)
Labeled for cats and kittens 8 
weeks of age and older
OTC (EPA); single-dose 
applicators of 0.5 mL in 
packages of 3 and 6 for cats 0.7 
kg (1.5 lb) or greater
Frontline® Gold for Cats
Methoprene 0.27%, piperonyl 
butoxide 0.37%, pyrethrins 
0.2% (spray) 
Labeled for use on dogs, cats, 
puppies, kittens, horses, and 
ponies
NOT for puppies or kittens 
less than 12 weeks old
OTC (EPA); 16 oz, 24 oz, 1 
gallon
Vet-Kem Ovitrol Plus®; Bio-Spot®
Methoprene 0.27%, fipronil 
0.29% (spray) 
Labeled for use on cats or kit-
tens 8 weeks of age or older
OTC (EPA); 6.5 oz (aerosol 
spray), 8 oz (trigger spray)
Martin’s FLEE®
Methoprene 1.1%, piperonyl 
butoxide 1.05%, pyrethrins 
0.15% (shampoo) 
NOT for puppies or kittens 
less than 12 weeks old
OTC (EPA); 12 oz Vet-Kem®
Methoprene 1.02%, tetrachlor-
vinphos 14.55% (collar)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC (EPA); sizing based on 
neck circumference and varies 
based on manufacturer 
Hartz® UltraGuard Plus®; Hartz® 
UltraGuard Pro®; PetArmor® for 
Cats; Adams® Plus
Methoprene 1.02%, deltame-
thrin 4% (collar)
Labeled for dogs 12 weeks and 
older
OTC (EPA); one size, fits dogs 
with necks up to 26"
Hartz® InControl®;
Hartz® UltraGuard ProMAX
Human-Labeled Products
None
Permethrin/Permethrin Combinations, Topical 
(per-meth-rin)
Indications/Actions
Permethrin is a synthetic pyrethroid insecticide that acts as an adulticide and miticide. It has knockdown activity against fleas, ticks, lice, 
and some mites, including Cheyletiella spp and Sarcoptes scabiei. Permethrin also has repellant activity against flies, gnats, and mosquitoes. 
In dogs, permethrin is primarily used to prevent fleas and ticks. In large animal and food animal species, it is primarily used for flies, lice, 
mites, mosquitoes, ticks, and keds.
Permethrin acts by disrupting the sodium channel current in arthropod nerve cell membranes, resulting in paralysis and death.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Permethrin products can typically be applied every 2 weeks or every 4 weeks; refer to specific product label for details on use.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Permethrin and other synthetic pyrethroids are toxic to cats, especially small kittens. Do not use permethrin-containing products on cats 
and avoid use on dogs that cohabitate with cats.
Permethrin may cause hypersensitivity reactions. Do not use permethrin near the eyes or mucous membranes. Adverse effects are uncom-
mon but can include pruritus or mild skin irritation at the application site.
Wear gloves and wash hands after application. In case of skin contact, wash off with water.
Permethrin is extremely toxic to aquatic organisms and bees. Apply and dispose of products with caution as not to contaminate the en -
vironment.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
NOTES: 
1. This is not an inclusive list; there are an extensive number of products marketed, including shampoos, pour-ons, sprays, foggers, and 
dusts. Use caution selecting products, as different combinations of active ingredients may be marketed under the same trade name.
2. Permethrin products must NOT be used on cats and should not be used on dogs that cohabitate with cats.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Permethrin 45% (spot-on solution) Labeled for horses 
over 3 months of age 
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators in 
packages of 3 or 6
Equi-Spot®

===== PDF_PAGE_1487 =====
1460    Pemethrin//Pemethrin Combinations, Topical
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Permethrin 50% (spot-on solution) Labeled for horses 
over 3 months of age
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators in 
packages of 3 or 6
Pro-Force®50
Permethrin 45%, pyriproxyfen 1.9% (spot-
on solution)
Labeled for dogs over 
3 months of age
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators in 
packages of 3:
6.8 kg (15 lb) and under: 1 mL 
6.8 - 15 kg (15-33 lb): 1.5 mL 
15 -30 kg (33-66 lb): 3 mL 
30 kg (66 lb) and over: 4.5 mL 
Sentry®
Permethrin 45%, pyriproxyfen 5% (spot-on 
solution)
Labeled for dogs 
older than 3 months 
of age 
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators in 
packages of 4:
2.3 - 6.8 kg (5-15 lb): 1 mL 
7.3 - 15 kg (16-33 lb): 1.5 mL 
15.4 - 30 kg (34-66 lb): 3 mL 
Over 30 kg (66 lb): 4.5 mL
ShieldTec Plus®
Permethrin 44%, imidacloprid 8.8%, 
pyriproxyfen 0.44% (spot-on solution)
Labeled for dogs 7 
weeks of age and 
older
OTC (EPA); in packages of 2, 4, or 6:
1.8 - 4.5 kg (4-10 lb): 0.4 mL
5 - 9.1 kg (11-20 lb): 1 mL 
9.5 - 25 kg (21-55 lb): 2.5 mL 
Over 25 kg (55 lb): 4 mL 
K9 Advantix® II
Permethrin 35.6%, imidacloprid 7.12%, 
pyriproxyfen 0.36% (spot-on solution)
Labeled for dogs 7 
weeks of age and 
older
OTC (EPA); in packages of 4:
1.8 - 4.5 kg (4-10 lb): 0.48 mL 
5 - 9.1 kg (11-20 lb): 1.2 mL 
9.5 - 25 kg (21-55 lb): 3 mL 
Over 25 kg (55 lb): 4.8 mL
Activate® II
Permethrin 36.08%, dinotefuran 4.95%, 
pyriproxyfen 0.44% (spot-on solution)
Labeled for dogs 7 
weeks of age and 
older
OTC (EPA); in packages of 3 or 6:
2.3 - 4.5 kg (5-10 lb): 0.8 mL
5 - 9.1 kg (11-20 lb): 1.6 mL
9.5 - 25 kg (21-55 lb): 3.6 mL
25.4 -4 3.1 kg (56-95 lb): 4.7 mL
Over 43.1 kg (95 lb): 8 mL
Vectra 3D®
Permethrin 45%, methoprene 3% (spot-on 
solution)
Labeled for dogs 6 
months of age and 
older
OTC (EPA); in packages of 4:
3.2  6.8 kg (7-15 lb): 0.65 mL
7.3 - 13.6 kg (16-30 lb): 1 mL
14.1 - 27.2 kg (31-60 lb): 2 mL
Over 27.2 kg (60 lb): 3 mL
Zodiac®
Permethrin 0.1%,  
2-[1 methyl-2-(4- phenoxyphenoxy) ethoxy] 
pyridine 0.125%, N-octyl bicycloheptene 
dicarboximide 0.479%, pyrethrins 0.112% 
(spray)
Labeled for dogs over 
6 months of age
OTC (EPA); 8 oz bottle Veterinary Formula 
Clinical Care®
Permethrin 0.1%, piperonyl butoxide 0.5%, 
pyrethrins 0.05% (spray) 
Labeled for dogs over 
3 months of age
OTC (EPA); 32 oz bottle Flea Halt®
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Permethrin 1% (creme rinse) OTC; 59 mL Nix®; generic
Labeled for treatment of head lice in humans
Permethrin 5% (cream) Rx; 60 g Acticin®; Elimite®; generic 
Labeled for treatment of scabies in humans

===== PDF_PAGE_1488 =====
Pyrethrin/Pyrethrin Combinations, Topical     1461
Pyrethrin/Pyrethrin Combinations, Topical  
(pye-ree-thrin)
For otic use, see Antiparasitic Agents, Otic.
Indications/Actions
Pyrethrins are natural insecticides derived from the pyrethrum flower that have knockdown activity against fleas, lice, ticks, and Cheyletiella 
spp. In small animal medicine, pyrethrins are used primarily to treat fleas and ticks on dogs and cats. In large animal and food animal med-
icine, there are many products available for pour-on, dusting, and spray use.
The natural pyrethrins are made up of 6 compounds. They act by disrupting the sodium channel current in arthropod nerve cell mem -
branes, resulting in paralysis and death. Pyrethrins are often found in combination with insect growth regulators, such as methoprene or 
pyriproxyfen, or with synergistic agents such as piperonyl butoxide. Insect growth regulators add activity against egg and larval growth stag-
es. Piperonyl butoxide inhibits insect metabolic enzymes (P450 system), which prevents the breakdown of primary insecticides and allows 
for a lower dose to be used.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
For dosage recommendations, refer to the specific product label.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Pyrethrins are generally considered to be some of the safest insecticidal products. Avoid contact with the eyes and mucous membranes. Do 
not apply over wounds or irritated skin. Wear gloves when applying or wash hands after handling.
Cats are more susceptible to pyrethrin toxicity than other species. Only use products on cats that are specifically labeled for cats. Use 
pyrethrin products with caution in dogs that cohabitate with cats, and do not allow cats to groom application areas before dry. Avoid applying 
to hypothermic patients or applying when ambient temperatures are low. Pyrethrin products are toxic to fish and aquatic animals; do not 
allow products to enter drains or other water sources during application or disposal.
Adverse effects are uncommon but may include pruritus or mild skin irritation at the application site. Hypersensitivity reactions can also 
occur.
 Veterinary-Labeled Products
There are a wide variety of available products, including shampoos, pour-ons, sprays, dusts, and ointments. The following is not an all-in-
clusive list.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Pyrethrins 0.2%, piperonyl butoxide 
0.37%, (S)-methoprene 0.27% (spray) 
 Other  ingredients: N-octyl bicycloheptene 
 dicarboximide 0.62%
Labeled for use on dogs, cats over 
3 pounds and 12 weeks of age; 
horses; and ponies. 
OTC (EPA); 16 oz,  
1 gallon
Vet-Kem Ovitrol Plus®
Pyrethrins 0.05%, permethrin 0.1%, piperonyl 
butoxide 0.5% (spray)
Labeled for dogs older than 3 
months of age.
Do NOT use on cats or on dogs 
that cohabit with a cat.
OTC (EPA); 8 oz, 32 oz, 
40 oz
Flea Halt®
Pyrethrins 0.18%,  
2-[1-Methyl-2-(4-phenoxyphenoxy) ethoxy]
pyridine 0.125%, N-octyl bicycloheptene 
dicarboximide 0.957% (spray)
Labeled for dogs over 6 months of 
age or cats over 7 months of age
OTC (EPA); 8 oz, 15 oz Advantage®
Pyrethrins 0.18%, N-octyl bicycloheptene 
dicarboximide 0.479%, piperonyl butoxide 
0.3% (spray)
Labeled for dogs and puppies over 
6 months of age
OTC (EPA); 8 oz, 15 oz Advantage®
Pyrethrins 0.05%, piperonyl butoxide 0.5% 
(shampoo)
Labeled for dogs and cats over 12 
weeks of age
OTC (EPA); 12 oz Zodiac®
Pyrethrins 0.15%, piperonyl butoxide 1.88%, 
(S)-methoprene 0.1% (shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs and cats over 12 
weeks of age
OTC (EPA); 12 oz Adams® Plus
Pyrethrins 0.15%, piperonyl butoxide 1.88%, 
(S)-methoprene 0.1% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs and cats over 12 
weeks of age
OTC (EPA); 12 oz Vet-Kem® Ovitrol Plus 
Pyrethrins 0.15%, N-oxyl bicycloheptene 
dicarboximide 0.5%, piperonyl butoxide 0.3% 
(shampoo)
Labeled for dogs and cats over 12 
weeks of age 
OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon Davis®
Pyrethrins 0.15%, N-octyl bicycloheptene 
dicarboxamide 0.479%, piperonyl butoxide 
0.3% (shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, ferrets, and 
horses over 12 weeks of age
OTC (EPA); 16 oz,  
1 gallon
Veterinary Formula® 

===== PDF_PAGE_1489 =====
1462    Pyriproxyfen/Pyriproxyfen Combinations, Topical 
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Pyrethrins 0.97%, di-n-propyl  isocinchomerate 
1.94%, N-octyl bicycloheptene dicarboxamide 
5.7%, piperonyl butoxide 3.74% (dip) 
Labeled for dogs and cats over 12 
weeks of age
OTC (EPA); 4 oz Adams Plus® 
Pyrethrins 0.3%, piperonyl butoxide 3% (dip) Labeled for dogs and cats over 12 
weeks of age
OTC (EPA); 8 oz, 1 
gallon
Bio-Groom® 
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Pyrethrins 0.33%, piperonyl butoxide 4% (shampoo) OTC; 2 oz, 4 oz, 8 oz Rid®; generic
Indicated for treatment of lice in humans
Pyriproxyfen/Pyriproxyfen Combinations, Topical 
(pye-ri-proks-i-fen)  
See also Deltamethrin, Dinotefuran/Pyriproxyfen Combinations, Fipronil/Fipronil Combinations, Imidacloprid/Imidacloprid Combi-
nations, Methoprene/Methoprene Combinations, Permethrin/Permethrin Combinations, and Pyrethrin/Pyrethrin Combinations
Indications/Actions
Pyriproxyfen is a second-generation insect growth regulator and is added to topical and environmental products to extend the insecticidal 
spectrum to include eggs and larva.
Pyriproxyfen mimics insect juvenile growth hormone, halting development during metamorphosis and larval development. It also con-
centrates in female flea ovaries, causing non-viable eggs to be produced. Pyriproxyfen is combined with adulticides such as permethrin or 
fipronil to kill all stages of targeted parasites, making re-infestation less likely. 
Suggested Dosages/Uses
For dosage recommendations, refer to the specific product label.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Pyriproxyfen can be found in products that contain permethrin, which is toxic to cats , particularly small kittens. Only use products 
containing pyrethroids that are specifically labeled for use on cats . Pyriproxyfen has low toxicity in mammals, but skin irritation and 
hypersensitivity reactions are possible.
Wear gloves when applying products containing insecticides and wash hands after handling. Pyriproxyfen is more resistant to UV light 
than is methoprene.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
NOTE: This is not an all-inclusive list but is representative of the types of products available.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Pyriproxyfen 0.46%, 
imidacloprid 9.1% (spot-on 
solution)
Labeled for dogs and puppies 7 
weeks of age and older; cats and 
kittens 8 weeks of age and older
OTC (EPA); packages of 3, 4 or 6 
 applicators:
Cats 0.9 - 2.3 kg (2-5 lb): 0.23 mL
Cats 2.3 - 4.1 kg (5-9 lb): 0.4 mL
Cats over 4.1 kg (9 lb): 0.8 mL
Dogs 1.4 - 4.5 kg (3-10 lb): 0.4 mL
Dogs 5 - 9.1 kg (11-20 lb): 1 mL
Dogs 9.5 - 25 kg (21-55 lb): 2.5 mL
Dogs over 25 kg (55 lb): 4 mL
Advantage®II; Adventure 
Plus®; Cross Block® II; Pet 
Armor Advanced® II 
Pyriproxyfen 0.46%, 
imidacloprid 9.1% (spot-on 
solution)
Labeled for cats and kittens 7 weeks 
of age and older
OTC (EPA); packages of 4 applicators: 
2.3 - 4.1 kg (5-9 lb): 0.4 mL (red)
Over 4.1 kg (9 lb): 0.8 mL (purple)
Provecta® II
Pyriproxyfen 0.44%, 
imidacloprid 8.8%, 
permethrin 44% (spot-on 
solution) 
Labeled for dogs and puppies 7 
weeks of age and older
Do NOT use on cats or on dogs 
that cohabitate with a cat.
OTC (EPA); packages of 4 or 6 
 applicators for use on dogs ONLY:
1.8 - 4.5 kg (4-10 lb): 0.4 mL
5 - 9.1 kg (11-20 lb): 1 mL
9.5 -25 kg (21-55 lb): 2.5 mL
Over 25 kg (55 lb): 4 mL
K9 Advantix® II; Provecta® 
Advanced

===== PDF_PAGE_1490 =====
Spinetoram, Topical    1463
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Pyriproxyfen 0.36%, 
imidacloprid 7.12%, 
permethrin 35.6% (spot-on 
solution)
Dogs and puppies over 7 weeks of 
age
Do NOT use on cats or on dogs 
that cohabitate with a cat.
OTC (EPA); packages of 4 applicators 
for use on dogs ONLY:
1.8 - 4.5 kg (4-10 lb): 0.48 mL
5 - 9.1 kg (11-20 lb): 1.2 mL
9.5 - 25 kg (21-55 lb): 3 mL
Over 25 kg (55 lb): 4.8 mL
Activate®II
Pyriproxyfen 0.44%, 
dinotefuran 4.95%, 
permethrin 36.08% (spot-on 
solution) 
Labeled for dogs over 7 weeks of 
age  
Do NOT use on cats or on dogs 
that cohabitate with a cat. 
OTC (EPA); in packages of 3 or 6:
2.3 – 4.5 kg (5-10 lb): 0.8 mL
5 - 9.1 kg (11-20 lb): 1.6 mL
9.5 -25 kg (21-55 lb): 3.6 mL
56 to 95 lb: 4.7 mL
Over 95 lb: 8 mL
Vectra 3D®
Pyriproxyfen 1.9%, 
permethrin 45%, (spot-on 
solution) 
Labeled for dogs over 3 months of 
age 
Do NOT use on cats or on dogs 
that cohabitate with a cat. 
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators in 
packages of 3:
6.8 kg (15 lb) and under: 1 mL 
6.8 - 15 kg (15-33 lb): 1.5 mL 
15 - 29.9 kg (33-66 lb): 3 mL 
29.9 kg (66 lb) and over: 4.5 mL
Sentry®
Pyriproxyfen 5%, permethrin 
45% (spot-on solution) 
Labeled for dogs over 3 months of 
age 
Do NOT use on cats or on dogs 
that cohabitate with a cat. 
OTC (EPA); single-dose applicators in 
packages of 4:
2.3 - 6.8 kg (5-15 lb): 1 mL 
7.3 - 15 kg (16-33 lb): 1.5 mL 
15.4 - 29.9 kg (34-66 lb): 3 mL 
Over (29.9 kg) 66 lb: 4.5 mL
ShieldTec Plus® 
Pyriproxyfen 3%, 
dinotefuran 22%, fipronil 
8.92% (spot-on solution) 
Labeled for cats and kittens over 8 
weeks of age
OTC (EPA); available in packages of 
3 or 6 applicators for cats over 0.7 kg 
(1.5 lb)
Catego®
Pyriproxyfen 2%, 
cyphenothrin 40%, (spot-on 
solution)
Labeled for use on dogs more than 
12 weeks of age
Do NOT use on cats or on dogs 
that cohabitate with a cat.
OTC (EPA); available in packages of 3 
applicators:
 4.1 - 9.1 kg (9 - 20 lb), 9.5 - 17.7 kg 
(21 - 39 lb), 18.1 - 27.2 kg (40 - 60 lb), 
and at least 27.7 kg (61 lb)
TriForce®
Human-Labeled Products
None
Spinetoram, Topical 
(spin-et-oh-ram)  
Indications/Actions
Spinetoram is an insecticide used for the prevention and treatment of flea infestations in cats.
Spinetoram is a semi-synthetic, second-generation derivative of the natural insecticide spinosad. It acts on both GABA and nicotinic ace-
tylcholine receptors in the CNS of insects, leading to CNS hyperexcitation, followed by paralysis and death. Spinetoram begins to act within 
30 minutes after application.1 
Suggested Dosages/Uses
To treat and prevent flea infestations, spinetoram should be applied once monthly to the skin at the base of the head. For detailed application 
instructions, refer to the specific product label. 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Spinetoram should not be used on kittens less than 8 weeks of age. Do not allow cats to ingest product. Only a single dose should be applied at 
one time, regardless of the weight of the cat (ie, large cats do not require additional doses). Use spinetoram with caution on debilitated, aged, 
pregnant, or nursing animals, or any animal known to be sensitive to pesticides. Avoid contact with the eyes or mouth. Spinetoram should 
not be used in dogs, as they are more sensitive to the toxic effects of spinetoram than mice, rats, or cats.2 
The primary adverse effects are application site reactions, including hair loss, hair changes (eg, greasing, clumping, matting), redness, 
inflammation, and itching. Other reported adverse effects include inactivity, vomiting, and inappetence.3 Do not allow cats to groom after 
application in order to prevent ingestion. Application at the base of the head, rather than the shoulder blades, decreases the risk for direct 
ingestion.
Spinetoram has been shown to produce reproductive adverse effects in female rats including treatment-related depletion of primordial 

===== PDF_PAGE_1491 =====
1464    Imiquimod, Topical 
ovarian follicles, growing ovarian follicles, dystocia and other parturition abnormalities, late resorptions or retained fetuses, and increased 
postimplantation loss. However, no adverse effects were observed on the offspring at dose levels that produced parental toxicity. The de -
velopmental toxicity and reproduction studies indicated no evidence of increased susceptibility of the offspring with pre- and/or postnatal 
exposures.2
Veterinary-Labeled Products 
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Spinetoram 11.2% (spot-on 
solution)
Labeled for cats and 
kittens 8 weeks of age 
and older
OTC (EPA); in packs of 1, 3, or 6: 
Cats and kittens over 0.82 kg (1.8 lb):  
0.77 mL
Cheristin®
Human-Labeled Products
None
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Antiseborrheic Agents, Topical
Refer to:
Benzoyl Peroxide, Topical (Antimicrobial Agents, Topical; Antibacterial Agents)
Coal Tar/Coal Tar Combinations, Topical (Keratolytic Agents)
Fatty Acids (Omega), Topical (Antipruritic/Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Topical; Non-Corticosteroid Agents)
Phytosphingosine, Topical (Antipruritic/Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Topical; Non-Corticosteroid Agents)
Salicylic Acid, T opical (Keratolytic Agents)
Selenium Sulfide, Topical (Antimicrobial Agents, Topical; Antifungal Agents)
Sulfur, Precipitated, Topical (Keratolytic Agents)
Immunomodulator Agents, Topical
Imiquimod, Topical 
(ih-mi-kwih-mod) Aldara®, Zyclara®
Indications/Actions
Imiquimod is an immune response modifier that may be useful in the treatment of a variety of topical conditions in animals. In dogs and 
cats, it may be beneficial in treating actinic keratosis, squamous cell carcinoma, pigmented epidermal plaques, cutaneous viral papillomato-
sis, localized solar dermatitis, and solar carcinoma in situ. It may also be useful for feline herpesvirus dermatitis, feline Bowen’s disease, and 
canine melanocytomas. Many of these indications are based on anecdotal evidence, as there are very few studies published for veterinary use. 
In horses, imiquimod has been anecdotally used for treating equine sarcoids, aural plaques, and epitrichial sweat gland ductal carcinoma. In 
humans, it is labeled as a treatment for genital or perianal warts, superficial basal cell carcinomas, and actinic keratoses of the face and scalp.
Imiquimod is an imidazoquinoline compound that binds to toll-like receptor 7 and stimulates the immune system to release various cyto-
kines, including interferon-alpha and interleukin-12. These locally generated cytokines induce a Th1 immune response with the generation 
of cytotoxic effectors. Imiquimod itself does not have in vitro activity against wart viruses but stimulates monocytes and macrophages to 
release cytokines that induce regression in viral protein production.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Use of imiquimod in animals is limited and further studies are needed. Doses and treatment regimens vary depending on the disease treated 
and tolerance to the drug. Doses range from applying a thin film once daily to applying every other week. Exudate and crusts should be 
gently cleaned prior to application of imiquimod. Treatment duration and frequency may be adjusted depending on patient response and 
adverse reactions.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Wear gloves when applying imiquimod. Avoid exposing the eyes and mucous membranes to imiquimod; however, dogs with oral mucosal 
papilloma and horses with corneal squamous cell carcinomas have been treated without significant problems. Although systemic absorption 
is unlikely, do not allow treated animals to lick or groom the application site. 
Local skin reactions are common and expected with imiquimod therapy, including erythema, burning, tenderness, pain, irritation, ooz-
ing/exudate, and erosion. Treatment duration and frequency may require adjustment depending on irritant reactions. Depigmentation and 
hair loss may occur at application sites as posttreatment sequelae.
Increased liver enzymes, neutropenia, partial anorexia, and vomiting were reported in cats in one small study, possibly associated with 
ingestion postcutaneous application.1 Consider a baseline hepatic profile with periodic monitoring. Do not cover application site with occlu-
sive dressings. It is thought that imiquimod may increase risk for sunburn; avoid exposing application site to sunlight.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
None

===== PDF_PAGE_1492 =====
Pimecrolimus, Topical   1465
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Imiquimod 2.5% (cream) Rx; 7.5 g pump bottle, single-use 250 mg packets in boxes 
of 28
Zyclara®
Imiquimod 3.75% (cream) Rx; 7.5 g pump bottle Zyclara®; generic
Imiquimod 5% (cream) Rx; single-use 250 mg packets in boxes of 12 or 24 Aldara®; generic
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
 
Pimecrolimus, Topical
(pim-e-kroe-li-mus) 
Indications/Actions
Topical pimecrolimus may be beneficial for the adjunctive treatment of atopic dermatitis, discoid lupus erythematosus, pemphigus ery -
thematosus or foliaceous, pinnal vascular disease or other cutaneous vasculopathies, alopecia areata, vitiligo, perianal fistulas (concurrent 
therapy or as maintenance treatment after cyclosporine therapy), and for feline proliferative and necrotizing otitis externa. Unlike topical 
corticosteroids, pimecrolimus does not have atrophogenic or metabolic effects associated with long-term use or large treatment areas.
Pimecrolimus is a calcineurin inhibitor that acts similarly to cyclosporine and tacrolimus. It inhibits T-lymphocyte activation primarily 
by inhibiting the phosphatase activity of calcineurin. It also inhibits the release of inflammatory cytokines and mediators from mast cells 
and basophils. The mechanism of pimecrolimus may not be identical to tacrolimus, as pimecrolimus did not impair the primary immune 
response (as did tacrolimus) in mice after a contact sensitizer was applied. Both drugs did impair the secondary response, however. Any 
clinical significance associated with this difference is not yet clear.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
There is limited experience with pimecrolimus in veterinary patients. It is typically recommended to use twice daily until signs are controlled, 
then decrease to the least frequent application that controls clinical signs.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Although a causal relationship has not been established, skin malignancy and lymphoma have rarely been reported in humans using top -
ical pimecrolimus. Therefore, long-term use is not recommended in humans, and pimecrolimus application should be limited to only the 
affected area(s). The long-term adverse effects of topical pimecrolimus in veterinary patients are currently unknown. Close monitoring is 
recommended for patients using this medication on a continuous maintenance basis. When long-term treatment is required, the ultimate 
goal should be to achieve the lowest possible dose that controls clinical signs. Pimecrolimus should not be used in patients that are receiving 
systemic immunosuppressant therapy or are otherwise immunocompromised.
Wear gloves or use an applicator (eg, cotton swab) when applying the cream and wash hands after handling. Do not allow animals to lick 
or chew at the treated area(s) for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application to avoid ingestion and allow the medication to work. 
Although topical pimecrolimus appears well tolerated in dogs, localized irritation and pruritus have been reported in both humans and 
dogs. Pimecrolimus has been anecdotally reported to be less irritating than tacrolimus in dogs; however, it may also be less effective. Pi -
mecrolimus may be cost prohibitive. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
None
Human-Labeled Products 
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Pimecrolimus 1% (cream) Rx; 30 g, 60 g, and 100 g Elidel®; generic
Tacrolimus, Topical 
(ta-kroe-li-mus)
Indications/Actions
Tacrolimus ointment may be beneficial in veterinary patients as a sole or adjunctive treatment of atopic dermatitis, discoid lupus erythematosus, 
pemphigus erythematosus or foliaceous, pinnal vascular disease, alopecia areata, vitiligo, dermal arteritis of the nasal philtrum, perianal fistulas 
(adjunctive or maintenance treatment after cyclosporin therapy), sterile canine panniculitis, and feline proliferative and necrotizing otitis externa. 
Unlike topical corticosteroids, tacrolimus does not have atrophogenic or metabolic effects associated with long-term use or large treatment areas.
Tacrolimus is a calcineurin inhibitor that inhibits T-lymphocyte activation. It also inhibits the release of inflammatory cytokines and 
mediators from mast cells and basophils.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
There is limited experience with topical tacrolimus in veterinary patients. Twice-daily application is typically recommended until signs are 
controlled. Application can then be reduced to the minimum frequency needed to control clinical signs.

===== PDF_PAGE_1493 =====
1466    Coal Tar/Coal Tar Combinations, Topical
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Although a causal relationship has not been established, skin malignancy and lymphoma have rarely been reported in humans using topical 
tacrolimus. Therefore, long-term use is not recommended in humans, and tacrolimus application should be limited to only the affected 
area(s). The long-term adverse effects of topical tacrolimus in veterinary patients are currently unknown, and thus close monitoring is 
recommended for patients using this medication on a continuous maintenance basis. When long-term treatment is required, the ultimate 
goal should be to achieve the lowest possible dose that controls clinical signs. Tacrolimus should not be used in patients that are receiving 
systemic immunosuppressant therapy or are otherwise immunocompromised. Do not use this ointment on premalignant or malignant skin 
conditions.
Wear gloves or use an applicator (eg, cotton swab) when applying the ointment and wash hands after handling. Do not allow animals to 
lick or chew at the treated area(s) for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application to avoid ingestion and allow the medication to work.
The commercially available ointment should not be used as (or compounded into) an ophthalmic preparation for treating KCS in dogs, as 
it contains propylene carbonate, a known ocular toxin.
Although topical tacrolimus appears well tolerated in dogs, localized irritation and pruritus have been reported in both humans and 
dogs. Pimecrolimus has been anecdotally reported as less irritating than tacrolimus in dogs; however, it may also be less effective. The cost of 
topical tacrolimus may be prohibitive.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) classifies tacrolimus as a hazardous drug; personal protective equip-
ment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the risk for exposure. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
None
Human-Labeled Products 
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Tacrolimus 0.03% (ointment) Rx; 30 g, 60 g, and 100 g Protopic®; generic
Tacrolimus 0.1% (ointment) Rx; 30 g, 60 g, and 100 g Protopic®; generic
Keratolytic Agents, Topical
See also: 
Benzoyl Peroxide, Topical (Antimicrobial Agents, Topical; Antibacterial Agents)
Phytosphingosine, Topical (Antipruritic/Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Topical; Non-Corticosteroid Agents)
Selenium Sulfide, Topical (Antimicrobial Agents, Topical; Antifungal Agents)
Coal Tar/Coal Tar Combinations, Topical
(kole tar)
Indications/Actions
The use of coal tar containing shampoos in veterinary medicine is somewhat controversial, particularly since almost all veterinary-labeled 
products have been withdrawn from the market. However, coal tar shampoos have been used for many years to treat greasy dermatoses 
(seborrhea oleosa) in dogs.
Coal tar possesses keratoplastic, keratolytic, vasoconstrictive, antipruritic, and degreasing actions. Coal tar’s mechanism of keratoplastic 
(keratoregulating) action is probably secondary to decreasing mitosis and DNA synthesis of basal epidermal cells.1
Suggested Dosages/Uses
The frequency of shampooing will vary according to the patient’s needs. When using a medicated shampoo, allow 10 minutes of contact time. 
Another acceptable regimen is to allow the shampoo to act for 3 to 5 minutes, rinse it thoroughly, then repeat the procedure. Refer to specific 
product labels for directions, as contact time recommendations may vary. Completely rinse to prevent skin irritation and/or excessive drying.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
The carcinogenic risks associated with coal tar products are debated. At present, most (including the FDA) believe that coal tar products with 
concentrations of 5% or less are safe for human use. However, should they be used on animals, clients should wear gloves when applying and 
wash off any product that contacts their skin. Carcinogenic risk assessment for dogs using coal tar products was not located. Coal tar prod-
ucts should not be used on cats, patients that have prior sensitivity reactions to tar products, or patients that have dry scaling dermatoses.
Be careful comparing coal tar concentrations on labels. Coal tar solution contains ≈20% coal tar extract or refined tar. For example, a 10% 
coal tar solution contains ≈2% coal tar (refined).
Photosensitization, skin drying, and skin irritation are possible with coal tar therapy. Adverse effects are more likely with coal tar concen-
trations greater than 3%. Residual odor is often bothersome to clients. Tar may stain fabrics or haircoats and discolor jewelry.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Coal tar solution 3%, chloroxylenol 0.6%, 
salicylic acid 2%, sulfur 2% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC; 8 oz Imrex®

===== PDF_PAGE_1494 =====
Salicylic Acid, Topical    1467
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Coal tar solution 2%, sulfur 2% (shampoo) 
Other ingredients: allantoin, aloe vera 
extract, citric acid, sodium laureth sulfate
Labeled for dogs
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz, and 
12 oz
Sulfodene®
Coal tar solution 5% (equivalent to 1% 
refined coal tar) (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon Nova Pearls®
Slow-release power moisturizers 
 encapsulated in Novasome® microcarriers
Coal tar solution 2%, menthol 1%, salicylic 
acid 3% (shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC; 16 oz, 1 gallon Pharmasal-T®
Coal tar solution 1%, salicylic acid 0.22%, 
sulfur 2% (shampoo) Other ingredients: 
aloe vera, menthol, zinc oxide 
Labeled for dogs
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon
Human-Labeled Products
Several products labeled for human use and containing coal tar—including ointments, lotions, and creams—are available in concentrations 
ranging from 0.5% to 5% coal tar (not coal tar extract).
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Coal tar 0.5% (shampoo) OTC; 120 mL, 177 mL, 240 mL, 355 mL, and 480 mL DHS Tar®; Polytar®; Tera-Gel®
Coal tar 1% (shampoo) OTC; 180 mL, 473 mL Ionil T®; PC-Tar®; Zetar®
Coal tar 2% (shampoo) OTC; 132 mL, 255 mL, and 480 mL Neutrogena® T/Gel Original®
Coal tar 3% (shampoo) OTC; 120 mL, 240 mL MG 217 Medicated Tar®
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
 
Salicylic Acid, Topical 
(sal-i-sil-ic ass-id)
Indications/Actions
Salicylic acid is used to treat seborrheic disorders with mild to moderate scaling and mild waxy or keratinous debris, including seborrhea 
sicca and oleosa. Salicylic acid is often combined with sulfur or benzoyl peroxide. In higher concentrations, salicylic acid can be used to 
remove localized excessive tissues associated with hyperkeratotic disorders, such as calluses and idiopathic thickening of the planum nasale 
and footpads. Salicylic acid is also used in some wound cleansers.
Salicylic acid has mild antipruritic, antibacterial (bacteriostatic), keratoplastic, and keratolytic actions. Lower concentrations are primar-
ily keratoplastic, and higher concentrations are keratolytic. Salicylic acid lowers skin pH, increases corneocyte hydration, and dissolves the 
intercellular binder between corneocytes. Salicylic acid and sulfur are thought to be synergistic in their keratolytic actions.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Salicylic acid shampoos are typically labeled for use 2 to 3 times weekly; however, the frequency will vary according to the patient’s needs. 
Allow medicated shampoos to remain in contact with the skin for 5 to 10 minutes before rinsing well. Alternatively, allow for 3 to 5 minutes 
of contact time, rinse thoroughly, then repeat the procedure. Ensure shampoo is rinsed completely to prevent skin irritation and excessive 
drying. Refer to specific product labels for complete directions.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Salicylic acid products that are combined with coal tar must not be used on cats.
Avoid contact with eyes and mucous membranes. Do not allow animals to lick during bathing in order to avoid ingestion. Avoid using 
on broken skin unless product is specifically labeled for wounds. Wash hands after application, as skin irritation is possible. Salicylic acid 
products may bleach colored fabrics.
Possible adverse effects include burning, itching, pain, erythema, and swelling at the application site, particularly when used in concen -
trations greater than 2%. A rebound seborrheic effect can occur.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Salicylic acid 6.6% (gel) Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 1 oz Solva-Ker®
Salicylic acid 1.6%, benzocaine 1.5% 
(ointment)
Labeled for dogs OTC; 2 oz Sulfodene®3-Way Ointment

===== PDF_PAGE_1495 =====
1468    Sulfur, Precipitated, Topical
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Salicylic acid, benzoic acid, malic acid 
(cream)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 1 oz, 14 oz Derma-Clens®
Salicylic acid 2% (shampoo) Labeled for dogs and cats; some 
products also labeled for horses
OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz BioSeb®; CeraSoothe® SA; 
KeraSeb®, Ceraven SA®
Salicylic acid 1%, benzoyl peroxide 2.5% 
(shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 12 oz, 1 
gallon
DermaBenSs®
Salicylic acid 2%, benzoyl peroxide 3% 
(shampoo)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 12 oz, 1 
gallon
EZ-Derm®
Salicylic acid 2%, chloroxylenol 2%, 
 sodium thiosulfate 2% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 16 oz, 1 
gallon
Universal Medicated Shampoo
Salicylic acid 2%, sulfur 2% (shampoo) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz, 
16 oz
Exfolux®
Salicylic acid 2%, selenium sulfide 1%, 
sulfur 2% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 16 oz Siccaderm®
Salicylic acid 2%, benzoyl peroxide 3%, 
sulfur 2% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 12 oz Pet MD®
Salicylic acid 0.22%, sulfur 2%, coal tar 
solution 1%, zinc oxide 0.22% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs
Do NOT use on cats. 
OTC; 12 oz, 1 
gallon
Sulfur & Tar® 
Salicylic acid 1%, benzoyl peroxide 2.5% 
(shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 12 oz Peroxiderm®
Salicylic acid 1% (mousse) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 6.8 oz CeraSoothe® SA
Salicylic acid 2% (mousse) Labeled for dogs, cats, and horses OTC; 6.8 oz BioSeb®
Human-Labeled Products
NOTE: In addition to the prescription products listed, there are a wide variety of human-labeled topical salicylic acid products in a range 
of concentrations available OTC, including creams, ointments, transdermal patches, liquids, and gels. These products are typically labeled 
for wart removal or treatment of acne. There are also a wide variety of OTC skin cleansers and shampoos containing salicylic acid, often in 
combination with sulfur, coal tar, or menthol. For more information on these products, refer to a comprehensive human drug reference or 
contact a pharmacist.
Active Ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Salicylic acid 3% (ointment) Rx; 30 g Bensal HP®; Keralyt®; generic
Salicylic acid 6% (cream) Rx; 16 oz Salex®
Salicylic acid 6% (lotion) Rx; 8 oz Salex®
Salicylic acid 6% (foam) Rx; 7.1 oz Salvax®
Salicylic acid 6% (gel) Rx; 40 g, 100 g Keralyt®; generic
Sulfur, Precipitated, Topical
(sul-fer)
Indications/Actions
Sulfur-containing shampoos are often used to treat patients with seborrheic disorders exhibiting mild to moderate scaling, with mild waxi-
ness and keratinous debris. Sulfur is often found in combination with salicylic acid.
Sulfur has keratoplastic and keratolytic actions. Lower concentrations of sulfur are primarily keratoplastic secondary to assisting the con-
version of cysteine to cystine, which is thought to be an important factor in the maturation of corneocytes. Like salicylic acid, the keratolytic 
effects of sulfur increase with concentration. Salicylic acid and sulfur are believed to be synergistic in their keratolytic actions. Sulfur also 
has mild degreasing effects and can be mildly antipruritic. Sulfur has antibacterial, antifungal, and antiparasitic effects secondary to sulfur 
conversion to hydrogen sulfide and pentathionic acid by bacteria and keratocytes. 
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Sulfur shampoo label directions range from once daily to once weekly; the frequency of use will vary depending on the patient. Allow med-
icated shampoos to remain in contact with the skin for 5 to 10 minutes before rinsing well. Alternatively, allow for 3 to 5 minutes of contact 
time, rinse thoroughly, then repeat the procedure. Ensure shampoo is rinsed completely to prevent skin irritation and excessive drying. Refer 
to the specific product label for complete instructions.

===== PDF_PAGE_1496 =====
Tretinoin, Topical    1469
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Avoid contact with eyes, mucous membranes, and open cuts or sores. Wear gloves when applying and wash hands after application. Residual 
odor can be bothersome, and sulfur may stain fabrics and hair.
Sulfur can be irritating or drying and can cause pruritus. A rebound seborrheic effect can occur with sulfur-containing products.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Sulfur 2% (shampoo) Labeled for dogs 
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC; 12 oz Sulfodene®
Sodium thiosulfate 2%, chloroxylenol 2%, 
salicylic acid 2% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 16 oz, 1 gallon Universal Medicated Shampoo®
Sodium thiosulfate serves as 
source of soluble sulfur.
Sulfur 2%, salicylic acid 2%, selenium 
sulfide 1% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 16 oz Siccaderm®
Sulfur 1%, benzoyl peroxide 2.5%, salicylic 
acid 1% (shampoo)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon Sulfur Benz®
Sulfur 2%, coal tar solution 1%, salicylic 
acid 0.22%, zinc oxide 0.22% (shampoo) 
Labeled for dogs
Do NOT use on cats.
OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon Sulfur & Tar®
Sulfur 2%, salicylic acid 2% (shampoo) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz, 16 oz Exfolux®
Human-Labeled Products
NOTE: There are several topical products containing sulfur labeled for human use, including creams, lotions, shampoos, and soaps that are 
typically labeled for acne or dandruff. For more information on these products, refer to a comprehensive human drug reference or contact 
a pharmacist.
Retinoid Agents, Topical
Tretinoin, Topical 
All-Trans Retinoic Acid; Vitamin A Acid
(tret-in-oyn)
Indications/Actions
Topical tretinoin has been used anecdotally for treating localized follicular or hyperkeratotic disorders, such as idiopathic nasal and footpad 
hyperkeratosis, Schnauzer comedo syndrome, callous pyodermas, and chin acne. 
The exact mechanism of action of tretinoin is not well understood, but it stimulates cellular mitotic activity, increases cell turnover, and 
decreases the cohesiveness of follicular epithelial cells. Similar to other retinoids, tretinoin is derived from vitamin A. It may have anti-in-
flammatory and immunomodulatory effects by stimulating cytotoxic T-cells and natural killer cells, inhibiting polymorphonuclear 
cells and suppressing lymphocyte proliferation. Retinoids also have antineoplastic effects by maintaining epithelial cell differentiation 
and inhibiting tumor cell proliferation. 
Suggested Dosages/Uses
In small animal species, topical tretinoin is often used initially at a concentration of 0.05% and is applied once daily. Treatment is continued 
until clinical signs are controlled or until treatment is no longer tolerated. Once clinical signs are controlled, tretinoin frequency is then re-
duced to only as needed. In animals that are unable to tolerate therapy, a lower concentration of 0.025% to 0.01% may be tried to minimize 
adverse effects.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Avoid excessive sun exposure during treatment with tretinoin. Avoid contact with eyes, nostrils, inner ears, and mouth. Wear gloves when 
applying and wash hands after handling. Do not use this product in pregnant or nursing animals. Do not let animals lick or chew at the 
treated area(s) for at least 20 to 30 minutes after application. Some gel products contain soluble fish proteins and should be used with 
caution in patients with fish allergies.
Adverse effects can include hypersensitivity reactions and local irritation (eg, erythema, dryness, peeling, pruritus).
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) classifies tretinoin as a hazardous drug; personal protective equip -
ment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the risk for exposure. 
Veterinary-Labeled Products
None

===== PDF_PAGE_1497 =====
1470    Antibacterial Agents, Otic
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Tretinoin 0.02% (cream) Rx; 20 g, 40 g, 44 g, 60 g Renova®
Tretinoin 0.025% (cream) Rx; 20 g, 45 g Avita®; Retin-A®; generic
Tretinoin 0.05% (cream) Rx; 20 g, 40 g Refissa®; Retin-A®; generic
Tretinoin 0.1% (cream) Rx; 20 g Retin-A®; generic
Tretinoin 0.01% (gel) Rx; 15 g, 45 g Retin-A®; generic
Tretinoin 0.025% (gel) Rx; 15 g, 20 g, 45 g Avita®; Retin-A®; generic
Tretinoin 0.05% (gel) Rx; 45 g Atralin®; generic
Tretinoin 0.04% (gel microspheres) Rx; 20 g, 45 g, 50 g Retin-A Micro®; generic
Tretinoin 0.06% (gel microspheres) Rx; 50 g Retin-A Micro®
Tretinoin 0.08% (gel microspheres) Rx; 50 g Retin-A Micro®
Tretinoin 0.1% (gel microspheres) Rx; 20 g, 45 g, 50 g Retin-A Micro®; generic
Tretinoin 0.05% (lotion) Rx; 20 g, 45 g, 50 g Altreno®
Otic Agents, Topical
Although this is not a complete list, the following examples are representative of the types of topical otic preparations that are available to 
veterinarians. Included are both veterinary-labeled and human-labeled products that may be of use in veterinary medicine. Portions of this 
section are adapted from Koch SN, Torres SMF , Plumb, DC. Canine and Feline Dermatology Drug Handbook. John Wiley & Sons, 2012. This 
reference provides additional detail on these and other compounds and products.
Antibacterial Agents, Otic 
See also Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic
Indications/Actions
Antibacterial ear preparations are commonly used to treat infections caused by various bacteria, such as Staphylococcus spp or Pseudomonas 
spp. Ear cytology should be performed to confirm a bacterial infection prior to prescription of topical antibiotics, mainly to prevent antibiotic 
overuse and bacterial resistance. In long-term cases and when rods are seen on cytology, culture and susceptibility may be recommended to 
identify multidrug-resistant organisms, such as Pseudomonas spp. Very few otic products that contain solely an antibiotic are commercially 
available to treat bacterial otitis; therefore, ophthalmic products, compounded products, or injectable products applied topically into the ear 
canals are sometimes used to treat these infections, mainly when steroids and antifungals are not needed. Listed below are the commercial 
products containing an antibiotic agent exclusively. 
Suggested Dosages/Uses
These products should be used 2 to 3 times daily in adequate amounts to coat the entire ear canal. When using acidifying ear cleansers with 
an aminoglycoside- or fluoroquinolone-containing agent, it is recommended to use these products about 1 hour apart since low pH can 
decrease the activity of aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones. Advise the client to discontinue the medication and contact the veterinarian 
if the animal’s ears become redder or more inflamed at any time during treatment. 
Patients should be rechecked before discontinuing treatment, and treatment must be continued until 1 week after negative cytology is 
obtained. 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
There is little information available regarding ototoxicity from topical antibiotics use in dogs and cats; therefore, caution should be used 
when prescribing various topical otic medications in patients with ruptured tympanic membranes due to potential ototoxicity. Ototoxicity 
has been reported with aminoglycosides in dogs and cats, and cats may be more sensitive to their potential ototoxicity; however, this concern 
may be overstated. One study showed no vestibulotoxic or ototoxic effects from 21 days of otic gentamicin applied every 12 hours to ears 
with ruptured tympanic membranes. Another study showed that instillation of aqueous solutions of tris-EDTA combined with marbofloxa-
cin or gentamicin into the middle ear of dogs with otitis media either did not change or improved the brainstem auditory-evoked responses 
(BAER); however, tobramycin solution impaired the BAER. Based on this study, the concern for ototoxicity is higher with tobramycin com-
pared with marbofloxacin and gentamicin.1
Veterinary- and Human-Labeled Products
Refer to each product’s label for inactive ingredients and precautions or contraindications.

===== PDF_PAGE_1498 =====
Antibiotic-Potentiating Agents, Otic    1471
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Enrofloxacin 0.5%, silver 
 sulfadiazine (SSD) 1%
Labeled for dogs Rx; 15 mL, 30 mL Baytril®
Gentamicin sulfate 0.3% 
 (solution, ointment)
Labeled for dogs and 
cats
Rx; 5 mL (solution), 3.5 g 
(ointment)
Gentocin®
Extra-label use in the ears. Many human 
 ophthalmic products are also available.
Oxytetracycline hydrochloride 
5 mg/g, polymixin B 10,000 
units/g (ointment)
Labeled for dogs, cats, 
and horses
3.5 g tube Terramycin®
Extra-label use in the ears
Ciprofloxacin hydrochloride 
0.3% (solution, ointment)
Human-labeled product Rx; 5 mL, 10 mL (solution), 
3.5 g (ointment)
Ciloxan®; generic
Extra-label use in the ears
Ciprofloxacin hydrochloride 
0.2% (solution)
Human-labeled product Rx; 0.25 mL single use Cetraxal®; generic
Ofloxacin 0.3% (solution) Human-labeled product Rx; 5 mL, 10 mL Floxin®; generic
Tobramycin 0.3% (solution, 
ointment)
Human-labeled product Rx; 5 mL Tobrex®; generic
Extra-label use in the ears
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
 
Antibiotic-Potentiating Agents, Otic 
Tromethamine-ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (tris-EDTA) has antimicrobial and antibiotic potentiating activity. Cell surfaces of gram-neg-
ative bacteria are damaged when exposed to EDTA. Tromethamine (tris) enhances the effects of EDTA, and the tris-EDTA combination is 
bacteriostatic.1 Exposure to tris-EDTA results in increased permeability to extracellular solutes and leakage of intracellular solutes. Cell sur-
faces of gram-positive bacteria are more resistant to tris-EDTA than gram-negative bacteria.2 Tris-EDTA has also shown synergistic effects 
with various antibiotics, such as aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones in vitro.1–4 Tris-EDTA also has antibiofilm activity through inhibition 
of bacterial adhesion.5
Tris-EDTA is non-ototoxic and safe to use in the middle ear. Tris-EDTA–containing products are most effective when applied 15 to 30 
minutes before the topical antibiotic. Products containing tris-EDTA are available as a sole ingredient or combined with chlorhexidine or 
ketoconazole. When recommending ear flushing as part of the treatment regimen, it is important to demonstrate the cleaning technique 
in the examination room and advise the client to discontinue application and contact the veterinarian if the ears become redder or more 
inflamed at any time during the course of cleaning. The frequency of cleaning varies according to the needs of the individual patient. Refer 
to each product’s label for inactive ingredients and precautions or contraindications.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Tris-EDTA (flush) Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
4 oz, 16 oz TrizEDTA®
Tris-EDTA (crystals flush) Labeled for dogs and cats 4 oz, 16 oz TrizEDTA crystals®
Tris-EDTA, chlorhexidine 0.15% (flush) Labeled for dogs and cats 4 oz TrizCHLOR®
Tris-EDTA, ketoconazole 0.15% (flush) Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
4 oz, 12 oz TrizULTRA + Keto®
Tris-EDTA, chlorhexidine 0.15%, 
 ketoconazole 0.15% (flush)
Labeled for dogs and cats 4 oz, 12 oz Mal-A-Ket Plus TrizEDTA®
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
 
Antifungal Agents, Otic
See also Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic 
 Indications/Actions
Antifungal ear preparations are usually used to treat otitis caused by Malassezia spp and rarely other otic fungal diseases, such as aspergillosis 
and candidiasis. Most commercially available products also contain an antibiotic and/or a glucocorticoid. Therefore, ear cytology should 

===== PDF_PAGE_1499 =====
1472    Antiparasitic Agents, Otic
be performed to confirm a fungal/yeast infection prior to prescription of topical antifungals, particularly if an antimicrobial and antibiotic 
combination is being considered. 
Topical azole antifungals, such as miconazole and clotrimazole, have been shown to possess in vitro activity against Staphylococcus spp. 
Listed in the Veterinary-Labeled Products section are exclusively the products without antibiotic or glucocorticoid agents. These products 
are not labeled as otic medications but have commonly been used in veterinary patients. 
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Most products are labeled to be used 1 to 2 times daily in adequate amounts to coat the patient’s entire ear canal. 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Advise owners to discontinue the medication and contact their veterinarian if their animal’s ears become redder or more inflamed at any time 
during treatment. There is little information available regarding ototoxicity from topical antifungal use in dogs and cats; therefore, caution 
should be used when prescribing various topical otic medications in animals with ruptured tympanic membranes. In one study in dogs, ad-
ministration of clotrimazole (15 g tube [2% cream] mixed 50:50 with sterile water) did not change the BAER score, and vestibular signs were 
not reported.1 No other safety studies in dogs or cats with otic antifungals are available. Patients should be rechecked before discontinuing 
treatment, and treatment should be continued until 1 week after negative cytology is obtained. 
Refer to each product’s label for inactive ingredients and precautions or contraindications. Some inactive ingredients, including alcohol or 
alcohol-based solvents such as propylene glycol, can be irritating and cause inflammation, particularly in sensitive, eroded, or ulcerated ears, 
and these ingredients should be avoided in ears with ruptured tympanum.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Clotrimazole 1% (solution) Labeled for dogs and cats Rx; 10 mL, 30 mL, and 60 mL ClotrimaTop®; Clotrimazole®
Miconazole nitrate 1.15% 
 (equivalent to 1% miconazole base 
by weight) (lotion)
Labeled for dogs and cats Rx; 60 mL, 120 mL Conzol®; MicaVed®; Miconosol®
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Antiparasitic Agents, Otic
NOTE: This monograph includes only preparations labeled to be applied directly into the ear canals for the treatment of otoacariosis; how-
ever, parasiticides with systemic or more generalized effect are preferred because Otodectes cynotis mites are known to also live outside ear 
canals and can re-infest the ears. See also Afoxolaner; Fipronil/Fipronil Combinations, Topical; Fluralaner; Sarolaner; Selamectin. Refer 
to specific product labels for complete instructions regarding use, inactive ingredients, precautions, and contraindications.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Piperonyl butoxide 0.5%, 
 pyrethrins 0.05%
Labeled for dogs and cats 
12 weeks of age or older
OTC; 3 mL, 9 mL, 
0.5 oz, 1 oz
Adams®; Happy Jack Mitex®; Hartz  UltraGuard®
Clean ears. Apply daily for 7 to 10 days. Repeat in 
2 weeks if necessary
Piperonyl butoxide 0.6%, 
 pyrethrins 0.06% 
For use on dogs and cats 12 
weeks of age or older
OTC; 1 oz, 3 oz, 4 oz No-Bite®; PetArmor; Sentry HC EARMITE free®; 
Sergeant’s Vetscription MITEaway®
Clean ears. Apply twice daily until ticks/mites are 
eliminated
Piperonyl butoxide 1%, 
 pyrethrins 0.15%
Labeled for dogs; some 
products labeled for cats 
and horses
NOT for use on puppies or 
kittens under 12 weeks old 
OR for use on horses/foals 
intended for slaughter
OTC; 4 oz, 6 oz Ear-Rite® (dogs); Ear Mite® (dogs, cats, horses)
Clean ears. Apply daily for 7 to 10 days. Do not re-
peat treatment for 3 to 5 days if used as a repellent.
Horses are treated daily for 2 to 3 days, then every 
3 to 5 days as needed for controlling ectoparasites 
(eg, ticks, gnats).
Piperonyl butoxide 1.05%, 
pyrethrins 0.1%
For use on dogs 12 weeks 
of age or older 
OTC; 0.75 oz Ear Mite Remedy 
Clean ears. Apply once. If needed, repeat every 
other day until the infestation is resolved.

===== PDF_PAGE_1500 =====
Antiseptic Cleaning Agents, Otic   1473
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Piperonyl butoxide 1.5%, 
 pyrethrins 0.15% 
Species depends on 
 product
No products available for 
use on dogs, cats, or rabbits 
under 12 weeks of age 
OTC; 0.5 oz, 1 oz Ear-Rite® (cats and kittens); Eradimite® (dogs and 
cats);
Otomite® Plus (dogs, cats, puppies, kittens)
Clean ear. Apply as a single dose. May repeat every 
2 days until the condition has cleared up or repeat 
in 7 days depending on product directions. 
As a preventative treatment, apply every 15 days
Piperonyl butoxide 1%, 
 pyrethrins 0.15% (lotion)
For use on dogs and cats at 
least 12 weeks old
OTC; 6 oz Performer® 
Clean ears. Apply for 7 to 10 days
Piperonyl butoxide 1.5%, 
 pyrethrins 0.15% (lotion)
For use on dogs and cats 
over 12 weeks of age
OTC; 12 mL, 22 mL Mita-Clear®
Clean ear; instill enough to wet ear canal and 
 massage. Do not reapply for 7 days
Milbemycin oxime 0.1% 
 (solution)
For use on cats or kittens 4 
weeks of age or older
Rx; box of 10 
 pouches of 2 tubes of 
0.25 mL each
MilbeMite®
Clean ear. Apply entire contents of tube in the 
external ear canal; one tube per ear. Repeat in 30 
days, if recommended by the veterinarian
Safe use in cats used for breeding purposes, 
 pregnant, or lactating has not been evaluated.
Ivermectin 0.01% (suspen-
sion)
For use in cats and kittens 
4 weeks of age or older
Rx; box of 12 foil 
pouches of 2 ampules 
of 0.5mL each
Acarexx®
Apply 0.5 mL in each ear. Repeat 1 time if 
 necessary based on ear mite life cycle and response 
to treatment 
Neomycin sulfate 0.25%, 
 thiabendazole 4%, 
 dexamethasone 0.1%
Labeled for otoacariasis 
and bacterial and fungal 
otitis in dogs and cats for 
a maximum of 1 week 
duration
OTC; 7.5 mL, 15 mL Tresaderm®
Clean ears. Apply twice daily until the infestation 
is resolved
Antiseptic Cleaning Agents, Otic
See also Cleaning/Drying Agents, Otic
Indications/Actions
Topical antiseptic ear flushes include acetic acid, salicylic acid, boric acid, chlorhexidine, ketoconazole, miconazole, hypochlorous acid, and 
microsilver-containing products. These products are typically used as adjunctive therapy for ear infections (eg, bacterial and/or yeast) but 
can also be used as sole treatment in mild, first-time infections and for maintenance in some cases. Acetic and boric acids work as an acidify-
ing, drying, and antimicrobial agent. Chlorhexidine has activity against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria and fungi. Chloroxylenol 
is mostly active against bacteria. Ketoconazole and miconazole are fungistatic antifungals, although miconazole has been shown to be fungi-
cidal against Candida spp. Hypochlorous acid is a broad-spectrum antimicrobial with rapid activity against gram-positive and gram-negative 
bacteria and fungal/yeast organisms. Its mode of action against micro-organisms mimics that of neutrophils in the body. The main route of 
attack against microorganisms is disruption of the cellular membrane. Microsilver has both antibiofilm and antibacterial properties, gener-
ating silver ions that kill gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus spp, Streptococcus spp, 
including multidrug-resistant organisms, in addition to Malassezia spp. 
Suggested Dosages/Uses
When recommending ear flushing as part of the treatment regimen, it is important to demonstrate the cleaning technique in the examination 
room and advise the client to discontinue application and contact the veterinarian if the ears become redder or more inflamed at any time 
during the course of cleaning. 
The frequency of cleaning varies according to the needs of the individual patient. Some of these products may also be used as antiseptics 
for the skin. Refer to each product label for inactive ingredients, details on use, and any precautions.
Precautions/Adverse Effects
There is little information regarding the ototoxicity of ear cleaners in dogs and cats. Agents that are believed to be safe in dogs and cats for 

===== PDF_PAGE_1501 =====
1474    Antiseptic Cleaning Agents, Otic
ear flushing in the presence of ruptured tympanic membrane include sterile water, sterile saline, tris-EDTA, and possibly chlorhexidine at a 
concentration of less than 0.05%. More concentrated chlorhexidine-containing products should be used cautiously in ear canals with rup -
tured tympanic membranes because of the potential for ototoxicity, particularly in cats. 
Alcohol-containing products should be avoided if the status of the tympanic membrane cannot be determined or if it is ruptured. Avoid 
products containing alcohol for eroded, ulcerative, and/or painful and sensitive ears as that alcohol can be irritant.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Acetic acid 2%, boric acid 2% 
(cleanser) 
Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz, 
and 16 oz
MalAcetic®
Other ingredients: water, glycerin, polysorbate 20, 
fragrance, sodium hydroxide
Acetic acid 2% (solution) Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC; 4 oz, 16 oz OtoCetic®
Other ingredients: water, witch hazel, benzyl alcohol, 
polysorbate 80, DMDM hydantoin (as preservative), fragrance
Acetic acid 1%, ketoconazole 
0.15%, hydrocortisone 1% 
(cleanser) 
Labeled for dogs, 
cats, and horses
OTC; 2 oz, 8 oz MalAcetic®Ultra
Other ingredients: ceramide complex
Acetic acid 1%, boric acid 2%, 
hydrocortisone 1%, keto-
conazole 0.15% (flush) 
Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC; 8 oz Oticetic®
Other ingredients: propylene glycol, ceramides, glycerin, 
polysorbate, triethanolamine, fragrance
Chlorhexidine 0.15%, keto-
conazole 0.15%, tris-EDTA 
(flush) 
Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC; 4 oz, 12 oz Mal-A-Ket Plus TrizEDTA® 
Other ingredients: decolorized aloe vera, glycerine, glycolic 
acid, methylisothiazolinone, nonoxynol-9, tris-EDTA, water
Chloroxylenol 0.2%, 
 ketoconazole 0.2% (flush) 
Labeled for dogs, 
cats, and horses
OTC; 4 oz, 8oz Pharmaseb®
Chloroxylenol 0.33%, 
 ketoconazole 0.33% (flush) 
Labeled for dogs, 
cats, and horses
OTC; 8 oz Ketomax®
Other ingredients: benzyl alcohol, fragrance, propylene 
glycol, purified water, sodium borate decahydrate
Hypochlorous acid (HOCl) 
0.009% (rinse) 
Safe for use on all 
animals
OTC; 3 oz Vetericyn Plus®Antimicrobial Ear Rinse
Other ingredients: electrolyzed water (H2O), sodium chlo-
ride (NaCl), sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl)
Ketoconazole 0.1% (flush)  Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC; 12 oz Curaseb®
Other ingredients: purified water, SDA-40, nonoxynol-9, 
benzyl alcohol, disodium EDTA, tromethamine technical 
grade, fragrance
Ketoconazole 0.1%, phyto-
sphingosine HCl 0.01% (flush)
Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC; 4 oz, 16 oz VetraSeb® TRIS
Other ingredients: water, SDA 40B 190 proof, nonoxynol-9, 
tromethamine, disodium EDTA, methylisothiazolinone
Miconazole 0.1% (flush) Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC; 4 oz, 16 oz BioTris®
Other ingredients: disodium EDTA, 
methylchloroisothiazolinone, methylisothiazolinone, 
N-octadecanoylphytosphingosine (ceramide Ill), PEG-40 
hydrogenated castor oil, propylene glycol, purified water, 
tromethamine (Tris USP)
Microsilver 0.5%. climbazole 
0.5% (concentrate)  
Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC; 6 mL UltraOtic®Concentrate
Other ingredients: avicel RC-591, benzyl alcohol, 
glycerin, N-octadecanoylphytosphingosine (ceramide Ill), 
phenoxyethanol, polysorbate 80, purified water, sodium 
benzoate, titanium dioxide, triton x100/OP10, xanthan gum

===== PDF_PAGE_1502 =====
Cerumenolytic Agents, Otic    1475
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Microsilver 0.2%, lactic acid 
1% (rinse) 
Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC; 4 oz UltraOtic®
Antiseptic/antibiofilm activity. May be used prior to 
UltraOtic® Concentrate for additional benefit
Other ingredients: carboxymethyl cellulose, fragrance, glycerin, 
magnesium aluminum silicate, methylchloroisothiazolinone, 
methylisothiazolinone, octoxynol-10, purified water
Salicylic acid 0.15%, 
 ketoconazole 0.1% (ear rinse) 
Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC; 4 oz PetArmor®Medicated Ear Rinse
Other ingredients: glycerin, potassium sorbate, propyelene 
glycol, purified water, sodium benzoate
Cerumenolytic Agents, Otic
Indications/Actions
Cerumenolytic agents soften hardened cerumen and make it easier to remove. Cerumenolytic agents can be classified as water-based agents, 
oil-based agents, or agents that are neither water nor oil based. Docusate sodium (DSS) and triethanolamine polypeptide oleate are wa -
ter-based agents that act as surfactants to emulsify and disperse cerumen. Oil-based agents, such as propylene glycol, squalane, and various 
oils, soften and loosen cerumen without disintegrating it.1 Squalane is the most potent of these agents. Some agents are neither water nor oil 
based, such as carbamide peroxide (urea-hydrogen peroxide) and glycerin. Carbamide peroxide is a foaming agent that releases oxygen to 
help break up debris. Glycerin acts by softening and loosening cerumen, similar to oil-based agents.
Docusate sodium, calcium sulfosuccinate (docusate calcium), and carbamide peroxide are considered potent cerumenolytic agents. Squa-
lane and triethanolamine polypeptide oleate are less potent agents. Propylene glycol, glycerin, and oils are considered very mild cerumeno-
lytic agents.
Evidence in humans suggests that no cerumenolytic agent is superior to any other, but any type of cerumenolytic agent tends to be supe-
rior to no treatment.2
Suggested Dosages/Use
These agents work best when they are applied 10 to 15 minutes prior to cleaning an area with an astringent or drying cleaner. Demonstrate 
proper cleaning technique in the examination room if cerumenolytic products will be administered at home by an owner. Advise owners to 
discontinue product application and contact their veterinarian if their animals’ ears become redder or more inflamed at any time during the 
course of cleaning. 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Cerumenolytic agents should not be used with ruptured tympanic membranes (especially in cats) because of the potential for ototoxicity, 
with the exception of squalane.3 If cerumenolytic agents are needed during in-hospital ear-flushing procedures, use of these products should 
be followed by multiple flushes with warm sterile isotonic saline. Alcohol-containing products should be avoided if the status of the tympanic 
membrane cannot be determined, or if the tympanic membrane is ruptured. Avoid products containing alcohol for eroded, ulcerative, and/
or painful and sensitive ears, as the alcohol can be an irritant. The frequency of cleaning varies according to the needs of the individual ani-
mal. Some of these products may also be used as antiseptics for the skin. Refer to each product label for details on use and any precautions.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Squalane 25% in isopropyl myristate and light mineral oil Labeled for 
dogs and cats
OTC; 4 oz Cerumene®
Phytosphingosine 0.2% in alcohol, water, and propylene glycol Labeled for 
dogs and cats
OTC; 4.2 oz, 8.4 oz Douxo®Micellar
Carbamide peroxide 6.5%, glycerin base Labeled for 
dogs and cats
OTC; 4 oz Earoxide®
Propylene glycol, salicylic acid, glycerin Labeled for 
dogs and cats
OTC; 8 oz, 12 oz EpiKlean®
Squalane 22%, isopropyl myristate, white mineral oil Labeled for 
dogs and cats
OTC; 4 oz KlearOtic®
Methylchloroisothiazolinone, methylisothiazolinone, micellar solution 
(cetrimonium bromide, disodium EDTA, PEG-6 caprylic/capric 
glycerides, polysorbate 80, water), N-octadecanoyl-phytosphingosine 
(ceramide III)
Labeled for 
dogs and cats
OTC; 8 oz Milytic®

===== PDF_PAGE_1503 =====
1476    Cleaning/Drying Agents, Otic
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional 
information
Calendula, capryloyl glycine (Lipacide® C8G), glycerin, isopropyl 
alcohol, labrasol, lemon synthetic perfume, polysorbate 80, transcutol 
V , tromethamine, undecylenoyl glycine (Lipacide® UG), water
Labeled for 
dogs and cats
OTC; 4 oz pH•notix®
Phytosphingosine hydrochloride 0.01%, salicylic acid 0.15% Labeled for 
dogs and cats
OTC; 8 oz SkinGuard® Cleanse
Denatured alcohol 10%, lactic acid 1.76%, propylene glycol, docusate 
sodium, salicylic acid
Labeled for 
dogs and cats
OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz, and 
16 oz
Vet Solutions®
 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Cleaning/Drying Agents, Otic
Indications/Actions
Cleaning and drying agents are typically used after debris or exudate has been removed from the ear canals with a cerumenolytic agent; 
however, they may also be used as a sole ear cleanser. The primary ingredients are astringents, such as isopropyl alcohol or aluminum acetate, 
and acids, such as boric acid or salicylic acid. Some cleaning and drying agents may have antimicrobial effects, and some may also be used 
as antiseptics for the skin.
Suggested Dosages/Use
The frequency of cleaning varies according to the needs of the individual patient. Cleaning and drying ear solutions can be used on a main-
tenance regimen to help prevent ear infections and after bathing or swimming to keep the external ear canals dry. It is important to demon-
strate the cleaning technique in the examination room. 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Advise the client to discontinue the application and contact the veterinarian if the ears become redder or more inflamed at any time during 
the course of cleaning.
There is little information regarding the ototoxicity of ear cleaners in dogs and cats. Agents that are believed to be safe in dogs and cats 
for ear flushing in the presence of ruptured tympanic membrane include sterile water, sterile saline, tris-EDTA, and possibly chlorhexidine 
at a concentration of less than 0.05%. Propylene glycol- and alcohol-containing products should be avoided if the status of the tympanic 
membrane cannot be determined or if it is ruptured. Avoid products containing alcohol for eroded, ulcerative, and/or painful and sensitive 
ears as that alcohol can be irritant.
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Refer to each product label for specific details on use, inactive ingredients, and any precautions. 
There is an overwhelming number of these products marketed, and the following are representative; they do not appear to be FDA-ap -
proved products. Many products also contain cerumenolytic ingredients. See also Cerumenolytic Otic Agents.
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Isopropyl alcohol, glycerin (lotion) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 6 oz, 8 oz, 12 oz, 
32 oz, 1 gallon
ADL® Ear Flushing Drying Lotion
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, 
glycerin, lactic acid, salicylic acid, SD 
alcohol (solution)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz, 1 gallon Aloe vera otic cleanser (formerly 
 AloeClens®); Aurocin®; Clean Ear® 
with Aloe Vera; Conquer® Hy-Otic
Lactic acid 1.76%, salicylic acid 0.1%, 
SD alcohol 10% (solution)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz, 16 oz, and 
1 gallon
Ear Cleansing Solution
Acetic acid, boric acid, ethanol (flush) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon EarMed® Boracetic®
Ethanol (solution) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 12 oz, 1 gallon EarMed® Cleansing Solution and 
Wash
Ethanol (wipes) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 40 wipes 5 x 6, 50 
wipes 5 x 8.5, and 160 
wipes 6 x 7
EarMed®
Propylene glycol 3%, salicylic acid 
0.05%, SD alcohol (cleanser) 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz, 12 oz, 32 oz EpiKlean®
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, 
chloroxylenol 0.1%, EDTA 0.5%, 
 salicylic acid 0.2% (solution) 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz Epi-Otic® Advanced
Eucalyptus oil, malic acid, salicylic 
acid (solution)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 16 oz Eucalyptus Oil (formerly Euclens®)

===== PDF_PAGE_1504 =====
Corticosteroid Agents, Otic    1477
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Acetic acid 2%, boric acid 2% 
( cleanser)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 8 oz, and 16 oz MalAcetic®
Acetic acid 1%, hydrocortisone 1%, 
ketoconazole 0.15% (cleanser)
Labeled for dogs, cats, and 
horses
OTC; 2 oz, 8 oz MalAcetic ULTRA®
Boric acid, zinc gluconate (liquid) Recommended for dogs, 
cats, and exotics
OTC; 2 oz, 4 oz Maxi/Guard® zn 4.5
Isopropyl alcohol (solution) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 16 oz Nolvasan®
Malic acid, salicylic acid (solution) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz Oti-Clens®
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, lactic 
acid, propylene glycol, salicylic acid, 
SD alcohol (solution)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz Otiderm®
Boric acid 2%, glycolic acid 2% 
 (solution) 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 16 oz Otiderm® Advanced
Glycerin, dioctyl sodium 
 sulfosuccinate, lactic acid, salicylic 
acid (solution) 
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz OtiRinse®
Acetic acid, alcohol (cleanser) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz Sulfodene®
Chloroxylenol, SD alcohol (gel) Labeled for dogs OTC; 4 oz Swimmer’s Ear Astringent
Glycerin, lactic acid 1%, microsilver 
0.2% (rinse)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz UltraOtic®
Hypochlorous acid (HOCI) 0.009% 
(rinse) 
Safe for all animals OTC; 3 oz Vetericyn Plus®
Glycerin, lactic acid 2.7%,  salicylic 
acid 0.15%, sodium dioctyl 
 sulfosuccinate, SD alcohol (solution)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 8 oz, 16 oz VetOtic®
Coco-glucoside, glucose oxidase, 
glycerin, lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, 
lysozyme, zinc gluconate (cleanser)
Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 4 oz, 1 gallon Zymox® Ear Cleanser
 
Corticosteroid Agents, Otic
See also Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic
Indications/Actions
Corticosteroid-containing ear medications are used in cases of acute or chronic otitis with the goal of reducing inflammation, edema, tissue 
hyperplasia, pain, and pruritus. In addition, they are helpful in decreasing secretions from sebaceous and apocrine glands, thereby reducing 
the buildup of debris in ear canals. Otic solutions that contain glucocorticoids without an antibiotic can be used as maintenance therapy, if 
needed, in cases of allergic otitis.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
The frequency of applications should be according to the patients’ needs, usually 1 to 4 times daily. 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
When using corticosteroid preparations as maintenance therapy, use the least potent glucocorticoid at the lowest possible frequency to bal-
ance efficacy and prevent undesirable adverse effects, including skin atrophy, alopecia, and adrenocortical suppression effects from systemic 
absorption. Some glucocorticoids, such as dexamethasone and fluocinolone, are believed to be safe for use in the middle ear; however, the 
combination of fluocinolone and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Synotic®) may not be safe for administration in the ear if the tympanic mem -
brane is ruptured as DMSO may cause ototoxicity.1
Veterinary-Labeled Products
Refer to each product’s label for inactive ingredients and precautions or contraindications. Some inactive ingredients, including alcohol or 
alcohol-based solvents such as propylene glycol, can be irritating and cause inflammation, particularly in sensitive, eroded, or ulcerated ears, 
and should be avoided in ears with ruptured tympanum. 
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Fluocinolone 0.01%, DMSO 60% 
(solution)
Labeled for dogs Rx; 8 mL, 60 mL Synotic®

===== PDF_PAGE_1505 =====
1478    Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Hydrocortisone 0.5% (solution) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 1.25 oz Zymox®
Hydrocortisone 1% (solution) Labeled for dogs and cats OTC; 1.25 oz Zymox®, Zymox®Plus
Hydrocortisone 1%, Burow’s 
solution 2% (solution)
Labeled for dogs OTC; 1 oz, 16 oz Cort/Astrin®
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Fluocinolone acetonide 0.01% (oil) Labeled for humans Rx; 20 mL DermOtic®; generic
 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
 
Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic
See also Corticosteroid Agents, Otic
Indications/Actions
Most otic antimicrobial preparations for veterinary use that are commercially available combine an antifungal, an antibiotic, and a glucocor-
ticoid agent. These medications should be used when anti-inflammatory and/or anti-pruritic effects are needed in the presence of concurrent 
bacteria and yeast infections. Ear cytology should be performed to confirm an infection prior to prescription of ear medications containing 
antimicrobials, particularly antibiotics, to help prevent antibiotic overuse and bacterial resistance. In chronic cases or when rods are seen 
on cytology, culture and susceptibility may be recommended to identify multidrug-resistant organisms, such as Pseudomonas spp. If only 
bacteria or yeast are present, more targeted otic antimicrobials, with or without glucocorticoids, may be considered.
Suggested Dosages/Uses
Most of these products should be used 2 to 3 times daily in adequate amounts to coat the entire ear canal. Refer to each product’s label for 
detailed usage instructions. Patients should be rechecked before discontinuing treatment, and treatment must be continued until 1 week after 
negative cytology is obtained. 
Precautions/Adverse Effects
Advise the client to discontinue the medication and contact the veterinarian if the ears become redder or more inflamed at any time during 
treatment and to avoid contact with the animal’s mouth and eyes. 
Use with caution when prescribing various topical otic medications in patients with ruptured tympanic membranes due to potential 
ototoxicity. Cats may be more sensitive to irritation and ototoxicity from topical otic agents. 1 Use of aminoglycosides in the presence of a 
ruptured tympanic membrane is controversial. One study showed no vestibulotoxic or ototoxic effects from 21 days of otic gentamicin ap-
plied every 12 hours to ears with ruptured tympanic membranes. Another study measured brainstem auditory-evoked responses (BAER) 
and found that although tobramycin significantly impaired hearing, gentamicin did not2; however, ototoxicity from topical aminoglycoside 
administration has been shown in many chinchilla and guinea pig studies.3–6 In dogs, administration of clotrimazole 2% cream mixed 50:50 
with sterile water did not change the BAER score, and vestibular signs were not reported. Some glucocorticoids, such as dexamethasone 
and fluocinolone, are believed to be safe for use in the middle ear. One dog developed pemphigus vulgaris after 1 week of otic polymyxin B 
application.7
Veterinarians and owners must use caution when handling these medications to prevent potential accidental human exposure, especially 
direct skin and eye contact. Claro® and Osurnia® contain specific warnings regarding ocular injuries in humans, including corneal ulcers.8,9 
Eye protection is recommended during administration, and dogs should be restrained to minimize postapplication head shaking.
Veterinary- and Human-Labeled Products
Refer to each product’s label for inactive ingredients and precautions or contraindications. Some inactive ingredients, including alcohol or 
alcohol-based solvents, such as propylene glycol, can be irritating and cause inflammation, particularly in sensitive, eroded, or ulcerated 
ears, and should be avoided in ears with ruptured tympanum. 
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Florfenicol 16.6 mg/mL, terbinafine  
14.8 mg/mL, mometasone furoate  
2.2 mg/mL (solution)
Labeled for dogs  Rx; 1 mL single-dose 
 dropperette
Claro®
1 tube per ear; 30-day duration of effect. 
Shake before use. To be administered in 
the clinic.
Gentamicin sulfate 0.3%, clotrimazole 1%, 
betamethasone valerate 0.1% (ointment)
Labeled for dogs Rx; 7.5 g, 10 g, 15 g, 
25 g, 30 g, and 215 g 
Gentizol®, MalOtic®, Otibiotic®, Otomax®

===== PDF_PAGE_1506 =====
Corticosteroid/Antimicrobial Agents, Otic    1479
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Gentamicin sulfate 1.5 mg/mL, miconazole 
nitrate 17.4 mg/mL, hydrocortisone  aceponate 
1.11 mg/mL, (suspension)
Labeled for dogs Rx; 10 mL (10 doses) Easotic®
Oily suspension; shake well before use. 
Labeled for once-daily dosage for 5 days. 
Prime pump before first use.
Gentamicin sulfate 3 mg/mL, betamethasone 
valerate 1 mg/mL (solution)
Labeled for dogs 
and cats
Rx; 7.5 mL, 15 mL, 
and 240 mL 
GenOne®, GentaOtic®, GentaVed®, 
Vet Beta-Gen®
Ketoconazole 0.15%, hydrocortisone 1% 
 (thermally activated gel)
Labeled for dogs 
and cats
OTC; 2 oz KC-Oto Pack®
Gentamicin 3 mg/g, clotrimazole 10 mg/g, 
mometasone 1 mg/g (suspension)
Labeled for dogs Rx; 7.5 g, 15 g, 30 g, 
and 215 g
LoZatom®, Malmetazone®, Maxi-Otic®, 
Mometamax®, Mometavet®, MotaZol®
Once-daily dosing. Shake well before use.
Neomycin sulfate 0.25%, thiostrepton 
2500 units/mL, nystatin 100,000 units/mL, 
 triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% (ointment)
Labeled for dogs 
and cats
Rx; 7.5 mL, 15 mL, 
30 mL, and 240 mL
Animax®, Dermalone®, Derma-Vet®, 
EnteDerm®, Quadritop®
Florfenicol 10 mg/mL, terbinafine  
10 mg/mL, betamethasone acetate  
1 mg/mL (gel)
Labeled for dogs Rx; single-dose 1 mL 
tube
Osurnia®
1 tube per ear; repeat in 7 days. To be 
 administered in the clinic. Do not clean 
ear canal for 45 days after initial treatment.
Orbifloxacin 10 mg/g, posaconazole 1 mg/g, 
mometasone furoate 1 mg/g (suspension)
Labeled for dogs Rx; 7.5 g, 15 g, and 
30 g 
Posatex®
Once-daily dosing. Shake well before use.
Polymyxin B 0.5293 mg/mL, miconazole  
23 mg/mL, prednisolone acetate 5 mg/mL 
(suspension)
Labeled for dogs Rx; 15 mL, 30 mL Surolan®
Shake well before use.
Neomycin 3.2 mg/mL, thiabendazole  
40 mg/mL, dexamethasone 1 mg/mL 
 (solution)
Labeled for dogs 
and cats 
Rx; 7.5 mL, 15 mL Tresaderm®
Neomycin sulfate 0.5%, isoflupredone  
acetate 0.1%, 
tetracaine hydrochloride 0.5% (ointment)
Labeled for dogs, 
cats, and horses
Rx; 10 g Tritop®
Human-Labeled Products
Active ingredients (formulation) Species Label status; size(s) Trade names/additional information
Ciprofloxacin 0.3%, dexamethasone 0.1% 
(suspension)
Human-labeled product Rx; 7.5 mL Ciprodex®
Shake before use.
Ciprofloxacin 0.2%, hydrocortisone 1% 
(suspension)
Human-labeled product Rx; 10 mL Cipro® HC
Shake well before use.
Colistin 3 mg/mL, neomycin 3.3 mg/mL,  
thonzonium bromide 0.5 mg/mL, hydrocor-
tisone 10 mg/mL (suspension)
Human-labeled product Rx; 10 mL Coly-Mycin S®, Cortisporin-TC®
Shake well before use.
Neomycin 3.5 mg/mL, polymyxin B 10,000 
units/mL, hydrocortisone 10 mg/mL (solu-
tion)
Human-labeled product Rx; 7.5 mL and 10 mL generic
Tobramycin 0.3%, dexamethasone 0.05% 
(suspension)
Human-labeled product Rx; 2.5 mL and 5 mL TobraDex® ST
Extra-label use in the ear.
Tobramycin 0.3%, dexamethasone 0.1% 
(suspension)
Human-labeled product Rx; 2.5 mL, 5 mL, and 
10 mL
TobraDex®
Extra-label use in the ear.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 

===== PDF_PAGE_1507 =====
1480    Veterinarian’s Guide to Writing Prescriptions
A growing number of pet owners opt to have prescriptions filled at 
community or online pharmacies to obtain medications for their 
animals. In accordance with this trend, at least 40 states require vet-
erinarians to provide pet owners with written prescriptions upon 
request.1 Additionally, these pharmacies may be needed to fill pre -
scriptions for medications that are compounded or not stocked in 
the veterinarians’ clinic. Legally, animal prescriptions are treated the 
same as human prescriptions and must meet the same requirements 
in order to be filled. The following best practices will assist veterinar-
ians to write legally compliant prescriptions while also minimizing 
the risk for medication errors and reduce potential harm to animal 
patients.
Prescription Requirements
Prescriptions are legal documents, and the information required on 
prescriptions, veterinary or otherwise, varies by state. Check with 
your state’s Pharmacy and Veterinary boards to ensure all legal re -
quirements are met. 
LEGAL PRESCRIPTION REQUIREMENTS
 ■ Patient name and species 
 ■ Pet owner’s name and address
 ■ Date prescription was written
• Do not postdate; however, it may be acceptable to write “Do 
not fill until ___” to prevent early filling.
 ■ Drug Information
• Drug name
• Strength
• Dosage form (eg, tablet, capsule, suspension)
• Quantity 
• Instructions for use (“sig”): dose, route, and frequency of ad -
ministration
 ■ Number of refills. The use of “PRN” generally authorizes refills for 
1 year from written date.
 ■ DEA # for controlled substance prescriptions
 ■ Prescriber’s name, address, and phone number 
 ■ Prescriber signature
 ■ Withdrawal time (if applicable)
HELPFUL ITEMS THAT MAY NOT BE LEGALLY REQUIRED 
Think of the pharmacist as the last safety check before the medi -
cation reaches the patient. The more information provided on the 
prescription, the more the safety of patients and their owners can be 
assured.
 ■ Client phone number
 ■ Patient’s breed
 ■ Patient’s current body weight 
 ■ Indication for use
 ■ Duration of use
 ■ Patient date of birth
 ■ Usage (ie, companion versus food/fiber animal)
Appendix
Veterinarian’s Guide to Writing Prescriptions
Controlled Substances
Controlled substances are drugs that have the potential for abuse 
or dependence and are classified into 5 schedules according to their 
medical use, as well as relative abuse potential and dependence lia -
bility. Controlled substances are regulated both by individual states 
as well as by the Federal government. In order to prescribe controlled 
substances, practitioners must be authorized in the jurisdiction 
where they are licensed to practice and also be registered with the 
Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA). As controlled substance require-
ments vary between states, consult your state’s controlled substance 
act to ensure compliance.
 ■ All controlled substances prescriptions must include the pre -
scriber’s DEA registration number.
 ■ Schedule II (C-II) prescriptions (eg, hydrocodone combina -
tions)
• Must be a physical (written or printed) prescription with orig-
inal, manual signature (cannot be called in or faxed). Note 
that electronic prescribing of C-II prescriptions is permitted 
by DEA, but current veterinary practice management systems 
often do not meet DEA requirements. 
• Refills are not permitted – a new prescription must be gener -
ated each time
• States may specify a time limit (eg, 30 or 60 days) within which 
C-II prescriptions must be filled; unfilled prescriptions be -
come void after this time limit has passed.
• Quantity limits (eg, 30-day maximum supply) may be mandat-
ed by the state 
 ■ Schedule III-IV (CIII-IV) prescriptions  (eg, benzodiazepines, 
phenobarbital, tramadol)
• Fax and verbal (ie, telephone) transmission is allowed
• For chronic medications, a new prescription is required every 
6 months
• Refills are permitted, up to a maximum of 5 refills in 6 months
• Quantity limits (eg, 90-day maximum supply) may be mandat-
ed by the state 
Best Practices for Prescription Writing
 ■ Manually written prescriptions should be in blue or black ink.
 ■ Write the quantity to be dispensed both numerically and alpha -
betically for clarity and to avoid potential diversion (eg, #30 [thir-
ty] tablets).
 ■ When a patient requires a specific brand or manufacturer of a 
product (eg, Novolin® N), write the prescription for the required 
product name or manufacturer, and notate on the prescription for 
the pharmacist to “dispense as written. ”
 ■ Do not pre-sign blank prescriptions. 
 ■ Prescribers are not obligated to provide their DEA number for 
noncontrolled prescriptions and may instead provide a state-is -
sued license number.
• The National Provider Identifier (NPI) is used for human in -
surance billing purposes and as such is not intended to be held 
by veterinarians.

===== PDF_PAGE_1508 =====
Veterinarian’s Guide to Writing Prescriptions   1481
Medication Errors and Patient Safety
The human health care system has given considerable attention to reducing medical errors, including those involving medications. Although 
prescription abbreviations are used throughout many references and are generally well recognized, they increase the potential for errors to 
occur. The Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP) and the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) 
focus on medication safety and have identified certain abbreviations and dose expressions that should be avoided due to the documented 
increased risk for medication errors. When writing a prescription, writing out the directions in plain English and avoiding the use of er -
ror-prone abbreviations help to ensure patient safety.
Style to avoid Example Potential problem Use instead
Naked decimals .5 mg Read as 5 mg (10x overdose) 0.5 mg
Trailing zeros 5.0 mg Read as 50 mg (10x overdose) 5 mg
Examples of 
error-prone 
abbreviations
(not a complete list)
SID* Read as BID, QID, 5/day Write out “daily” or “every 24 hours”
QD, q.d., q1d Read as QID Write out “daily” or “every 24 hours”
QOD, EOD Read as QD or other frequency Write out “every other day” or “every 48 hours”
QID Read as QD or other frequency Write out “four times daily” or “every 6 hours”
IU or u Read as “IV” or 10; read as 0 Write out “units”
ng Read as mg Write out “nanogram”
Gr Read as “gram” instead of “grain” Write out “grain” or use metric system (eg, mg 
equivalent)
AD, AS, AU Read as “OD” , “OS” , or “OU” Write out “right ear” , “left ear” , or “both ears”
hs, qhs Read as “half strength” Write out “at bedtime” 
SQ, sq, or sub q Read as “SL ” or “5 every” SUBQ or write out “subcutaneously”
Drug name short-
hand
MgSO4 Read as morphine sulfate Write out magnesium sulfate
Bute Read as butorphanol Write out “phenylbutazone”
*SID is an abbreviation that is virtually unknown to health professionals outside of veterinary medicine, and most pharmacists do not recognize it. SID should be eliminated 
from usage and replaced with “daily” or “once daily. ” The additional time taken to write out “once daily” could prevent a potentially serious, avoidable error.
Commonly Used Abbreviations 
Listed below are some commonly used abbreviations; however, the use of any abbreviation can increase the potential for errors to occur.
Abbreviation Meaning
mL milliliter (ensure L is capitalized)
OD right eye
OS left eye
OU both eyes
pc after meals
PO by mouth
prn as needed
q every
q4h every 4 hours
qs; qs ad quantity sufficient; quantity sufficient to make
Sig directions to patient
SL sublingual
stat immediately
susp suspension
tab tablet
Tbsp, T tablespoon (15 mL)
tsp, t teaspoon (5 mL)
UD, ut dict as directed
Abbreviation Meaning
ac before meals
amp ampule
c- , c with
cap capsule
disp dispense
g or gm gram
gtt(s) drop(s)
h, hr hour
IA intra-articular
ID Intradermal
IM intramuscular
IO intraosseous
IP intraperitoneal
IV intravenous
kg kilogram 
lb pound
m2 meter squared
mg milligram
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  

===== PDF_PAGE_1509 =====
1482    Pharmacist’s Quick Guide  to Veterinary Prescriptions:  A Whole Different Animal
Pharmacist’s Quick Guide  
to Veterinary Prescriptions:  
A Whole Different Animal
Dogs are not furry versions of people, and cats  
are not small dogs
Veterinarians may prescribe approved animal and human drugs in an 
extra-label (off-label) manner for therapeutic purposes to their pa -
tients as long as there is no threat to public health and certain other 
criteria are met, including a valid veterinarian–client–patient relation-
ship (VCPR). Because often there are significant differences in the use 
of medications in animals versus humans, pharmacists must under-
stand that information applicable to human patients may not be valid 
for veterinary patients. The following points are essential to consider.
Pharmacokinetics/Pharmacodynamics
The pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics can differ significantly 
for many drugs used in veterinary versus human patients. Some key 
species-specific examples follow.
DOGS
Dogs have nearly 30% more blood/kg than humans do, which can 
affect drug concentrations in the blood.
Dogs have a faster glomerular filtration rate, so renal elimination 
of drugs may be more rapid.
CATS
Cats are deficient or limited in several metabolic pathways, including 
hepatic glucuronidation, hydroxylation, and demethylation.
As compared to humans, animals—especially cats—may use dif -
ferent hepatic CYP isoenzymes to metabolize drugs.
For example, cats may not adequately convert prednisone to pred-
nisolone.
OF NOTE
Doses and dose frequency can differ radically between humans and 
animals.
Thyroid supplementation: Levothyroxine doses for hypothyroid 
dogs can be 10 times (or more) the doses used in hypothyroid hu -
mans and may be given twice daily (q12h).
Seizure control: Doses for seizure medications can be much high-
er than those prescribed for human patients.
Antibiotics: Some antibiotic doses are very large (eg, ciprofloxacin 
dose for dogs) as compared to doses needed for human patients.
Different breeds of a species may have varying pharmacokinetics 
for a given drug.
Toxicities/Adverse Effects
Compounds that are considered relatively nontoxic for human pa -
tients can cause serious toxicity or adverse effects in veterinary pa -
tients. Key examples follow.
DOGS
Over-the-counter (OTC) NSAIDs (eg, aspirin, ibuprofen, naprox -
en): Relatively low doses can cause serious GI bleeding and/or renal 
toxicity.
Xylitol (common sweetener, sugar alcohol) can cause life-threat-
ening hypoglycemia and acute hepatic failure in dogs.
Phenobarbital can cause hepatotoxicity in dogs.
CATS
Acetaminophen in cats: As little as 10 mg/kg can cause fatal methe -
moglobinemia.1
Cats can develop serious renal toxicity from the use of NSAIDs.
Dry-pilling doxycycline in cats can cause esophageal erosions and 
strictures.
Permethrin-containing products are toxic to cats.
OF NOTE
Be wary of pet owners’ requests to give food with their pet’s oral 
medications (to increase patient acceptance) without seeking a vet -
erinarian’s guidance. Many common foods (eg, chocolate, grapes/
raisins) can be toxic to animals.
Understanding the Prescription
Veterinarians use different terminology and abbreviations than phy-
sicians and often prescribe drugs differently than pharmacists are 
accustomed to seeing.
OF NOTE
Pet owners may be referred to as “clients. ” The pet is the patient.
Veterinarians are taught to use the abbreviation SID (derived 
from the Latin semel in die, meaning once a day) in dosing instruc -
tions. Do not confuse this abbreviation with other abbreviations.
Veterinarians will rarely prescribe oral liquids as per 5 mL. Ex -
ample: Amoxicillin 250 mg/5 mL suspension may be prescribed as 
50 mg/mL.
KEY INFORMATION
A few key reminders may help pharmacists avoid medication errors 
and ensure animal health in partnership with the veterinarian and 
animal’s owner.
KEY REMINDERS
What applies to human patients may not be relevant or valid for vet-
erinary patients.
Refer to a trusted veterinary drug reference or contact the pre -
scribing veterinarian if there are any questions or concerns about a 
prescription as written.
Do not assume that take-home information intended for human 
patients, including patient information sheets, is appropriate for an-
imal patients.
Some drugs are used exclusively in animal patients (eg, enrofloxacin).
Veterinary-only drugs may interact with human-labeled drugs 
being concurrently administered extra-label.
All insulin products require a prescription when used in animals.
OTC drugs labeled for humans (eg, diphenhydramine) require a 
veterinary prescription to be used in animals, as veterinary use of 
these drugs is extra-label.
KEY DO NOTS
Do not substitute drug products (especially insulins) or dose forms 
without first contacting the veterinarian. 10% of veterinarians re -
sponding to recent polls indicated that some patients had been 
harmed when outside pharmacies made unauthorized substitutions.2
Do not recommend use of human OTC products or supplements 
in animal patients without seeking guidance from the animal’s veter-
inarian, as some OTC products may contain combinations of drugs 
that could be toxic to animals (eg, phenylephrine).
Do not ask veterinarians for their NPI number—it is illegal for veter-
inarians to have one. A DEA number is not an appropriate substitution.
FOR MORE INFORMATION:
Use of prescription drugs in veterinary medicine. American Veteri-
nary Medical Association: avma.org/resources-tools/avma-policies/
use-prescription-drugs-veterinary-medicine. 
Veterinary Pharmacy Education (Resolution No: 110-5-14). National 
Association of Boards of Pharmacy: nabp.pharmacy/news/news-  
releases/veterinary-pharmacy-education-resolution-110-5-14/. 
Passed May 30, 2014. NABP 110th Annual Meeting, Phoenix, AZ.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb    

===== PDF_PAGE_1510 =====
Important Contact Information    1483
Important Contact Information
Poison Control Centers
In the US:
There are many regional poison centers that may be of assistance 
with animal poisonings; refer to your local poison control center for 
more information. The following are known 24-hour poison control 
centers in the US that specialize in providing information specific for 
veterinary patients. 
 ■ Arizona Poison and Drug Information Center: 
• 800-222-1222 
• expertise with management of snake bite envenomation
• azpoison.com
 ■ ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center: 
• 888-426-4435 
• consultation fee applies 
• aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control 
 ■ Pet Poison Helpline: 
• 855-764-7661 
• consultation fee applies 
• petpoisonhelpline.com 
In the UK:
 ■ Veterinary Poisons Information Center: 
• +44 20 7305 5055 (for veterinarians) 
• +44 12 0250 9000 (pet owners)
• subscription service 
• vpisglobal.com
In Australia:
 ■ Australian Animal Poisons Centre: 
• +61 1300 869 738
• animalpoisons.com.au
Governmental Veterinary  
Drug-Related Websites
In the US:
 ■ Center for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute 
for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH):
• Useful document: List of Hazardous Drugs (cdc.gov/niosh/
docs/2016-161/default.html)
• cdc.gov/niosh/index.htm
 ■ Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA):
• 800-882-9539 (toll-free number for registration information) 
• deadiversion.usdoj.gov
 ■ Food and Drug Administration Center for Veterinary Medi -
cine (FDA-CVM):
• General questions: email askCVM@fda.hhs.gov
• Report an adverse event for a pharmaceutical:
 ■ For FDA-approved or indexed products, contact the drug 
company directly to report the adverse drug event.
 ■ Alternatively, file a report by downloading and completing 
the 1932a electronic form from fda.gov/animal-veterinary/
report-problem/how-report-animal-drug-and-device-side-
effects-and-product-problems#report See How Do I Report 
A Problem (Adverse Events for Animal Drugs and Devices)?
• Call 888-332-8387 (888-FDA-VETS) 
• Emergency: 866-300-4374 or 301-796-8240 
• For after hours, call and leave a recorded message 
• Importation of veterinary products: The burden of importa -
tion appears to rest upon the exporter in completing necessary 
Customs and Border Patrol (CBP) documents that will allow 
the drugs to clear US Customs upon entry into the United 
States. It is important to note that drug shipments may still 
be seized by US Customs and returned to the exporter despite 
efforts to provide necessary documentation.
 ■ For more information: fda.gov/media/71776/download
 ■ Questions regarding importation of unapproved animal 
drugs should be emailed to the FDA Center for Veterinary 
Medicine, Office of Surveillance and Compliance, Division 
of Compliance at CVMImportRequests@fda.hhs.gov.
 ■ Food Animal Residue Avoidance & Depletion Program (FAR -
AD):
• 1-888-USFARAD (1-888-873-2723) 
• farad.org
 ■ US Department of Agriculture (USDA) Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection Service (APHIS):
• Report an adverse event for an immunobiological agent (eg, 
vaccines, bacterins) or diagnostic kits:
 ■ For USDA-approved products, contact the manufacturer 
directly to report the adverse event.
 ■ Alternatively, call the USDA at 800-752-6255 or file a report 
by downloading and completing the USDA Adverse Event 
Reporting form from www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/ourfocus/
animalhealth/veterinary-biologics/adverse-event-report -
ing/CT_Vb_adverse_event
 ■ US Environmental Protection Agency (EP A):
• Most of the products used topically for the control of ectopar-
asites and insects on animals are regulated by the Environ -
mental Protection Agency (EPA) under the Federal Insecticide 
Fungicide and Rodenticide Act.  The National Pesticide Infor -
mation Center (NPIC) is a collaboration between Oregon State 
University and the EPA. 
• Report an adverse event related to topical pesticides: 
 ■ For EPA-approved products, contact the manufacturer di-
rectly to report the adverse event. 
 ■ Alternatively, call NPIC at 800-858-7378 or report the ad -
verse on the NPIC web portal located at npic.orst.edu/vet
In Australia:
 ■ Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APV-
MA Website): 
• apvma.gov.au 
In Canada:
 ■ Health Canada website with many veterinary links: 
• canada.ca/en/health-canada.html
In New Zealand:
 ■ New Zealand Food Safety Authority Ag Compounds and Vet 
Medicines: 
• www.mpi.govt.nz/agriculture/agricultural-compounds-vet  
-medicines

===== PDF_PAGE_1511 =====
1484    Drug Store Toxins in Small  Animal  Species
In the UK:
 ■ Veterinary Medicines Directorate: 
• www.gov.uk/government/organisations/veterinary-medicines- 
directorate 
 ■ Centre for Agriculture and Bioscience International (CABI):
• maintains a listing of global and country/region specific web -
sites and databases pertaining to veterinary drug products
• cabi.org/ahpc/more-resources/drug-databases
Drug Shortage Websites
 ■ The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) maintains a drug 
shortage website: 
• email notification service is available
• fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/drug-shortages 
• download the app for Android and iOS: FDA Drug Shortages
 ■ The American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) has 
a website for drug shortages related to human drugs: 
• ashp.org/drug-shortages/current-shortages
Drug Store Toxins in Small 
 Animal  Species
Products or compounds may be found in retail settings, pharmacies, 
or in human drugs that may be potentially toxic to dogs, cats, or 
other pets. Below is a partial list only . This list is not meant to be 
inclusive of all potentially toxic items. In addition, there are many 
human prescription drugs with significant toxic potential for small 
animal species; refer to the respective systemic monograph section. 
If the drug is not listed, consult with an animal poison control center 
for more information. The following known 24-hour poison control 
centers specialize in providing information specific for veterinary 
patients. Consultation fees apply.
 ■ ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center:  888-426-4435; aspca.
org/pet-care/animal-poison-control
 ■ Pet Poison Helpline (US): 855-764-7661; petpoisonhelpline.com
 ■ Veterinary Poisons Information Service (UK):  0207 305 5055; 
vpisglobal.com (membership required)
 ■ Australian Animal Poisons Centre (AU/NZ): 1300 869 738 (AU) 
or 0800 869 738 (NZ); animalpoisons.com.au
Over-the-Counter (OTC) Medications
 ■ 5-Hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP , Griffonia seed extract): Human 
dietary supplement; serotonin precursor. Toxic to dogs and cats, 
as it induces serotonin syndrome. Clinical signs include sedation 
at low doses. High doses cause agitation, tremors, seizures, hy -
perthermia, GI upset, ataxia, abdominal pain, hyperesthesia, and 
transient blindness. The minimum oral toxic dose for dogs is 24 
mg/kg; the minimum oral lethal dose for dogs is 128 mg/kg.1
 ■ Acetaminophen (eg, Tylenol®; also known as APAP , paracetamol): 
Human analgesic and antipyretic. Contraindicated in cats at any 
dose and not recommended for ferrets. In cats, this medication 
can cause methemoglobinemia, hepatic necrosis, and death. Clin-
ical signs include shock, brown mucous membranes, respiratory 
distress, cyanosis, lethargy, depression, coma, and edema of the 
face and paws. In dogs, hepatotoxicity and methemoglobinemia 
can also occur; doses above 100 mg/kg are considered toxic. Clin-
ical signs include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, abdominal 
pain, icterus, hepatic encephalopathy, and coma.2
 ■ Alpha lipoic acid (thioctic acid, ALA): Dietary supplement used 
to manage diabetes mellitus. Dose-dependent toxicity in dogs and 
cats; cats are more sensitive. Clinical signs develop in 30 minutes 
to several hours, with acute hypoglycemia as the primary concern. 
Other clinical signs include hypersalivation, vomiting, ataxia, trem-
ors, and seizures. Anecdotal therapeutic dose in cats is 1 – 5 mg/kg 
daily; the minimum toxic dose is 13 mg/kg. ALA is considered 
10 times more toxic to cats than dogs. 3 In dogs, the experimen -
tal maximum tolerated dose is 126 mg/kg,4 but suspicious deaths 
have been reported at 100 mg/kg. 
 ■ Aspirin (ASA): NSAID and antiplatelet agent. Toxicity is dose de-
pendent—see the Aspirin monograph for more information. This 
medication is used therapeutically in dogs and cats but at very 
different doses. Cats are very sensitive to salicylates, which have 
half-lives of 38 to 45 hours at 25 mg/kg in this species. Severe 
intoxication occurs at more than 80 mg/kg in cats and 100 to 500 
mg/kg in dogs. Clinical signs include vomiting, GI ulceration, he-
matemesis, melena, Heinz body anemia (cats), metabolic acidosis, 
hyperthermia, and renal and liver damage. 
 ■ Caffeine (eg, No-Doze®, also found in analgesics, coffee, energy 
drinks, gels and gums, foods such as chocolate): Toxic to dogs and 
cats. Clinical signs include vomiting, diarrhea, polyuria, polydip-
sia, hyperactivity, ataxia, tachycardia, tachypnea, hypertension, 
weakness, cardiac arrhythmias, tremors, seizures, and coma. 
Death can result from cardiac arrhythmia or respiratory failure. 
Clinical signs begin at 15 mg/kg. The oral LD50 in dogs is 140 mg/
kg and 80 – 150 mg/kg in cats.5
 ■ Dextromethorphan (eg, Delsym®, Robitussin-DM®): Human 
cough suppressant—see the Dextromethorphan monograph for 
more information. Toxicity is dose dependent. Dextrometho -
rphan has been used anecdotally in dogs at 2 mg/kg PO twice 
daily to treat cough and repetitive behavioral disorders. Clinical 
signs of toxicity include agitation, hallucination, nervousness, 
mydriasis, shaking, facial edema (dogs), vomiting, and diarrhea. 
Some clinical signs may be similar to serotonin syndrome, such as 
tremors, seizures, hyperesthesia, hyperthermia, hypersalivation, 
and death.5
 ■ Ibuprofen (eg, Advil®, Motrin®): Human NSAID. Toxic to dogs, 
cats, and ferrets; not recommended for veterinary use. GI ulcer -
ation may occur, as evidenced by hematemesis, diarrhea, melena, 
weakness, pale mucous membranes, abdominal pain, lethargy, 
and inappetence. With larger ingestions, acute renal failure, liv -
er failure, and neurologic signs such as tremors or seizures can 
develop. In ferrets, toxicity affects GI, renal, and central nervous 
systems.6
 ■ Imidazolines (eg, oxymetazoline [Afrin®], tetrahydrozoline [Vis-
ine®], naphazoline, tolazoline): Toxic to all pets. Not recommend-
ed for veterinary use. Poisoning occurs most commonly after 
pets chew open product vials. Clinical signs of intoxication may 
include vomiting, bradycardia, cardiac arrhythmias, poor capil -
lary refill time, hypotension or hypertension, panting, depression, 
weakness, nervousness, hyperactivity, or shaking. These signs 
appear within 30 minutes to 4 hours postexposure. In general, 
imidazoline decongestant exposure may affect the GI, cardiopul-
monary, and nervous systems. Veterinary alpha-2-adrenergic an-
tagonists such as atipamezole (Antisedan®) or yohimbine may be 
antidotal. 
 ■ Iron (Fe): Found in OTC iron supplements (see the Ferrous 
Sulfate monograph), multivitamins, prenatal vitamins, fertiliz -
ers, pesticides, single-use hand warmers or heating pads such as 
ThermaCare®, and oxygen absorber sachets in food packaging (eg, 
beef jerky). Toxicity in dogs has been observed at doses greater 
than 20 mg/kg of elemental iron. Clinical signs include vomiting, 
bloody diarrhea, lethargy, abdominal pain, and GI ulcerations. 
More severe signs such as metabolic acidosis, shock, hypotension, 
hypovolemia, tachycardia, coagulation deficits, hepatic necrosis, 

===== PDF_PAGE_1512 =====
Drug Store Toxins in Small  Animal  Species   1485
tremors, seizures, and coma can occur. The amount of elemental 
iron ingested should be determined to assess toxicity. Oxygen ab-
sorbers used in food packaging are commonly mistaken for silica 
gel packets, which are nontoxic.7
 ■ Naproxen (eg, Aleve®): Human NSAID. Highly toxic to dogs, cats, 
and ferrets. This medication is not recommended for veterinary 
use in small animal species. In dogs, doses of 5 mg/kg may result 
in GI irritation or ulceration, and doses greater than 10 – 20 mg/
kg may result in acute renal failure. Stomach ulcers, bloody vom-
iting, diarrhea, melena, weakness, pale gums, abdominal pain, 
lethargy, and inappetence may occur. 
 ■ Permethrin: Topical insecticide. Toxic to cats in concentrated for-
mulas (typically greater than 5% to 7%). OTC lice treatment prod-
ucts typically contain 1% permethrin or pyrethrins/piperonyl bu-
toxide and are not usually of concern. Cats are highly sensitive to 
pyrethrins and pyrethroids; application of concentrated products 
could be fatal. The most common clinical signs observed are ner-
vous system effects such as hyperesthesia, generalized tremors, 
muscle fasciculation, hyperthermia, and seizures. Clinical signs 
can develop within hours or may be delayed up to 72 hours and 
generally last 2 to 3 days.8
 ■ Phenazopyridine (eg, Pyridium®; PAP): Human urinary analge -
sic. This medication is not recommended for veterinary use, as 
it is metabolized to acetaminophen. Cyanosis, methemoglobin -
emia, rhabdomyolysis, and hepatotoxicity are possible.9
 ■ Phenylephrine (eg, Sudafed-PE®): Human oral decongestant. May 
be toxic to dogs and cats at high doses. Ingestion can result in 
hyperactivity, agitation, vomiting, mydriasis, tachycardia, hyper-
tension, hyperthermia, cyanosis, arrhythmias, tremors, and sei -
zures. Pet owners purchasing antihistamines for their pets may 
unwittingly select a combination product that also contains de -
congestants like phenylephrine.5
 ■ Pseudoephedrine (eg, Sudafed®): Human oral decongestant with 
sympathomimetic properties. Pseudoephedrine can be highly 
toxic to dogs and cats. In dogs, 5 – 6 mg/kg results in moderate 
to severe clinical signs, with death possible at 10 –12 mg/kg. In -
gestion can result in hyperactivity, agitation, vomiting, mydriasis, 
tachycardia, hypertension, hyperthermia, cyanosis, arrhythmias, 
tremors, and seizures. Pet owners purchasing antihistamines for 
their pets may unwittingly select a combination product that also 
contains decongestants such as pseudoephedrine. See the Pseudo-
ephedrine monograph for additional information.5
 ■ Vitamin D (ergocalciferol [D 2], cholecalciferol [D 3]): Found in 
rodenticides, as a single-agent vitamin, and in multivitamin prod-
ucts. Ingestion of cholecalciferol-rodenticides and single-agent 
vitamins carries a greater risk for toxicosis than ingestion of 
multivitamins. Intoxication results from hypercalcemia and hy -
perphosphatemia followed by metastatic mineralization, typical -
ly presenting as acute renal failure. Clinical signs are observed 
within the first 48 hours of overdose and can include vomiting, 
lethargy, muscle weakness, bloody diarrhea, depression, polyuria, 
and polydipsia. With high doses, death from acute renal failure 
can result.10
Medicinal Oils, Solvents, or Excipients
 ■ Benzyl alcohol: Preservative. Commonly found in injectable drug 
products. Cats may be very susceptible to toxic effects. Clinical 
signs include ataxia, hyperesthesia, muscle fasciculation, depres -
sion, coma, respiratory failure, and death.11
 ■ Peppermint oil (menthol): Toxic to cats. Ingested peppermint oil 
may cause GI upset, CNS depression, and hepatotoxicity. Inhala-
tion may cause aspiration pneumonia. 
 ■ Propylene glycol : Commonly found in automotive antifreeze 
as an alternative to ethylene glycol (also known as pet-safe anti -
freeze, RV antifreeze), as well as hair dyes, disinfectants, paints, 
and varnishes; occasionally used in injectable drug products. The 
canine oral LD50 is 9 mL/kg of undiluted propylene glycol. Initial 
clinical signs can include depression, weakness, ataxia, polyuria, 
and polydipsia. Lactic acidosis occurs later. Heinz body anemia 
occurs in cats with chronic ingestion. Hypotension, cardiovascu-
lar collapse, and seizures can occur.12
 ■ Tea tree oil (melaleuca oil): Topical antibacterial agent. Toxicosis 
is common following exposure to 100% oil (oral or dermal ex -
posure). As little as 7 drops of oil have caused poisoning in pets. 
Cats are more susceptible to toxicosis than dogs. Clinical signs 
observed include ataxia, hypothermia, dehydration, muscle trem-
ors, and coma. Tea tree oil may be hepatotoxic to cats.13 Toxicosis 
in birds has also been reported.14
 ■ Xylitol: Natural sweetener with a low glycemic index. Commonly 
found in many sugar-free foods (eg, peanut butter) and chewing 
gum, breath mints, nicotine gum, baked goods, oral care products, 
nasal sprays, chewable vitamins, and some prescription medica -
tions, including gabapentin oral liquid, and some oral dispersing 
tablet (ODT) formulations. It can be toxic to dogs; clinical signs 
may be delayed up to 12 hours after ingestion and include hy -
poglycemia, lethargy, vomiting, ataxia, and collapse, and seizures 
can occur. Acute liver failure is possible. Dogs ingesting greater 
than 0.1 g/kg of xylitol are considered at risk for developing hy -
poglycemia; doses greater than 0.5 g/kg may be hepatotoxic. De -
contamination is suggested for dogs with exposure greater than 
50 mg/kg.15
Foods 
 ■ Allium-containing foods (eg, garlic, onion, leeks, chives): May be 
toxic to dogs and cats. Oral consumption can lead to toxicosis. 
Clinical signs result from hemolytic anemia and often include de-
pression, hemoglobinuria, icterus, tachypnea, tachycardia, weak-
ness, and exercise intolerance. Inappetence, abdominal pain, and 
diarrhea may also occur. Development of clinical signs is delayed; 
they may not be observed until several days after ingestion.16
 ■ Bread/Y east dough: Dough containing yeast continues to rise 
after ingestion, releasing gas that may result in bloating and tor -
sion.17 Ethanol also can be produced, resulting in ethanol toxi -
cosis. Clinical signs include vomiting, ataxia, lethargy, blindness, 
abdominal distension, and coma.
 ■ Chocolate: Toxic to dogs and cats. Chocolate contains methylx -
anthines, including caffeine, although the primary toxic com -
ponent is theobromine, which varies in concentration between 
brands and types of chocolate products. Clinical signs occur 6 to 
12 hours after ingestion. Dogs that ingest 20 mg/kg of methylxan-
thine content generally display mild GI signs, but cardiotoxic and 
neurotoxic effects may be seen after ingestion of 40 to 50 mg/kg 
and more than 60 mg/kg, respectively. Initial signs include poly -
dipsia, vomiting, diarrhea, and restlessness, followed by hyper -
activity, polyuria, ataxia, tremors, and seizures. Other effects in -
clude tachycardia, premature ventricular contractions, tachypnea, 
cyanosis, hypertension, hyperthermia, and coma. Pancreatitis can 
occur 24 to 72 hours after ingestion, due to the high-fat content 
in chocolate. Death can result from cardiac arrhythmias or respi-
ratory failure. Dogs can easily ingest a toxic dose of chocolate.18
 ■ Grapes, raisins, currants, tamarinds : These foods are toxic to 
dogs, as they contain tartaric acid, which dogs are highly sensitive 
to.19 Clinical signs can appear within hours and include vomiting, 
diarrhea, lethargy, and polydipsia. Acute kidney injury may de -
velop within 24 hours to several days after exposure. A toxic dose 
can be difficult to clinically ascertain, as fruits contain varying 
amounts of tartaric acid. As such, all exposures are concerning.
 ■ Macadamia nuts: Toxic to dogs. Common clinical signs of mac -

===== PDF_PAGE_1513 =====
1486    Drug Store Toxins in Small  Animal  Species
adamia nut ingestion include weakness, depression, vomiting, 
ataxia, tremors, joint pain, lameness, hind limb weakness, hyper-
thermia, recumbency, and abdominal pain. Clinical signs are typ-
ically seen at doses greater than 2 g/kg. Clinical signs have been 
reported at doses as low as 0.7 mg/kg.20
 ■ Xylitol: See Medicinal Oils, Solvents, or Excipients
Household Products/Solvents
 ■ Acids (eg, drain/toilet bowl cleaners, hair wave neutralizers, metal 
cleaners, rust removers, vinegar): Tissue damage is related to pH 
and concentration. Products with a pH of 2 to 4 can cause mild to 
moderate tissue irritation. Products with a pH less than 2 are cor-
rosive; some examples include acetic acid (concentrations more 
than 50%), aluminum sulfate (concentrations more than 20%), 
hydrochloric acid (concentrations more than 10%), and sulfuric 
acid (concentrations more than 10%). Clinical signs include oral/
dermal/GI ulcerations, dysphagia, vomiting, hematemesis, ab -
dominal pain, stridor, and coughing. Induction of emesis is not 
recommended.5
 ■ Alkalis/Bases (eg, drain cleaners, dry cell batteries, hair relaxers, 
lye, nonchlorine bleach, oven cleaners): Tissue damage is relat -
ed to pH and concentration. Products with a pH of 10 to 11 can 
cause mild tissue irritation. Products with a pH of 11 to 12 may 
cause corrosive tissue injury; examples include sodium hypochlo-
rite (concentrations more than 10%), sodium carbonate (con -
centrations more than 15%), sodium hydroxide (concentrations 
more than 2%), and sodium silicate (concentrations more than 
20%). Clinical signs include ulcerations, dysphagia, vomiting, he-
matemesis, abdominal pain, stridor, and coughing. Induction of 
emesis is not recommended.5
 ■ Rodenticides, anticoagulants: Toxic to all mammals and birds; 
dogs are more sensitive than cats. Active ingredients (eg, brod -
ifacoum, bromadiolone, chlorophacinone, difethialone, diphaci -
none, warfarin) antagonize vitamin K epoxidase. Clinical signs 
typically develop 3 to 5 days after ingestion. Most common clin -
ical signs following ingestion can include dyspnea, coughing, 
lethargy, exercise intolerance, and hemoptysis. Nonspecific signs 
can include lethargy, anorexia, or lameness. Signs of bleeding can 
occur such as hematuria, hematemesis, melena, hyphema, and 
epistaxis. Vitamin K1 (phytonadione) is the antidote for these toxic-
ities. See the Phytonadione Vitamin K1 monograph for more infor-
mation. NOTE: As of April 2015, retail stores in the United States 
are no longer allowed to carry rodenticide products that contain 
brodifacoum, bromadiolone, or difethialone for residential use. 
 ■ Rodenticides, bromethalin: Toxic to all species; however, cats are 
more sensitive than dogs. Intoxication is due to cerebral edema 
(white matter vacuolization). No antidote is available, although 
IV lipid emulsion may be effective to reverse the clinical signs as-
sociated with bromethalin.21–23 The minimum lethal dose in dogs 
is 2.5 mg/kg active ingredient, and in cats it is 0.3 mg/kg. Dogs 
may exhibit ataxia, weakness, paralysis, tremors, seizures, and 
coma. Cats are more prone to paralytic signs.24
 ■ DEET (eg, Off®; N,N-diethyl-meta-toluamide): Found in insect 
repellants. Neurologic signs (eg, tremors, hyperexcitation, ataxia, 
and seizures), skin irritation, hypersalivation, and vomiting can 
result. Up to 13% of DEET is absorbed through the skin in dogs. 
 ■ Ethanol (alcohol, Purell® and other hand sanitizers): Ingesting 
large amounts of ethanol may cause hypoglycemia, hypothermia, 
and hypotension. Clinical signs include weakness, lethargy, vom-
iting, collapse, hypothermia, weak respirations, and coma. The 
minimum oral lethal dose in dogs is 5.55 g/kg. See the Ethanol 
monograph for additional information.
 ■ Ethylene glycol (found in automotive antifreeze): The minimum 
lethal dose of undiluted ethylene glycol antifreeze is 4.2 to 6.6 
mL/kg in dogs and 1.5 mL/kg in cats. Toxicity typically occurs 
in 3 stages. The first stage occurs within 30 minutes to 12 hours 
and clinical signs include nausea, vomiting, polyuria, polydipsia, 
ataxia, and metabolic acidosis. The second stage occurs 12 to 24 
hours after ingestion, and is characterized by dehydration, tachy-
pnea, and tachycardia. The third stage occurs 12 to 24 hours af -
ter ingestion in cats and 36 to 72 hours in dogs. Clinical signs 
include renal failure, anorexia, depression, lethargy, oral ulcers, 
hypersalivation, coma, and seizures. Products such as wall paint 
and printer ink that contain less than 5% ethylene glycol rarely 
cause problems. See the Fomepizole and Ethanol monographs for 
additional information.25
 ■ Ice melts containing calcium chloride: Exposure may cause se -
vere skin and GI tract irritation, and electrolyte imbalance. Clini-
cal signs associated with exposure include salivation, depression, 
disorientation, polydipsia, diarrhea, vomiting, and anorexia.26
 ■ Metaldehyde (found in some snail/slug baits): Concentrations of 
active ingredient range from 3.25% to 4%, which are toxic to pets. 
Clinical signs are similar in dogs and cats and may appear minutes 
to hours after ingestion. Typical signs include anxiety, tachycar -
dia, nystagmus, mydriasis, hyperpnea, panting, hypersalivation, 
and ataxia. Vomiting, diarrhea, tremors, hyperesthesia, continu -
ous seizures, metabolic acidosis, rigidity, opisthotonos, and severe 
hyperthermia may also be seen. Delayed signs that may develop 
are depression, coma, and liver failure. Death from respiratory 
failure can occur within a few hours of exposure.27
 ■ Methanol (organic solvent found in windshield washer fluid, 
paint thinners, household cleaning products): Toxic to dogs and 
cats. The canine oral LD50 of undiluted methanol is 5 to 11.25 mL/
kg. Clinical signs in dogs and cats are similar to ethanol intoxica-
tion and include ataxia, depression, lethargy, sedation, hypother-
mia, and metabolic acidosis. It does not cause blindness in dogs 
and cats as it does in humans.5
 ■ Mothballs (naphthalene or paradichlorobenzene [PDB]): Toxic 
to all species via ingestion, inhalation, or dermal contact. Inges -
tion may cause severe GI upset, neurologic stimulation followed 
by depression (PDB), hemolytic anemia (naphthalene), and liver 
and kidney damage. Dogs that ingested 1.5 g/kg of naphthalene 
mothballs developed hemolytic anemia. PDB is ≈50% less toxic 
than naphthalene. Mothballs typically weigh 2.7 g to 4 g each.28
 ■ Polyurethane glues (eg, Gorilla®, Elmer’s® ProBond®): Expanding 
adhesive glues that contain isocyanates. Although not poison -
ous, the glue expands significantly once ingested to create a firm, 
foam-like foreign body that can cause gastric or esophageal ob -
structions.28 Clinical signs can be seen 15 minutes to 20 hours af -
ter ingestion and include vomiting, abdominal distension, stom -
ach pain, inappetence, and lethargy. Surgical removal is almost 
always necessary. Inducing emesis is not often recommended. 
Miscellaneous Items
 ■ Glow-in-the-dark jewelry and toys (liquid-filled plastic necklac-
es, earrings, plastic wands, safety sticks): Mildly toxic to dogs and 
cats. These products contain dibutyl phthalate, a chemical that has 
a bitter taste and is capable of causing immediate eye, skin, and 
mucous membrane irritation. Most commonly, cats are exposed 
after piercing jewelry with their teeth. Significant but self-limiting 
hypersalivation results but is of little toxicologic concern. 
 ■ Lily plants (Lilium spp, Hemerocallis spp): Highly toxic to cats. 
Lilium spp (eg, Easter lily, stargazer lily, tiger lily, Asiatic hybrids) 
are frequently sold as cut flowers in retail settings, as they are in -
expensive, fragrant, and long lasting. Hemerocallis spp (day lilies) 
are more often sold in pots for outdoor planting. Small ingestions 
of leaves, petals, pollen, or vase water can cause kidney injury in 
cats within 1 to 2 days. If untreated, the prognosis is grave.

===== PDF_PAGE_1514 =====
Overdose and Toxin Exposure  Decontamination Guidelines    1487
 ■ Liquid potpourri (simmer pot potpourri): Cats are more suscepti-
ble to toxicosis than dogs. Products may contain cationic detergents 
and essential oils. Ingestion of cationic detergents can result in ul-
ceration or severe inflammation of the mouth and upper GI tract. 
Essential oils are absorbed across the skin and mucous membranes 
and result in tissue irritation, GI upset, CNS depression, and der-
mal hypersensitivity. Inducing emesis is not recommended.29
 ■ Lithium-ion disc batteries:  Ingestion can be toxic to dogs and 
cats. Tissue necrosis is caused by electric current flow in the GI 
tract. The greatest concern is for esophageal necrosis followed by 
perforation, potential aortic fistula, and fatal hemorrhage. Clin -
ical signs include ulceration of the gums, teeth discoloration, 
hypersalivation, food/water refusal, abdominal pain, shock and 
pallor, and abdominal distension.5
 ■ Pennies from the United States : Pennies minted after 1982 are 
toxic to dogs and cats due to high (97%) zinc content. Ingestion 
can cause acute GI distress and oxidative damage to red blood 
cells that results in hemolytic anemia. Additionally, damage to the 
kidneys, liver, GI tract, pancreas, and red blood cells can occur.30
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb    
Overdose and Toxin Exposure 
 Decontamination Guidelines
Contacting a poison control center to manage overdose and toxin 
exposures is strongly encouraged. The following known 24-hour 
poison control centers specialize in providing information specific 
for veterinary patients: 
 ■ ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center : 888-426-4435; aspca.
org/pet-care/animal-poison-control 
 ■ Pet Poison Helpline (US): 855-764-7661; petpoisonhelpline.com 
 ■ Veterinary Poisons Information Service (UK): 0207 305 5055; 
vpisglobal.com
 ■ Australian Animal Poisons Centre: 1300 869 738 (AU) or 0800 
869 738 (NZ); animalpoisons.com.au
All patients should be stabilized prior to attempts at decontamina -
tion to prevent or limit systemic absorption of toxicants. The choice 
of decontamination method(s) to be administered is guided by the 
species being treated and the circumstances related to the exposure 
(eg, duration since exposure, drug or toxin properties). When a pa -
tient has ingested a potentially toxic dose of a substance, the clinician 
has many options for GI decontamination including, but not limited 
to, dilution, induction of emesis, gastric lavage, the use of adsorbents 
or cathartics, and administration of enemas. In many cases, the best 
treatment plan will include more than one of these methods. 
Dilution using a small amount of milk or water is recommended 
in cases where irritant or corrosive materials have been ingested. A 
dose of 2 – 6 mL/kg is suggested (ie, ≈1 to 2 teaspoons/cat [NOT 
teaspoons/kg]).1,2 Administration of the diluent in small volumes 
is important because giving excessive amounts may lead to emesis 
and cause the esophagus to be re-exposed to the damaging material.3 
Fruits and vegetables with high water content can be fed to accom -
plish dilution in some patients, especially birds and reptiles. Dilution 
methods should not be used for patients with an increased risk for 
aspiration (eg, actively seizing, obtunded). 3 Dilution with milk, yo -
gurt, or cottage cheese may be useful for patients with oral irritation 
after ingesting oxalate-containing plants (eg, Philodendron spp).4
Emetics are often most effective when administered within 2 to 3 
hours postingestion.3 Induction of emesis beyond 3 hours may still 
be effective for some ingested substances, such as those that coalesce 
to form a bezoar in the stomach (eg, chewable medications, choco -
late5) or those that delay gastric emptying. In general, administration 
of an emetic will empty ≈40% to 60% of the stomach contents when 
emesis is induced within an hour of toxin ingestion2,6,7; however, the 
amount of vomitus produced will diminish as time passes. 7 If the 
patient has not recently eaten, emetic efficacy (ie, productive emesis) 
may be increased by feeding a small meal prior to administration. 
Emetics can be administered to dogs, cats, potbelly pigs, and ferrets; 
however, they should not be administered to horses, ruminants, birds, 
rabbits, or rodents. Horses and rodents are physically unable to vomit, 
and induction of emesis may put them at risk for gastric rupture. 
Emesis may not be warranted for patients that have already vom-
ited. Patients that are exhibiting clinical signs such as coma, seizures, 
or recumbency should not be given an emetic. Additionally, if the 
patient has ingested a CNS stimulant and is already agitated, the 
additional stimulation of vomiting could lead to seizures. 3 Do not 
induce emesis (ie, emesis is contraindicated) in patients that have 
ingested corrosive agents (eg, alkalis, acids) because the lining of the 
esophagus may become ulcerated when the product is swallowed. 
Re-exposure of the esophageal lining to the corrosive agent during 
emesis will increase the risk for esophageal ulceration, perforation, 
and scarring.6 Emesis is also not recommended after petroleum dis-
tillate ingestion due to the risk for aspiration.
Caution is advised when inducing emesis in patients with under-
lying conditions (eg, severe cardiac disease, seizures) that may im -
pact the patient’s ability to safely vomit; carefully consider the risk 
versus benefit to induing emesis in these patients.
Apomorphine, Dexmedetomidine, Hydrogen Peroxide 3%, Hy -
dromorphone, Ropinirole, and Xylazine are emetics that are com -
monly used in veterinary medicine. Emesis was successful in 95% of 
dogs that received ropinirole8 and in over 90% of dogs that received 
either apomorphine or hydrogen peroxide9; however, hydrogen per-
oxide has fallen out of favor due to its associated adverse effects (eg, 
protracted emesis, esophageal irritation/injury) and should only be 
used when no other option is available (eg, patient is too far away 
from veterinary care). Apomorphine is ineffective as an emetic in 
cats; dexmedetomidine and hydromorphone are a preferred emetics 
in this species.10,11
Historically, other agents such as table salt, dishwashing liquid, 
syrup of ipecac, and powdered mustard have been used to induce 
vomiting; however, they are no longer recommended due to the in -
creased risk for adverse effects.3,6 
Gastric lavage may be considered for patients when emesis is con-
traindicated, not possible, or has been unsuccessful (eg, presence 
of bezoars in the stomach); however, it should also not be used to 
remove caustic materials or volatile hydrocarbons for the same rea -
sons emesis is contraindicated in such cases. 3 The efficacy of gastric 
lavage is limited by the substance ingested and the diameter of the 
stomach tube that can be passed. Lavage is not a routinely chosen 
decontamination method, as it is unlikely to be as effective as eme -
sis6 and is associated with significant potential risks (eg, aspiration, 
general anesthesia).3
General anesthesia with endotracheal intubation is required to 
perform gastric lavage to minimize the risk for aspiration. Rodents 
with cheek pouches should have these spaces gently emptied with a 
finger or swab prior to the lavage. Risks associated with gastric lavage 
include damage to or perforation of the esophagus and/or stomach, 
electrolyte abnormalities (eg, hypo-/hypernatremia depending on 
lavage solution used), hypothermia, and unintentional placement of 
the stomach tube into the trachea with subsequent instillation of flu-
id into the patient’s lungs.3 

===== PDF_PAGE_1515 =====
1488    Multidrug Sensitivity ( MDR1  Mutation) in Dogs and Cats
Adsorbents bind to chemicals/toxicants in the GI tract to prevent 
further systemic absorption of a toxicant; they may be used as a sin-
gle agent or in addition to administration of an emetic or performing 
gastric lavage. Activated charcoal (AC) is the most commonly used 
adsorbent. See also Charcoal, Activated for more information. Many 
AC products also contain sorbitol, a cathartic to aid in the elimina -
tion of the toxicant. See Cathartics below. When administering these 
products, it is important to note which product is being adminis -
tered to avoid adverse effects caused by overuse of the cathartic.
AC is composed of large porous particles that have a large bind -
ing surface area to trap organic compounds within the GI tract, in -
cluding any orally administered medications given concurrently at 
the time of decontamination. Over-the-counter charcoal tablets and 
capsules labeled to control flatulence and bloating are not recom -
mended, as the amount of charcoal is often low, and the binding area 
is much smaller when compared to the AC products specifically in -
tended for GI decontamination.12
Repeated doses of AC can be considered in some instances where 
toxicants are known to undergo enterohepatic recirculation. Exam -
ples of toxicants known to undergo this type of recycling include 
bromethalin, cholecalciferol, ivermectin, and some NSAIDs. If med-
ications are excreted in the bile, AC can be beneficial regardless of 
the route the medication was administered. 
AC does not bind to all compounds equally. Efficiency of adsorp-
tion increases with the molecular size of the toxin, and poorly wa -
ter-soluble organic substances are better adsorbed than small, polar, 
water-soluble organic compounds. Chemicals that are not effective-
ly bound include ethanol, methanol, fertilizer, fluoride, petroleum 
distillates, heavy metals, iodides, nitrates, nitrites, sodium chloride, 
and chlorate. Animals that have ingested caustic substances should 
not receive AC, as AC is unlikely to bind these products. Addition -
ally, AC may compound the mucosal surface irritation caused by 
the caustic substance and complicate the identification of oral and 
esophageal burns.12
Animals with no clinical signs may freely consume the charcoal 
suspension if administered via syringe. A small amount of food may 
be added to enhance palatability. 4 In animals exhibiting clinical 
signs, administration of activated charcoal suspensions may be done 
via a nasogastric tube, as it may be better accepted (especially in cats) 
and offer a greater margin of safety. Always ensure adequate airway 
protection, as AC administration carries a risk for aspiration, which 
carries a poor prognosis. 
Cholestyramine may also be used to treat toxicoses of enterohe -
patically recirculated agents 13 (eg, cholecalciferol, 14,15 amiodarone, 
digoxin, NSAIDs, 16 vincristine). 17 Cholestyramine is an anion ex -
change resin that binds with bile acids in the intestine to prevent 
their reabsorption; toxins that require binding to bile acids for reab-
sorption (eg, cholecalciferol, piroxicam, indomethacin) will be ex -
creted in the feces. See Cholestyramine for more information.
  
Cathartics promote elimination of substances, including the thera-
peutically administered AC, from the GI tract. When used in com -
bination with AC, the cathartic is given immediately following or 
mixed with the charcoal. 
Cathartics are contraindicated when corrosive substances were 
ingested or if the animal is dehydrated or hypotensive or has ileus, 
diarrhea, intestinal obstruction or perforation, history of recent ab -
dominal trauma, or significant electrolyte imbalance.7 Saline cathar-
tics should also not be used in birds or reptiles and in patients with 
renal insufficiency.
Osmotic cathartics cause free water to enter the GI tract; the 
resulting increase of the lumen volume stimulates GI motility and 
expulsion of the feces. Sorbitol and Saline Cathartics are most com-
monly used for decontamination procedures and may be combined 
with AC in commercially prepared products.
Other cathartics are classified as bulk and lubricant cathartics. 
The most commonly used bulk cathartic is Psyllium; in dogs and 
cats, unspiced canned pumpkin or squash also can be fed. In birds 
and reptiles, diluted peanut butter, fruit, or vegetables can also be 
used as bulking agents. Timothy hay can be used in rabbits. Histor -
ically, mineral oil was the most commonly used lubricant cathartic, 
especially in horses; however, mineral oil is no longer recommended 
in dogs and cats due to the aspiration risk and limited efficacy. Be -
cause all cathartics alter the water balance in the GI tract, hydration 
needs to be maintained. 
Enemas using warm water may be indicated when elimination of 
toxicants (eg, extended-release or controlled-release drugs) from the 
lower GI tract is desired. 6,18 Commercially prepared phosphate en -
ema solutions should be avoided due to the risk for electrolyte and 
acid-base disturbances.6 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb   
Multidrug Sensitivity (MDR1 
 Mutation) in Dogs and Cats
KATRINA L. MEALEY , DVM, PHD, DACVIM, DACVCP  
College of Veterinary Medicine, Washington State University
Editor’s Note: The following information is adapted, with permis -
sion, from Washington State University, College of Veterinary Med-
icine Program in Individualized Medicine (PrIMe) website: prime.
vetmed.wsu.edu/.
Introduction 
P-glycoprotein, encoded by the multidrug sensitivity gene ( MDR1 
gene, also known as ABCB1 gene), is a drug transport pump that 
plays an important role in limiting drug distribution to the brain, 
as well as pumping many drugs into the bile for excretion from the 
body. Both canine-specific and feline-specific mutations in the re -
spective MDR1 genes have been identified such that affected animals 
have either no P-glycoprotein function, in the case of homozygous 
animals, or decreased P-glycoprotein function, in the case of hetero-
zygous animals.1,2 Affected dogs and cats have a decreased ability to 
limit brain distribution of P-glycoprotein substrate drugs and biliary 
excretion of those same drugs, which may lead to serious toxicity.
 
Distribution of Canine and Feline Breeds Affected by 
the MDR1 Gene Mutation 
Dogs: The canine MDR1 mutation (also known as ABCB1-1delta) 
is most commonly found in the dog breeds listed in the table below; 
however, it is important to note that the mutation can occur in any 
breed, and clinicians should not rely solely on breed predispositions. 
Genetic testing is the only definitive way to know which dogs are 
affected. 
Breed
Allele
frequency (approximate)
Australian shepherd 50%
Australian shepherd, mini 50%
Border collie Less than 5%
Chinook 25%

===== PDF_PAGE_1516 =====
Multidrug Sensitivity ( MDR1  Mutation) in Dogs and Cats   1489
Breed
Allele
frequency (approximate)
Collie 70%
English shepherd 15%
German shepherd 10%
Herding breed cross 10%
Long-haired whippet 50%
McNab 30%
Mixed breed 5%
Old English sheepdog 5%
Shetland sheepdog 15%
Silken windhound 30%
Cats: Current data do not suggest a breed predilection for the feline 
MDR1 mutation. 
Problem Drugs 
P-glycoprotein function can be reduced by drugs that are P-glyco -
protein substrates (eg, ketoconazole) and not solely by the MDR1 
mutation itself.3
The following drugs have been documented to cause problems in 
dogs and cats with the MDR1 mutation. These are general recom-
mendations and are intended to be a starting point; clinical condi -
tions (eg, MDR1 genotype, health status) and concurrently adminis-
tered drugs or supplements must be factored in when deciding how 
to proceed with the use of these drugs in a particular patient. It is 
recommended to consult a veterinary clinical pharmacologist for de-
tails related to a specific patient. 
 ■ Acepromazine : In dogs with the MDR1 mutation, aceproma -
zine tends to cause more profound and prolonged sedation.4 It 
is recommended to reduce the dose by 25% in dogs heterozygous 
for the MDR1 mutation (mutant/normal) and by 30% to 50% in 
dogs homozygous for the MDR1 mutation (mutant/mutant).
 ■ Apomorphine : Apomorphine can cause CNS depression in 
dogs homozygous for the MDR1 mutation at standard doses.5
 ■ Butorphanol : Anecdotally, butorphanol tends to cause more 
profound and prolonged sedation in dogs with the MDR1 muta-
tion. It is recommended to reduce the dose by 25% in dogs het -
erozygous for the MDR1 mutation (mutant/normal) and by 30% 
to 50% in dogs homozygous for the MDR1 mutation (mutant/
mutant).
 ■ Cyclosporine : Excessive immunosuppression (T-cell suppres-
sion) occurred in a dog heterozygous for the MDR1 mutation (mu-
tant/normal) receiving a relatively low (6.6 mg/kg/day) cyclosporine 
dose.6
 ■ Doxorubicin : Dogs with the MDR1 mutation are more sensitive 
to adverse effects to these antineoplastic drugs. Myelosuppression 
(eg, decreased blood cell counts, particularly neutrophils) and GI 
toxicity (eg, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea) are more likely to occur 
at normal doses in dogs with the MDR1 mutation.7–10 To reduce 
the likelihood of severe toxicity in these dogs, MDR1 mutant/nor-
mal dogs should have their initial dose reduced by 25%, whereas 
MDR1 mutant/mutant dogs should have their initial dose reduced 
by 50%; subsequent doses can be increased by 10% if the initial 
dose is well tolerated. It has been suggested that these dosage re -
ductions may reduce clinical efficacy, 9 but there are no clinical 
data to support this. These patients should be closely monitored 
for adverse effects.
 ■ Emod Epsid E: Use of emodepside in dogs and cats with the MDR1 
mutation has resulted in neurologic toxicity.1,11
 ■ Eprinomectin : Eprinomectin used at label dosages in cats with 
the MDR1 mutation has resulted in neurologic toxicity.12 
 ■ Grapiprant : Self-limited vomiting occurred in one collie dog 
homozygous for the MDR1 mutation. It is recommended to re -
duce the dose by 25% in dogs heterozygous for the MDR1 muta-
tion (mutant/normal) and by 30% to 50% in dogs homozygous for 
the MDR1 mutation (mutant/mutant).13  
 ■ Ivermectin : Although the dose of ivermectin used to prevent 
heartworm infection (6 µg/kg) is safe in dogs with the mutation, 
higher doses, such as those used for treating mange (300 – 600 
µg/kg), will cause neurologic toxicity in dogs that are homozy -
gous for the MDR1 mutation (mutant/mutant) and can cause less 
severe neurologic toxicity in dogs that are heterozygous for the 
mutation (mutant/normal).1,2,14 
 ■ Loperamide : At doses used to treat diarrhea, this drug will 
cause neurologic toxicity in dogs with the MDR1 mutation. This 
drug should be avoided in all dogs with the MDR1 mutation.15,16
 ■ Maropitant : Maropitant has been noted to cause mild to mod-
erate CNS depression in dogs with the MDR1 mutation.17 
 ■ Milbemycin : Like ivermectin, milbemycin is safe in dogs with 
the mutation when it is used for heartworm prevention at the la -
beled dosages; however, higher doses have been documented to 
cause neurologic toxicity in dogs with the MDR1 mutation.18
 ■ Moxidectin : Similar to ivermectin, moxidectin is safe for use 
in dogs and cats with the mutation when it is used for heartworm 
prevention at the labeled dosages. Higher doses (generally 10 to 
20 times higher than the heartworm prevention dose) and oral in-
gestion of topical products have been documented to cause neu -
rologic toxicity in dogs with the MDR1 mutation. 
 ■ Selamectin : Like ivermectin, selamectin is safe in dogs and cats 
with the mutation when it is used for heartworm prevention at the 
labeled dosages; however, higher doses and oral ingestion of top-
ical products have been documented to cause neurologic toxicity 
in pets with the MDR1 mutation.1,19,20
 ■ Vinca alkaloids  (eg, vinblastine, vincristine, vinorelbine): 
Dogs with the MDR1 mutation are more sensitive to adverse effects 
to these antineoplastic drugs. 7,8 Myelosuppression (eg, decreased 
blood cell counts, particularly neutrophils) and GI toxicity (eg, an-
orexia, vomiting, diarrhea) are more likely to occur at normal doses 
in dogs with the MDR1 mutation.7–10 To reduce the likelihood of 
severe toxicity in these dogs, MDR1 mutant/normal dogs should 
have their initial dose reduced by 25%, whereas MDR1 mutant/mu-
tant dogs should have their initial dose reduced by 50%; subsequent 
doses can be increased by 10% if the initial dose was well tolerated. 
It has been suggested that these dosage reductions may reduce clin-
ical efficacy,9 but there are no clinical data to support this. These 
patients should be closely monitored for adverse effects.
The following drugs have been reported to be pumped by P-glyco-
protein in humans, but there are currently no data stating whether 
they are canine or feline P-glycoprotein substrates and should be 
used with caution until more data are available. 
 ■ Domperidone
 ■ Etoposide
 ■ Ondansetron
There are many additional drugs that are P-glycoprotein substrates 
in humans and data continue to emerge regarding their effects in 
dogs and cats with the MDR1 mutation.
Testing 
Only genetic diagnostic testing can identify animals with normal 

===== PDF_PAGE_1517 =====
1490    How to Find a Quality-Assured  Compounding Pharmacy
P-glycoprotein function ( MDR1 normal/normal), heterozygote 
animals ( MDR1 mutant/normal), or homozygote mutant animals 
(MDR1 mutant/mutant). Washington State University College of 
Veterinary Medicine offers MDR1 genotyping for dogs and cats as 
well as counseling for dosing patients tested through Washington 
State University: https://prime.vetmed.wsu.edu/
Further Reading:
Mealey KL, Fidel J. P‐glycoprotein mediated drug interactions in an-
imals and humans with cancer. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medi-
cine. 2015;29(1):1-6.
Mealey KL. Adverse drug reactions in veterinary patients associ -
ated with drug transporters. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract . 
2013;43(5):1067-1078.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb   
How to Find a Quality-Assured 
 Compounding Pharmacy
GIGI DAVIDSON, RPH, DICVP , FSVHP (HONORARY), FACVP
VetPharm Consulting and College of Veterinary Medicine, North 
Carolina State University
Compounded medications are often required in veterinary medicine to 
provide for the specialized needs of a patient that cannot be met with 
commercially available dosage forms. However, choosing a “quality” 
compounding pharmacy among the many available can be challeng -
ing. The following guidelines can help the clinician narrow their choices 
to best provide for their patients. — Donald Plumb, PharmD
1. When choosing a compounding pharmacy, look 
for the designation “ACHC Accredited Compounding 
Pharmacy” (www.achc.org).
Accreditation by the Accreditation Commission for Healthcare 
(ACHC, formerly Pharmacy Compounding Accreditation Board or 
ACHC) means the pharmacy has independent, external validation 
that it meets nationally accepted quality assurance, quality control, 
and quality improvement standards. ACHC’s national standards are 
based on the consensus of industry experts on those elements that 
should exist in a pharmacy that adheres to high-quality standards. 
While all pharmacies must be licensed, ACHC accredited pharma -
cies have gone the “extra mile” to assure quality.
Only when a pharmacy has met ACHC’s rigorous standards is ac-
creditation issued. In order to demonstrate compliance with ACHC 
standards and earn ACHC accreditation, pharmacies voluntarily 
participate in an off-site and on-site evaluation process that includes:
 ■ Verification by ACHC that the pharmacy is not on probation for 
issues related to compounding quality, public safety, or controlled 
substances.
 ■ Verification that the pharmacy is properly licensed in each state in 
which it does business.
 ■ An extensive on-site evaluation by an ACHC surveyor, all of 
whom are compounding pharmacists trained in evaluating com-
pliance with ACHC’s quality standards. For example, this evalu-
ation includes:
• An assessment of the pharmacy’s system for assuring and 
maintaining compliance with all of the United States Phar -
macopeia (USP) Standards for Compounding. (eg, Chapters 
<795>, <797>, and <800>.)
• An assessment of the pharmacy’s system for assuring and 
maintaining staff competency.
• A review of facilities and equipment.
• Review of records and procedures required to prepare quality 
compounded medications.
• Verification that the pharmacy uses ingredients manufactured 
in FDA-registered facilities.
• Review of the pharmacy’s program for the quality testing of 
compounded preparations.
2. In addition to accreditation by ACHC or other 
compounding accreditation organizations (eg, NABP 
or the Joint Commission), inquire about specialized 
training and expertise in compounding dosage forms 
for delivery to veterinary patients.
 ■ Many active and inactive ingredients (eg, sweeteners, flavors, pre-
servatives, solvents, vehicles, dyes) used to compound prepara -
tions for humans can be toxic in nonhuman species. It is critical 
that pharmacists preparing compounds for animals are aware of 
these toxicities. 
 ■ Specialized administration devices (eg, subpalpebral lavage cath-
eters, tom cat catheters for rectal administration of antiepileptic 
medications, and enteral feeding tubes) are also used in veteri -
nary patients. Qualified compounding pharmacists preparing 
medications for administration through these devices must be 
aware of compound components and qualities (eg, viscosity, caus-
ticity, absorbency) that could obstruct or otherwise damage these 
administration devices.
 ■ Quality veterinary compounding pharmacies maintain a variety 
of species-specific and species-appropriate flavoring agents and 
can customize compounded therapies to individual veterinary 
patients as indicated. 
3. Request evidence for assigned beyond-use dates 
(expiration dates for compounded preparations).
Chemical and physical stability, as well as sterility storage times for 
compounded preparations, should be supported by scientific evi -
dence or national quality standards, such as the United States Phar-
macopeia (USP) Chapters <795> (nonsterile compounds) and <797> 
(sterile compounds). USP beyond use dating limits for compounds 
can be found in the current official versions of those General Chap-
ters at www.usp.org and also in USP’s Compounding Compendium 
on USP’s website. If a pharmacy assigns longer beyond-use dates 
(BUDs) than the limits stated in the current official versions of those 
chapters, a request should be made to the compounding pharmacy 
to provide supporting scientific evidence.

===== PDF_PAGE_1518 =====
Glucocorticoid Agents, General Information
Glucocorticoid Comparison Table
Drug
Equivalent anti- 
inflammatory  
dose (mg)
Relative anti- 
inflammatory 
potency
Relative mineral- 
corticoid activity
Plasma 
half-life dogs 
(minutes) 
[humans]
Duration of  
action after  
oral/IV
Ester form: solubility/release 
durations (IM)
Hydrocortisone (Cor-
tisol)
20 1 1-2 52-57 [90] Less than 12 
hours (8-12 
hours)
Sodium succinate: very/
minutes
Betamethasone 0.6 25 0 * [300+] More than 36 
hours (36-54 
hours)
Sodium succinate or 
phosphate:
very/minutes
Dexamethasone 0.75 30 0 119-136
[200-300+]
More than 36 
hours (36-54 
hours)
Sodium succinate or 
sodium phosphate: very/
minutes
Phenylpropionate or ison-
icotinate: moderate/days 
to weeks
Flumethasone 1.5 15-30 * * * Very/minutes
Isoflupredone * 17 * * * Acetate: duration of action 
up to 48 hours
Methylprednisolone 4 5 0 91 [200] 12-36 hours Sodium succinate: very/
minutes
Acetate: moderate/days to 
weeks
Prednisolone 5 4 1 69-197
[112-212]
12-36 hours Sodium succinate: very/
minutes 
Acetate: moderate/days to 
weeks
Prednisone 5 4 1 *[60] *
Triamcinolone 4 5 0 [200+]  24-48 hours Acetonide: poorly/weeks
*Data not available
Uses/Indications
Although glucocorticoids have been used to treat many condi -
tions in humans and animals, dexamethasone has 5 primary uses 
with accompanying dosage ranges: 1) as a diagnostic agent to test 
for hyperadrenocorticism, 2) as a replacement or supplementation 
(eg, relative adrenal insufficiency associated with septic shock) for 
glucocorticoid deficiency secondary to hypoadrenocorticism, 3) as 
an anti-inflammatory agent, 4) for immunosuppression, and 5) as an 
antineoplastic agent.1,2
Glucocorticoids are used in the treatment of endocrine conditions 
(eg, adrenal insufficiency), autoimmune and immune-mediated dis-
eases (eg, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus, masticatory myosi -
tis3), severe allergic conditions, anaphylaxis, envenomation, respi -
ratory diseases (eg, asthma), dermatologic diseases (eg, pemphigus, 
allergic dermatoses), hematologic disorders (eg, thrombocytopenia, 
autoimmune hemolytic anemia), neoplasias, nervous system disor -
ders (eg, increased CSF pressure), GI diseases (eg, ulcerative coli -
tis exacerbations, inflammatory bowel disease), renal diseases (eg, 
nephrotic syndrome), and induction of fetal maturation. Some glu -
cocorticoids are used topically on the eye and skin or are injected 
intra-articularly or intralesionally. This list is not exhaustive. High-
dose glucocorticoid use in the treatment of hemorrhagic or hypovo-
lemic shock, head trauma, spinal cord trauma, and/or sepsis is not 
supported.4
In general, when administering glucocorticoids, the following 
principles should be followed:
 ■ A specific diagnosis is needed before glucocorticoids are adminis-
tered, as they can mask disease.
 ■ A course of treatment should be determined prior to treatment.
 ■ A therapeutic endpoint should be determined prior to treatment.
 ■ The least potent glucocorticoid should be used at the lowest dose 
for the shortest amount of time.
 ■ It is important to understand when glucocorticoid use is inappro-
priate (eg, acute infection, diabetes).5 
Pharmacology/Actions
Glucocorticoids have effects on virtually every cell type and system 
in mammals. An overview of the effects of these agents follows:
Glucocorticoid Agents, General Information    1491

===== PDF_PAGE_1519 =====
1492    Glucocorticoid Agents, General Information
 ■ Cardiovascular system : Glucocorticoids can reduce capillary 
permeability and enhance vasoconstriction, and a clinically in -
significant positive inotropic effect can occur after glucocorticoid 
administration.
 ■ Cells: Glucocorticoids inhibit fibroblast proliferation, macro -
phage response to migration inhibiting factor, sensitization of 
lymphocytes and the cellular response to mediators of inflamma-
tion; they can also stabilize lysosomal membranes.
 ■ CNS/autonomic nervous system: Glucocorticoids can lower sei-
zure threshold, alter mood and behavior, diminish the response 
to pyrogens, stimulate appetite, and maintain alpha rhythm. Glu-
cocorticoids are necessary for normal adrenergic receptor sensi -
tivity.
 ■ Endocrine system: When an animal is not stressed, glucocorti -
coids suppress the release of corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic 
hormone [ACTH]) from the anterior pituitary, which reduces or 
prevents the release of endogenous corticosteroids. Stress factors 
(eg, renal disease, liver disease, diabetes) may occasionally nullify 
the suppressing aspects of exogenously administered steroids. The 
release of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), follicle-stimulat -
ing hormone (FSH), prolactin, and luteinizing hormone may be 
reduced when glucocorticoids are administered at pharmacolog-
ical doses. Conversion of thyroxine (T4) to triiodothyronine (T3) 
may be reduced by glucocorticoids, and plasma levels of para -
thyroid hormone may be increased. Glucocorticoids may inhibit 
osteoblast function. Vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone [ADH]) 
activity is reduced at the renal tubules, and diuresis may occur. 
Glucocorticoids inhibit insulin binding to insulin receptors and 
the post-receptor effects of insulin.
 ■ Fluid and electrolytes balance : Glucocorticoids can increase 
renal potassium and calcium excretion, sodium and chloride re -
absorption, and extracellular fluid volume. Hypokalemia and/or 
hypocalcemia rarely occur. Diuresis may develop following glu -
cocorticoid administration.
 ■ GI tract and hepatic system: Glucocorticoids increase the secre-
tion of gastric acid, pepsin, and trypsin. Glucocorticoids alter the 
structure of mucin and decrease mucosal cell proliferation. Iron 
salts and calcium absorption are decreased while fat absorption is 
increased. Hepatic changes can include increased fat and glyco -
gen deposits within hepatocytes, increased serum levels of ALT, 
and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT). Significant increases 
can be seen in serum ALP levels. Glucocorticoids can cause minor 
increases in bromosulfophthalein (BSP) retention time.
 ■ Hematopoietic system: Glucocorticoids can increase the number 
of circulating platelets, neutrophils, and red blood cells, but plate-
let aggregation is inhibited. Decreased amounts of lymphocytes 
(peripheral), monocytes, and eosinophils can be seen, as gluco -
corticoids can sequester these cells in the lungs and spleen and 
can decrease the release from bone marrow; removal of old red 
blood cells becomes diminished. Glucocorticoids can cause invo-
lution of lymphoid tissue.
 ■ Immune system (also see Cells and Hematopoietic system): Glu-
cocorticoids can decrease circulating levels of T lymphocytes; 
inhibit lymphokines; inhibit neutrophil, macrophage, and mono-
cyte migration; reduce production of interferon; inhibit phago -
cytosis, chemotaxis, and antigen processing; and diminish intra -
cellular killing. Specific acquired immunity is affected less than 
nonspecific immune responses. Glucocorticoids can also antago-
nize the complement cascade and mask the clinical signs of infec-
tion. Mast cells are decreased in number and histamine synthesis 
is suppressed. Many of these effects only occur at high doses and 
different species have different responses.
 ■ Metabolic effects: Glucocorticoids stimulate gluconeogenesis. Li-
pogenesis is enhanced in certain areas of the body (eg, abdomen) 
and adipose tissue can be redistributed away from the extremities 
to the trunk. Fatty acids are mobilized from tissues, and their oxi-
dation is increased. Plasma levels of triglycerides, cholesterol, and 
glycerol are increased. Protein is mobilized from most areas of the 
body (except the liver).
 ■ Musculoskeletal: Glucocorticoids may cause muscular weak -
ness, atrophy, and osteoporosis. Bone growth can be inhibited via 
growth hormone and somatomedin inhibition, increased calcium 
excretion, and inhibition of vitamin D activation. Resorption of 
bone can be enhanced. Fibrocartilage growth is also inhibited.
 ■ Ophthalmic: Prolonged glucocorticoid use (both systemic or 
topically to the eye) can cause increased intraocular pressure and 
glaucoma, cataracts, and exophthalmos.
 ■ Skin: Thinning of dermal tissue and skin atrophy can be seen with 
chronic glucocorticoid therapy. Hair follicles can become distend-
ed, and alopecia may occur.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Systemic use of glucocorticoids is generally considered contrain -
dicated in systemic fungal infections (unless used for replacement 
therapy for treatment of hypoadrenocorticism), when administered 
IM in patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenia, and in patients 
that are hypersensitive to a particular glucocorticoid. Concurrent 
use of sustained-release injectable glucocorticoids is contraindicated 
for chronic corticosteroid therapy of systemic diseases. Corticoste -
roid use may be contraindicated in horses predisposed to laminitis 
or exhibiting endocrinopathies.
Patients that have received systemic glucocorticoids for more 
than 2 weeks should be slowly tapered off the drug to allow return 
of endogenous ACTH and corticosteroid function. If the animal 
undergoes a stressful event (eg, surgery, trauma, illness) during the 
tapering process and/or until normal adrenal and pituitary function 
resume, additional glucocorticoids should be administered.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are associated with long-term administration of 
these drugs, especially if the drugs are administered at high doses or 
not on an alternate-day regimen. Effects typically manifest as clini -
cal signs of hyperadrenocorticism. Glucocorticoids can delay growth 
when administered to young, growing animals. See Pharmacology.
In dogs, polyuria (PU), polydipsia (PD), and polyphagia (PP) may 
occur during short-term burst therapy and on days when the drug 
is administered during alternate-day maintenance therapy. Adverse 
effects in dogs can include dull/dry coat, weight gain, panting, vom-
iting, diarrhea, elevated liver enzymes (ALP more than ALT), vac -
uolar hepatopathy, GI ulceration/perforation (especially with high 
parenteral or oral doses), hypercoagulability, hyperlipidemia, activa-
tion or worsening of diabetes mellitus, muscle wasting, and behavior 
changes (eg, depression, lethargy, aggression).6 Glucocorticoids have 
been known to delay growth in young animals. Discontinuation of 
the drug may be necessary; changing to an alternative glucocorticoid 
may also alleviate adverse effects. Adverse effects associated with an-
ti-inflammatory therapy are relatively uncommon, with the excep -
tion of PU, PD, and PP . Adverse effects (eg, secondary infections) 
associated with immunosuppressive doses are more common and 
potentially more severe.
Cats generally require higher dosages than dogs for clinical effect, 
but typically develop fewer adverse effects. Glucocorticoids appear 
to have a greater hyperglycemic effect in cats than in other species. 
Occasionally, PU, PD, PP with weight gain, diarrhea, or depression 
can be seen. Long-term, high-dose therapy can lead to Cushingoid 
effects.
Administration of dexamethasone or triamcinolone may play a 
role in the development of laminitis in horses, but this is thought to 
only occur rarely. In a study of healthy adult horses, hyperglycemia 
Veterinarian’ s Guide to Writing Prescriptions

===== PDF_PAGE_1520 =====
Glucocorticoid Agents, General Information    1493
and hyperinsulinemia returned to baseline values within 2 to 3 days 
of discontinuing dexamethasone, but recovery of insulin secretion was 
delayed by ≈2 weeks .7
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Glucocorticoids are necessary for normal fetal development. They 
may be required for adequate surfactant production, myelin, reti -
nal, pancreatic, and mammary development. Excessive doses early in 
pregnancy may lead to teratogenic effects. In horses and ruminants, 
exogenous steroid administration may induce parturition when ad-
ministered in the latter stages of pregnancy.
Glucocorticoids are present in human breast milk. 8 High doses 
or prolonged administration to dams may potentially inhibit the 
growth of nursing newborns. In humans, several studies suggest that 
amounts excreted in human breast milk are negligible with predni -
sone or prednisolone doses of 20 mg/day or less, or methylprednis -
olone doses of less than or equal to 8 mg/day. Large doses for short 
periods of time may not harm the infant. Waiting 3 to 4 hours after 
administration before allowing offspring to nurse and using pred -
nisolone rather than prednisone may result in a lower corticosteroid 
exposure for the offspring.
Overdosage/Acute Toxicity
When given short-term, glucocorticoids are unlikely to cause harm-
ful effects, even in massive doses. One incidence of a dog develop -
ing acute CNS effects after accidental ingestion of glucocorticoids 
has been reported. Should clinical signs occur, supportive treatment 
should be implemented if necessary.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving glucocorticoids and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use to-
gether is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks should 
be weighed, and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
 ■ Amphotericin B : When administered concomitantly with glu-
cocorticoids, may cause hypokalemia
 ■ Anticholinesterase Agents  (eg, neostigmine, pyridostig -
mine): In patients with myasthenia gravis, concomitant glucocor-
ticoid with these agents may lead to profound muscle weakness. 
If possible, discontinue anticholinesterase medication at least 24 
hours prior to corticosteroid administration.
 ■ Aspirin (salicylates) : Glucocorticoids may reduce salicylate 
blood levels.
 ■ Cyclophosphamide : Glucocorticoids may inhibit the hepatic 
metabolism of cyclophosphamide; dosage adjustments may be 
required.
 ■ Cyclosporine : Concomitant administration may increase the 
blood levels of each, by mutually inhibiting the hepatic metabo -
lism of each other; clinical significance of this interaction is not 
clear.
 ■ Digoxin : Secondary to hypokalemia, increased risk for arrhyth-
mias
 ■ Diuretics, potassium-depleting  (eg, furosemide, thiazides): 
When administered concomitantly with glucocorticoids, may 
cause hypokalemia
 ■ Ephedrine:  May increase metabolism
 ■ Estrogens : The effects of hydrocortisone, and possibly other glu-
cocorticoids, may be potentiated by concomitant administration 
with estrogens.
 ■ Insulin : Requirements may increase in patients receiving gluco-
corticoids.
 ■ Ketoconazole : May decrease metabolism
 ■ Mitotane : May alter the metabolism of glucocorticoids; higher 
than usual doses of glucocorticoids may be necessary to treat mi-
totane-induced adrenal insufficiency.
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs  (NSAIDs; eg, 
carprofen, meloxicam): Administration of other ulcerogenic drugs 
with glucocorticoids may increase ulceration risk.
 ■ Phenobarbital : May increase the metabolism of glucocorti -
coids
 ■ Rifampin : May increase the metabolism of glucocorticoids
 ■ V accines : Patients receiving corticosteroids at immunosuppres-
sive dosages should generally not receive live attenuated-virus 
vaccines, as virus replication may be augmented; a diminished 
immune response may occur after vaccine, toxoid, or bacterin ad-
ministration in patients receiving glucocorticoids.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Glucocorticoids may increase serum cholesterol and urine glu-
cose levels.
 ■ Glucocorticoids may decrease serum potassium.
 ■ Glucocorticoids may induce ALP activity in dogs.
 ■ Certain glucocorticoids (eg, prednisone, prednisolone, hydro -
cortisone) will interfere with cortisol assays (ACTH stimulation 
testing). NOTE: Dexamethasone does not interfere.
 ■ Glucocorticoids can suppress the release of thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH) and reduce T3 and T4 values. Thyroid gland atro-
phy has been reported after chronic glucocorticoid administration. 
Uptake of I131 by the thyroid may be decreased by glucocorticoids.
 ■ Reactions to allergen intradermal skin tests may be suppressed 
by glucocorticoids.9,10 A 2-week (14-day) withdrawal time before 
intradermal skin testing is recommended for dogs and cats11,12; no 
withdrawal time is required before serum IgE testing to identify 
sensitizing allergens in cats.12
 ■ False negative results of the nitroblue tetrazolium test for sys -
temic bacterial infections may be induced by glucocorticoids.
Monitoring
Monitoring of glucocorticoid therapy is dependent on its reason for 
use, dosage, agent used (amount of mineralocorticoid activity), dos-
age schedule (daily versus alternate day therapy), duration of thera-
py, and the animal’s age and condition. The following list may not be 
appropriate or complete for all animals; use clinical assessment and 
judgment should adverse effects be noted:
 ■ Weight, appetite, and/or signs of fluid retention
 ■ Serum and/or urine electrolytes
 ■ Total plasma proteins and albumin
 ■ Blood glucose
 ■ Urine culture
 ■ Growth and development in young animals
 ■ ACTH stimulation test to rule out iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism
Client Information
 ■ Clients should carefully follow the dosage instructions and should 
not discontinue the drug abruptly without consulting with veter-
inarian beforehand.
 ■ Clients should be briefed on the potential adverse effects that can 
be seen with these drugs and instructed to contact the veterinari-
an should these effects progress or become severe.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb    

===== PDF_PAGE_1521 =====
1494    Insulin, General Information 
Insulin, General Information 
Insulin preparations are used for the treatment of diabetic ketoac -
idosis (DKA) and uncomplicated diabetes mellitus and as adjunc -
tive therapy in treating hyperkalemia. Veterinary use of insulin has 
primarily been in dogs and cats, and there are 2 insulin products 
with FDA approval for use in these species: lente ( vetsulin®) and 
recombinant human protamine zinc ( ProZinc®) insulin. Insulin ad -
ministration has also been reported for use in other species includ -
ing, but not limited to, horses, cattle, camelids, birds, ferrets, and 
guinea pigs. (Information on the individual species and insulins with 
their exact application can be found in the relevant monographs.)
Goals of insulin therapy in diabetic patients include resolution of 
clinical signs associated with diabetes mellitus and minimizing the 
risk for complications such as hypoglycemia or ketosis. Often, hy -
poglycemia occurring secondary to insulin treatment can be more 
life-threatening than the hyperglycemia being treated. Diabetic dogs 
are typically permanently insulin-dependent (similar to a type 1 di -
abetes in humans) with an inability to produce insulin and require 
lifelong exogenous insulin. However, diabetic cats tend to develop 
an early insulin resistance (more consistent with type 2 diabetes in 
humans), which results in a combination of impaired insulin action 
(ie, resistance, beta cell dysfunction/failure) and culminates in in -
sulin dependence. Achieving diabetic remission in cats should be 
considered as a possible treatment goal in newly diagnosed diabetic 
cats.1 Increasing the chances for successful remission in cats is often 
accomplished by instituting more rigorous diabetic management in-
terventions to achieve glycemic control as early as possible after the 
initial diagnosis. 
Treatment of diabetes mellitus is complex. In sick diabetic patients 
(ie, those with DKA), insulin is only one component of therapy and 
treatment may require fluid and electrolyte replacement, manage -
ment of acid/base disturbances, dietary adjustments, and antimicro-
bial therapy. These patients are typically stabilized with short-acting 
insulins before transitioning to long-acting insulin therapy; however, 
in cats, the use of a long-acting insulin (ie, glargine) has been found 
to be an effective and safe alternative treatment for the management 
of DKA.2 Adequate monitoring is mandatory for all patients.  
When treating uncomplicated diabetic patients, insulin choice is 
generally based on efficacy and duration of action in the species be-
ing treated. Recommended first-choice insulin products are porcine 
lente, recombinant human protamine zinc insulin (rPZI), or NPH 
insulin in dogs and protamine zinc insulin (rPZI) or glargine insulin 
in cats.3  
Uses/Indications 
Rapid or short-acting insulin: 
Rapid or short-acting insulin is commonly used for stabilization of 
the sick diabetic patient, and as adjunctive therapy for the treatment 
of hyperkalemia. It is administered by IM and SC injection or by 
IV infusion. IV insulin administration is recommended in patients 
with poor tissue perfusion, in shock or cardiovascular collapse, or in 
those that require adjunct therapy for hyperkalemia. 
Regular insulin (or R insulin) is the most commonly used 
short-acting insulin for diabetic emergencies. If regular insulin is not 
available or is cost prohibitive, other short-acting insulin prepara -
tions include insulin lispro or aspart. All short-acting insulin prepa-
rations are human products in U100 (100 units insulin/mL) concen-
tration; higher concentrations may be available for some products, 
but their use has not been studied in veterinary species. 
Regular insulin (Humulin® R, Novolin® R) 
Lispro insulin (HumaLOG®, Admelog®, or Lyumjev®) 
Aspart insulin (NovoLog®, Fiasp®) 
Intermediate-acting insulin:
Intermediate-acting insulin preparations can be used for initial and 
long-term management of diabetes, especially in dogs. 
Porcine lente insulin (vetsulin®) is a U40 (40 units insulin/mL) 
insulin and is FDA-approved for use in dogs and cats.
Recombinant human neutral protamine hagedorn (NPH) in -
sulin (Humulin® N, or Novolin® N) is a U100 insulin approved for 
use in humans. Novolin® N and Humulin® N are essentially inter-
changeable; however, veterinary endocrinologists often recom -
mend using only one brand after therapy is initiated. This insulin 
is not recommended for use in cats due to its short duration of 
action in this species.3 
  
Long-acting insulin:
Although these insulins are categorized as long-acting, twice-daily 
therapy is often required. Long-acting insulin preparations can be 
considered when intermediate-acting insulin preparations are too 
short in duration of action. Long-acting insulin preparations are of-
ten used as first-line insulin choices in diabetic cats. 
Glargine insulin is available in U100 concentration ( Lantus®, 
Basaglar®, Rezvoglar®, Semglee®); a U300 (300 units insulin/mL) 
concentration (Toujeo®) is available. Glargine insulin also can be 
considered as an alternative to regular insulin CRI for the man -
agement of DKA.4
Protamine zinc insulin (ProZinc®) is a U40 insulin and is 
FDA-approved for use in dogs and cats.
Detemir insulin (Levemir®) is a U100 insulin. Use this product 
cautiously in dogs, as they exhibit a strong hypoglycemic response 
to detemir.
Degludec insulin (Tresiba®) is a U100 insulin that is ul -
tra-long-acting in humans. There are insufficient data and experi-
ence in veterinary clinical patients to make a dosing recommen -
dation for this insulin type at this time.
Pharmacology/Actions 
Insulin is a hormone secreted by beta cells in the pancreatic islets 
of Langerhans. Eliciting multiple biologic responses, insulin initiates 
its actions by binding to cell-surface receptors, which are present in 
varying numbers in virtually all mammalian cells. This binding re -
sults in a cascade of intracellular events that can be studied in detail 
by consulting a physiology text.
Insulin is the primary hormone responsible for controlling the 
uptake, utilization, and storage of cellular nutrients. Insulin primar-
ily affects liver, muscle, and adipose tissues but also exerts potent 
regulatory effects on other cell types. Insulin stimulates carbohy -
drate metabolism in cardiac, skeletal, and adipose tissue by facilitat-
ing glucose uptake into the cells. Other tissues, such as brain, nerve, 
intestinal, liver, and kidney tubules, do not require insulin for glu -
cose transport. Insulin is involved in hepatic conversion of glucose 
to glycogen (for storage), and the hypothalamus requires insulin for 
glucose entry into the satiety center. 
Insulin secretion is a tightly regulated process designed to pro -
vide stable concentrations of glucose in blood during fasting and 
feeding. This regulation is achieved by the coordinated interplay of 
nutrients, GI and pancreatic hormones, and autonomic neurotrans-
mitters. The primary stimulus for secretion of endogenous insulin is 
glucose. Insulin also has direct effects on fat and protein metabolism. 
The hormone stimulates lipogenesis, increases protein synthesis, and 
inhibits lipolysis and free fatty acid release from adipose tissues. In -
sulin promotes an intracellular shift of potassium and magnesium. 
Exogenous insulin elicits all the pharmacologic responses usually 
produced by endogenous insulin.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
There are no alternatives for insulin used for diabetic indications; 

===== PDF_PAGE_1522 =====
Insulin, General Information    1495
thus, there are no absolute contraindications to its use except during 
episodes of hypoglycemia. The likelihood that significant amounts 
of insulin antibodies will form is directly related to how divergent 
the administered insulin molecule is from the species being treated. 
Porcine insulin is identical to canine insulin and is considered the 
insulin source of choice for diabetic dogs. Cats have been shown to 
develop anti-insulin antibodies when given human, beef, and beef/
pork insulins 5; dogs have developed anti-insulin antibodies when 
given beef and pork insulins.6 The presence of insulin antibodies may 
increase, decrease, or have no effect on glycemic control. 5,7 Anti-in-
sulin antibodies should be investigated only after other etiologies for 
poor control (eg, expired insulin, concurrent disease, medication 
interference) are ruled out. In dogs with significant (ie, greater than 
40%) anti-insulin antibodies and poor glycemic control, consider 
switching to a porcine or recombinant human insulin source or an 
insulin preparation devoid of protamine. It is unknown if veterinary 
patients produce antibodies to insulin analogues (eg, glargine, de -
temir).
Patients presented with severe ketoacidosis, anorexia, lethargy, and/
or vomiting should be treated with short-acting insulin (eg, regular) 
and appropriate supportive therapy until their condition is stabilized. 
Alternatively, glargine administration was determined to be an effec-
tive and safe alternative to the standard regular insulin IV CRI proto-
col for the management of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in cats.4 
For obese patients, dose calculations should be based on the indi-
vidual patient’s ideal body weight to avoid inadvertent insulin over-
dose.
Long-term repeated SC/IM injections of insulin at the same site 
may cause lipodystrophic reactions, which could interfere with insu-
lin absorption.
Insulin syringes are designed for use with a specific strength of in-
sulin, with the needle covers color-coded according to strength (U40 
syringes have a red top, whereas U100 syringes have an orange top). 
When dosing from a vial, caution must be used to ensure the correct 
syringes are being used for the insulin strength (eg, U40 syringes for 
U40 insulin) and that they are not mismatched (eg, U40 syringes 
for U100 insulin). U40 syringes contain 0.5 mL and have 20 unit 
marks. One unit mark in a U40 syringe will contain 1 unit of U40 
insulin. U100 syringes are available in 0.3 mL, 0.5 mL, and 1 mL size. 
One unit mark in a U100 syringe will contain 1 unit of U100 insulin. 
Some brands of 0.3 mL syringes include half unit markings. 
Tuberculin (TB) syringes can also be used but are not generally 
recommended because the potential for dose calculation confusion 
is substantial. 
Using syringe sizes that do not match the insulin type is not rec -
ommended due to the increased risk for (potentially catastrophic) 
dosing errors; however, if the appropriate syringe is not available, 
conversions can be carefully calculated. Always double-check the 
conversion before administering to the patient. NOTE: Inadvertent-
ly using a U40 syringe for U100 insulin will result in a 2.5 times over-
dose of insulin; similarly, using U100 syringes with U40 insulin will 
result in a 2.5 times underdose of insulin. 
 ■ If using U100 syringes to measure U40 insulin doses:
• Determine the required dose of U40 insulin.
• Multiply the required units of U40 insulin by 2.5. Example: If 
the required U40 insulin dose is 10 units, then 10 units × 2.5 = 
25 units of U40 insulin when using U100 syringes to administer.
 ■ If using TB syringes to measure U40 insulin doses:
• Determine the required dose of U40 insulin.
• Multiply the required units of U40 insulin × 0.025. Example: 
If the required U40 insulin dose is 10 units, then 10 units × 
0.025 = 0.25 mL of U40 insulin when using TB syringes to ad-
minister.
 ■ Be sure to double-check all calculations before administering 
to patient.
When using pen devices, ensure the needles being used are designed 
specifically for the product being given.
When writing prescriptions, do not abbreviate units as “U, ” as it 
has been shown to increase the rate of transcription and dosage er -
rors. In human medicine, insulin is considered a “high alert” medi -
cation (ie, medication that requires special safeguards to reduce the 
risk for errors). Consider instituting practices such as redundant 
drug dosage and volume checking, and special alert labels.
Adverse Effects 
Adverse effects of insulin therapy may include hypoglycemia (see 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity), hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia (dia -
betic ketoacidosis [DKA] only), and injection site reactions to the 
“foreign” proteins. In cases of hypoglycemia caused by excessive in-
sulin, rebound hyperglycemia may follow (ie, Somogyi effect) due to 
release of counter-regulatory hormones in response to hypoglycemia 
or rapid rates of glucose decline following insulin administration. 
It is important to recognize this phenomenon when making insulin 
adjustments to avoid complications caused by inadvertent increases 
in insulin doses when in fact the dose needs to be decreased.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
The safe use of veterinary-labeled insulins (ie, vetsulin®, ProZinc®) in 
breeding or pregnant animals has not been studied. Refer to specific 
insulin monographs for further information.
In humans, insulin is considered a treatment of choice for gesta -
tional diabetes8; insulin is compatible with nursing.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 
Insulin overdose leads to hypoglycemia. Signs may include weak -
ness, shaking, head tilt, lethargy, ataxia, seizures, blindness, unusual 
behavior, and coma. Other signs may include restlessness, hunger, 
and muscle fasciculations. Electrolyte disturbances, including hypo-
kalemia, may occur. Prolonged hypoglycemia can result in perma -
nent brain damage or death.
Mild hypoglycemia can be treated by offering the animal its usual 
food. More serious signs (eg, seizures) should be treated with oral 
dextrose solutions (eg, Karo® syrup) applied to the buccal mucosa 
or by IV injections of 50% dextrose solutions (small amounts: usu -
ally 2 – 15 mL [0.5 – 1 mL/kg], diluted and slowly administered 9; 
see Dextrose 50% injection ). For in-clinic management, glucagon 
may also be considered on an as-needed basis for an insulin over -
dose. See Glucagon for more information. If the animal is seizing, 
fingers should not be placed in the animal’s mouth. Once the ani -
mal’s hypoglycemia is alleviated (response usually occurs within 1 to 
2 minutes), the animal should be closely monitored (both by physi -
cal observation and serial blood glucose concentrations) to prevent 
a recurrence of hypoglycemia (especially with the slower-absorbed/
longer-acting products) and to prevent hyperglycemia from devel -
oping. Future insulin dosages or feeding habits should be evaluated 
or adjusted based on consultation with the clinician to prevent fur -
ther occurrences of hypoglycemia.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions 
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving insulin and may be of im -
portance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 

===== PDF_PAGE_1523 =====
1496    Insulin, General Information 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Beta-Adrenergic Antagonists  (eg, atenolol, propranolol): 
Can have variable effects on glycemic control and can mask the 
signs associated with hypoglycemia
 ■ Clonidine : Can mask the signs associated with hypoglycemia
 ■ Digoxin : Because insulin can reduce serum potassium concen -
trations, patients receiving concomitant digoxin therapy—partic-
ularly patients receiving concurrent diuretic therapy—should be 
closely monitored. 
 ■ Diuretics  (eg, furosemide, hydrochlorothiazide): Insulin shifts 
extracellular potassium into the intracellular space; serum potassi-
um concentration should be closely monitored in patients receiv-
ing concomitant diuretic therapy. Diuretics may also decrease the 
hypoglycemic activity of insulin (ie, increase insulin requirements). 
 ■ Reserpine : Can mask the signs associated with hypoglycemia
The following drugs or drug classes may potentiate the hypoglyce -
mic activity of insulin (ie, decrease insulin requirements): 
 ■ Alcohol
 ■ Anabolic Steroids (eg, boldenone, stanozolol, testosterone)
 ■ Angiotensin  II Receptor Blockers  (ARBs; eg, telmisar-
tan)
 ■ Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors  (ACEIs; eg, 
benazepril, enalapril)
 ■ Disopyramide
 ■ Fenofibrate
 ■ Fluoroquinolones (eg, ciprofloxacin, enrofloxacin)
 ■ Fluoxetine
 ■ Hypoglycemic Agents, Oral  (eg, acarbose, glipizide, met -
formin)
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors  (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, linezol-
id, selegiline)
 ■ Pentoxifylline
 ■ Salicylates (eg, aspirin, bismuth subsalicylate)
 ■ Somatostatin Deriv atives (eg, octreotide)
 ■ Sulfonamides (eg, sulfadimethoxine, sulfamethoxazole)
The following drugs or drug classes may decrease the hypoglycemic 
activity of insulin (ie, increase insulin requirements): 
 ■ Alpha-2-Adrenergic Agonists (eg, dexmedetomidine, me-
detomidine, xylazine ): May cause hyperglycemia and tempo -
rarily interfere with glycemic control
 ■ Beta-Adrenergic Agonists (eg, albuterol, terbutaline)
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one)
 ■ Danazol
 ■ Diazoxide 
 ■ Estrogens (eg, diethylstilbestrol [DES], estriol)
 ■ Isoniazid 
 ■ Niacin
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine, chlorpromazine)
 ■ Progestins (eg, megestrol)
 ■ Thyroid Hormones:  Can elevate blood glucose concentrations 
in diabetic patients when thyroid hormone therapy is first initiated
Monitoring 
Diabetic patients should be closely monitored, especially during the first 
month of insulin therapy. Each patient requires an individualized treat-
ment plan, frequent reassessment, and adjustments of the plan based on 
the response of the patient. It is encouraged to review a veterinary endo-
crinology reference text or consult with a veterinary emergency and crit-
ical care and/or endocrinology specialist for further information related 
to regulating diabetic patients and insulin adjustments. The overarching 
goal when monitoring diabetic patients is control of clinical signs related 
to hyperglycemia (eg, polyuria, polydipsia) while avoiding hypoglyce-
mia.3 Interpret all monitoring strategies based on clinical signs. Results 
from the monitoring options below may conflict in regards to achieving 
good glycemic and clinical control. 
 ■ Patient status and control of clinical signs: body weight, appetite, 
fluid intake, urine output
 ■ Glucose (blood or interstitial). Experience with continuous in -
terstitial glucose monitoring in dogs and cats indicates that these 
devices are easy to apply, user friendly, and provide useful infor -
mation surrounding glycemic control while the patient is in the 
clinic or home environment.10–14 A blood glucose curve should be 
considered at the following times3:
a) At the discretion of the supervising veterinarian, after the first 
dose of a new insulin type, blood glucose can be checked reg -
ularly after administration. The goal for monitoring following 
the first dose of insulin would be solely to identify hypoglyce -
mia. The insulin dose should NOT be increased based on the 
first-day blood glucose evaluation. If blood glucose falls below 
150 mg/dL during the glucose curve, frequency of monitor -
ing should increase to hourly until the blood glucose is greater 
than 150 mg/dL. 3 Although the insulin dose should never be 
increased on the first day of therapy, the dose should be de -
creased by 10% to 50% in dogs and 0.5 units in cats if blood 
glucose is less than 150 mg/dL at any time during the day.3 Re-
peat glucose curves on subsequent days (and decrease insulin 
dose if necessary) until nadir is greater than 150 mg/dL. 
b) 7 to 14 days after starting insulin or an insulin dose change
c) At least every 3 months, even in animals with well-controlled 
diabetes
d) Any time clinical signs recur in an animal with previously 
well-controlled diabetes
e) When hypoglycemia is suspected. NOTE: For patients that 
have experienced or are suspected to have experienced repeat-
ed or unexplained hypoglycemia, it is strongly encouraged to 
consult with a veterinary emergency and critical care and/or 
endocrinology specialist or reference text that specializes in 
providing information specific for treatment of hypoglycemia.
 ■ Urine glucose monitoring is typically only helpful for document-
ing prolonged hypoglycemia (eg, persistently negative urine glu -
cose testing when monitoring for diabetic remission in cats). As 
most diabetic patients spend time above the renal threshold for 
urinary glucose spillage, even patients with well-controlled diabe-
tes may be intermittently glucosuric throughout the day. 
 ■ Fructosamine or glycosylated hemoglobin can be measured if 
available and warranted.
 ■ Additional monitoring for patients with diabetic ketoacidosis 
(DKA)15:
• Glucose measurement every 1 to 2 hours initially; adjust insu-
lin therapy and begin dextrose infusion when blood glucose 
decreases below 250 mg/dL (14 mmol/L). See Dosages section 
of specific insulin type being administered.
• Hydration status, respiration, pulse every 2 to 4 hours 
• Serum electrolytes (eg, magnesium, phosphorous, potassium), 
plasma ketones, and total venous CO 2 concentrations every 4 
to 8 hours
• Urine output, glycosuria urine ketones every 4 to 8 hours
• Body weight, packed cell volume, temperature, and blood 
pressure every 6 to 8 hours
• Additional monitoring as applicable to address concurrent disease
Client Information 
 ■ NOTES for veterinarian: 
1. Correct injection techniques should be taught and practiced 
with the client before the animal’s discharge. 

===== PDF_PAGE_1524 =====
Insulin, General Information    1497
2. Emphasis should be placed on matching the appropriate sy -
ringe and insulin concentration (eg, do not interchange U40 
insulin and syringes with U100 insulin and syringes) and cor-
rect needles with pens/devices.
3. Both veterinary-approved insulins have owner information 
sheets, client-friendly handouts, and websites to provide client 
support on administration and use of insulin.
 ■ For this medication to work safely, give the insulin exactly as your 
veterinarian has prescribed. Y our veterinarian will teach you cor-
rect injection techniques before your animal is discharged. Only 
use the syringes provided by your veterinarian.
 ■ Always double-check the dose in the syringe before you inject 
your animal. Overdoses may be fatal.
 ■ Do not give this medicine if your animal is not eating.
 ■ The insulin bottle should be visually inspected prior to use. Some 
insulins will be clear and colorless, whereas others may appear 
as a uniform milky suspension. There should never be clumps or 
unexpected particles. Y our veterinarian will show you what the 
vial contents should look like.
 ■ Some insulins require gentle rolling or shaking of the vial prior to 
withdrawing a dose. 
 ■ Unused insulin is stored in the refrigerator. After the vial or pen/
device is first used, the insulin will need to be either kept at room 
temperature or refrigerated depending on the type of insulin. Af-
ter measuring the dose from a refrigerated insulin into a syringe, 
allow the contents to come to room temperature before injection. 
 ■ The injection site should be frequently changed, with the main sites 
being the back of the neck, side of the animal, or shoulder area.
 ■ Place the used needles and syringes in a sharps disposal container 
immediately after use, making sure you do not attempt to discon-
nect the needle from the syringe or recap the needle. Y our veter-
inarian or pharmacist will help you obtain these containers. Do 
not reuse needles or syringes.
 ■ Signs of low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia) include weakness, de -
pression, lack of energy, sluggishness, staggering gait (ie, stum -
bling) when walking, behavior changes, muscle twitching, seizures 
(convulsions), or coma. If your animal is unconscious or having 
a seizure, this is a medical emergency. Take your animal to the 
veterinarian immediately. If your animal is conscious and able to 
swallow, rub ≈1 tablespoon of corn syrup (Karo®) or honey on your 
animal’s gums until it is alert enough to eat. Feed the usual meal 
and contact your veterinarian for recommendations. Some animals 
may not show any obvious physical signs of low blood sugar. If your 
animal is not acting normally, contact your veterinarian to make 
sure your animal’s blood sugar concentrations are in a safe range. 
 ■ Contact your veterinarian at your earliest convenience if you 
notice excessive thirst, increased frequency of urination, or in -
creased appetite in your animal, as these signs may indicate the 
insulin dose needs to be adjusted.
 ■ Keep insulin products out of temperature extremes. When trav -
eling, insulin should not be left in carry-on luggage that will pass 
through airport surveillance equipment. Generally, insulin sta -
bility is not affected by a single pass-through surveillance equip -
ment; however, longer than normal exposure or repeated passes 
through surveillance equipment may alter insulin potency.
 ■ Do not stop giving this medication to your animal unless instruct-
ed to do so by your veterinarian.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to closely monitor your animal during 
treatment. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
 ■ Keep insulin out of the reach of children. Avoid contact with 
eyes. In case of contact, immediately flush eyes with running 
water for at least 15 minutes. Accidental injection may cause 
hypoglycemia. In case of accidental injection, seek medical at -
tention  immediately.
Chemistry/Synonyms
The endocrine component of the pancreas is organized as discrete 
islets (islets of Langerhans) that contain 4 cell types, each of which 
produces a different hormone. Insulin is produced in the beta cells, 
which comprise 60% to 80% of the islet. Insulin is a protein consist-
ing of 2 chains, designated A and B, with 21 and 30 amino acids, 
respectively, that are connected by 2 disulfide bonds. Human insulin 
has a molecular weight of 5808. 
The amino acid composition of insulin has been determined in 
various animal species. The insulin of dogs and pigs is identical in 
structure. Dogs, horses, cattle, sheep, and goats differ only in posi -
tions 8, 9, and 10 of the A chain. Porcine insulin differs from human 
insulin by 1 amino acid (alanine instead of threonine at the carboxy 
terminal of the B chain [ie, in position B 30]), and bovine insulin 
differs by 2 additional alterations in the A chain (threonine and iso-
leucine in positions A8 and A10 are replaced by alanine and valine, 
respectively). Of the domestic species, feline insulin is most similar 
to bovine insulin, differing by only 1 amino acid (at position 18 of 
the A chain). Human insulin differs from rabbit insulin by a single 
amino acid. There is a single insulin gene and a single protein prod-
uct in most mammalian species (multiple insulins appear to occur 
frequently among fish). Recombinant DNA technology is used to 
manufacture most insulins, in which the insertion of the insulin gene 
into the DNA of nonpathogenic bacteria or yeast allows the organ -
isms to produce the insulin protein.
For therapeutic purposes, doses and concentrations of insulin 
are expressed in units. This is sometimes abbreviated as “U, ” but this 
practice is discouraged to reduce the chance for transcription and 
dosing errors. One unit of insulin is equal to the amount required 
to reduce the concentration of blood glucose in a fasting rabbit to  
45 mg/dL. All commercial preparations of human-labeled insulin 
currently manufactured in the United States are supplied in solu -
tion or suspension at a concentration of 100 units/mL, which is  
≈3.6 mg/mL of insulin (one notable exception is detemir, which con-
tains 14.2 mg/mL of insulin). Likewise, one unit of insulin equals 
≈35 µg of insulin, and 1 mg insulin is ≈28.8 units. 16 
All human and purified pork insulin products have a neutral pH 
of ≈7 to 7.8, except for insulin glargine, which has an acidic pH of ≈4.
Storage/Stability 
All insulin manufacturers state that unopened insulin products 
should be stored in the refrigerator and protected from temperature 
extremes and direct sunlight. Freezing (less than 2°C [36°F]) may 
alter the protein structure and decrease potency. Particle aggregation 
and crystal damage may not be visible to the naked eye. Higher tem-
perature extremes (greater than 30°C [86°F]) and direct exposure 
to sunlight may produce insulin transformation products and fibril 
formation. Manufacturers allow room-temperature storage of most 
in-use vials, but recommendations for duration of use and storage 
vary by manufacturer and product. 
Although manufacturers recommend discarding opened bottles of 
insulin after 4 to 6 weeks (or expiration date, whichever comes first), 
studies support that insulin potency and stability is maintained for 
longer durations.17,18 Veterinary internal medicine specialists indicate 
that the vial may be used for 3 to 6 months after opening and possi-
bly beyond the listed expiration date as long as it is handled carefully, 
stored in the refrigerator, and the solution does not develop discol -
oration, flocculent precipitates, or changes in consistency. If a lack of 
diabetes regulation is noted when using the product beyond the expi-
ration date (3 to 6 months after starting therapy), it may be prudent to 
replace with new insulin prior to adjusting insulin  therapy.3

===== PDF_PAGE_1525 =====
1498    Opioids, General Information
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult a pharmacist or specialized 
references for more specific information.
Diluting insulin: Not all insulin solutions can or should be diluted. 
Refer to specific insulin monographs for detailed information. 
Dosage Forms
Insulin preparations are available for injection from a vial or as an 
insulin pen. For some pet owners, insulin pens may provide more 
accuracy with dosing, especially when administering low or half 
doses of insulin. See specific insulin monographs for details related 
to available dosage forms.
For humans, insulins are FDA-licensed (approved) biological 
products. Some insulin types have biosimilar or interchangeable bi-
osimilar products available. Please refer to the FDA ’s Purple Book for 
more information about FDA-approved biologics, including biosim-
ilar and interchangeable products.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Opioids, General Information
Receptors for opioid analgesics are found in high concentrations in 
the limbic system, spinal cord, thalamus, hypothalamus, striatum, 
and midbrain. They are also found in tissues, such as the GI tract, 
urinary tract, and in other smooth muscles. 
Opioid receptors are further broken down into 3 main subgroups:
1. Mu (MOP) receptors are found primarily in the pain-regulat -
ing areas of the brain. They are responsible for analgesia but 
also many of the associated adverse effects, including eupho -
ria, respiratory depression, sedation, physical dependence, mi-
osis, decreased GI motility, nausea, vomiting, and hypother -
mic actions of opioids.
2. Kappa (KOP) receptors are located primarily in the deep layers 
of the cerebral cortex and spinal cord. They are thought to con-
tribute to analgesia, nociception, diuresis, sedation, and miosis. 
3. Delta (DOP) receptors are located in the limbic areas of the 
CNS, such as the neocortex and amygdala. They are thought to 
contribute to analgesia, decreased GI motility, and inhibition 
of dopamine release.  
The nociceptin orphanin peptide receptor [NOP , also known as or-
phan receptor L1, ORL1]) has a structure that is very similar to the 
other opioid receptors; however, it does not respond in a classic fash-
ion to opioid antagonists, and its classification as an opioid receptor 
remains controversial. Previously, several other opioid receptor sub-
types (including sigma and epsilon) were proposed but have been 
reclassified as nonopioid receptors as they have little to no affinity for 
opioids and morphine-like compounds.1–4
All opioids in clinical practice act primarily at the MOP receptor with 
varying degrees of activity on the KOP and DOP receptors. Opioids can 
be classified according to origin: naturally occurring (eg, morphine, co-
deine), semisynthetic (eg, oxycodone, buprenorphine), and synthetic 
(eg, methadone, fentanyl). Additionally, they can be classified according 
to their effect on the receptors: agonist (eg, morphine, fentanyl), partial 
agonist (eg, buprenorphine), and antagonist (eg, naloxone, naltrexone). 
The primary pharmacologic effects of opioids include analgesia, 
antitussive activity, respiratory depression, sedation, emesis, physical 
dependence, and intestinal effects (constipation, defecation).
Secondary pharmacologic effects include: 
 ■ CNS: Euphoria, excitement
 ■ Cardiovascular: Bradycardia, peripheral vasodilation, decreased 
peripheral resistance, and baroreceptor inhibition, which may re-
sult in orthostatic hypotension and syncope
 ■ Urinary: Diuresis, increased bladder sphincter tone can induce 
urinary retention
Various species may exhibit paradoxical effects from these agents. 
For example, in contrast to the expected effects of sedation and con-
stipation after morphine administration, horses, cattle, swine, and 
cats may develop excitement while dogs may defecate. Dogs and hu-
mans may develop miosis, while other species (especially cats) may 
develop mydriasis. For more information, see the individual mono-
graphs for each agent.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb   
Penicillins, General Information
Uses/Indications
Penicillins are beta-lactam antimicrobials that are used for a wide 
range of infections in various species. FDA-approved indications/
species, as well as non-FDA-approved uses, are listed in the Uses/
Indications and Dosages section for each drug.
Pharmacology/Actions
Penicillins are beta-lactam antimicrobials that disrupt bacterial cell 
wall synthesis by binding penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) within 
the bacterial cell wall, which inhibits peptidoglycan synthesis. This 
results in a defective barrier and an osmotically unstable spheroplast. 
The number and type of PBPs vary between different bacteria, as do 
the different affinities for various beta-lactams. This helps explain the 
differences in spectrums of activity the drugs have, which are not 
explained by the influence of beta-lactamases. Penicillins are time-  
dependent antimicrobials, usually bactericidal, and like other  
beta-lactam antibiotics, they are generally considered more effective 
against actively growing bacteria. The penicillins have no activity 
against rickettsia, mycobacteria, Mycoplasma spp, fungi and virus -
es. There are several classes of penicillins with various spectrums of 
activity.
Natural penicillins: penicillin G and V
In general, the natural penicillins are susceptible to the effects of 
beta-lactamases and are unable to penetrate the cell membrane of 
gram-negative bacteria. Therefore, their spectrum of activity is main-
ly aerobic gram-positive cocci, including streptococci and non–pen-
icillinase-producing staphylococci. They also have activity against 
some aerobic and anaerobic gram-positive bacilli, such as Bacillus 
anthracis, Clostridium spp, Fusobacterium spp, and Actinomyces 
spp. In addition, they have activity against some nonpenicillinase-  
producing gram-negative aerobic cocci and against most spiro -
chetes. The natural penicillins are inactive against most aerobic and 
anaerobic gram-negative bacilli. The natural penicillins are available 
as sodium, potassium, procaine, or benzathine salt forms. Procaine 
and benzathine salts slow absorption, leading to a longer duration of 
action. However, the slow absorption of benzathine penicillin G can 
result in inadequate penicillin concentration.
Penicillinase-resistant penicillins: nafcillin, cloxacillin,  
dicloxacillin, oxacillin
The penicillinase-resistant penicillins have a narrower spectrum of ac-
tivity than the natural penicillins but are resistant to degradation by 
penicillinases. Their antimicrobial efficacy is aimed directly against 
penicillinase-producing strains of gram-positive cocci, particularly 
staphylococcal species. Their spectrum of activity is mainly meth -
icillin-susceptible staphylococci and streptococci; they are inactive 
against methicillinresistant staphylococci and extended-spectrum 
beta-lactamase-producing Enterobacteriaceae. In general, this class is 
more hepatically excreted than other classes of penicillins and is less 
likely to require dose adjustments for patients with renal insufficiency.

===== PDF_PAGE_1526 =====
Penicillins, General Information    1499
Aminopenicillins: ampicillin, amoxicillin
The aminopenicillins (sometimes referred to as broad-spectrum or 
ampicillin penicillins) have increased activity against many strains 
of gram-negative aerobes, including Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp, 
Proteus mirabilis, and Haemophilus spp. Like the natural penicil -
lins, they are susceptible to inactivation by beta-lactamases. They 
also have some activity against many anaerobic bacteria, including 
clostridial organisms. They are inactive against Pseudomonas aeru-
ginosa, Serratia spp, indole-positive Proteus spp ( Proteus vulgaris), 
Citrobacter spp, and Acinetobacter spp. 
Extended-spectrum penicillins (anti-pseudomonal 
 penicillins): piperacillin
The extended-spectrum penicillins have increased activity against 
gram-negative aerobes and are sometimes called anti-pseudomo -
nal penicillins. These agents have similar spectrums of activity as 
the aminopenicillins but with additional activity against several 
gramnegative organisms of the family Enterobacteriaceae, as well as 
many strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Like the aminopenicillins, 
these agents are susceptible to inactivation by beta-lactamases. The 
primary agent in this class (ie, piperacillin) is only available as a pip-
eracillin/tazobactam combination.
Potentiated penicillins: amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, 
 ampicillin/sulbactam, piperacillin/tazobactam
In order to reduce the inactivation of penicillins by beta-lactamases, 
beta-lactamase inhibitors, such as clavulanic acid, sulbactam, and 
tazobactam, have been developed to inactivate these enzymes. These 
compounds have little to no inherent antimicrobial activity but can 
inactivate beta-lactamases, rendering beta-lactamase-producing 
bacteria susceptible to the penicillin component of the combination. 
This is an effective approach against many resistant bacteria, par -
ticularly staphylococci and Enterobacteriaceae. The effect of these 
betalactamase inhibitors depends on the type of beta-lactamase that 
is being produced. Extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs), an 
increasing problem in human and veterinary medicine, are variably 
susceptible to beta-lactamase inhibitors.
Resistance mechanisms:
In addition to the production of beta-lactamases, other resistance 
mechanisms against penicillins exist. Some bacteria, such as Staph-
ylococcus aureus (MRSA), Enterococcus spp, and Streptococcus pneu-
monia, have PBP mutations or alterations that have decreased affinity 
for penicillins.1 Resistance may also occur through decreased entry 
through membrane porins or removal of the drug via efflux pumps. 
Pharmacokinetics (General)
The oral absorption characteristics of the penicillins are dependent 
upon their class. Penicillin G is the only available oral penicillin that is 
substantially affected by gastric pH and can be completely inactivated 
at a pH of less than 2. The other orally available penicillins are resistant 
to acid degradation. Effects of food vary between the penicillins. Of 
the orally administered penicillins, penicillin V and amoxicillin tend 
to have the greatest bioavailability in their respective classes.
Penicillins are generally distributed widely throughout the body. 
Most drugs attain therapeutic concentrations in the kidneys, liver, 
heart, skin, lungs, intestines, bile, bone, and peritoneal, pleural, and 
synovial fluids. Penetration into the CSF and eye only occur with 
inflammation and may not reach therapeutic concentrations. Pen -
etration into the prostate is poor. 2 Penicillins are bound in varying 
degrees to plasma proteins and cross the placenta.
Most penicillins are rapidly excreted largely unchanged by the 
kidneys into the urine via glomerular filtration and tubular secre -
tion and, therefore, achieve high concentrations in the urine. Probe-
necid can prolong half-lives and increase serum concentrations by 
blocking the tubular secretion of penicillins. Except for the penicil -
linase-resistant penicillins, hepatic inactivation and biliary secretion 
are minor routes of excretion.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Penicillins are contraindicated in patients with a history of hypersen-
sitivity to them. Because there may be cross-reactivity, use penicillins 
cautiously in patients that are documented hypersensitive to other be-
ta-lactam antibiotics (eg, cephalosporins, cephamycins, carbapenems).
Do not administer systemic antibiotics orally in patients with sep-
ticemia, shock, or other grave illnesses, as absorption of the medica-
tion from the GI tract may be significantly delayed or diminished. 
Parenteral (preferably IV) routes should be used for these cases. Cer-
tain species (eg, snakes, birds, turtles, guinea pigs, and chinchillas) 
are reportedly sensitive to procaine penicillin G. 
Do not use oral penicillins in hindgut fermenting species, such as 
horses and rabbits, as they can cause a fatal GI disease.
High doses of penicillin G sodium or potassium, particularly in 
small animals with a pre-existing electrolyte abnormality, renal dis -
ease, or congestive heart failure, may cause electrolyte imbalances, in-
cluding hypokalemia. Other injectable penicillins, such as ampicillin, 
have significant quantities of sodium per gram and may cause elec -
trolyte imbalances when used in large dosages in susceptible patients.
Adverse Effects
Penicillins are typically well tolerated. When given orally, penicillins 
may cause GI effects (eg, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea). Because the 
penicillins may also alter gut flora, antibiotic-associated diarrhea can 
occur.
Hypersensitivity reactions, unrelated to dose, can occur with 
these agents and manifest as rashes, fever, eosinophilia, neutropenia, 
agranulocytosis, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, anemias, lymph -
adenopathy, or anaphylaxis. In humans, it is estimated that up to 
15% of patients hypersensitive to cephalosporins will also be hyper-
sensitive to penicillins. 3 The incidence of cross-reactivity in veteri -
nary patients is unknown.
Neurotoxicity (eg, ataxia in dogs) has been associated with very 
high doses or prolonged use. Although the penicillins are not con -
sidered hepatotoxic, elevated liver enzymes have been reported. 
Other effects reported in dogs include tachypnea, dyspnea, edema, 
and tachycardia.
Some penicillins (ticarcillin, piperacillin, and nafcillin) have been 
implicated in causing bleeding problems in humans. These drugs are 
infrequently used systemically in veterinary species, so the ramifica-
tions of this effect are unclear.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Penicillins have been shown to cross the placenta. Safe use during 
pregnancy has not been firmly established, but no teratogenic re -
ports have been documented either. 
Penicillins are excreted in maternal milk in low concentrations; 
use potentially could cause diarrhea, candidiasis, or allergic response 
in the nursing offspring.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Acute oral penicillin overdoses are most likely to cause GI distress, 
but other effects are possible (see Adverse Effects). In humans, very 
high dosages of parenteral penicillins, especially in patients with re-
nal disease, have induced CNS effects.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 

===== PDF_PAGE_1527 =====
1500    Antimicrobials in Human and Veterinary Medicine
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving penicillins and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Aminoglycosides : In vitro studies have demonstrated that 
penicillins can have synergistic or additive activity against certain 
bacteria when used with aminoglycosides or cephalosporins. Pen-
icillins and aminoglycosides should not be administered in the 
same syringe because of the potential for inactivation.
 ■ Bacteriostatic antibiotics (eg, chloramphenicol, erythro-
mycin, tetracyclines): Use with penicillins is generally not rec -
ommended, particularly in acute infections where the organism 
is rapidly proliferating as penicillins tend to perform better on 
actively growing bacteria.
 ■ Probenecid : Competitively blocks the tubular secretion of most 
penicillins, thereby increasing serum levels and serum half-lives
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Penicillins may cause false-positive urine glucose determinations 
when using cupric-sulfate solution (Benedict’s solution, Clinit-
est®). Tests utilizing glucose oxidase (Tes-Tape®, Clinistix®) are not 
affected by penicillin.
 ■ In humans, clavulanic acid and high dosages of piperacillin have 
caused a false-positive direct Coombs test.
 ■ Penicillins may cause false-positive urine protein determinations 
and falsely elevated urine, serum, or CSF protein in a variety of 
testing methods. 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical signs of efficacy
 ■ Culture and susceptibility as indicated for clinical condition being 
treated
 ■ CBC and electrolytes may be indicated in some cases.
 ■ Adverse effects including hypersensitivity reactions and GI dis -
turbances (ie, vomiting, diarrhea, inappetence) 
 ■ Serum levels and therapeutic drug monitoring are not routinely 
done with these agents.
Client Information
 ■ Gastrointestinal side effects are most common. 
 ■ Compliance with the therapeutic regimen should be stressed. It is 
important to complete the full course of therapy, even after clini-
cal signs improve.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Antimicrobials in Human  
and Veterinary Medicine:  
A Global Classification
ERICA EARNHARDT WASSACK,  
PHARMD, DICVP , FSVHP , FACVP
College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi State University
Antimicrobial agents used in human and veterinary medicine are 
drugs used to kill or inhibit the growth of microorganisms such as 
bacteria and fungi. These drugs are essential for human and animal 
health and welfare. Human and veterinary antimicrobial use has 
created a global health concern regarding antimicrobial resistance.1,2 
The World Health Organization (WHO), in collaboration with the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
and the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE), addressed 
the public health consequences of using antimicrobial agents in food 
producing animals and concluded that: 
1. Antimicrobial resistance was a global public and animal health 
concern that has been impacted by the use of antimicrobial 
agents in all sectors. 
2. Evidence existed of human health consequences as a product 
of nonhuman use of antimicrobials resulting in resistant mi -
croorganisms.
3. The volume and pattern of nonhuman antimicrobial use have 
affected the human exposure to resistant bacteria. 
4. The consequences of antimicrobial resistance were severe in 
pathogens resistant to antimicrobials critically important in 
humans. 
As a result, WHO appointed an expert committee to develop a 
list of antimicrobial agents considered critically important in human 
medicine [Critically Important Antimicrobials for Human Medi -
cine1]. WHO also recommended that OIE develop a list of critically 
important antimicrobial agents in veterinary medicine [OIE List of 
Antimicrobial Agents of Veterinary Importance2]. These lists should 
be used to ensure that all antimicrobials, especially critically import-
ant antimicrobials, are used prudently in both human and veterinary 
medicine to minimize the risk for antimicrobial resistance.
Additionally, antimicrobials listed as critically important (eg, flu-
oroquinolones, third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins, and 
colistin) in the WHO and OIE veterinary guidelines should be used 
with the following antimicrobial stewardship recommendations:
 ■ Antimicrobials are not to be used as preventive treatment applied 
via feed or water in the absence of clinical signs in animal(s) to 
be treated.
 ■ Antimicrobials are not to be used as a first-line treatment unless 
justified. When antimicrobials are used as second-line treatment, 
their use should ideally be based on results of bacteriological tests.
 ■ Extra-label use should be limited and reserved for instances where 
no alternatives are available.
 ■ Antimicrobials should be phased out for use as growth promotors.
WHO Critically Important Antimicrobials  
for Human Medicine
The WHO list of Critically Important Antimicrobials for Human 
Medicine is a reference to help public health authorities as well as 
practitioners formulate and prioritize risk assessment and manage -
ment strategies to preserve antimicrobial effectiveness and minimize 
risk for transmission of resistance to the human population.1 The list 
takes into account pathogens likely to transfer from animals, food 
products, or the environment to humans.
The ranking of antimicrobial agents helps identify which veteri -
nary antimicrobials pose a higher risk to humans. 
As stated in the Critically Important Antimicrobials for Human 
Medicine document,1 categorization of medically important antimi-
crobial classes is determined by two criteria:
Criterion 1 : Antimicrobial class is the sole, or one of limited 
available therapies, to treat serious bacterial infections in humans.
Criterion 2: Antimicrobial class is used to treat infections in hu -
mans caused by either:
1. Bacteria that may be transmitted to humans from nonhuman 
sources, or
2. Bacteria that may acquire resistance genes from nonhuman 
sources.

===== PDF_PAGE_1528 =====
Antimicrobials in Human and Veterinary Medicine    1501
Based on the above criteria, antimicrobial agents are placed into 
three categories:
 ■ Critically Important: Antimicrobial class meets both criterion 1 
and criterion 2
 ■ Highly Important: Antimicrobial class meets either criterion 1 
or criterion 2
 ■ Important: Antimicrobial class does not meet either criterion
Antimicrobial agents within the Critically Important category are 
further prioritized to determine which agents need the most re -
sources allocated to provide risk management strategies. Antimicro-
bial classes in this group that also meet all three of the following cri-
teria are considered the Critically Important, Highest Priority; those 
that meet only one or two of these additional criteria are considered 
Critically Important, High Priority.
1. Antimicrobial class used to treat a large number or proportion 
of humans being treated for serious infections for which there 
are limited antimicrobial choices available.
2. Antimicrobial class has high frequency of use for any indica -
tion in human medicine, or high proportion of use for serious 
infection in healthcare settings; use in these situations may in-
crease microbial resistance.
3. Antimicrobial class used to treat infections in people with ex-
isting evidence that animal sources transmit resistant bacteria 
(eg, nontyphoidal Salmonella spp and Campylobacter spp) or 
resistance genes (eg, Escherichia coli and Enterococcus spp).
OIE Antimicrobial Agents of Veterinary Importance
The development of the OIE List of Antimicrobial Agents of Veter -
inary Importance took into consideration any antimicrobial agent 
authorized for use in veterinary medicine according to the criteria of 
quality, safety, and efficacy defined by the Terrestrial Animal Health 
Code.2 Therefore, all antimicrobial agents used in food-producing 
animals (avian, bee, bovine, caprine, camel, equine, rabbit, ovine, 
fish, swine) were divided into three categories: critically important, 
highly important, and important. NOTE: The OIE list of antimicro-
bials was compiled for antimicrobial importance in food-producing 
animals only and differs from the WHO classification listed above.
The criteria to define veterinary important antimicrobial agents 
took into account the vast number of species treated in veterinary 
medicine.
Categorization of important antimicrobial classes used in veteri -
nary medicine is determined by two criteria.
Criterion 1: Majority (greater than 50%) of OIE Member Coun -
try contributions response to questionnaire identified the impor-
tance of antimicrobial class.
Criterion 2 : Compounds within the antimicrobial class were 
identified as essential against specific infections and sufficient 
therapeutic alternatives were lacking.
Categorization of antimicrobials of veterinary importance is similar 
to the WHO guidelines:
Veterinary Critically Important Antimicrobial Agents (VCIA): 
Antimicrobial class meets both criterion 1 and criterion 2
Veterinary Highly Important Antimicrobial Agents (VHIA) : 
Antimicrobial class meets either criterion 1 or criterion 2
Veterinary Important Antimicrobial Agents (VIA): Antimicro-
bial class meets neither criterion 1 nor criterion 2
Summary of the Current WHO and OIE Antimicrobial Classifications
WHO Abbreviations
CI-Highest: Critically Important, Highest Priority
CI-High: Critically Important, High Priority
Highly: Highly Important
Important: Important
NC: Not classified
OIE Abbreviations
VCIA: Veterinary Critically Important Antimicrobial Agents
VHIA: Veterinary Highly Important Antimicrobial Agents
VIA: Veterinary Important Antimicrobial Agents
NC: Not classified
*Veterinary-approved drug only
Antimicrobial class Example of antimicrobials(s) WHO OIE
Amdinopenicillins Mecillinam, Pivmecillinam Highly VCIA
Aminocoumarin Novobiocin NC VIA
Aminocyclitols Spectinomycin Important VCIA
Aminoglycosides
Amikacin, Arbekacin, Apramycin*, Bekanamycin, Dibekacin, Dihydrost-
reptomycin, Framycetin, Gentamicin, Isepamicin, Kanamycin, Neomycin, 
Netilmicin, Ribostamycin, Streptomycin, Tobramycin
CI-High VCIA
Amphenicols Chloramphenicol, Florfenicol*, Thiamphenicol Highly VCIA
Ansamycins Rifabutin, Rifampicin, Rifaximin, Rifapentine, Rifamycin CI-High VHIA
Arsenical Nitarsone, Roxarsone NC VIA
Bicyclomycin Bicozamycin NC VIA
Carbapenems and other penems Biapenem, Doripenem, Ertapenem, Faropenem, Imipenem, Meropenem, 
Panipenem CI-High NC
Cephalosporins, first generation
Cefacetrile, Cefadroxil, Cefaloridine, Cefalexin, Cefalonium*, Cefalotin, 
Cefaparin, Cefatrizine, Cefazedone, Cefazolin, Cefradine, Cefroxadine, 
Ceftezole
Highly VHIA

===== PDF_PAGE_1529 =====
1502    Antimicrobials in Human and Veterinary Medicine
Antimicrobial class Example of antimicrobials(s) WHO OIE
Cephalosporins, second gener-
ation
Cefaclor, Cefamandole, Cefbuperazone, Cefmetazole, Cefminox, Cefonicid, 
Ceforanide, Cefotetan, Cefotiam, Cefoxitin, Cefprozil, Cefuroxime Highly VHIA
Cephalosporins, third genera-
tion
Cefcapene, Cefdinir, Cefditoren, Cefetamet, Cefixime, Cefmenoxime, 
Cefodizime, Cefoperazone, Cefoperazone/Sulbactam, Cefotaxime, Cefpi-
ramide, Cefpodoxime, Cefovecin*, Cefsulodin, Ceftazidime, Ceftazidime/
Avibactam, Ceftibuten, Ceftiofur*, Ceftizoxime, Ceftriaxone, Ceftriazone/
sulbactam, Latamoxef, Tazobactam
CI-Highest VCIA
Cephalosporins, fourth gener-
ation Cefepime, Cefoselis, Cefozopran, Cefpirome, Cefquinome* CI-Highest VCIA
Cephalosporins, fifth generation Ceftaroline fosamil, Ceftobiprole, Ceftolozane CI-Highest NC
Cephamycins Flomoxef, Loracarbef Highly NC
Cyclic polypeptides Bacitracin, Enramycin, Gramicidin Important VHIA
Drugs used solely to treat 
tuberculosis and mycobacterial 
diseases
Bedaquiline, Calcium aminosalicylate, Capreomycin, Cycloserine, Dela-
manid, Ethambutol, Ethionamide, Isoniazid, Morinamide, Para-aminosa-
licylic acid, Protionamide, Pyrazinamide, Sodium aminosalicylate, Teriz-
idone, Tiocarlide
CI-High NC
Fluoroquinolones
Besifoxacin, Cinoxacin, Ciprofloxacin, Danofloxacin*, Delafloxacin, Di-
floxacin*, Enoxacin, Enrofloxacin*, Fleroxacin, Garenoxacin, Gatifloxacin, 
Gemifloxacin, Grepafloxacin, Bafloxacin*, Levofloxacin, Lomefloxacin, 
Marbofloxacin*, Moxifloxacin, Nadifloxacin, Norfloxacin, Ofloxacin, 
Orbifloxacin*, Pazufloxacin, Pefloxacin, Pipemidic acid, Piromidic acid, 
Pradofloxacin*, Prulifloxacin, Rosoxacin, Rufloxacin, Sitafloxacin, Sparflox-
acin, Temafloxacin
CI-Highest VCIA
Fusidic acid Fusidic acid NC VIA
Glycopeptides and lipoglyco-
peptides
Avoparcin*, Dalbavancin, Oritavancin, Teicoplanin, Telavancin, Vancomy-
cin CI-Highest NC
Glycylcyclines Tigecycline CI-High NC
Ionophores Lasalocid, Maduramycin, Monensin, Narasin, Salinomycin, Semduramicin NC VHIA
Lincosamides Clindamycin, Lincomycin, Pirlimycin* Highly VHIA
Lipopeptides Daptomycin CI-High NC
Macrolides and ketolides
Azithromycin, Cethromycin, Clarithromycin, Dirithromycin, Eryth-
romycin, Fidaxomicin, Flurithromycin, Gamithromycin*, Josamycin, 
Kitasamycin*, Midecamycin, Miocamycin, Oleandomycin, Ramoplanin, 
Rokitamycin, Roxithromycin, Solithromycin, Spiramycin, Telithromycin, 
Tildipirosin*, Tilmicosin*, Troleandomycin, Tulathromycin*, Tylosin*, 
Tylvalosin*
CI-Highest VCIA
Monobactams Aztreonam, Carumonam CI-High NC
Nitrofurantoins Furaltadone*, Furazolidone, Nifurtoinol, Nitrofural, Nitrofurantoin Important NC
Nitroimidazoles Metronidazole, Ornidazole, Tinidazole Important NC
Orthosomycins Avilamycin NC VIA
Oxazolidinones Cadazolid, Linezolid, Radezolid, Tedizolid CI-High NC
Penicillins (anti-staphylococcal) Cloxacillin, Dicloxacillin, Flucloxacillin, Oxacillin, Nafcillin Highly VCIA
Penicillins (natural, aminopeni-
cillins, antipseudomonal)
Amoxicillin, Amoxicillin/Clavulanate, Ampicillin, Ampicillin/Sulbactam, 
Aspoxicillin*, Azidocillin, Azlocillin, Bacampicillin, Carbenicillin, Carin-
dacillin, Clometocillin, Epicillin, Hetacillin, Metampicillin, Meticillin, Me-
zlocillin, Panamecillin, Penethamate hydriodide*, Penicillin G (benzylpen-
icillin), Penicillin V (phenoxymethylpenicillin), Pheneticillin, Piperacillin, 
Piperacillin/Tazobactam, Pivampicillin, Propicillin, Sulbenicillin, Sultami-
cillin, Talampicillin, Temocillin, Ticarcillin, Ticarcillin/Clavulanate 
CI-High VCIA
Phosphoglycolipids  Bambermycin (Lavomycin)  NC NC
Phosphonic acid Fosfomycin CI-High VHIA
Pleuromutilins Retapamulin, Tiamulin*, Valnemulin* Important VHIA

===== PDF_PAGE_1530 =====
Extra-Label Drug Use    1503
Antimicrobial class Example of antimicrobials(s) WHO OIE
Polymyxins Colistin, Polymyxin B CI-Highest VHIA
Pseudomonic acids Mupirocin Highly NC
Quinolones, first generation Flumequine, Miloxacin, Nalidixic acid, Oxolinic acid CI-Highest VHIA
Quinoxalines Carbadox, Olaquindox NC VIA
Riminofenazines Clofazimine Highly NC
Steroid antibacterials Fusidic acid Highly VIA
Streptogramins Quinupristin/Dalfopristin, Pristinamycin, Virginiamycin* Highly VIA
Sulfonamides, dihydrofolate 
reductase inhibitors, and com-
binations
Brodimoprim, Formosulfathiazole*, Iclaprim, Phthalylsulfathiazole*, 
Pyrimethamine, Sulfadiazine, Sulfadimethoxine, Sulfadimidine, Sulfafu-
razole, Sulfaisodimidine, Sulfalene, Sulfamazone, Sulfamerazine, Sulame-
thizole, Sulfamethoxazole, Sulfamethoxypyridazine, Sulfametomidine, 
Sulfametoxydiazine, Sulfametrole, Sulfamoxole, Sulfanilamide, Sulfaperin, 
Sulfaphenazole, Sulfapyridine, Sulfathiazole, Sulfathiourea, Tetroxoprim, 
Trimethoprim
Highly VCIA
Sulfones Aldesulfone, Dapsone Highly NC
Tetracyclines
Chlortetracycline, Clomocycline, Demeclocycline, Doxycycline, Lymecy-
cline, Metacycline, Minocycline, Omadacycline, Oxytetracycline, Penimepi-
cycline, Rolitetracycline, Tetracycline
Highly VCIA
Thiostrepton Nosiheptide NC VIA
Further Reading:
Prestinaci F , Pezzotti P , Pantosti A. Antimicrobial resistance: a global 
multifaceted phenomenon. Pathog Glob Health. 2015;109(7):309–
318.
Weese JS, Giguère S, Guardabassi L, et al. ACVIM consensus state -
ment on therapeutic antimicrobial use in animals and antimicro-
bial resistance. J Vet Intern Med. 2015;29(2):487-98.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
ARCI UCGFS Classifications
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI), 
Inc. is a not-for-profit corporation that exists to assist in the coordi -
nation of the collective efforts of its members who are responsible for 
ensuring compliance with government laws and regulations designed 
to protect the general public and racing industry participants, includ-
ing the equine and canine athletes. 
The organization’s website has the most current information on the 
Uniform Classification Guidelines for Foreign Substances (UCGFS) 
and Recommended Penalties Model Rule. It can be accessed at: 
https://www.arci.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Uniform 
-Classification-Guidelines-Version-14.4.pdf
Extra-Label Drug Use
JAMES A. BUDDE, PHARMD, FSVHP , DICVP  
VetMedux
The following information is adapted from the FDA website: https://
www.fda.gov/AnimalVeterinary/GuidanceComplianceEnforce -
ment/ActsRulesRegulations/ucm085377.htm
The Animal Medicinal Drug Use Clarification Act of 1994 (AMD -
UCA) permits veterinarians to prescribe extra-label use of certain 
approved new animal drugs and approved human drugs for animals 
under certain conditions. Extra-label use refers to the use of an ap -
proved drug in a manner that is not in accordance with the approved 
label directions. This includes, but is not limited to, use in species 
not listed in the labeling, use for indications (disease or other condi-
tions) not listed in the labeling, use at dosage levels, frequencies, or 
routes of administration other than those stated in the labeling, and 
deviation from the labeled withdrawal time based on these different 
uses. Under AMDUCA and its implementing regulations published 
at Title 21, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 530 (21 CFR 530), any 
extra-label use of an approved new animal or human drug must be 
by or on the lawful order of a veterinarian within the context of a 
veterinarian-client-patient relationship (VCPR).
There are additional specific conditions that must be met for extra-la-
bel use of approved animal and approved human drugs in food-produc-
ing animals. The following conditions appear in 21 CFR 530.20: 
 ■ There is no approved animal drug that is labeled for such use and 
that contains the same active ingredient in the required dosage 
form and concentration, except where a veterinarian finds, within 
the context of a valid VCPR, that the approved animal drug is 
clinically ineffective for its intended use.
 ■ Before prescribing or dispensing an approved animal drug or ap-
proved human drug for extra-label use in food animals, the vet -
erinarian must: 
1. make a careful diagnosis and evaluation of the conditions for 
which the drug is to be used;
2. establish a substantially extended withdrawal period prior to 
marketing of milk, meat, eggs, or other edible products sup -
ported by appropriate scientific information, if applicable;
3. institute procedures to assure that the identity of the treated 
animal or animals is carefully maintained; and
4. take appropriate measures to assure that assigned time frames 
for withdrawal are met and no illegal drug residues occur in 
any food-producing animal subjected to extra-label treatment.
The following additional conditions must be met for a permitted 
extra-label use, in food-producing animals, of an approved hu -
man drug, or of an animal drug approved only for use in animals 
not intended for human consumption:

===== PDF_PAGE_1531 =====
1504    Veterinary Feed Directive
 ■ Such use must be accomplished in accordance with an appropri -
ate medical rationale.
 ■ If scientific information on the human food safety aspect of the 
use of the drug in food-producing animals is not available, the 
veterinarian must take appropriate measures to assure that the an-
imal and its food products will not enter the human food supply.
 ■ Extra-label use of an approved human drug in a food-producing 
animal is not permitted if an animal drug approved for use in 
food-producing animals can be used in an extra-label manner for 
the particular use.
Any drug prescribed and dispensed for extra-label use by a veteri-
narian or dispensed by a pharmacist on the order of a veterinarian 
must bear or be accompanied by labeling information adequate 
to assure the safe and proper use of the drug.(21 CFR 530.12) At a 
minimum, such information shall include the following:
 ■ the name and address of the prescribing veterinarian. If the drug 
is dispensed by a pharmacy on the order of a veterinarian, the 
labeling shall include the name of the prescribing veterinarian 
and the name and address of the dispensing pharmacy, and may 
include the address of the prescribing veterinarian
 ■ the established name of the drug (active ingredient), or, if formu-
lated from more than one active ingredient, the established name 
of each ingredient
 ■ any directions for use specified by the veterinarian (including 
class/species or identification of the animal(s) being treated; dos-
age, frequency, and route of administration; and the duration of 
therapy)
 ■ any cautionary statements
 ■ the veterinarian’s specified withdrawal, withholding, or discard 
time(s) for meat, milk, eggs, or any food which might be derived 
from the treated animal(s).
AMDUCA provides specific conditions under which extra-label use 
from compounding of approved animal drugs or approved human 
drugs is permitted. The compounding must be in compliance with all 
relevant provisions of 21 CFR 530. The extra-label drug use regulation 
does not permit animal drug compounding from active pharmaceuti-
cal ingredients (bulk drugs). FDA/CVM issued the final compounding 
drug guidance for veterinarians and pharmacists in 2022. For more 
information, consult guidance document #256 Compounding Animal 
Drugs from Bulk Drug Substances; CVM GFI #256 - Compounding 
Animal Drugs from Bulk Drug Substances | FDA
Under the AMDUCA provisions, FDA has the right to prohibit 
extra-label uses of certain drugs in animals.
FDA may prohibit the extra-label use of an approved animal drug 
or approved human drug or class of drugs in food-producing ani -
mals if FDA determines that:
 ■ An acceptable analytical method needs to be established and such 
method has not been established or cannot be established.
 ■ The extra-label use of the drug or class of drugs presents a risk to 
the public health.
 ■ A prohibition may be a general ban on the extra-label use of the 
drug or class of drugs or may be limited to a specific species, in -
dication, dosage form, route of administration, or combination 
of factors. FDA may prohibit the extra-label use of an animal or 
human drug in nonfood-producing animals if FDA determines 
that such extra-label use presents a risk to the public health. 
The following drugs, families of drugs, and substances are pro -
hibited for extra-label animal and human drug uses in food-pro -
ducing animals (21CFR 530.41 Drugs prohibited for extra-label use 
in animals):
 ■ Chloramphenicol
 ■ Clenbuterol
 ■ Diethylstilbestrol (DES)
 ■ Dimetridazole
 ■ Ipronidazole
 ■ Other nitroimidazoles
 ■ Furazolidone
 ■ Nitrofurazone
 ■ Sulfonamide drugs in lactating dairy cattle (except approved use 
of sulfadimethoxine, sulfabromomethazine, and sulfaethoxypyr -
idazine)
 ■ Fluoroquinolones
 ■ Glycopeptides
 ■ Phenylbutazone in female dairy cattle 20 months of age or older
 ■ Cephalosporins (not including cephapirin) in cattle, swine, chick-
ens, or turkeys:
(i) for disease prevention purposes;
(ii) at unapproved doses, frequencies, durations, or routes of ad-
ministration; or
(iii) if the drug is not approved for that species and production 
class.
The following drugs, or classes of drugs, that are approved for treat-
ing or preventing influenza A, are prohibited from extra-label use in 
chickens, turkeys, and ducks:
 ■ Adamantanes
 ■ Neuraminidase inhibitors
To clarify extra-label use of cephalosporins , a cephalosporin may 
be used for an extra-label indication to treat cattle, swine, chickens, 
or turkeys provided the cephalosporin product being administered 
is approved for use in that species for another indication, and the 
dosage used adheres to the labeled dose, route of administration, fre-
quency and duration of use for that species. The following examples 
of extra-label drug use are prohibited:
 ■ Use of cefpodoxime tablets in a pig because cefpodoxime is not 
labeled for use in that species
 ■ Administration of ceftiour sodium (Naxcel®) 5 mg/kg SC in a cow, 
because only the labeled dose of 1.1 – 2.2 mg/kg may be used
 ■ Administration of ceftiour sodium ( Naxcel®) to healthy cattle 
prior to shipment to prevent shipping fever, as cephalosporins 
may not be used for disease prevention 
 ■ Administration of ceftiofur crystalline free acid (Excede®) to cattle 
intramuscularly because it is only labeled for subcutaneous use
 ■ administration of ceftiofur crystalline free acid (Excede®) to cattle 
subcutaneously but at a site other than the posterior aspect of the 
ear, because it is only labeled to be administered in the posterior 
aspect of the ear
Veterinary Feed Directive
JAMES A. BUDDE, PHARMD, DICVP
VetMedux
Per the Federal Register, In 1996, Congress enacted the Animal Drug 
Availability Act (ADAA) to facilitate the approval and marketing of 
new animal drugs and medicated feeds. In passing the ADAA, Con -
gress created a new regulatory category for certain animal drugs used 
in or on animal food (animal feed) called veterinary feed directive 
drugs (or VFD drugs).1 Per the FDA, This category was created to pro-
vide veterinary supervision without invoking state pharmacy laws for 
prescription drugs that were unworkable for the distribution of medi-
cated feed.2 VFD drugs are not prescription drugs. In 2015, the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) amended the new animal drug reg-

===== PDF_PAGE_1532 =====
Veterinary Feed Directive   1505
ulations to implement the VFD drugs section of the ADAA, with 
full implementation beginning in December 2016. The VFD require-
ments apply to all VFD drugs for use in major or minor species.
The FDA approves drugs that require veterinary supervision and 
oversight for their use. These drugs are classified into 2 separate reg-
ulatory categories. When the drug being approved is not for use in 
or on animal feed, the drug is approved as a prescription drug. When 
the drug being approved is for use in or on animal feed (a medicated 
feed), the FDA approves these drugs as a VFD drug. 
Per the FDA: A veterinary feed directive (VFD) is a written (non -
verbal) statement issued by a licensed veterinarian in the course of the 
veterinarian’s professional practice that authorizes the use of a VFD 
drug or combination VFD drug in or on an animal feed. This written 
statement authorizes the client (the owner of the animal or animals or 
other caretaker) to obtain and use animal feed bearing or containing 
a VFD drug or combination VFD drug to treat the client’s animals 
only in accordance with the conditions for use approved, conditionally 
approved, or indexed by the FDA. A VFD is also referred to as a VFD 
order.2
To issue a VFD, a veterinarian must meet all the following re -
quirements*:
 ■ Be licensed to practice veterinary medicine
 ■ Be operating in the course of the veterinarian’s professional prac-
tice and in compliance with all applicable veterinary licensing and 
practice requirements
 ■ Write VFD orders in the context of a valid client–patient relation-
ship 
 ■ Issue a VFD compliant with the conditions for use approved, con-
ditionally approved, or indexed for the VFD drug or combination 
VFD drug (ie, Extra-label use of VFD is NOT permitted.)
 ■ Prepare and sign a written VFD providing all required informa -
tion
 ■ Enter additional discretionary information to more specifically 
identify the animals to be treated/fed the VFD feed (See Optional 
information on the VFD below for more information)
 ■ Include required information when a VFD drug is authorized for 
use in a drug combination that includes more than 1 VFD drug
 ■ Restrict or allow the use of the VFD drug in combination with 1 
or more OTC drug(s)
 ■ Provide the feed distributor with a copy of the VFD via hardcopy, 
facsimile (fax), or other electronic means
 ■ Provide the client with a copy of the VFD
 ■ Retain the original VFD in its original form (electronic or hard -
copy) for 2 years
 ■ Provide VFD orders for inspection and copying by FDA on re -
quest.
*This list was adapted from US FDA. Veterinary Feed Directive Requirements  
for Veterinarians. https://www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/development-approval 
-process/veterinary-feed-directive-requirements-veterinarians.
Use of medicated feed is authorized by a VFD, not by a prescrip -
tion (Rx). A lawful VFD must be complete. The following infor -
mation is required on a lawful VFD*:
 ■ Veterinarian’s name, address, and telephone number
 ■ Client’s name, business or home address, and telephone number
 ■ Premises at which the animals specified in the VFD are located
 ■ Date of VFD issuance
 ■ Expiration date of the VFD (the expiration date specifies the last 
day the VFD feed can be fed)
 ■ Name of the VFD drug(s) (NOTE: By default, the VFD feed man-
ufacturer may use an approved substitute, but the VFD may spec-
ify that a substitution is not allowed)
 ■ Species and production class of animals to be fed the VFD feed
 ■ Approximate number of animals to be fed the VFD feed by the 
expiration date of the VFD
 ■ Indication for which the VFD is issued
 ■ Level of VFD drug in the feed and duration of use (Duration of 
use determines the length of time [established as part of the ap -
proval, conditional approval, or index listing process] that the 
animal feed containing the VFD drug is allowed to be fed to the 
animals.)
 ■ Withdrawal time, special instructions, and cautionary statements 
necessary for use of the drug in conformance with the approval
 ■ Number of reorders (refills) authorized, if permitted by the drug 
approval, conditional approval, or index listing (refills may not be 
authorized if a drug approval is silent on refills)
 ■ Statement: Use of feed containing this veterinary feed directive 
(VFD) drug in a manner other than as directed on the labeling (ex-
tra-label use), is not permitted.1
 ■ An affirmation of intent for combination VFD drugs as described 
in 21 CFR 558.6(b)(6)
 ■ Veterinarian’s electronic or written signature
*This list was adapted from US FDA. Veterinary Feed Directive Requirements for 
Veterinarians. https://www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/development-approval 
-process/veterinary-feed-directive-requirements-veterinarians.
Optional information on the VFD*:
 ■ A more specific description of the location of the animals (eg, 
by site, pen, barn, stall, tank, or other descriptor the veterinarian 
deems appropriate)
 ■ Approximate age range of the animals
 ■ Approximate weight range of the animals
 ■ Any other information the veterinarian deems appropriate to 
identify the animals at issue
*This list was adapted from US FDA. Veterinary Feed Directive Requirements  
for Veterinarians. https://www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/development-approval 
-process/veterinary-feed-directive-requirements-veterinarians.
The following definitions may be useful*:
 ■ VFD drug: a drug intended for use in or on animal feed, which 
is limited to use under the professional supervision of a licensed 
veterinarian. 
 ■ Combination VFD drug: an approved combination of new animal 
drugs intended for use in or on animal feed under the professional 
supervision of a licensed veterinarian, and at least 1 of the new 
animal drugs in the combination is a VFD drug.
 ■ Category I drugs: drugs that do not require a withdrawal period 
at the lowest use level in each species for which they are approved. 
 ■ Category II drugs: drugs that require a withdrawal period at the 
lowest use level for at least 1 species for which they are approved 
or are regulated on a “no-residue” basis or with a zero tolerance 
because of a carcinogenic concern, regardless of whether a with -
drawal period is required.
 ■ Type A medicated articles are the most concentrated form of the 
new animal drug and are used in the manufacture of another Type 
A medicated article, or a Type B or C medicated feed. ( NOTE: 
To reduce the potential to create unsafe drug residues, the manu-
facturing of medicated feeds with Category II Type A medicated 
articles is restricted to licensed feed mills.)
 ■ Type B medicated feed is intended solely for the manufacture of 
other Type B or Type C medicated feeds and contains a substan -
tial quantity of nutrients with the new animal drug. 
 ■ Type C medicated feed is intended as the complete feed for the an-

===== PDF_PAGE_1533 =====
1506    Conversion Tables for Weight in Kilograms to Body Surface Area (m2)
imal, or may be added on top of a usual ration, or may be offered 
as a supplement with other animal feed. A Type C medicated feed 
has the lowest concentration of the new animal drug.
*This list was adapted from US FDA. Veterinary Feed Directive Requirements  
for Veterinarians. https://www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/development-approval 
-process/veterinary-feed-directive-requirements-veterinarians
FDA resources:
Guidance for Industry (GFI) documents:
 ■ #120, Small Entity Compliance Guide: Veterinary Feed Directive 
Regulation Questions and Answers, last updated March 2019.
 ■ #209, The Judicious Use of Medically Important Antimicrobial 
Drugs in Food-Producing Animals, published April 2012.
 ■ #213, New Animal Drugs and New Animal Drug Combination 
Products Administered in or on Medicated Feed or Drinking 
Water of Food-Producing Animals: Recommendations for Drug 
Sponsors for Voluntarily Aligning Product Use Conditions with 
GFI #209, published December 2013.
 ■ #233, Veterinary Feed Directive Common Format Questions and 
Answers, published September 2016.
Websites: 
US FDA. Veterinary Feed Directive (VFD). www.fda.gov/animal- 
veterinary/development-approval-process/veterinary-feed-  
directive-vfd 
US FDA. FACT SHEET: Veterinary Feed Directive Final Rule and 
Next Steps. www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/development-approval- 
process/fact-sheet-veterinary-feed-directive-final-rule-and-next-steps
US FDA. Veterinary Feed Directive Requirements for Veterinarians. 
www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/development-approval-process/
veterinary-feed-directive-requirements-veterinarians
National Archives. Code of Federal Regulations. ecfr.gov/current/
title-21/chapter-I/subchapter-E/part-558 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
 
Conversion Tables for Weight  
in Kilograms to Body Surface 
Area (m2)
The following tables are derived from the equation: 
Weight 
in kg m2
18 0.69
19 0.71
20 0.74
21 0.76
22 0.78
23 0.81
24 0.83
25 0.85
26 0.88
27 0.9
28 0.92
29 0.94
30 0.96
32 1.01
34 1.05
DOGS
Approximate body surface area in m2 = 
10.1  (body weight in grams)2/3 ÷ 10,000
Weight 
in kg m2
0.5 0.06
1 0.1
2 0.15
3 0.2
4 0.25
5 0.29
6 0.33
7 0.36
8 0.4
Weight 
in kg m2
9 0.43
10 0.46
11 0.49
12 0.52
13 0.55
14 0.58
15 0.6
16 0.63
17 0.66
Weight 
in kg m2
36 1.09
38 1.13
40 1.17
42 1.21
44 1.25
46 1.28
50 1.36
54 1.44
58 1.51
62 1.58
66 1.65
70 1.72
74 1.78
80 1.88
CATS
Approximate body surface area in m2 = 
10  (body weight in grams)2/3 ÷ 10,000
Weight 
in kg m2
2 0.159
2.5 0.184
3 0.208
3.5 0.231
4 0.252
4.5 0.273
5 0.292
5.5 0.311
6 0.33
6.5 0.348
7 0.366
7.5 0.383
8 0.4
8.5 0.416
9 0.432
9.5 0.449
10 0.464

===== PDF_PAGE_1534 =====
Conversion of Conventional Chemistry Units to SI Units   1507
Conversion of Conventional 
Chemistry Units to SI Units
The Système Internationale d’Unites (SI), or the International System 
of Units, was recommended for use in the health professions by the 
World Health Assembly in 1977. It is slowly being adopted in the 
United States and many journals now require its use. The following 
is an abbreviated table of conversion values for some of the more 
commonly encountered tests that may now be reported in SI units.
Chemistry analyte Conventional 
unit
Conversion 
factor SI unit
Albumin g/dL x 10 = g/L
Ammonia µg/dL x 0.5872 = µmol/L
Bilirubin mg/dL x 17.10 = µmol/L
Calcium mg/dL x 0.2495 = mmol/L
Cholesterol mg/dL x 0.0259 = mmol/L
CO2 pressure, pCO2 mm Hg x 0.1333 = kPa
Creatinine mg/dL x 88.4 = µmol/L
Glucose mg/dL x 0.0555 = mmol/L
Lactate mg/dL x 0.1110 = mmol/L
Magnesium mg/dL x 0.4114 = mmol/L
O2 pressure, pO2 mm Hg x 0.1333 = kPa
Phosphorus mg/dL x 0.3229 = mmol/L
Protein g/dL x 10 = g/L
Urea nitrogen mg/dL x 0.3570 = mmol/L
Amylase IU/L x 1 = units/L
AST (SGOT) IU/L x 1 = units/L
ALT (SGPT) IU/L x 1 = units/L
Lipase IU/L x 1 = units/L
ALP IU/L x 1 = units/L
SDH (Sorbitol) IU/L x 1 = units/L
Bicarbonate mEq/L x 1 = mmol/L
Chloride mEq/L x 1 = mmol/L
Potassium mEq/L x 1 = mmol/L
Sodium mEq/L x 1 = mmol/L
CO2 (total) mEq/L x 1 = mmol/L
Conversion: Weights; 
Temperature; Liquids
WEIGHTS:
1 ounce (oz) = 28.4 grams
1 pound (lb) = 0.454 kilogram = 454 grams = 16 ounces (oz)
1 kilogram (kg) = 2.2 pounds = 1000 grams
1 gram (g) = 1000 milligrams = 15.43 grains
1 milligram (mg) = 1000 micrograms (µg or mcg)
1 microgram (mcg or µg) = 1000 nanograms (ng)
1 grain (gr) = 64.8 mg (often rounded to 60 mg or 65 mg)
TEMPERATURES: 
°F = (°C + 1.8) + 32
°C = (°F – 32) ´ 0.56
LIQUIDS:
1 gallon (gal) = 4 quarts = 8 pints = 128 fluid ounces = 3.785 liters 
= 3785 mL
1 quart (qt) = 2 pints = 32 fluid ounces = 946 mL
1 pint = 2 cups = 16 fluid ounces = 473 mL
1 cup = 8 fluid ounces = 237 mL = 16 tablespoons
1 fluid ounce = 30 mL
1 tablespoon = 15 mL = 3 teaspoons
1 teaspoon = 5 mL
4 liters = 1.06 gallons
1 liter (L) = 1000 mL = 10 deciliters
1 deciliter (dL) = 100 mL
1 milliliter (mL) = 1 cubic centimeter (cc) = 1000 microliters (µL; mcL)
Milliequivalents 
and Molecular Weights 
The term milliequivalent (mEq) is typically used to express the quan-
tities of electrolytes administered to patients. A mEq is 1/1000 of an 
equivalent (Eq). For pharmaceutical purposes, an equivalent may be 
thought of as equal to the equivalent weight of a given substance. In 
practical terms, an equivalent is the molecular weight of the sub -
stance divided by the valence or the radical. Examples:
How many milligrams equal 1 mEq of potassium chloride (KCl)?
Equivalent weight = molecular weight ÷ valence
[Molecular weight of KCl = 74.5 (K+ = 39.1 + Cl-= 35.4) grams; Va-
lence = 1 (K+; Cl)]
Equivalent weight = 74.5 ÷ 1 = 74.5 grams ÷ 1000 = 0.0745 grams
Milliequivalent weight of KCl = 0.0745 grams × 1000 mg/1 gram 
= 74.5 mg = 1 mEq KCl
How many milligrams equal 1 mEq of anhydrous calcium chloride 
(CaCl2)?
Equivalent weight = molecular weight ÷ valence
[Molecular weight of anhydrous CaCl2 = 111 (Ca2+ = 40 + Cl-= 35.4 
× 2 = 71) grams; Valence = 2 (Ca2+; 2-Cl-)]
Equivalent weight = 111 ÷ 2 = 55.5 grams ÷ 1000 = 0.0555 grams
Milliequivalent weight of anhydrous CaCl 2 = 0.0555 grams × 
1000 mg/1 gram = 55.5 mg = 1 mEq anhydrous CaCl2
Listed below are some commonly used electrolytes with their molec-
ular weights and valences in parentheses:
Electrolyte Molecular weight (valence)
Sodium chloride 58.44 (1)
Sodium bicarbonate 84 (1)
Sodium acetate, anhydrous 82 (1)
Sodium acetate, trihydrate 136 (1)
Sodium lactate 112 (1)
Potassium chloride 74.55 (1)
Potassium gluconate 234.25 (1)
Calcium gluconate 430.4 (2)
Calcium lactate, anhydrous 218.22 (2)
Calcium chloride, anhydrous 111 (2)
Calcium chloride, dihydrate 147 (2)

===== PDF_PAGE_1535 =====
1508    Solubility Definitions  
Electrolyte Molecular weight (valence)
Magnesium sulfate, heptahydrate 246.5 (2)
Magnesium sulfate, anhydrous 120.4 (2)
Magnesium chloride, anhydrous 95.21 (2)
Magnesium chloride, hexahydrate 203.3 (2)
Solubility Definitions
The following definitions are used throughout the book in the chem-
istry section for each agent:
Descriptive term Parts of solvent for 1 part of solute
Very soluble Less than 1
Freely soluble From 1 to 10
Soluble From 10 to 30
Sparingly soluble From 30 to 100
Slightly soluble From 100 to 1000
Very slightly soluble From 1000 to 10,000
Practically insoluble or insoluble More than 10,000
Parenteral Fluids
(Not a complete listing; includes both human- and veterinary-approved products)
Sodium chloride solutions Sodium (mEq/L) Chloride (mEq/L) Osmolality (mOsm/L) Volumes available (mL)
Sodium chloride 0.45%
(half-normal saline)
77 77 155 3, 5, 500, 1000
Sodium chloride 0.9% 
(normal saline)
154 154 308 1, 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 5, 10, 20, 25, 30, 
50, 100, 130, 150, 250, 500, 1000 
Sodium chloride 3% 513 513 1027 500
Sodium chloride 5% 855 855 1710 500
Sodium chloride 7.2% 1232 1232 2464 1000
Sodium chloride 7.5% 1283 1283 2567 1000
Dextrose
solutions
Dextrose
(g/L)
Calories
(kCal/L)
Osmolality
(mOsm/L)
Volumes available (mL)
Dextrose 2.5% 25 85 126 250, 500, 1000
Dextrose 5% 50 170 253 10, 25, 50, 100, 130, 150, 250, 400, 500, 1000
Dextrose 10% 100 340 505 250, 500, 1000
Dextrose 20% 200 680 1010 500, 1000
Dextrose 25% 250 850 1330 in 10 mL syringes
Dextrose 30% 300 1020 1515 500, 1000
Dextrose 38.5% 385 1310 1945 1000
Dextrose 40% 400 1360 2020 500, 1000
Dextrose 50% 500 1700 2525 50, 250, 500, 1000
Dextrose 60% 600 2040 3030 500, 1000
Dextrose 70% 700 2380 3535 250, 500, 1000

===== PDF_PAGE_1536 =====
Parenteral Fluids   1509
Dextrose/Saline solutions Sodium (mEq/L) Chloride (mEq/L) Dextrose (g/L) Calories (kCal/L) Osmolality
(mOsm/L) Volumes available (mL)
Dextrose 2.5% and 0.45% 
sodium chloride
77 77 25 85 280 250, 500, 1000
Dextrose 5% and 0.11% 
sodium chloride
19 19 50 170 290 500, 1000
Dextrose 5% and 0.2% 
sodium chloride
34 34 50 170 320 250, 500, 1000
Dextrose 5% and 0.33% 
sodium chloride
56 56 50 170 365 250, 500, 1000
Dextrose 5% and 0.45% 
sodium chloride
77 77 50 170 405 250, 500, 1000
Dextrose 5% and 0.9% 
sodium chloride
154 154 100 170 560 250, 500, 1000
Dextrose 10% and 0.45% 
sodium chloride
77 77 100 340 660 1000
Dextrose 10% and 0.9% 
sodium chloride
154 154 100 340 815 500, 1000
Electrolyte 
solutions
Sodium
(mEq/L) 
Potassium
(mEq/L) Calcium Magnesium
(mEq/L)
Chloride
(mEq/L)
Gluconate 
(mEq/L)
Lactate
(mEq/L)
Acetate
(mEq/L)
Osmolarity
(mOsm/L)
Volumes available 
(mL)
Ringer’s 
 injection
147 4 4.5 – 156 – – – 310 250, 500, 1000
Lactated 
 Ringer’s
solution 
130 4 2.7 – 109 – 28 – 273 250, 500, 1000, 
5000
Plasma-Lyte® 
148
140 5 – 3 98 23 – 27 294 500, 1000
Plasma-Lyte® A;
Normosol®-R 
pH 7.4
140 5 – 3 98 23 – 27 294 500, 1000, 5000
Isolyte® S pH 
7.4
141 5 – 3 98 23 – 27 295 500, 1000
Hartmann’s 
solution
131 5 4 – 111 – 29 – 278 1000, 5000
Dextrose/ 
electrolyte 
solutions
Dextrose 
(g/L)
Calories 
(kCal/L)
Sodium 
(mEq/L)
Potassium 
(mEq/L)
Calcium 
(mEq/L)
Magnesium 
(mEq/L)
Creatinine 
(mEq/L)
Gluconate 
(mEq/L)
Lactate 
(mEq/L)
Acetate 
(mEq/L)
Osmolarity 
(mOsm/L)
Volumes 
available 
(mL)
Half-strength 
lactated 
Ringer’s and 
dextrose 
2.5%
25 89 65.5 2 1.4 – 54 – 14 – 263 250, 500, 
1000
Lactated 
Ringer’s and 
dextrose 5%
50 179 130 4 2.7 – 109 – 28 – 527 250, 500, 
1000
Normosol®-M 
and dextrose 
5%
50 170 40 13 – 3 40 – – 16 363 500, 
1000
Normosol®-R 
and dextrose 
5%
50 185 140 5 – 3 98 23 – 27 547 1000
Ringer’s and 
dextrose 5%
50 170 140 4 4.5 – 156 – – – 562 500, 
1000

===== PDF_PAGE_1537 =====
1510    Normal Vital Signs
Normal Vital Signs
Species Temperature °C (°F)* Resting heart rate/minute Resting respiratory rate/minute
Dog, young 37.5-39.2 (99.5-102.5) 110-120 15-30
Dog, adult medium breed 37.5-39.2 (99.5-102.5) – –
Dog, adult large breed 37.5-39.2 (99.5-102.5) 60-90 15-30
Cat, young 37.8-39.5 (100-102.5) 130-140 20-30
Cat, senior 37.8-39.5 (100-102.5) 100-120 20-30
Cattle, up to 1 year old 38.6-39.4 (101.5-103.5) 100-120 15-40
Cattle, over 1 year old 37.8-39.2 (100-102.5) 55-80 10-30
Chicken 40.5-43 (105-109.4) 250-300 –
Chinchilla 37-38 (98.6-100.4) 100-150 –
Ferret 37.8-39.2 (100-102.5) 200-400 33-36
Gerbil 38.2 (100.8) 260-600 85-160
Goat 38.5-40.2 (101.3-104.5) 70-120 10-30
Guinea pig – 200-300 –
Hamster 37.6 (99.7) 300-600 38-110
Hedgehog, African 35.5-37 (95.7-98.6) 180–280 25-50
Horse, foal 37.5-39.3 (99.5-102.7) 64-128 10-14
Horse, 3 to 24 months 37.5-39.3 (99.5-102.7) 40-80 10-14
Horse, adult 37.2-38.5 (99-101.3) 28-40 10-14
Mouse 37.1 (98.8) 450-750 90-210
Rat 37.7 (99.9) 250-400 71-146
Rabbit 38.5-39.3 (100.4-105) 150-350 50-60
Sheep 38.5-40 (101.3-104) 66-115 10-30
Swine, piglet 38.9-40 (102-104) 100-130 24-36
Swine, adult 37.8-38.9 (100-102) 60-90 8-18
Sugar glider 36.3 (97.3) 200-300 16-40
*Temperature (Rectal): Temperatures will normally fluctuate over the course of the day. The following things may increase body tem -
perature: time of day (evening), food intake, muscular activity, approaching estrus, during gestation, and high external temperatures. The 
following conditions may decrease body temperature: intake of large quantities of cool fluids, time of day (morning), and low atmospheric 
temperature. Small-breed dogs tend to have higher normal temperatures than large-breed dogs.
Reference Laboratory Ranges
NOTE: The following reference ranges are as a general reference only. For clinical use, refer to the designated normal values published by the 
specific laboratory used. Values were originally published by Marshfield Clinic Laboratories, Veterinary Diagnostic Service. 
Ferret values were adapted from Biology and Diseases of the Ferret, 3rd Edition. Fox, JG and Marini, RP , Eds; Wiley-Blackwell, 2014.
Rabbit values were adapted from Animal Models in Toxicology, 3rd Edition. Gad, SC, Ed; CRC Press, 2013.
Rat hematology values were adapted from Schalm’s Veterinary Hematology, 3rd Edition. Weiss, DJ and Wardrop, KJ, Eds; Wiley-Blackwell, 2010.

===== PDF_PAGE_1538 =====
Reference Laboratory Ranges    1511
Chemistry: Companion/Small Animal Species
Values were originally published by Marshfield Clinic Laboratories, Veterinary Diagnostic Service.
Test Units Canine Feline Ferret Rat Rabbit
Albumin gm/dL 2.6-4 2.3-3.9 3.5-4.2 3.2-3.7 3.5-5.5 
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) units/L 13-289 8 -115 9-84 232-632 40-140 
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) units/L 14-151 23-145 78-149 59-166 15-50 
Amylase units/L 268-1653 627-1572 ** 545-847 **
Anion gap – 17-28 17-32 ** 24-39 **
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) units/L 18-86 14-68 28-120 90-345 15-45 
Beta-hydroxybutyrate mg/dL 0.2-0.8 0.3-1.9 ** 2.2-5.1 **
Bicarbonate mmol/L 16-31 11-21 20-28 18-27 **
Bile acids, fasting µmol/L 0-12 0-5 ** NA **
Bile acids, postprandial (or nonfasting) µmol/L 5-25 5-15 ** 2.2-5.1 **
Bilirubin – Direct mg/dL 0-0.2 0-0.2 ** 0-0 **
Bilirubin – Total mg/dL 0.1-0.5 0 -0.4 0-0.1 0-0.1 0.1-0.5 
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) mg/dL 8-30 13-36 11-25 13-19 11-25 
Calcium mg/dL 8.7-12 8.1-11.8 8.7-9.4 9.5-13.9 12.5-15.5 
Chloride mmol/L 100-121 114-130 118-126 98-104 96-106
Cholesterol mg/dL 98-300 81-275 119-201 50-92 30-100 
Creatine kinase (CK) units/L 50-554 52-462 – 113-692 **
Creatinine mg/dL 0.4-2 0.5-2.5 0.4-0.9 0.3-0.5 0.9-1.7 
Fructosamine µmol/L 180-330 164-356 ** 139-176 **
Gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) units/L 3-19 0-2 1-8 0-0 0-10
Globulin g/dL 2.2-4.1 2.8-5.4 ** 2.6-3.5 **
Glucose mg/dL 74-145 65-155 107-138 70-308 100-190
Haptoglobin mg/mL 1-5 0.5-3.8 ** 0.9-2.1 **
Insulin µunits/mL 5-65 NA 4.9-34.8 NA **
Iron µg/dL 46-214 43-226 ** 184-497 **
Lactate mmol/L 0.99-4.77 0.83-4.95 – 1.60-17.29 **
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) units/L 19-162 35-325 241-752 364-1706 **
Lipase units/L 109 -750 15-246 ** 14-41 **
Magnesium mg/dL 1.6-2.3 1.7-2.6 ** 3.8-5.5 **
Phosphorus mg/dL 2.5-7.9 2.7-7.3 5.2-7.6 5.6-16.8 2-9
Potassium mmol/L 3.4-5.6 3.4-5.4 4.3-5.3 3.8-5.6 3.5-6
Sorbitol dehydrogenase (SDH) units/L 0.7-20 1.8-22.1 ** 27.3-118.5 **
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) ng/mL 0.03-0.32 NA NA NA NA
Sodium mmol/L 141-159 151-164 146-160 146-151 133-150
Symmetric dimethylarginine (SDMA) µg/dL 0-14 0-14 ** ** **
Total T4 (tT4) µg/dL 0.4-3.7 0.6-3.6 0.7-8.3 0.6-3.9 **
Total protein (TP) g/dL 5-8.3 5.7-8.6 6.2-7.1 5.8-7.1 5.2-7.5
Triglycerides mg/dL 36-240 24-169 10-32 101-369 30-180
Uric acid ng/dL 0.2-0.7 0-0.4 0.8-3.1 3.7-9.1 **
**No normal range established in this laboratory

===== PDF_PAGE_1539 =====
1512    Reference Laboratory Ranges
Hematology: Companion/Small Animal Species 
Values were originally published by Marshfield Clinic Laboratories, Veterinary Diagnostic Service.
Test Units Canine Feline Ferret Rat Rabbit
Red blood cell (RBC) count x 106/µL 4.48-8.53 5.80-11 7.30-12.18 5-7.20 7-9
Hemoglobin g/dL 10.5-20.1 8.6-16 12-17.4 10.5-15 13.7-16.8
Hematocrit % 33-58.7 28-47 36-61 32-45 37.9-49.9
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) fL 63-78.3 37.7-50 42.6-51 55-70 49.9-58.3
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) pg/cell 21-27 12.3-17.2 13.7-16 19-23 17.8-29
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) g/dL 30.8-35.9 31.1-36 30.3-34.9 30-35 33.2-37.9
Red cell distribution width (RDW) % 11.9-18.1 17-24 7.3-12.2 ** 10.5-14.9
Platelet count x 103/µL 140-540 160-660 297-910 300-750 680-1280
White blood cell (WBC) count x 103/µL 4-18.2 3.7-20.5 4.4-19.1 4-13 1.1-7.5
Segmented neutrophil absolute # x 103/µL 2.5-15.7 1.3-15.7 1.3-3.7 1-6 0.2-1.5
Band neutrophil absolute # x 103/µL 0-0.20 0-0.5 0-0.10 0-0.10 0-0.10
Lymphocyte absolute # x 103/µL 0.3-3.9 1-7.9 1.5-6.7 2-9 0.8-5.7
Monocyte absolute # x 103/µL 0-1.4 0-1 0.1-0.8 0-0.5 0-0.2
Eosinophil absolute # x 103/µL 0-1.3 0.10-2 0.1-0.9 0-0.4 0-0.2
Basophil absolute # x 103/µL 0-0.1 0-0.1 0-0.1 0-1 0-0.3
Chemistry: Equine, Food, and Fiber Animal Species 
Values were originally published by Marshfield Clinic Laboratories, Veterinary Diagnostic Service.
Test Units Alpaca Bovine Camelid (Llama) Caprine Equine Ovine Porcine
Albumin g/dL 2.7-4.4 3.1-4.3 1.9-4.9 2.3-3.4 2.4-3.7 2.8-3.7 3.2-4.2
Alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP)
units/L 17-232 12-154 15-115 18-220 96-385 47-681 61-147
Alanine aminotransfer-
ase (ALT)
units/L 5-21 10-33 5-18 11-28 5-13 11-26 30-53
Amylase units/L 561-1211 11-21 ** 10-73 1-5 5-40 744- 2330
Anion gap — 11-22 10-25 ** 12-20 10-24 14-21 13-30
Aspartate aminotrans-
ferase (AST)
units/L 73-282 48-204 98-256 60-118 204-390 52-122 17-63
Beta-hydroxybutyrate mg/dL 0.4-0.9 1.9-14.8 0.3-1.2 2.3-4.9 1.2-4.4 0.6-5.4 0.2-1.2
Bicarbonate mmol/L 20-32 22-29 13-38 23-3 2 21-33 21-32 18-32
Bile acids, fasting µmol/L NA NA ** NA NA NA NA
Bile acids, postprandial 
(or nonfasting)
µmol/L 11-82 1.9-14.8 ** 5-69 1.2-4.4 3-86 1-31
Bilirubin – Direct mg/dL 0-0 0-0.2 ** 0-0.7 0-0.4 0-0 0-0.2
Bilirubin – Total mg/dL 0-0.1 0-0.2 0.1-0.2 0-0.1 0.2-2.2 0-0.1 0-0.1
Blood urea nitrogen 
(BUN)
mg/dL 13-30 8-22 8-34 7-22 9-27 13-28 10-24
Calcium mg/dL 8.5-10.1 7.9-10.5 7.8-10.7 8.2-10.3 10.2-13.4 9.4-11 10.1-11.8
Chloride mmol/L 107-116 100-109 106-129 101-109 92-107 100-112 91-109
Cholesterol mg/dL 15-63 112-331 16-57 52-120 59-125 31-85 41-89
Creatine kinase (CK) units/L 31-232 50-271 ** 98-267 131-548 47-273 136-1609
Creatinine mg/dL 0.8-2 0.3-0.8 0.4-3.1 0.4-0.9 0.4-1.9 0.5-0.9 0.8-1.7
Fructosamine µmol/L 222-386 186-243 ** 187-273 227-347 182-278 217-299
**No normal range established in this laboratory

===== PDF_PAGE_1540 =====
Reference Laboratory Ranges    1513
Test Units Alpaca Bovine Camelid (Llama) Caprine Equine Ovine Porcine
Gamma glutamyl trans-
ferase (GGT)
units/L 12-29 4-41 9-41 31-58 6-32 26-75 34-82
Globulin g/dL 1.4-5.5 2-4 0.8 -4.5 3.5-5.3 2.3-5.3 2.5-4.5 5.3-6.4
Glucose mg/dL 93-137 44-75 61-173 40-76 54-118 45-85 44-91
Haptoglobin mg/mL 0.3 -1.6 0.1-1.7 ** 0-4.9 0.9-5 0.1-1.8 0-1.8
Insulin µunits/mL NA NA ** NA 0.5-10 NA NA
Iron µg/dL 53-206 97-261 — 13-215 98-213 90-310 109-222
Lactate mmol/L 0.31-5.06 0.38 -1.83 ** 0.67-4.43 0.60-7.97 8.18-15.14 1.43-5.52
Lactate dehydrogenase 
(LDH)
units/L 171-445 744 -1592 ** 172-441 244-802 280-597 328-782
Lipase units/L 2-130 1-10 ** 11-42 10-32 10-38 2-12
Magnesium mg/dL 1.8-2.5 1.8-2.9 ** 2.1-3.2 1.5-2.4 1.9-2.7 1.9-3.1
Phosphorus mg/dL 2.8-9 4.1-8.3 1.5-8.9 3.8-9.6 1.4-5.9 4.5-9.2 6-9.3
Potassium mmol/L 4-5.8 3.7-5.6 3.7-5.8 4.4-6.5 3.2-5.5 4.1-5.9 4.5-7.6
Sorbitol dehydrogenase 
(SDH)
u/L 1.5-16 6.6-37.8 ** 19.7-71.9 3.3-15.5 10.2-54.3 4.7-18.8
Thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH)
ng/mL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Sodium mmol/L 145-153 135-145 145-166 139-147 130-140 139- 150 128-151
Total T4 (tT4) µg/dL 5.5-12 1.5-5.3 5.5-12 4.1-8.9 0.5-3.1 4-9.6 2.4-7.1
Total protein (TP) g/dL 4.8-8.7 5.6-7.8 3.3-8.8 6.3-8.2 5.2-8.2 5.7-7.7 5.8-8.1
Triglycerides mg/dL 11-55 4-26 6-41 11-66 10-61 10-32 34-165
Uric acid mg/dL 0-0.1 0.5-1.6 ** 0-0.2 0.1- 0.6 0-0.2 0-02
**No normal range established in this laboratory
Hematology: Equine, Food, and Fiber Animal Species 
Values were originally published by Marshfield Clinic Laboratories, Veterinary Diagnostic Service.
Test Units Alpaca Bovine Camelid (Llama) Caprine Equine Ovine Porcine
Red blood cell (RBC) 
count 
x 106/µL 8.6-15.9 5-10 9.33-17.06 12.2-20 5.63-12.09 9.9-14.5 6.4-8
Hemoglobin g/dL 8.6-16.5 8-15 10.6-17.3 7-12 9.8-17.1 10.2-14.3 12.9-15.9
Hematocrit % 21.1-41.8 24-46 25.8-45.6 19.2-33 27-47.5 32.3-47.4 38.3 – 47.8
Mean corpuscular volume 
(MCV)
fL 21.6-29.9 40-60 23.3-31 13.2-19.7 33.5-55.8 28.6-36.7 55.1-65.1
Mean corpuscular hemo-
globin (MCH)
pg/cell 8.6-11.7 11-17 9.2-12.1 5.1-6.7 12.2-19.3 8.9-11.2 18.2-22
Mean corpuscular 
 hemoglobin concentration 
(MCHC)
g/dL 38.1-41.1 30-36 36.3-41.9 33.1-40 32.4-37.4 29.3-32.3 31.4-35.1
Red cell distribution width 
(RDW)
% 18.8-31.4 14-31 20.3-29.6 24.9-41.2 20.6-29 19.9-26.4 14.2-17.7
Platelet count x 103/µL 269-912 230-690 185-1007 300-600 95-385 78-1309 157-618
White blood cell (WBC) 
count
x 103/µL 4.7-28.6 4-12 5.9-18.9 9.5-30.5 4.1-14.3 3.7-11.7 10.9-21.8
Segmented neutrophil 
absolute #
x 103/µL 1.3-12 0.6-4 2.6-13.1 4.2-17.5 1.7-10.4 0.8-3.6 3.2-13.1
Band neutrophil absolute # x 103/µL 0-0.1 0-0.1 0-0.05 0-0.1 0-0.1 0-0.1 0-0.1
Lymphocyte absolute # x 103/µL 0.6-11 2.5-7.5 0.73-6.90 1.6-9.6 0.6-6.7 0.8-7.4 3.3-11.5

===== PDF_PAGE_1541 =====
1514    Reference Laboratory Ranges
Test Units Alpaca Bovine Camelid (Llama) Caprine Equine Ovine Porcine
Monocyte absolute # x 103/µL 0-4.7 0-0.8 0-0.61 0.1-1.5 0-0.9 0-0.4 0-1.9
Eosinophil absolute # x 103/µL 0.3-6.4 0-2.4 0-4.32 0-3.5 0-0.5 0-1.10 0-1.5
Basophil absolute # x 103/µL 0-3.6 0-0.2 0-0.27 0-0.6 0-0.2 0-0.4 0-0.2
Coagulation: Bovine, Canine, Equine, Feline
Values were originally published by Marshfield Clinic Laboratories, Veterinary Diagnostic Service.
Test Units Canine Feline Equine Bovine
Antithrombin (AT) % 75-108 87-143 10-1000 10-1000
Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) seconds 9.1-15.6 9.9-23.4 33-55 21.3-35.8
Fibrinogen, quantitative mg/dL 200-400 50-300 100-400 300-700
Fibrinogen, semi-quantitative mg/dL 100-500 50-300 100-400 300-700
Prothrombin time (PT) seconds 5.4-8.8 7.2-12.5 9.1-12.6 16.8-20.7
Urinalysis: Canine, Feline
Values were originally published by Marshfield Clinic Laboratories, Veterinary Diagnostic Service.
Test Units Canine Feline
Specific gravity – 1.001-1.070 1.001-1.080
pH – 5.5-7.5 5.5-7.5
Volume mL/kg/day 24-41 22-30
Osmolality mOsmol/kg H20 500-1200
50 minutes; 2400 maximum
50 minutes;  
3000 maximum
Sediment: RBCs/hpf cells/hpf 0-5 0-5
Sediment: WBCs/hpf cells/hpf 0-5 0-5
Sediment: casts/hpf cells/hpf 0 0
Glucose mg/dL 0 0
Ketones mg/dL 0 0
Bilirubin mg/dL 0–trace 0
Calcium mEq/L 2-10 **
Creatinine mg/dL 100-300 110-280
Chloride mEq/L 0-400 **
Magnesium mg/kg/24 hours 1.7-3 3
Phosphorus mEq/L 50-180 **
Potassium mEq/L 20-120 **
Sodium mEq/L 20-165 **
Urea nitrogen mg/kg/24 hours 140-2302 374-1872
**No normal range established in this laboratory

===== PDF_PAGE_1542 =====
Estrus and Gestation Periods: Dogs and Cats    1515
Cerebral Spinal Fluid: Canine, Feline
Values were originally published by Marshfield Clinic Laboratories, Veterinary Diagnostic Service.
Test Units Canine Feline
Pressure mm H20 Less than 170 Less than 100
Specific gravity – 1.005-1.007 1.005-1.007
Lymphocytes/µL – Less than 5 Less than 5
Pandy test – Negative–trace Negative
Protein mg/dL Less than 25 Less than 25
Creatine kinase (CK) units/L 9-28 **
Potassium mEq/L 3.5-6 **
Chloride mEq/L 96-106 **
Triglycerides mg/dL 30-180 **
Gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) units/L 0-10 **
**No normal range established in this laboratory
Estrus and Gestation Periods: Dogs and Cats
Dog Cat
Appearance of first estrus at the age of: 7-9 months 4-12 months
Estrous cycle in animals not served: Mean = 7 months
Range = every 5-8 months
Every 4-30 days
(14-19 day model) if constant photoperiod
Duration of estrus period: 7-42 days (proestrus plus estrus) 2-19 days
First occurrences after parturition: Pregnancy does not alter interval 7-9 days
Gestation period Mean = 63 days; Range 58-71 days Mean = 63 days; Range 58-70 days
Number of young 8-12 large breeds
6-10 medium breeds
2-4 small breeds
4-6
Suckling period 3-6 weeks 3-6 weeks

===== PDF_PAGE_1543 =====
1516    Systemic Drugs  Sorted by  Therapeutic Class  or Major Indication
Systemic Drugs  
Sorted by  
Therapeutic Class  
or Major Indication
This appendix lists systemic drugs or com -
bination drug products by their therapeu -
tic class or major indication. Classifica -
tions are based on the American Society of 
Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) drug 
classification system. As some drugs have 
multiple indications, there may not be a spe-
cific dosage listed for a specific indication for 
every species. As such, the following species 
codes are used in parentheses after the drug 
name to indicate for which species a dosage 
is presented:
A = Avian
B = Bovine, Cattle
C = Cat, Feline
D = Dog, Canine
Fer = Ferret 
Fi = Fish
H = Horse, Equine
Hb = Honey Bees
L = Llama, Alpacas, New World Camelids, 
Camels
Po = Pocket Pets, Rabbits, Small Mammals
R = Reptiles/Amphibians
Ru = Ruminants
Sh = Sheep/Goats; Ovine/Caprine; Small 
Ruminants
Sw = Swine, Pigs
Z = Wildlife/Zoo Animals
Antihistamines
Cetirizine (D, C, H)
Chlorpheniramine (D, C, H, A, Fer) 
Clemastine (D, C) 
Cyproheptadine (D, C, H) 
Diphenhydramine (D, C, H, B, A, Fer, Po) 
Doxepin (D, C, H, A) 
Fexofenadine (D, C) 
Hydroxyzine (D, C, H, A, Fer, Po)
Loratadine (D, C) 
Meclizine (D, C, Po) 
Promethazine (D, C, H) 
Pyrilamine (H) 
Trimeprazine/Prednisolone (D, C) 
Tripelennamine (H, B) 
Central Nervous System Drugs
(including anti-inflammatories, analgesics, 
muscle relaxants)
CNS/Respiratory Stimulants
Caffeine (D, H)
Doxapram (D, C, H, B, Sw, A, Fer, Po, R) 
Analgesics, Nonsteroidal Anti- 
Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)
Aspirin (D, C, H, B, Fer, Po) 
Carprofen (D, C, H, B, Sh, A, Fer, Po, R) 
Deracoxib (D) 
Diclofenac, Topical (H) 
Dimethyl Sulfoxide (DMSO) (D, H) 
Dipyrone (D, C, H)
Etodolac (D, H) 
Firocoxib (D, H) 
Flunixin (B, H, Sh, Sw, Fer, Po) 
Grapiprant (D)
Ketoprofen (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw, A, Fer, Po) 
Ketorolac (D, Po) 
Mavacoxib (D) 
Meloxicam (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, Sw, A, Fer, 
Po, R)
Phenylbutazone (D, H, Ru) 
Piroxicam (D, C, H, Po) 
Robenacoxib (D, C) 
Tolfenamic Acid (D, C, B, Sw) 
Analgesics, Opioid Agonists
Alfentanil (D, C)  
Codeine (D, C, Po) 
Fentanyl Injection (D, C, H, Sh, Fer, Po) 
Fentanyl Transdermal Patch (D, C, H, Sh, L, 
Sw, A, Po) 
Hydrocodone Combinations (D) 
Hydromorphone (D, C, H, Fer, Po, R) 
Meperidine (D, C, H, B, Fer, Po) 
Methadone (D, C, H, Sh) 
Morphine (D, C, H, Sh, L, Po) 
Oxymorphone (D, C, H, Sh, A, Fer, Po) 
Remifentanil (D, C, H)
Sufentanil (D, C) 
Tramadol (D, C, H, B, A, Po, R) 
Analgesics, Opioid Agonist/ 
Antagonists
Buprenorphine (D, C, H, Sh, Sw, Fer, Po) 
Butorphanol (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, A, Fer, Po) 
Nalbuphine (D, C, B, Po) 
Analgesics, Other
Acetaminophen (D, H, Po) 
Amantadine (D, C) 
Clonidine (D, C, B) 
Frunevetmab (C)
Gabapentin (D, C, A) 
Ketamine (D, C, H, B, Ru, L, Sw, A, Fer, Po, 
R) 
Lidocaine (Intravenous; Systemic) (D, C, H, 
Sh, Po) 
Medetomidine/Vatinoxan (D) 
Pregabalin (D, C, H) 
Antipyretics 
Acetaminophen (D, H)
Aspirin (D, C)
Dipyrone (H)
Flunixin (B, Sw)
Ketoprofen (B, Sh, Sw)
Behavior-Modifying Agents
Alprazolam (D, C, H) 
Amitriptyline (D, C, A) 
Buspirone (D, C) 
Clomipramine (D, C, A) 
Clonazepam (D, C) 
Clorazepate (D, C) 
Diazepam (D, H, Sh, A) 
Doxepin (D, C, H, A) 
Fluoxetine (D, C, H) 
Fluvoxamine (D, C) 
Gabapentin (D, C) 
Imepitoin (D, C)
Imipramine (D) 
L-Theanine (D, C) 
Lorazepam (D, C) 
Methylphenidate (D) 
Oxazepam (D, C) 
Paroxetine (D, C, A) 
Pheromones (D, C, H) 
Pregabalin (C)
Sertraline (D, C) 
Trazodone (D, C, H) 
Cannabinoids
Cannabidiol (CBD) (D)
Tranquilizers/Sedatives
Acepromazine (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw, Fer, Po) 
Alfaxalone (D, C, B, Po)
Alprazolam (D, C, H) 
Chlorpromazine (D, C, B, Sh, Sw) 
Detomidine (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, A) 
Dexmedetomidine (D, C, H, Po) 
Diazepam (D, C, H, Sh, L, A, Fer, Po) 
Ketamine (D, C, H, B, Ru, L, Sw, A, Fer, Po, 
R) 
Lorazepam (D, C) 
Medetomidine (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, A, Fer, 
Po, R) 
Medetomidine/Vatinoxan (D) 
Midazolam (D, C, H, Ru, A, Po) 
Pentobarbital (H) 
Reserpine (H)
Romifidine (D, C, H, B) 
Tiletamine/Zolazepam (D, C, H, Ru, L, Sw, 
Fer, Po, R) 
Xylazine (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, Sw, A, Fer, Po, 
Z)
 
Anesthetic Agents, Barbiturates
Pentobarbital (D, C, H, Po) 
Thiopental (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw, Po) 
Anesthetic Agents, Inhalants
Desflurane (D, C, H, L, Po)
Isoflurane (D, C, H, Sh, A, Fer, Po, R) 
Sevoflurane (D, C, H, Sh, L, A, Po, R) 
Anesthetic Agents, Local
Bupivacaine (D, C, H, B, Sh, Po, R)
Bupivacaine Liposomal (D, C)
Lidocaine, Local Anesthetic (D, C, H, B, Sh, 
L, Po, R)

===== PDF_PAGE_1544 =====
Systemic Drugs Sorted by Therapeutic Class or Major Indication      1517
Mepivacaine (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw)
Ropivacaine (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw)
Anesthetic Agents, Miscellaneous
Alfaxalone (D, C, H, B, Sh, Fer, Po) 
Alfentanil (D, C) 
Etomidate (D, C, Fer, Po) 
Fentanyl Injection (D, C, H, Sh, Fer, Po) 
Ketamine (D, C, H, B, Ru, L, Sw, A, Fer, Po, 
R) 
Propofol (D, C, H, Sh, L, Po, R) 
Remifentanil (D, C, H) 
Sufentanil (D, C) 
Tiletamine/Zolazepam (D, C, H, Ru, L, Sw, 
Fer, Po, R) 
Reversal Agents
Atipamezole (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, A, Po, R) 
Flumazenil (D, C, H, A, R) 
Naloxone (D, C, H, Po, R) 
Naltrexone (D, C) 
Neostigmine (D, C, H) 
Tolazoline (D, C, H, Ru, L, Sw, A, Z) 
Y ohimbine (D, C, H, B, L, Sw, A, Po) 
Anticonvulsants
Bromides (D) 
Clonazepam (D, C) 
Clorazepate (D, C) 
Diazepam (D, H)  
Felbamate (D) 
Gabapentin (D, C, A) 
Imepitoin (D, C) 
Levetiracetam (D, C, H) 
Lorazepam (D, C) 
Phenobarbital (D, C, H, Fer) 
Pregabalin (D, C, H) 
Topiramate (D, C) 
Zonisamide (D, C) 
Neuromuscular Blockers
Atracurium (D, C, H, Sh, L, Po) 
Rocuronium (D, C, H) 
Succinylcholine (D, C, H, Ru, R) 
Vecuronium (D, C) 
Muscle Relaxants, Skeletal
Dantrolene (D, H) 
Diazepam (D)
Guaifenesin, Intravenous (H, Sh, L) 
Methocarbamol (D, C, H) 
Euthanasia Agents
Euthanasia Agents with Pentobarbital (D, C, 
Large Animals) 
Potassium (-Acetate, -Chloride, -Gluconate) 
(H, Ru)
Cardiovascular Agents
Inotropic Agents
Digoxin (D, C, Fer) 
Dobutamine (D, C, H, A) 
Pimobendan (D, C) 
Antiarrhythmic Drugs
Amiodarone (D, H) 
Digoxin (D, C, H, B)
Diltiazem (D, C, H, Fer, Po)
Lidocaine (Intravenous; Systemic) (D, C, 
H, Po) 
Mexiletine (D, C) 
Procainamide (D, C, H) 
Quinidine (D, H) Verapamil (D, C, H, Po) 
See also, Beta-Blockers 
Anticholinergics (Parasympatholytics)
Atropine (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, Sw, A, Fer, Po, 
R) 
Butylscopolamine (H)
Glycopyrrolate (D, C, H, Ru, Fer, Po, R) 
Hyoscyamine (D) 
Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 
 Inhibitors (ACEIs)
Benazepril (D, C, H) 
Enalapril (D, C, A, Fer) 
Imidapril (D) 
Lisinopril (D, C) 
Ramipril (D, C)
Calcium Channel Blocking Agents
Amlodipine (D, C, A) 
Diltiazem (D, C, H, Fer, Po) 
Verapamil (D, C, H, Po) 
Vasodilating Agents
Hydralazine (D, C, H) 
Isoxsuprine (H, A) 
Nitroglycerin, Transdermal (D, C, Fer) 
Nitroprusside (D, C) 
Pimobendan (D, C) 
Sildenafil (D, C) 
Tadalafil (D) 
Agents Used to Treat Hypotension  
and Shock
Dobutamine (D, C, H, A) 
Dopamine (D, C) 
Ephedrine (D, C, H)
Epinephrine (D, C, H, Ru, Sw, A, Po, R) 
Isoproterenol (D, C) 
Norepinephrine (D, C, H, Sh, L) 
Phenylephrine (D, C, H, Sh) 
Vasopressin (D, C, H) 
Alpha-Adrenergic Blocking Agents
Phenoxybenzamine (D, C, H) 
Prazosin (D, C) 
Beta-Adrenergic Blocking Agents
Atenolol (D, C, Fer) 
Carvedilol (D) 
Esmolol (D, C) 
Metoprolol (D, C) 
Propranolol (D, C, H, Fer) 
Sotalol (D, C, H) 
Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARBs)
Irbesartan (D, C) 
Losartan (D) 
Telmisartan (D, C) 
Antihypertensive Agents, 
 Miscellaneous
Fenoldopam (D, C, H) 
Nitroprusside (D, C) 
Other Cardiovascular Agents
Carnitine (D, C) 
Taurine (D, C) 
Respiratory Drugs
Sympathomimetics
Albuterol (D, C, H, B) 
Clenbuterol (H, B) 
Ephedrine (D, C, H) 
Epinephrine (D, C, H, Ru, Sw) 
Isoproterenol (D, C) 
Pseudoephedrine (C) 
Terbutaline (C, A, R) 
Xanthines
Aminophylline (D, C, H, B) 
Caffeine (D, H)
Theophylline (D, C) 
Antitussives
Butorphanol (D) 
Codeine (D) 
Diphenoxylate/Atropine (D) 
Hydrocodone Combinations (D) 
Mucolytics
Acetylcysteine (D, C, H) 
Other Respiratory Agents
Ciclesonide (H)
Cromolyn (H) 
Fluticasone (D, C, H) 
Ipratropium (H, Po)
Montelukast (C)
Renal and Urinary Tract Agents
Diuretics, Carbonic Anhydrase 
 Inhibitors
Acetazolamide (D, C, H) 
Dichlorphenamide (D, C) 
Methazolamide (D, C) 
Diuretics, Thiazides
Chlorothiazide (D, C) 
Hydrochlorothiazide (D, C, H, A) 
Diuretics, Loop
Furosemide (D, C, H, B, A, Fer, Po, R, Fi)
Torsemide (D, C) 
Diuretics, Potassium Sparing 
Spironolactone (D, C) 
Triamterene (D) 

===== PDF_PAGE_1545 =====
1518    Systemic Drugs Sorted by Therapeutic Class or Major Indication   
Diuretics, Osmotic 
Glycerin, Oral (D, C) 
Mannitol (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw, Fer, Po) 
Agents for Urinary Incontinence  
or Retention
Bethanechol (D, C, H) 
Dantrolene (D, C, Po)
Diazepam (D)
Diethylstilbestrol (DES) (D)
Ephedrine (D)
Estriol (D)
Imipramine (D, C) 
Oxybutynin (D, C) 
Phenoxybenzamine (D, C, H) 
Phenylpropanolamine (D, C) 
Prazosin (D, C)
Pseudoephedrine (D) 
Tamsulosin (D, C) 
Urinary Alkalinizers
Citrate, Potassium (D, C) 
Sodium Bicarbonate (D, C, H, Ru, A) 
Urinary Acidifiers
Ammonium Chloride (D, C, H, Sh) 
Methionine (D, C, Sh) 
Agents for Urolithiasis
Allopurinol (D, A, R) 
Ammonium Chloride (D, C, H, Sh) 
Citrate, Potassium (D, C) 
Methionine (D, C, Sh) 
Tiopronin (D) 
Renal/Urinary Agents, Miscellaneous
Amitriptyline (D, C, A) 
Colchicine (D, A) 
Probenecid (R) 
Gastrointestinal (GI) Agents
Antiemetic Agents
Acepromazine (D, C)
Chlorpromazine (D, C) 
Dimenhydrinate (D, C) 
Diphenhydramine (D, C) 
Dolasetron (D, C) 
Granisetron (D, C) 
Maropitant (D, C) 
Meclizine (D, C, Po) 
Metoclopramide (D, C)
Mirtazapine (D, C) 
Ondansetron (D, C) 
Prochlorperazine (D, C) 
Promethazine (D, C) 
Antacids, Oral
Aluminum Hydroxide (D, C, H, B, Po, R) 
Calcium Acetate (D, C) 
Calcium, Oral (-Carbonate, -Gluconate, 
-Lactate) (D, C) 
Magnesium Hydroxide (D, C, B, Sh) 
Sodium Bicarbonate (D, C, H, Ru, A) 
Histamine-2 Antagonists
Cimetidine (D, C, H, Fer, Po) 
Famotidine (D, C, H, B, Fer, Po)
Nizatidine (D, C) 
Ranitidine (D, C, H, Fer, Po)
Gastromucosal Protectants
Sucralfate (D, C, H, A, Fer, R)
Prostaglandin E Analogues 
Misoprostol (D, C, H, B, Sh) 
Proton Pump Inhibitors 
Esomeprazole (D, C, H) 
Omeprazole (D, C, H, Sw, Fer)
Pantoprazole (D, C, H, L) 
Appetite Stimulants
Capromorelin (D, C)
Cyproheptadine (D, C) 
Mirtazapine (D, C) 
Oxazepam (C) 
GI Antispasmodics-Anticholinergics
Hyoscyamine (D) 
Butylscopolamine (H) 
Propantheline (D, C, H) 
GI Stimulants/Prokinetic
Cisapride (D, C, H, Po) 
Erythromycin (D, C, H, B)
Lidocaine (Intravenous; Systemic) (H)
Metoclopramide (D, C, H, Po) 
Neostigmine (H, B, Sh, Sw) 
Nizatidine (D, C) 
Ranitidine (D, C, Po)
Digestive Enzymes
Pancrelipase (D, C, A, Po)
Laxatives
Bisacodyl (D, C) 
Docusate (D, C, H, Sh) 
Lactulose (D, C, A, R) 
Magnesium Hydroxide (D, C, B, Sh) 
Mineral Oil (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw, A, Po)
Polyethylene Glycol 3350 (PEG 3350) (D, 
C) 
Psyllium (D, C, H) 
Saline Cathartics (D, C, H, Ru) 
Sorbitol (D, C, H) 
Antidiarrheals
Bismuth Subsalicylate (D, C, H, B, Sw, Fer) 
Cholestyramine (D, Po)
Clonidine (D, C) 
Crofelemer (D)
Diphenoxylate/Atropine (D, C) 
Kaolin/Pectin (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw, A, Fer, 
Po) 
Loperamide (D, C, Po) 
Emetics
Apomorphine (D, Fer) 
Hydrogen Peroxide 3% (D, Sw, Fer) 
Hydromorphone (D, C)
Ropinirole (D)
Xylazine (C)
Tranexamic Acid (D)
GI Drugs, Miscellaneous
Bismuth Subsalicylate (D, C, H, B, Sw, Fer) 
Budesonide (D, C) 
Colchicine (D, A) 
Olsalazine (D) 
Phenobarbital (D)
S-Adenosyl Methionine ± Silybin (D, C) 
Sulfasalazine (D, C, H, Fer)
Ursodiol (D, C, H, A) 
Hormones/Endocrine/ 
Reproductive Agents
Sex Hormones, Estrogens
Diethylstilbestrol (DES) (D) 
Estradiol (H) 
Estriol (D) 
Sex Hormones, Progestins
Altrenogest (D, H, Sw) 
Medroxyprogesterone (D, C, H) 
Megestrol (D, C) 
Sex Hormones, Androgens
Testosterone (D, B) 
Anabolic Steroids
Stanozolol (D, C, H, A, Fer, Po, R)
Posterior Pituitary Hormones
Desmopressin (D, C, H, A) 
Vasopressin (D, C, H) 
Oxytocics
Oxytocin (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, Sw, A, Po, R)  
Adrenal Cortical Steroids
Corticotropin (ACTH) (D, H, A) 
Cortisone (D) 
Cosyntropin (D, C, H) 
Mineralocorticoids
Desoxycorticosterone Pivalate (DOCP) (D, 
C) 
Fludrocortisone (D, C, Fer) 
Glucocorticoids
Betamethasone (D, H) 
Budesonide (D, C, H) 
Ciclesonide (H)
Dexamethasone (D, C, H, B, Sw, Po)
Flumethasone (D, C, H) 
Fluticasone (D, C, H) 
Hydrocortisone (D, C) 
Isoflupredone (H, B, Sw) 
Methylprednisolone (D, C, H) 

===== PDF_PAGE_1546 =====
Systemic Drugs Sorted by Therapeutic Class or Major Indication      1519
Prednisolone/Prednisone (D, C, H, B, L, A, 
Po, R) 
Triamcinolone (D, C, H)
Adrenal Steroid Inhibitors
Metyrapone (C) 
Mitotane (D, Fer) 
Selegiline (D) 
Trilostane (D, C, H, Po) 
Antidiabetic Agents
Acarbose (D, C) 
Exenatide (C)
Glipizide (C) 
Glyburide (C) 
Insulin, Aspart (D, C, B)
Insulin, Detemir (D, C)
Insulin, Glargine (D, C, H, Fer, Po)
Insulin, Lente (D, C)
Insulin, Lispro (D, C)
Insulin, NPH (D, H, L, A, Fer, Po)
Insulin, Protamine Zinc (PZI) (D, C, H, B, 
L)
Insulin, Regular (Crystalline Zinc) (D, C, 
H, L, A)
Metformin (C, H) 
Glucose Elevating Agents
Diazoxide (D, Fer, Po) 
Glucagon (D, C, B, Fer) 
Octreotide (D, H, Fer) 
Thyroid Hormones
Levothyroxine (D, C, H, A, R) 
Liothyronine (D, C) 
Thyrotropin (TSH) (D, C, A, Fer, Po) 
Antithyroid Drugs
Carbimazole (C) 
Methimazole (C, Po) 
Prostaglandins
Cloprostenol (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, Sw)
Dinoprost (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw)  
Endocrine/Reproductive Drugs, 
 Miscellaneous
Aglepristone (D, C, Sh, Po) 
Bromocriptine (D, C, H) 
Cabergoline (D, C, A) 
Calcitriol (D, C) 
Chorionic Gonadotropin (HCG) (D, C, H, 
B, Sh, Sw, A, Fi) 
Clenbuterol (H, B) 
Cyproheptadine (H) 
Deslorelin (D, H, Fer)
Finasteride (D, Fer) 
Gonadorelin (D, C, B) 
Imipramine (H)
Leuprolide (A, Fer, Po) 
Melatonin (D, C, H, Sh, Fer, Z) 
Metergoline (D, C) 
Misoprostol (D, C, H, B, Sh)
Osaterone (D) 
Pergolide (H) 
Somatotropin (D, B) 
Terbutaline (D, C)
Thyrotropin (TSH) (D, C, H, A, Fe, Po) 
Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone (TRH) (D, 
C, H) 
Anti-infective Drugs
Antiparasitics, Ectoparasiticides
Afoxolaner (D, C, Sw, A) 
Doramectin (D, C, H, B, L, Sw, Po) 
Eprinomectin (C, H, B, Sh, L) 
Fluralaner (D, C, Po) 
Imidacloprid, Systemic (D)
Ivermectin (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, Sw, A, Fer, Po, 
R, Z)
Ivermectin/Clorsulon (B)
Lotilaner (D, C)
Lufenuron (D, C, Po) 
Milbemycin Oxime (D, C) 
Moxidectin (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, Fer) 
Nitenpyram (D, C, R)
Sarolaner (D, C)
Selamectin (D, C, Fer, Po) 
Selamectin/Sarolaner (C)
Spinosad (D, C)  
Antiparasitics, Endoparasiticides 
Albendazole (B, Sh, L, Po) 
Allopurinol (D, C, A, R) 
Amprolium (D, C, B, Sh, L, Sw, A, Fer, Po) 
Atovaquone (D, C) 
Decoquinate (D, B, Sh, L, A) 
Diclazuril (D, C, H, B, Sh, A, Po) 
Diminazene (D, H, B, Sh, Po) 
Doramectin (D, C, H, B, L, Sw, Po)
Emodepside/Praziquantel (D, C, R) 
Eprinomectin (C, H, B, Sh, L) 
Eprinomectin/Praziquantel (C)
Epsiprantel (D, C) 
Febantel (D, C) 
Fenbendazole (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, Sw, A, Fer, 
Po, R, Z) 
Furazolidone (C) 
Imidocarb (D, C, H, B) 
Ivermectin (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, Sw, A, Fer, Po, 
R, Z) 
Ivermectin/Clorsulon (B)
Levamisole (D, H, B, Sh, Sw, R) 
Meglumine Antimoniate (D) 
Melarsomine (D) 
Metronidazole (D, C, A, Po, R) 
Milbemycin Oxime (D, C) 
Miltefosine (D, Fer) 
Morantel (B, Sh) 
Moxidectin (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, Fer)
Nitazoxanide (D, C, H) 
Oxfendazole (H, B, Sh, Sw) 
Oxibendazole (H, Po) 
Paromomycin (D, C, Sh, L, R) 
Piperazine (D, C, Sw, A, Po, R)
Ponazuril (D, C, H, Sh, L, A, Po, R)
Praziquantel/Praziquantel Combination 
Products (D, C, H, Sh, L, A, Po, R) 
Primaquine (C) 
Pyrantel (D, C, H, L, A, Po) 
Pyrimethamine (D, C, H, A) 
Pyrimethamine/Sulfadiazine (H) 
Quinacrine (D, C, R) 
Ronidazole (D, C) 
Selamectin (D, C, Fer, Po) 
Selamectin/Sarolaner (C)
Sodium Stibogluconate (D) 
Sulfadiazine (H)
Sulfamethoxazole (D, C, Fer, A, Po, R) 
Sulfadimethoxine (D, C, B, L, Fer, Po, R)
Tinidazole (D, C)
Toltrazuril (D, C, B, Sh, L, Sw, A, Po, R)  
Antibiotics, Aminoglycosides,  
and Aminocyclitols 
Amikacin (D, C, H, L, A, Fer, Po, R, Fi) 
Apramycin (B, Sw, A, Po) 
Gentamicin (D, C, H, Sw, A, Fer, Po, R) 
Neomycin (D, C, B, Sh, Sw, A, Fer) 
Spectinomycin (Sw, A, Po) 
Tobramycin (D, C, H, L, A, R) 
Antibiotics, Carbapenems
Ertapenem (D, C) 
Imipenem/Cilastatin (D, C, H) 
Meropenem (D, C, H) 
Antibiotics, Cephalosporins 
Cefaclor (D, C) 
Cefadroxil (D, C, Fer) 
Cefazolin (D, C, H, R) 
Cefepime (D, C, H) 
Cefixime (D, C) 
Cefotaxime (D, C, H, A, R) 
Cefotetan (D, C) 
Cefovecin (D, C) 
Cefoxitin (D, C, H) 
Cefpodoxime (D, C, H) 
Cefquinome (H, B)
Ceftazidime (D, C, H, R) 
Ceftiofur Crystalline Free Acid (H, B, Sh, 
Sw, Po) 
Ceftiofur HCl (B, Sw) 
Ceftiofur Sodium (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw, A, R) 
Ceftriaxone (D, C, H) 
Cefuroxime (D, C, Sh) 
Cephalexin (D, C, A, Fer, Po, R)
Cephapirin (B) 
Antibiotics, Macrolides
Azithromycin (D, C, H, B, A, Po)  
Clarithromycin (D, C, H, Fer)
Erythromycin (D, C, H, B, A, Fer) 
Gamithromycin (H, B, Sh, Sw) 
Tildipirosin (B, Sw)
Tilmicosin (B, Sh, Sw, Po) 
Tulathromycin (B, Sh, Sw, Z) 
Tylosin (D, C, B, Sw, A, Fer, Po, Hb) 

===== PDF_PAGE_1547 =====
1520    Systemic Drugs Sorted by Therapeutic Class or Major Indication   
Antibiotics, Penicillins
Amoxicillin (D, C, B, A, Fer, Po, R) 
Amoxicillin/Clavulanate (D, C, A, Fer) 
Ampicillin (D, C, H, B, Fer, Po, R) 
Ampicillin/Sulbactam (D, C) 
Cloxacillin (B) 
Dicloxacillin (D, C) 
Oxacillin (D, C, H) 
Penicillin G (D, C, H, B, Ru, Sw, A, Fer, Po) 
Penicillin V (D, C) 
Piperacillin/Tazobactam (D, C, A, R) 
Antibiotics, Tetracyclines
Chlortetracycline (C, A, Po)
Doxycycline (D, C, H, A, Po, R)
Minocycline (D, C, H) 
Oxytetracycline (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw, A, R, Z) 
Tetracycline (D, C, B, Sh, Sw, A, Fer, Po) 
Antibiotics, Lincosamides
Clindamycin (D, C, A, Fer, R) 
Lincomycin (D, C, Sw, A, Fer) 
Pirlimycin (B) 
Antibiotics, Quinolones
Ciprofloxacin (D, C, H, A, Fer, Po)
Danofloxacin (B, R) 
Enrofloxacin (D, C, H, B, L, Sw, A, Fer, Po, R)
Marbofloxacin (D, C, A, Po, R)
Orbifloxacin (D, C, H, A, Po) 
Pradofloxacin (D, C, A) 
Antibiotics, Sulfonamides
Sulfa-/Trimethoprim (D, C, H, A, Fer, Po, R)
Sulfadiazine/Pyrimethamine (H) 
Sulfadimethoxine (D, C, H, B, L, Fer, Po, R) 
Sulfadimethoxine/Ormetoprim (D) 
Antibiotics, Antibacterials, 
 Miscellaneous
Chloramphenicol (D, C, H, A, Fer, Po, R) 
Clofazimine (D, C, A) 
Dapsone (D, H) 
Ethambutol (D, C, A) 
Florfenicol (B, Sh, L, Sw) 
Fosfomycin (D) 
Isoniazid (INH) (D, C, B, Ru) 
Linezolid (D, C)
Methenamine (D, C) 
Metronidazole (D, C, H, A, Fer, Po, R) 
Nitrofurantoin (D, C, H) 
Novobiocin (B)
Polymyxin B (C, H, Sh) 
Rifampin (D, C, H) 
Rifaximin (D)
Ronidazole (D, C) 
Tiamulin (Sw, A) 
Tinidazole (D, C) 
Vancomycin (D, C, H) 
Antifungal Agents
Amphotericin B (D, C, H, L, A, Po, R) 
Caspofungin (D, C) 
Fluconazole (D, C, H, A, Po, R) 
Flucytosine (D, C) 
Griseofulvin (D, H, Po) 
Iodide (Potassium-, Sodium-) (D, C, H, B, Sh) 
Itraconazole (D, C, H, A, Po, R) 
Ketoconazole (D, C, H, A, Po, R) 
Nystatin (D, C, H, A, R) 
Posaconazole (D, C) 
Terbinafine (D, C, A, Po, R)
Voriconazole (D, C, H, A, R) 
Antiviral Agents
Acyclovir (D, H, A)
Amantadine (D, C) 
Famciclovir (C) 
Interferon Alfa, Human Recombinant (D, C) 
Interferon Omega, Feline Origin (D, C) 
Lysine (C) 
Oseltamivir (D, H) 
Valacyclovir (H)
Zidovudine (C) 
Blood Modifying Agents
Anticoagulants/Antithrombotics
Aspirin (D, C, H, Po) 
Clopidogrel (D, C, H) 
Cobalamin (Po)
Dalteparin (D, C, H) 
Enoxaparin (D, C, H) 
Heparin (D, C, H) 
Rivaroxaban (D, C)
Warfarin (D, H) 
Erythropoietic Agents
Cobalamin | Vitamin B12 (D, C, H, B, Sw, Po)
Darbepoetin Alfa (D, C) 
Epoetin Alfa (D, C, Fer, Po) 
Ferrous Sulfate (D, C) 
Folic Acid | Vitamin B9 (D, C, H, Po) 
Iron Dextran (D, C, Sw, A, Fer) 
Leucovorin (D, C H)
Blood Modifying Agents, 
 Miscellaneous
Aminocaproic Acid (D, H) 
Fenofibrate (D)
Filgrastim (D, C, H, L) 
Gemfibrozil (D, C) 
Hemoglobin Glutamer-200 (Bovine) (D, C) 
Pentoxifylline (D, C, H) 
Tranexamic Acid (D, C)
Vitamin K1 | Phytonadione (D, C, H, B, Sh, 
Sw, A, Po) 
Fluid and Electrolyte Modifiers
Albumin, Human (D, C) 
Aluminum Hydroxide (D, C, Po, R)
Calcitonin (D, R) 
Calcitriol (D, C) 
Calcium Acetate (D, C) 
Calcium, Oral (-Carbonate, -Gluconate, 
-Lactate) (D, C) 
Calcium, IV (-Borogluconate, -Chloride, 
-Gluconate) (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw, A, R)
Dextran 70 (D, C, B)
Dextrose 50% Injection (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw)
Ergocalciferol (D, C) 
Hydroxyethyl Starch (HES) Colloids (D, C, 
H, L, A) 
Hypertonic Saline (7% – 7.5%) (D, C, H, B, A) 
Lanthanum (D, C) 
Magnesium Hydroxide (D, C, B, Sh) 
Magnesium, IV (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw) 
Phosphate, (Potassium-, Sodium-) IV (D, C) 
Potassium (-Acetate, -Chloride, -Gluconate) 
(D, C, H, Ru) 
Sevelamer (D, C) 
Antineoplastics
Antineoplastics, Alkylating Agents
Carboplatin (D, C) 
Chlorambucil (D, C, H, Fer) 
Cisplatin (D, H) 
Cyclophosphamide (D, C, H, Fer, Po) 
Dacarbazine (DTIC) (D) 
Ifosfamide (D, C) 
Lomustine (D, C) 
Mechlorethamine (D, C) 
Melphalan (D, C) 
Procarbazine (D, C) 
Antineoplastics, Antimetabolites
Cytarabine (D, C, H) 
Fluorouracil (D, H) 
Methotrexate (D, C, H) 
Rabacfosadine (D)
Antineoplastics, Antibiotics
Bleomycin (D, C) 
Dactinomycin (D, C) 
Doxorubicin (D, C, H, Fer) 
Epirubicin (D, C) 
Streptozocin (D) 
Antineoplastics, Mitotic Inhibitors
Vinblastine (D, C) 
Vincristine (D, C, H, Fer) 
Vinorelbine (D, C)
Antineoplastics, Miscellaneous
Asparaginase (D, C) 
Gemcitabine (D, C) 
Hydroxyurea (D, C) 

===== PDF_PAGE_1548 =====
Systemic Drugs Sorted by Therapeutic Class or Major Indication      1521
Interferon Alfa, Human Recombinant (D) 
Mitoxantrone (D, C) 
Mitotane (D)
Piroxicam (D, C, H) 
Tigilanol Tiglate (D, H)
Toceranib (D, C) 
Verdinexor (D)
Immunomodulators
Immunosuppressive Drugs 
Azathioprine (D, H, Fer) 
Cyclosporine (D, C) 
Dexamethasone (D, C, H, B, Sw, Po) 
Flumethasone (D, C, H) 
Hydroxychloroquine (D) 
Immune Globulin, Intravenous (IVIG) (D) 
Leflunomide (D, C) 
Methotrexate (D, C, H) 
Methylprednisolone (D, C, H) 
Mycophenolate (D, C) 
Niacinamide (D)
Oclacitinib (D, C) 
Prednisolone/Prednisone (D, C, H, B, L, A, 
Po, R) 
Triamcinolone (D, C, H) 
Gold Compounds
Auranofin (D, C) 
Immunostimulants
Mycobacterial Cell Wall Fraction Immuno-
modulator (D, H, B) 
Parapox Ovis Virus Immunomodulator (H) 
Propionibacterium acnes Injection (D, C, H) 
Staphylococcal Phage Lysate (D) 
Antidotes/Antivenoms/ 
Reversal Agents
Acetylcysteine (D, C) 
Antivenom, Black Widow Spider (D, C) 
Antivenom, Crotalidae (D, C, H) 
Antivenom, North American Coral Snake 
(D, C, H) 
Atipamezole (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, A, Po, R)
Atropine (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, Sw, A, Fer, Po, R) 
Charcoal, Activated (D, C, H, Ru, Fer)
Cobalamin (D)
Deferoxamine (D, C, H) 
Dexrazoxane (D) 
Dimercaprol (BAL) (D, C, H, Ru) 
Domperidone (D, H) 
Edetate Calcium Disodium (CaEDTA) (D, 
C, H, Food Animals, L, A, Po) 
Ethanol (D, C, H) 
Flumazenil (D, C, H, A, R) 
Glycopyrrolate (D, C, H)
Fomepizole (D, C) 
Leucovorin (D, C, H) 
Lipid Emulsion, Intravenous (ILE) (D, C, H, 
Sh, Po, R)
Methylene Blue (D, C, H, Ru)
Molybdates (D, Food Animals, Sh)
Naloxone (D, C, H, Po, R) 
Penicillamine (D, C, Ru, A) 
Phenobarbital (B)
Physostigmine (D, H, B) 
Polymyxin B (C, H, Sh)
Pralidoxime (2-PAM) (D, C, H, Ru, L, A) 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6) (D, C) 
S-Adenosyl Methionine (SAMe) ± Silybin 
(D, C) 
Sodium Thiosulfate (D, C, H, Ru) 
Succimer (D, C, H, A) 
Trientine (D) 
Vitamin K1 | Phytonadione (D, C, H, B, Sh, 
Sw, A, Po) 
Zinc, Systemic (D, C) 
Bone/Joint Agents
Alendronate (D, C) 
Allopurinol (A, R) 
Clodronate (H) 
Glucosamine/Chondroitin (D, C, H) 
Hyaluronate (D, H) 
Pamidronate (D, C, H) 
Pentosan Polysulfate (D, C, H) 
Polysulfated Glycosaminoglycan (D, C, H, Po) 
Tiludronate (H) 
Zoledronic Acid (D, C, H)
Dermatologic Agents  
(Systemic)
Amitriptyline (D, C, A) 
Interferon Omega, Feline Origin (D, C) 
Isotretinoin (D, C) 
Lokivetmab (Canine Atopic Dermatitis 
Immunotherapeutic, CADI) (D)
Pentoxifylline (D, C, H) 
Terbutaline (H) 
Topiramate (C)
Vitamins and Minerals/ 
Nutrients
Ascorbic Acid | Vitamin C (D, C, H, B, Po) 
Calcitriol (D, C)
Calcium, IV (-Borogluconate, -Chloride, 
-Gluconate) (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw, A, R)
Calcium, Oral (-Carbonate, -Gluconate, 
-Lactate) (D, C) 
Carnitine (D, C) 
Cobalamin (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw, Po) 
Ergocalciferol | Vitamin D2 (D, C) 
Fatty Acids, Omega-3 (D, C, H) 
Ferrous Sulfate (D, C) 
Folic Acid | Vitamin B9 (D, C, H, Po) 
Iron Dextran (D, C, Sw, A, Fer) 
Leucovorin (D, C H)
Lipid Emulsion, Intravenous (ILE) (small, 
large animal species)
Lysine (C)
Magnesium, IV (D, C, H, B, Sh, Sw) 
Medium Chain Triglycerides (MCT Oil) (D) 
Melatonin (D, C, H, Sh, Fer, Z) 
Methionine (D, C, Sh) 
Niacinamide (D) 
Phosphate, (Potassium-, Sodium-) IV (D, C) 
Potassium (-Acetate, -Chloride, -Gluconate) 
(D, C, H, Ru) 
Pyridoxine | Vitamin B6 (D, C) 
Taurine (D, C) 
Thiamine | Vitamin B1 (D, C, H, B, Sh, L, Sw) 
Vitamin A (D, R) 
Vitamin E ± Selenium (D, C, H) 
Vitamin K1 | Phytonadione (D, C, H, B, Sh, 
Sw, A, Po) 
Zinc, Systemic (D, C) 
Cholinergic Muscle Stimulants
Edrophonium (D, C, H) 
Pyridostigmine (D, C, Fer) 
Systemic Acidifiers
Acetazolamide (D, C, H) 
Acetic Acid (H, B, Ru) 
Systemic Alkalinizers 
Citrate, Potassium (D, C)
Sodium Bicarbonate (D, C, H, Ru, A) 
Unclassified
Iohexol (D, C, H, A, Po, R)

===== PDF_PAGE_1549 =====
Index
Note: For clarity, ® or ™ have been removed.
2-[1 Methyl-2-(4-Phenoxyphenoxy) 
Ethoxy] Pyridine, 1460, 1461
2-PAM, 1051
4-Methylpyrazole, 558
5-Hydroxytryptophan, 1484
Aardora, 1435
Abelcet, 74, 78
Absorica, 703
Acarbose, 1
Acarbose Oral Tablets, 2
Acarexx, 1473
ACC, 12
Accutane, 701, 703
Acepromazine, 2, 7, 1489
Acetaminophen, 7, 309, 615, 1264, 1484
Acetazolamide, 9
Acetazolamide Extended-Release Oral, 11
Acetazolamide Oral Tablets, 11
Acetazolamide Sodium Injection, 11
Acetic Acid, 11
Acetic Acid, Otic, 1474
Acetic Acid, Topical, 1415, 1436, 
1441, 1446
Acetylcysteine, 12
Acetylcysteine Inhalation or Oral 
Solution, 14
Acetylcysteine Injection, 14
Acetylcysteine Ophthalmic, 1339
Acetylcysteine Oral Capsules, 14
Acetylpromazine, 2
Acetylsalicylic Acid, 100
ACTH, 311
Acthar, 311, 312
Acticin, 1460
Actidose, 240, 243, 1169
Actigall, 1287, 1288
Actinomycin D, 334
Activase, 1340, 1341
Activate, 1457, 1460, 1463
Activated Charcoal, 240, 1169
Active Vitamin D3, 170
Activyl, 1452
Acular, 1375, 1376
Acuvail, 1375, 1376
ACV , 14
Acycloguanosine, 14
Acyclovir, 14
Acyclovir Buccal Tablets, 16
Acyclovir Injection, 16
Acyclovir Ophthalmic, 1339
Acyclovir Oral, 16
Adams, 1452, 1458, 1459, 1461, 1462, 1472
Adams Fortress, 1454
Adaptil, 1019, 1020
Adcirca, 1205
Adequan, 1039, 1041
ADL Ear Flushing Drying Lotion, 1476
Admelog, 670
Adoxa, 438
Adrenaclick, 460
Adrenalin, 457
Adriamycin, 430, 433
Adrucil, 544, 546
Adspec, 1172
Advantage, 1456, 1457, 1461, 1462
Advantage Multi, 912, 917, 918
Advantus, 639, 640
Adventure, 1462
Advocin, 337, 338
Aerane, 697
Afoxolaner, 16
Afoxolaner Chewable, 18
Aglepristone, 18
Aglepristone Injection, 20
A-Hydrocort, 617
Akbeta, 1377, 1378
AK-FLUOR, 1366
Akpentolate, 1356, 1357
AK-Poly-Bac, 1410
Akten, 1380
AkTob, 1406, 1407
ALA, 1484
Ala Scalp, 1415
Alavert, 777, 778
Alaway, 1376
Albadry Plus, 945
Albendazole, 20
Albendazole Oral Tablets, 22
Albendazole Suspension, 22
Albenza, 20, 22
Albon, 1197, 1199
Albumin, Canine, 22
Albumin, Human, 22
Albuterol, 24, 690
Albuterol and Ipratropium Solution for
Inhalation, 27
Albuterol Extended-Release Oral 
Tablets, 27
Albuterol Oral, 27
Albuterol Solution for Inhalation, 27
Alcaftadine Ophthalmic, 1340
Alcaine, 1398, 1399
Aldactazide, 612, 1177
Aldactone, 1175, 1177
Aldara, 1464, 1465
Alendronate, 27
Alendronate Oral, 29
Alfaxalone, 29
Alfaxalone Injection, 34
Alfaxan, 29, 34
Alfenta, 35, 37
Alfentanil, 35
Alfentanil HCl, 37
Alinia, 934, 935
Alizin, 18
Alizine, 18
Alkeran, 829, 831
Alkindi Sprinkle, 617
Allegra Allergy, 521, 522
Allercaine with Bittran II, 1423
Allium Spp., 1485
Allopurinol, 37
Allopurinol Oral, 39
All-Trans Retinoic Acid, 1469 
Alocane, 1424
Alocril, 1387
Alodox Convenience Kit, 438 
Aloedine, 1450
Aloe & Oatmeal, 1421
Aloe Vera Otic Cleanser, 1476 
Alomide, 1380, 1381
Alphagan P, 1349, 1350
Alpha Lipoic Acid, 1484
Alph E, 1314
Alprazolam, 39
Alprazolam Extended-Release Oral 
Tablets, 41
Alprazolam Orally Disintegrating 
Tablets, 41
Alprazolam Oral Tablets, 41
Alrex, 1381, 1382
Altacaine, 1404
Altace, 1109, 1111
Altachlore, 1400, 1401
Altafluor, 1345, 1346
Altafluor Benox, 1366
Altepase Ophthalmic, 1340
Altreno, 1470
Altrenogest, 41
Aluminum Acetate Solution, Topical, 
1415, 1419
Aluminum Hydroxide, 44, 790 
Aluminum Hydroxide Concentrated Gel 
Suspension/Liquid, 45
Alvesco, 263
Amantadine, 45
Amantadine HCl Oral, 47
AmBisome, 74, 78
A-Methapred, 867
Amicar, 51
Amidate, 491, 493
Amiglyde-V , 47
Amikacin Injection, 51
Amikacin Ophthalmic, 1341
Amikacin Sulfate, 51
Amikacin, Systemic, 47
Amikin, 47
Amlodipine, 62
Aminocaproic Acid, 51
Aminocaproic Acid Injection, 53 
Aminocaproic Acid Oral, 53 
Aminophylline, 53
Aminophylline Injection, 56 
Aminophylline Oral Tablets, 56 
Amiodarone, 56
Amiodarone Injection Solution, 58 
Amiodarone Oral Tablets, 58
Amitraz Collar, Topical, 1450
Amitraz, Topical, 1455
1523
1522    Index

===== PDF_PAGE_1550 =====
Index   15231524  Index
Amitriptyline, 58
Amitriptyline HCl, 62
Amlodipine, 62
Amlodipine Chewable Tablets, 65
Amlodipine Oral Tablets, 65
Ammonil, 854
Ammonium Chloride, 65
Ammonium Molybdate, 904, 905
Ammonium Tetrathiomolybdate, 904, 905
Amnesteem, 703
Amodip, 62
Amoxicillin, 67, 1499
Amoxicillin/Clavulanate, 70
Amoxicillin Oral, 70
Amoxicillin Powder for Oral Solution, 70
Amoxi-Drops, 67
Amoxi-Tabs, 67
Amphojel, 44
Amphotericin B, 74
Amphotericin B Ophthalmic, 1342
Ampicillin, 1499
Ampicillin Sodium, 78, 81
Ampicillin/Sulbactam, 82
Ampicillin Trihydrate, 78, 81
Amplimune, 919
Amprolium, 84
Amprolium Oral Solution, 86
Amprolium Soluble Powder, 86
AmproMed, 84
Anafranil, 289, 292
Anaprime, 541
AnaSed, 1319, 1324
Anaspaz, 633
Ancef, 201
Ancoban, 534, 535
Anecream, 1424
Anectine, 1187, 1188
Anihist, 1099
Animax, 1418, 1440, 1479
Anipryl, 1151
Antagonil, 1324
Antara, 510
Anthelcide EQ, 967, 968
Anticoagulants, 1486
Antilirium, 1022
Antirobe, 282, 285
Antisedan, 106, 107
Antivenin, 86, 87, 89, 90
Antivenom Crotalidae, 87
Antivenom Latrodectus mactans, 86
Antivenom North American Coral 
Snake, 90
Antivert, 805, 807
Antizol-Vet, 558, 559
Anxitane, 733, 734
Anzemet, 419, 420
APAP , 7
Apokyn, 92, 94
Apomorphine, 92, 1489
Apomorphine HCl Injection, 94
Apomorphine HCl Tablet, 94
Apoquel, 947, 949
Apraclonidine Ophthalmic, 1343 
Apralan, 94, 96
Apramycin, 94
Apramycin Soluble Powder, 96 
Apramycin Sulfate Soluble Powder, 96 
Apresoline, 607
Aquaflor, 530
Aquasol-A, 1311
Aquasol E, 1314
Aranesp, 342, 344
Arava, 738, 740
Aredia, 980
Arestin, 893
Arthropen Vet, 1002
ASA, 100
Ascorbic Acid, 96
Ascorbic Acid Injection, 97 
Ascorbic Acid Oral, 97
Aservo EquiHaler, 261, 263 
Asparaginase, 98
Aspart Insulin, 651, 654 
Aspercreme, 1424
Aspirin, 100, 1484
Aspirin Boluses, 102
Aspirin Granules, 103
Aspirin Liquid Concentrate, 103 
Aspirin Powder, 102
Aspirin Tablets, 102, 103
Atarax, 629, 631
Atenolol, 103
Atenolol Oral, 105
Atipamezole, 106
Atipamezole HCl for Injection, 107 
Ativan, 778, 781
Atopica, 322, 327
AtopiCream HC, 1415
Atorvastatin, 65
Atovaquone, 108
Atovaquone Oral Suspension, 109 
ATRA, 1469
Atracurium, 109
Atracurium Besylate Injection, 112 
Atralin, 1470
Atridox, 438
Atropine, 112, 412, 413, 442 
Atropine Ophthalmic, 1343 
Atropine Ophthalmic Ointment, 1344 
Atropine Ophthalmic Solution, 1344 
Atropine Sulfate for Injection, 116 
Atrovent, 689, 690
Augmentin, 70, 74
AU-PEN5000, 1002
Auranofin, 116
Auranofin Capsules, 118 
Aureomycin, 255, 257
Aurocin, 1476
Austrazole, 1435
Auvi-Q, 460
Avalide, 692
Avapro, 690, 692
Aveed, 1217
Avita, 1470
Axid, 941, 943
Azasan, 118, 120
Azasite, 1345
Azathioprine, 118
Azathioprine Sodium Injection, 120 
Azathioprine Tablets, 120
Azelastine Ophthalmic, 1344 
Azithromycin, 120
Azithromycin Ophthalmic, 1345 
Azithromycin Oral Tablets, 123 
Azithromycin Powder, 123
Azium, 361, 366
Azopt, 1350, 1351
Azulfidine, 1202, 1204
Bacitracin/Neomycin/Polymyxin B 
Ophthalmic, 1409
Bacitracin/Neomycin/Polymyxin/
Hydrocortisone Ophthalmic, 1372 
Bacitracin/Polymyxin B Ophthalmic, 1409 
Bacitracin, Topical, 1427
Bactocill, 963, 964
Bactrim, 1193, 1197
Bactroban, 1432
BAL in Oil, 400, 402
Banamine, 541, 544
Banophen, 411
Barrier II, 1423
Basaglar, 662
Baycox, 1255
Baytril, 450, 455, 1434, 1471
Baytril Otic, 455
Benadryl, 409, 411, 1421
Benasoothe, 1421, 1425, 1426 
Benazepril, 65, 123
Benazepril HCl Oral Tablets, 127 
Benazepril/Spironolactone, 1177 
Benoxinate Hydrochloride, 1366 
Benoxinate Ophthalmic, 1345
Bensal HP, 1468
Benzalkonium Chloride, 1423 
Benzocaine, Topical, 1467
Benzoic Acid, Topical, 1468
Benzoyl Peroxide, Topical, 1425, 1427, 
1468, 1469
Benzyl Alcohol, 1485
Bepotastine Ophthalmic, 1346
Bepreve, 1346, 1347
Berenil RTU, 404, 405
Besifloxacin Ophthalmic, 1347
Besivance, 1347
Bestguard, 936
Betadine, 1396, 1397, 1449, 1450
Betagan, 1377, 1378
Betagen, 1430
Betamethasone, 1491
Betamethasone Injection, 130 
Betamethasone, Otic, 1478, 1479 
Betamethasone, Systemic, 127 
Betamethasone, Topical, 1413, 1430, 1434 
Betamethasone Valerate, 130
Index   1523

===== PDF_PAGE_1551 =====
1524    Index Index  1525
Betapace, 1169, 1171
BetaVet, 130
Betaxolol Ophthalmic, 1347 
Bethanechol, 130
Bethanechol Chloride Oral Tablets, 132 
Betimol, 1405, 1406
Betoptic, 1347, 1348
Betoptic S, 1347, 1348
Beuthanasia-D, 493, 494
Biaxin, 276, 279
Bicillin C-R, 996
Bicillin L-A, 996
Biltricide, 1057
Bimatoprost Ophthalmic, 1348
Bimox, 67
BIO BALM, 1423
BioCalm, 1423, 1425
Bioglo, 1366
Bio-Groom, 1462
BioHex, 1439, 1444, 1446
Biomycin, 976
Bionn Tears, 1390
BioSeb, 1468
Biosol, 928
Bio-Spot, 1459
BioTris, 1438, 1474
Biozide, 1450
Bisacodyl, 132
Bisacodyl Enteric-Coated Oral Tablets, 133 
Bisacodyl Rectal Enema, 133
Bisacodyl Rectal Suppositories, 133 
Bismuth Subsalicylate, 133
Bismuth Subsalicylate Liquid/
Suspension, 135
Bismuth Subsalicylate Tablets/Caplets, 135 
Bivigam, 651
Black Widow Spider Antivenom, 86 
Blenoxane, 135, 137
Bleomycin, 135
Bleomycin Sulfate Lyophilized Powder for 
Injection, 137
Bleph-10, 1401, 1402
Blephamide, 1397, 1398, 1401, 1402
Blink Gel Tears, 1391
Bloxiverz, 930, 932
Bonine, 807
Borgal, 1197
Boric Acid, Otic, 1474, 1477
Boric Acid, Topical, 1415, 1436, 1441
Bo-Se, 1313
Bovine Somatotropin, 1167
BPO-3, 1428
Bravecto, 549, 552
Bravecto Plus, 912
Bread Dough, 1485
Brethine, 1213
Brevibloc, 477, 478
Brimonidine Ophthalmic, 1349 
Brinzolamide, 1350
Brinzolamide Ophthalmic, 1350 
Bromethalin, 1486
Bromfenac Ophthalmic, 1351 
Bromides, 137
BromoCriptine, 140
BromoCriptine Mesylate Oral, 141 
Bromsite, 1351, 1352
BSS, 1373, 1374
Budesonide, 142
Budesonide Extended-Release Tablets/
Capsules, 143
Budesonide Inhalation Suspension, 144 
Bupivacaine, 144
Bupivacaine HCl Solution, 146 
Bupivacaine HCl Solution with 
Epinephrine, 146
Bupivacaine Liposome, 147 
Bupivacaine Liposome Injectable 
Suspension, 149, 150
Bupivacaine Solution with Dextrose, 147 
Buprenex, 150, 155
Buprenorphine, 150
Buprenorphine HCl for Injection, 155 
Buprenorphine HCl Sublingual 
Tablets, 155
Burnamycin, 1424
Bur-O-Cort 2:1, 1415
Burow’s Solution, 1415, 1419, 1478 
Buscapina, 165
Buscospan, 165
BuSpar, 155
Buspirone, 155
Buspirone HCl Oral Tablets, 157 
Butazolidin, 1013, 1015
Bute, 1013
Butorphanol, 157, 1489
Butorphanol Nasal Spray, 164 
Butorphanol Tartrate Injection, 164 
Butorphanol Tartrate Tablets, 164 
Butorphic, 164
Butylscopolamine, 164 
Butylscopolamine Bromide Injection, 165 
Bydureon, 494, 497
Byetta, 494, 497
Cabergoline, 165
Cabergoline Oral, 167
CADI, 771
CaEDTA, 438, 440
Cafcit, 167, 169
Caffeine, 167, 1484
Caffeine Citrate for Injection, 169 
Caffeine Citrate Oral Solution, 169 
Calan, 1297, 1299
Calciferol Drops, 472
Calcijex, 170
Calcimar, 169
Calcitonin, 169
Calcitonin Salmon for Injection, 170 
Calcitriol, 170
Calcitriol Injection, 172
Calcitriol Oral, 172
Calcium Acetate, 172
Calcium Acetate Oral, 174
Calcium Alginate, 1432
Calcium Borogluconate, 174
Calcium Carbonate, 177, 179
Calcium Chloride, 174, 177, 1486 
Calcium Disodium Versenate, 438, 440 
Calcium Gluconate, Intravenous, 174, 177 
Calcium Gluconate, Oral, 177, 179 
Calcium, Inravenous, 174
Calcium Lactate, 177, 179
Calcium, Oral, 177
Cal-Dextro, 1022
Cal-Dextro Special, 177, 793
Calf Scour Bolus, 976
Calf Solutions Balansure, 1225
Cal-Phos, 793, 1022
Calphron, 172
Camphor, Topical, 1420
Canalevia-CA1, 316, 317
Cancidas, 195, 197
Canine Albumin, 22
Canine Appeasing Pheromone, 1020 
Canine Atopic Dermatitis 
Immunotherapeutic, 771 
Cannabidiol, 179
Cannabidiol Solution, 182 
Capromorelin, 182
Capromorelin Flavored Solution, 184 
Capstar, 887, 935, 936
Carafate, 1189, 1190
Carbamide Peroxide, Otic, 1475 
Carbimazole, 184
Carbimazole Oral Tablets, 186 
Carbocaine-V , 834, 837
Carboplatin, 186
Carboplatin Injection, 189 
Carboxymethylcellulose-Containing 
Ocular Lubricants, 1388, 1390 
Cardalis, 1177, 1180
Cardizem, 396, 399
Carmilax, 790
Carnitine, 189
Carnitor, 189, 190
Carprieve, 190, 193
Carprofen, 190
Carprofen Chewable Tablets, 193 
Carprofen Flavored Tablets, 193 
Carprofen Scored Caplets, 193 
Carprofen Sterile Injectable Solution, 193 
Carprovet, 190, 193
Carteolol Ophthalmic, 1352
Cartrophen-Vet, 1000, 1002
Carvedilol, 193
Carvedilol Oral, 195
Caspofungin, 195
Caspofungin Acetate Lyophilized Powder 
for Injection, 197
Cat Appeasing Pheromone, 1020 
Catapres, 294, 296
Catego, 1453, 1455, 1463
Cathflo Activase, 1341
CBD, 179

===== PDF_PAGE_1552 =====
Index   15251526  Index
CCNU, 773
Ceclor, 197
CeeNu, 773, 775
Cefaceptin, 237
Cefaclor, 197
Cefaclor Oral, 198
Cefaclor Powder for Oral Suspension, 198 
Cefa-Drops, 200
Cefadroxil, 198
Cefadroxil Oral, 200, 201
Cefadroxil Powder for Oral Suspension, 
200, 201
Cefaseptin, 237
Cefa-Tabs, 200
Cefazolin, 201
Cefazolin Sodium for Injection, 203 
Cefazolin Sodium Powder for Injection, 203 
Cefenil RTU, 224, 226
Cefepime, 203
Cefepime Injection Solution, 205 
Cefepime Powder for Injection, 205 
Ceffect, 216, 218
Cefimam, 218
Cefixime, 205
Cefixime Oral, 206
Cefixime Powder for Oral Suspension, 206 
Cefotan, 208
Cefotaxime, 206
Cefotaxime Sodium Powder for 
Injection, 208
Cefotetan, 208
Cefotetan Disodium Powder for 
Solution, 210
Cefovecin, 210
Cefovecin Sodium Lyophilized, 212 
Cefoxitin, 212
Cefoxitin Sodium Injection Solution, 214 
Cefoxitin Sodium Powder for Injection, 214 
Cefpodoxime, 214
Cefpodoxime Proxetil Granules for 
Suspension, 216
Cefpodoxime Proxetil Oral Tablets, 216 
Cefquinome, 216
Cefquinome Intramammary Infusion, 218 
Cefquinome Solution for Injection, 218 
Cefquinome Suspension for Injection, 218 
Ceftazidime, 219
Ceftazidime Powder for Injection, 221 
Ceftiflex, 227, 229
Ceftin, 232, 234
Ceftiofur Crystalline Free Acid, 221 
Ceftiofur HCl, 224
Ceftiofur HCl Sterile Suspension for 
Injection, 226
Ceftiofur HCl Sterile Suspension for 
Intramammary Infusion, 226, 227 
Ceftiofur Sodium, 227
Ceftiofur Sodium Powder for Injection, 229 
Ceftriaxone, 230
Ceftriaxone Injection Powder for 
Solution, 232
Cefuroxime, 232
Cefuroxime Axetil Oral, 234
Cefuroxime Sodium for Injection, 234 
Celestone, 127
Celestone Soluspan, 130
CellCept, 920, 922
Centany, 1432
Centragard, 465, 467, 1056
Cephaforte, 237
Cephaguard, 218
Cephalexin, 234
Cephalexin Chewable Tablets, 236 
Cephalexin Oral, 237
Cephalexin Powder for Oral 
Suspension, 237
Cephapirin, 237
Cephapirin Benzathine Mastitis Tube, 238 
Cephapirin Sodium Mastitis Tube, 238 
Cephorum, 237
Cephulac, 735
Ceporex, 237
Ceptaz, 219, 221
Cequa, 1357, 1358
CeraDerm, 1426, 1436
Ceramide Complex, 1444, 1446
CeraSoothe, 1426, 1468
Ceraven, 1436, 1437, 1468
Cerenia, 799, 802
Certifect, 1455
Cerumene, 1475
Cestex, 469, 470
Cetirizine, 238
Cetirizine HCL Oral, 240
Cetraxal, 1471
Charcoal, Activated, 240
Chemet, 1185, 1186
Cheristin, 1464
Chlorambucil, 243
Chlorambucil Oral Tablets, 245 
Chloramphenicol, 245
Chloramphenicol Ophthalmic, 1353 
Chloramphenicol Oral Tablets, 248 
Chloramphenicol Powder for Injection, 249 
Chlorhex, 1443, 1444
ChlorhexiDerm, 1444
Chlorhexidine, Otic, 1471, 1474 
Chlorhexidine, Topical, 1415, 1423, 1424, 
1425, 1436, 1437, 1438, 1439, 1442 
Chlorhexis, 1445
Chlormycetin, 245
Chloroxylenol, Otic, 1474
Chloroxylenol, Topical, 1436, 1437, 1447, 
1466, 1469
Chlorpheniramine, 251, 615 
Chlorpheniramine Maleate Oral Drops, 253 
Chlorpheniramine Maleate Oral Syrup, 253 
Chlorpheniramine Maleate Oral Tablets, 
253
Chlorpromazine, 253
Chlorpromazine Injection, 255 
Chlortetracycline, 255
Chlortetracycline Feed Additive/Water 
Mix, 257
Chlorthiazide, 249
Chlorthiazide Oral Suspension, 251 
Chlorthiazide Sodium Powder for 
Injection, 251
Chlor-Trimeton, 251
Chocolate, 1485
Cholestyramine, 257
Cholestyramine Light Powder for 
Suspension, 259
Cholestyramine Powder for Suspension, 259 
Choline Molybdate, 904
Chondroitin Sulfate, 583
Chorionic Gonadotropin, 259
Chorionic Gonadotropin Injection, 261 
Chorionic Gonadotropin Injection  
Freeze-dried Powder, 261
Chorionic Gonadotropin Powder for 
Injection, 261
Chorulon, 261
Cialis, 1204, 1205
Ciclesonide, 261
Ciclesonide Inhalation Spray, 263 
Ciclesonide Metered Aerosol, 263 
Ciclesonide Metered Nasal Aerosol 
Solution, 263
Ciclesonide Metered Nasal Suspension, 263 
Ciclosporin, 322, 1357
Cidofovir Ophthalmic, 1353
Cilastatin, 644
Ciloxan, 1354, 1355, 1471
Cimetidine, 263
Cimetidine HCl Oral Solution, 265 
Cimetidine Oral Tablets, 265
Cipro, 265, 269
Ciprodex, 1479
Ciprofloxacin, 265
Ciprofloxacin Extended-Release Oral 
Tablets, 269
Ciprofloxacin Ophthalmic, 1354 
Ciprofloxacin Oral Tablets, 269 
Ciprofloxacin, Otic, 1471, 1479 
Ciprofloxacin Solution for Injection, 269 
Cipro HC, 1479
Cisapride, 269
Cisplatin, 271
Cisplatin Injection, 274
Cisplatin Lyophilized Powder for 
Injection, 274
Citra-K, 276
Citra-K Crystals, 276
Citrate, Potassium, 274, 276
Citrolith, 276
Claforan, 206, 208
Claravis, 703
Clarithromycin, 276
Clarithromycin Granules for Oral 
Suspension, 279
Clarithromycin Oral Tablets, 279
Claritin, 777, 778
Claro, 1213, 1478
Clavamox, 70, 73
Clavulanate, 70

===== PDF_PAGE_1553 =====
1526    Index Index  1527
Clavulanic Acid, 1499
Clean Ear with Aloe Vera, 1476
Clear Eyes, 1374
ClearLax, 1037
Clemastine, 279
Clemastine Fumarate Oral Syrup, 280 
Clemastine Fumarate Oral Tablets, 280 
Clenbuterol, 280
Clenbuterol HCl for Injection, 282 
Clenbuterol HCl Oral Syrup, 282
Clenz-a-dent, 1446
Cleocin, 282, 285, 286, 1428, 1429 
Clevor, 1132, 1135
Climbazole, 1425
Climbazole, Otic, 1474
Climbazole, Topical, 1446
Clinacox, 385, 387
Clindamax, 1429
Clindamycin, 282
Clindamycin HCl Oral, 285 
Clindamycin Palmitate HCl Granules for 
Oral Solution, 285
Clindamycin Phosphate Solution 
Concentrate for Injection, 286 
Clindamycin, Topical, 1428
Clindets, 1429
Clinsol, 285
ClinzGard, 1428, 1429
Clodronate/Clodronic Acid, 286 
Clodronate Disodium Injection, 287 
Clofazimine, 288
Clomicalm, 289, 292
Clomipramine, 289
Clomipramine HCl Oral Tablets, 292 
Clomipramine Oral Capsules, 292 
Clonazepam, 292
Clonazepam Orally Dispersible 
Tablets, 294
Clonazepam Oral Tablets, 294 
Clonidine, 294
Clonidine HCl Injection, 296
Clonidine HCl Oral Tablets, 296 
Clopidogrel, 297
Clopidogrel Bisulfate Tablets, 299 
Cloprostenol, 299
Cloprostenol Sodium Injection, 301 
Clorazepate, 301
Clorazepate Dipotassium Tablets, 303 
Clorsulon, 714
ClotrimaTop, 1435, 1472
Clotrimazole, Otic, 1472, 1478, 1479 
Clotrimazole, Topical, 1414, 1417, 
1430, 1434
Cloxacillin, 303, 1498
Cloxacillin Benzathine, 304
Cloxacillin Sodium, 304
CMPK, 793, 1022
Coar Tar/Coal Tar Combinations, Topical, 
1466, 1468, 1469
Cobactan, 216, 218
Cobalamin, 304
Cobalequin, 306
Codeine, 307
Codeine and Acetaminophen Oral 
Solution, 309
Codeine Phosphate, 309
Codeine Sulfate Tablets, 309
Colace, 418, 419
Colchicine, 309
Colchicine Oral, 311
Colchicine Solution, 311
Colcrys, 309, 311
Colistin, Otic, 1479
Colloidal Oatmeal, Topical, 1420, 1439
Collyrium, 1373, 1374
Coly-Mycin S, 1479
CoLyte, 1035, 1037
Combigan, 1349, 1350, 1405, 1406
Combivent, 690
Comboguard, 887
Comfort, 1415, 1425, 1426
Comfortis, 1173, 1175
Comfort Zone, 1019, 1020
Compazine, 1073
Compose 2X, 1225
Composure, 733, 734
Compro, 1073, 1074
Concerta, 861
Conquer Hy-Optic, 1374
Conquer Hy-Otic, 1476
Constulose, 736
Contac, 1090
Contralac, 839, 840
Convenia, 210, 212
ConZip, 1264
Conzol, 1438, 1439, 1472
Coraxis, 917
Cordarone, 56
Coreg, 193, 195
Corid, 84, 86
Corlopam, 510, 512
Cort/Astrin, 1415, 1419, 1478
Cortef, 615, 617
Corticotropin, 311
Corticotropin Repository Injection, 312
Corti-Derm, 1415, 1419
Cortisone, 312
Cortisone Acetate Oral Tablets, 314
Cortisporin-TC, 1479
Cortizone-10 Easy Relief, 1415
Cortrosyn, 314, 316
Cosequin, 583, 585
Cosmegen, 334, 335
Cosopt, 1362, 1363, 1405, 1406
Cosopt PF , 1362, 1363
Cosyntropin, 314
Cosyntropin Powder for Injection, 316
Cosyntropin Solution for Injection, 316
Coumadin, 1317, 1319
Cozaar, 781, 783
Cranberry Extract, 276
Credelio, 783, 785
Crofelemer, 316
Crofelemer Delayed-Release Tablets, 317
Cromolyn, 317
Cromolyn Ophthalmic, 1355 
Cromolyn Sodium Ophthalmic 
Solution, 318
Cromolyn Sodium Solution for 
Inhalation, 318
Cross Block, 1462
Crotalidae Antivenom, 87 
Crotamiton, Topical, 1451
Crotan, 1451
Crystamine, 306
Crysti, 306
Cuprimine, 990, 992
Curaseb, 1474
Curatrem, 715
Currants, 1485
Cuvitru, 651
Cyanocobalamin, 304, 307 
Cyanocobalamin Chewable Tablets, 306 
Cyanocobalamin Injection, 306 
Cyanocobalamin Oral Tablets, 307 
Cyanoject, 306
Cyanokit, 307
Cyclavance, 322, 327
Cyclogyl, 1356, 1357
Cyclomydril, 1356, 1357, 1393, 1394 
Cyclopentolate Ophthalmic, 1356 
Cyclophosphamide, 318 
Cyclophosphamide Capsules, 321 
Cyclophosphamide Powder for 
Injection, 321
Cycloset, 140, 141
Cyclosporine, 1489
Cyclosporine Concentrated Solution for 
Injection, 327
Cyclosporine (Modified) Capsules, 327 
Cyclosporine (Modified) Oral 
Solution, 327
Cyclosporine Ophthalmic, 1357 
Cyclosporine Oral, 327
Cyclosporine, Systemic, 322
Cydectin, 912, 917, 918
Cyklokapron, 1264, 1266 
Cyphenothrin, Topical, 1455, 1458, 1463 
Cyproheptadine, 327
Cyproheptadine HCl Oral Syrup, 329 
Cyproheptadine HCl Oral Tablets, 329 
Cystorelin, 592
Cystospaz, 633
Cytarabine, 329
Cytarabine Injection, 332
Cytarabine Injection, Liposomal, 332 
Cytomel, 764, 766
Cytopoint, 771, 773
Cytosine Arabinoside, 329
Cytotec, 896, 898
Cytoxan, 318, 321
Cytra-LC, 276
Dacarbazine, 332
Dacarbazine Powder for Injection, 333 
Dactinomycin, 334

===== PDF_PAGE_1554 =====
Index   15271528  Index
Dactinomycin Powder for Injection, 335
Dalteparin, 335
Dalteparin Sodium Injection, 337
Danofloxacin, 337
Danofloxacin Mesylate for Injection, 338
Dantrium, 339, 340
Dantrolene, 339
Dantrolene Sodium Oral Capsules, 340
Dantrolene Sodium Powder for 
Injection, 340
Dantrolene Sodium Powder Injectable 
Suspension, 340
D.A.P ., 1019, 1020
Dapsone, 341
Dapsone Oral Tablets, 342
Daraprim, 1099, 1101
Darbepoeitin Alfa, 342
Darbepoeitin Alfa Solution for
Injection, 344
Dariclox, 303, 304
Davis, 1461
Dayhist, 279, 280
DDAVP , 352, 354
DDS, 341
Decadron, 366
Deccox, 344, 345
Decoquinate, 344
Decoquinate Medicated Feed, 345
Decoquinate Medicated Milk Replacer, 345
Dectomax, 424, 426
DEET, 1486
Deferoxamine, 346
Deferoxamine Mesylate Powder for 
Injection, 347
Degludec Insulin, 1494
Dehydrated Alcohol BP for Injection, 489
Delestrogen, 483
Delsym, 375, 376
Deltamethrin/Deltamethrin Combinations, 
Topical, 1451, 1459
Deltasone, 1063
Demadex, 1259, 1261
Demecarium Ophthalmic, 1358
Demerol, 831, 834
Denagard, 1230, 1231
Denamarin, 1139, 1142
Denosyl, 1137, 1139
Dentahex, 1446
Depen, 990, 992
DepoCyt, 332
Depo-Estradiol, 483
Depo-Medrol, 863, 867
Depo-Provera, 817
Depo-SubQ Provera, 817
Depo-Testosterone, 1217
Deracoxib, 347
Deracoxib Chewable Tablets, 349
Deramaxx, 347, 349
DermaBenSs, 1468
Dermabliss, 1425
Dermachlor, 1445
Dermachlor Flush Plus, 1423
Derma-Clens, 1468
Dermalid, 1424
Dermallay, 1420, 1421, 1422, 1423 
Dermalog, 1418, 1440
Dermalone, 1418, 1440, 1479
Dermalyte, 1422
Dermatonin, 825
Derma-Vet, 1418, 1440, 1479
DermOtic, 1478
DERM-TABS, 1225
DES, 390
Desferal, 346, 347
Desflurane, 349
Desflurane Solution for Inhalation 
Anesthesia, 350
Deslorelin, 351
Deslorelin Implants, 352
Deslorelin Suspension for Injection, 352 
Desmopressin, 352
Desmopressin Acetate Injection 
Solution, 354
Desmopressin Acetate Intranasal Spray 
Solution, 354
Desmopressin Acetate Oral Tablets, 354 
Desmopressin Acetate Sublingual Tablets, 354 
Desoxycorticosterone Pivalate, 355 
Desoxycorticosterone Pivalate Injectable 
Suspension, 357
Desyrel, 1266
Detemir Insulin, 655, 658, 1494
Deter-X, 1426
Detomidine, 358
Detomidine HCl for Injection, 360 
Detomidine HCl Oromucosal Gel, 361 
Dexamethasone, 361, 1491 
Dexamethasone and Trichlormethiazide 
Oral Bolus, 366
Dexamethasone Injection, 366 
Dexamethasone Ophthalmic, 1359 
Dexamethasone Oral Elixir/Solution, 366 
Dexamethasone Oral Powder, 366 
Dexamethasone Oral Tablets, 366 
Dexamethasone, Otic, 1473, 1479 
Dexamethasone Sodium Phosphate 
Injection, 366, 367
Dexasone, 361
Dexasporin, 1359, 1410
Dexdomitor, 367, 372
Dexmedetomidine, 367 
Dexmedetomidine HCl, 372 
Dexmedetomidine HCl Concentrated 
Solution for Injection, 372 
Dexmedetomidine HCl in NaCl Solution 
for Infusion, 372
Dexmedetomidine Oromucosal Gel, 372 
Dexrazoxane, 372
Dexrazoxane Lyophilized Powder for 
Injection Solution, 373
Dextran, 373
Dextromethorphan, 375, 1484 
Dextromethorphan Hydrobromide 
GelCaps, 376
Dextromethorphan Hydrobromide 
Syrup, 376
Dextromethorphan Polistirex Extended 
Release Suspension, 376
Dextrose 50% Injection, 376, 378
DiaBeta, 585, 587
Diaminodiphenyl sulfone, 341
Diamox, 9
Diastat, 378, 382
Diazepam, 378
Diazepam Injection, 382
Diazepam Oral Solution, 382
Diazepam Oral Tablets, 382
Diazepam Rectal Gel, 382
Diazoxide, 382
Diazoxide Oral Suspension, 384
Dibenzyline, 1011, 1013
Di-Biotic, 1197
Dichlorphenamide, 384
Dichlorphenamide Oral Tablets, 385
Diclazuril, 385
Diclazuril Medicated Feed Article, 387
Diclazuril Oral Pellets, 387
Diclofenac Ophthalmic, 1360
Diclofenac Sodium, 388
Diclofenac Topical, 387
Diclofenac Topical Patch, 388
Diclo Gel, 388
Dicloxacillin, 389, 1498
Dicloxacillin Sodium Capsules, 390
Dicloxin, 389, 390
Diclozor, 388
Diethylstilbestrol, 390
Difixin, 777
Diflucan, 530, 533
Difluprednate Ophthalmic, 1361
Digoxin, 392
Digoxin Oral Solution, 396
Digoxin Oral Tablets, 396
Digoxin Solution for Injection, 396
Dilacor XR, 396, 399
Dilaudid, 619, 623
Diltiazem, 396
Diltiazem Injection, 399
Diltiazem Oral Tablets, 399
Diltiazem Tablets/Capsules Extended/
Sustained Release, 399
Dimenhydrinate, 399
Dimenhydrinate Injection, 400
Dimenhydrinate Oral Tablets, 400
Dimercaprol, 400
Dimercaprol Injection, 402
Dimethyl Sulfoxide, 402
Dimethyl Sulfoxide Veterinary Gel, 404
Dimethyl Sulfoxide Veterinary Solution, 404
Diminazene, 404
Diminazene Aceturate, 405
Dinoprost, 405
Dinoprost for Injection, 409
Dinotefuran/Pyriproxyfen Combinations, 
Topical, 1452, 1455, 1460, 1463
Di-n-Propyl Isocinchomerate, 1462

===== PDF_PAGE_1555 =====
1528    Index Index  1529
Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate, 418 
Dioctynate, 419
Dipentum, 952, 953
Diphenhist, 411
Diphenhydramine, 409 
Diphenhydramine Capsules and 
Tablets, 411
Diphenhydramine Injection, 411 
Diphenhydramine Oral Liquid, 411 
Diphenhydramine Orally Disintegrating 
Strips, 411
Diphenhydramine Orally Disintegrating 
Tablets, 411
Diphenhydramine, Topical, 1421, 
1425, 1426
Diphenoxylate/Atropine, 412 
Diphenoxylate/Atropine Liquid, 413 
Diphenoxylate/Atropine Tablets, 413 
Diprivan, 1080, 1086
Dipyrone, 413
Dipyrone Injection, 415
Diroban, 821, 823
Disal, 563, 568
Ditropan, 968, 969
Diuril, 249, 250, 251
DL-Methionine, 852
DMSO, 402
Dobutamine, 416
Dobutamine HCl Injection Concentrated
Solution, 418
Dobutamine HCl Solution for 
Injection, 418
Dobutrex, 416
DOCP , 355, 357
Docusate, 418
Docusate Calcium Capsules, 419
Docusate Sodium Bloat Preparation, 419 
Docusate Sodium Enema, 419
Docusate Sodium Oral, 419
Docu-Soft Enema, 419
Dogswell, 1415
Dolasetron, 419
Dolasetron Tablets, 420
Dolophine, 842, 846
Dolorex, 164
Domeboro, 1419
Domitor, 807, 811
Domoso, 402, 404
Domperidone, 420
Domperidone Oral Gel, 422
Dopamine, 422
Dopamine HCl Concentrated Solution for 
Injection, 424
Dopamine HCl in Dextrose 5% Injection 
Solution, 424
Dopram-V , 426, 428
Doramectin, 424
Doramectin Injectable Solution, 426 
Doramectin Pour-On Solution, 426 
Dormosedan, 358, 360, 361
Doryx, 438
Dorzolamide Ophthalmic, 1362 
Dostinex, 165
Double Antibiotic Ophthalmic, 1409 
Douxo, 1424, 1443, 1444, 1445, 1446, 1475 
Doxapram, 426
Doxapram HCl for Injection, 428 
Doxepin, 429
Doxepin Capsules, 430
Doxepin HCl 5% Cream, 430
Doxepin Oral Solution Concentrate, 430 
Doxepin Tablets, 430
Doxorubicin, 430, 1489
Doxorubicin HCl (Conventional) 
Injection, 433
Doxorubicin HCl (Conventional) 
Lyophilized Powder for Injection, 433 
Doxy-100, 433, 438
Doxy-200, 438
Doxycycline, 433
Doxycycline Hyclate Tablets and 
Capsules, 438
Doxycycline Injection, 438
Doxycycline Lyophilized Powder for 
Injection, 438
Doxycycline Monohydrate Tablets and 
Capsules, 438
Doxycycline Oral Syrup, 438 
Doxycycline Powder for Oral 
Suspension, 438
Dramamine, 399, 400
Dramamine Less Drowsy Formula, 807 
Draxxin, 1282, 1284
Draxxin KP, 731
Driminate, 400
Drisdol, 470, 472
Droncit, 1053, 1056
Drontal, 1053, 1056
Drontal Plus, 1053, 1056, 1094
Droxia, 628, 629
Dry-Clox, 303, 304
Dry Eye Test, 1366
DSS, 418
DTIC, 332
D-Tox-Besc, 243
Dulcolax, 132, 133
DuoNeb, 690
Duraclon, 294, 296
Duragesic, 515, 519
Durezol, 1361, 1362
Duricef, 198
Durysta, 1348, 1349
Dynapen, 389
Dyna-Taurine, 1208
Dyrenium, 1273, 1274
EAP , 1020
Ear Cleansing Solution, 1476
EarMed, 1476
Ear Mite, 1472
Earoxide, 1475
Ear-Rite, 1472, 1473
Easotic, 1479
ECP , 481, 483
EctoAdvance, 1454
Edetate Calcium Disodium, 438 
Edetate Calcium Disodium Injection 
Solution, 440
Edetate Disodium Ophthalmic, 1363 
Edrophonium, 440
Edrophonium Chloride/Atropine Sulfate 
Solution for Injection, 442 
Edrophonium Chloride Solution for 
Injection, 442
ED-SPAZ, 633
E.E.S. Tablets/Granules, 476
EFA, 1422
Effipro, 1455
Effitix, 1455
Elavil, 58
Eldepryl, 1151, 1153
Elestat, 1364
Elevate, 1313
Elidel, 1465
Eligard, 743
Elimite, 1460
Elixophyllin, 1223
Ellence, 460, 463
Elmiron, 1000, 1002
Elocon, 1417
Elspar, 99
Elura, 182, 184
Emedog, 92, 94
Emeprid, 867
Emerphed, 457
EMLA, 1424
Emodepside, 1489
Emodepside/Praziquantel, 442, 1056 
Emodepside/Praziquantel Topical 
Solution, 444
Emsam, 1153
Emulsivit E-500, 1313
Enacard, 445, 448
Enalapril, 445
Enalapril Injection, 448
Enalapril Maleate Tablets, 448 
Enalapril Oral Solution, 448
Enema SA, 419
Enfamil Fer-In-Sol, 520
Enilconazole, Topical, 1435
Enisyl, 789
Enlon, 440, 442
Enoxaparin, 448
Enoxaparin Sodium for Injection, 450 
Enrofloxacin, 450
Enrofloxacin Injection, 455 
Enrofloxacin, Otic, 1471
Enrofloxacin Tablets, 455
Enrofloxacin, Topical, 1434
EnteDerm, 1418, 1440, 1479
Entocort EC, 142, 143
Entyce, 182, 184
Enulose, 736
Enzymes, Topical, 1448

===== PDF_PAGE_1556 =====
Index   15291530  Index
Epakitin, 179
Epaned, 448
Ephedrine, 455
Ephedrine Sulfate Injection, 457
Epidiolex, 179, 182
EpiKlean, 1475, 1476
Epinastine Ophthalmic, 1364
Epinephrine, 146, 457, 755
Epinephrine Bitartrate, 460
Epinephrine HCl Solution for Injection, 460
Epi-Otic Advanced, 1476
Epi-Pen, 457, 460
Epirubicin, 460
Epirubicin HCl for Injection, 463
Epi-Soothe, 1421
Epizyme, 983
EPO, 463
Epoetin Alfa, 463
Epoetin Alfa-epbx Solution for Injection, 465
Epoetin Alfa Solution for Injection, 465
Eprinex, 467, 469
Eprinomectin, 467, 1489
Eprinomectin/Praziquantel, 465, 1056
Eprinomectin/Praziquantel Transdermal 
Solution, 467
Eprinomectin Sustained-Release 
Injectable, 469
Eprinomectin Topical (Pour-On) 
Solution, 469
Eprontia, 1259
Epsiprantel, 469
Epsiprantel Oral Tablets, 470
Epsom Salts, 1144
EqStim, 1079, 1080
Equidone, 420, 422
Equimax, 714, 1056
Equimune, 919
Equine Appeasing Pheromone, 1020
Equioxx, 525, 527
Equiphed, 1089
EquiShield, 1444
EquiShield CK HC, 1415
EquiShield IR, 1425, 1426
Equi-Spot, 1459
EquiSul-SDT, 1193, 1197
Equ-SeE, 1313
Eqvalan, 714
Eradimite, 1473
Ergocalciferol, 470
Ergocalciferol Oral, 472
Ertapenem, 472
Ertapenem Sodium Lyophilized Powder for 
Injection, 473
Erwinase, 99
ERYC, 476
EryPed, 476, 477
Ery-Tab, 476
Erythromycin, 473
Erythromycin and Sulfisoxazole Granules 
for Oral Suspension, 477
Erythromycin Base Delayed-Release Oral, 476
Erythromycin Base Tablets, 476
Erythromycin Ethylsuccinate Powder for 
Oral Suspension, 476, 477
Erythromycin Ethylsuccinate Tablets, 476
Erythromycin Lactobionate Lyophilized 
Powder for Injection Solution, 477
Erythromycin Ophthalmic, 1364
Erythromycin Stearate Tablets, 476
Erythropoietin, 463
Eryzole, 477
E-Se, 1314
Esmolol, 477
Esmolol HCl Injection, 478
Esomeprazole, 478
Esomeprazole Magnesium Oral Delayed-
Release, 481
Esomeprazole Sodium for Injection, 481 
Esomeprazole Strontium Oral Delayed-
Release, 481
Essential Fatty Acid, 1422
Estradiol, 481
Estradiol Cypionate in Oil for Injection, 483 
Estradiol Valerate in Oil for Injection, 483 
Estriol, 483
Estriol Tablets, 485
estroPLAN Injection, 301
Estrumate, 299, 301
Ethambutol, 485
Ethambutol HCl Tablets, 487
Ethanol, 487
Ethyl Alcohol, 487, 1486
Ethylene Glycol, 1486
Etodolac, 489
Etodolac Injection, 491
Etodolac Scored Tablets, 491
Etodolac Tablets, 491
Etofenprox, Topical, 1453, 1455, 1458 
EtoGesic, 489, 491
Etomidate, 491
Etomidate Injection, 493
Eucalyptus Oil, 1476
Eurax, 1451
Euthanasia Agents with Pentobarbital, 493 
Evoclin, 1429
Evomela, 829, 831
Excede, 221, 224
Excenel, 229
Excenel RTU EZ, 224, 226
Exenatide, 494
Exenatide Extended-Release Injection, 497 
Exenatide Immediate-Release Injection, 497 
Exfolux, 1468, 1469
Exparel, 150
Extina, 1437
Eysuvis, 1381, 1382
Eythrocin, 477
EZ Char, 243
EZ-Derm, 1468
Factrel, 593
Famciclovir, 498
Famciclovir Oral Tablets, 499
Famotidine, 499
Famotidine Injection, 501
Famotidine Oral Tablets, 501
Famotidine Powder for Oral Suspension, 501 
Famvir, 498, 499
Fatal-Plus Powder, 494
Fatal-Plus Solution, 494
Fat Emulsion, Intravenous, 766, 769
Fatty Acids, 276
Fatty Acids (Omega-3/6), 501
Fatty Acids (Omega-3/6), Topical, 1422 
Febantel/Praziquantel/Pyrantel, 1056, 1094 
Felbamate, 503
Felbamate Suspension, 504
Felbamate Tablets, 504
Felbatol, 503, 504
Feldene, 1033, 1035
Felimazole, 849, 852
Feline Facial Pheromone, 1020
Felisyl, 789
Feliway, 1019, 1020
Fenbendazole, 505
Fenbendazole Granules, 508 
Fenbendazole Paste, 508
Fenbendazole Pellets, 508
Fenbendazole Premix Type A, 508 
Fenbendazole Suspension, 508 
Fenofibrate, 508
Fenofibrate Oral, 510
Fenofibric Acid Capsules, 510
Fenofibric Acid Delayed-Release Oral 
Capsules, 510
Fenoglide, 510
Fenoldopam, 510
Fenoldopam Injection Solution, 512 
Fensolvi, 743
Fentanyl, Injection, 512
Fentanyl Iontophoretic Transdermal 
System, 519
Fentanyl, Transdermal Patch, 515
Feosol, 520
Fer-Gen-Sol, 520
FeroSul, 520
Ferretonin, 825
Ferrous Sulfate, 519
Ferrous Sulfate Oral Drops, 520
Ferrous Sulfate Oral Elixir/Liquid, 520 
Ferrous Sulfate Oral Tablets, 520
Fertagyl, 592
Fexofenadine, 521
Fexofenadine Oral, 522
FFP , 1020
Fibricor, 510
Filgrastim, 522
Filgrastim Injection, 524
Finasteride, 524
Finasteride Oral Tablets, 525
Fipronil/Fipronil Combinations, Topical, 
1453, 1458, 1459, 1463
Firocoxib, 525
Firocoxib Chewable Tablets, 527 
Firocoxib Injection, 527

===== PDF_PAGE_1557 =====
1530    Index Index  1531
Firocoxib Oral Paste, 527
First Honey, 1431, 1432
First-Hydrocortisone, 1415
First-Omeprazole, 955
First-Vancomycin, 1293
Flagyl, 873, 877
Flarex, 1366, 1367
Flea Halt, 1460, 1461
Flebogamma, 651
Flector, 388
Flomax, 1205, 1207
Flo-Pred, 1063
Florcon, 530
Florfenicol, 528, 544, 1213
Florfenicol Concentrate Solution, 530
Florfenicol Injection, 530
Florfenicol, Otic, 1478, 1479
Florinef, 535, 537
Florvio, 530
Flovent, 552, 554
Floxin, 1471
Flucaine, 1398, 1399
Fluconazole, 530
Fluconazole in Sodium Chloride 0.9% 
Injection, 533
Fluconazole Oral Tablets, 533
Fluconazole Powder for Oral 
Suspension, 533
Flucort, 539, 541
Flucytosine, 534
Flucytosine Oral Capsules, 535
Fludrocortisone, 535
Fludrocortisone Acetate Tablets, 537
Flumazenil, 537
Flumazenil Injection, 539
Flumethasone, 539, 1491
Flumethasone Injection, 541
Flumethasone Suspension, 541
Flumethasone Tablets, 541
Flumethrin, Topical, 1456
Flunixin, 541
Flunixin Meglumine for Injection, 544
Flunixin Meglumine Oral Paste, 544
Flunixin Meglumine with 
Oxytetracycline, 544
Flunixin Transdermal Solution, 544
Flunixin with Florfenicol Injection, 544
Fluocinolone, Otic, 1477
Fluorescein Stain Ophthalmic, 1365
Fluorescite, 1366
Fluorometholone, 1366
Fluorouracil, 544
Fluorouracil Cream, 546
Fluorouracil Ophthalmic, 1367
Fluorouracil Solution for Injection, 546
Fluosmin, 541
Fluoxetine, 547
Fluoxetine HCl Oral, 549
Fluralaner, 549, 917
Fluralaner and Moxidectin Topical 
Solution, 552
Fluralaner Chewable Tablets, 552
Fluralaner Topical Solution, 552
Flurbiprofen Ophthalmic, 1368
Fluress, 1345, 1346, 1366
Flurox, 1345, 1346
Fluticasone, 552
Fluticasone Propionate Aerosol for 
Inhalation, 554
Fluticasone Propionate/Salmeterol Aerosol 
for Inhalation, 554
Fluvoxamine, 554
Fluvoxamine Oral Extended-Release 
Capsules, 556
Fluvoxamine Oral Tablets, 556
Fluxinin Meglumine, 976
FML, 1366, 1367
FML Forte, 1366, 1367
Folacin, 556
Folic Acid, 556
Folic Acid Capsules, 557
Folic Acid Injection, 557
Folic Acid Tablets, 557
Folinic Acid, 740
Fomepizole, 558
Fomepizole Injection Concentrate, 559
Forane, 697
Forceris, 1257
Formula V Taurine Tablets, 1208
Fortamet, 842
Fortaz, 219, 221
Fosamax, 27, 29
Fosfomycin, 559
Fosfomycin Sodium for Injection, 560
Fosfomycin Tromethamine, 560
Fosrenol, 736, 738
Fragmin, 335, 337
Freshkote, 1390
Frontline, 1453, 1454, 1455, 1458, 1459
Frunevetmab, 561
Frunevetmab Injection, 562
FulGlo, 1366
Fulvicin, 596
Fungizone, 74
Furadantin, 938
Fura-Septin, 1433
Furazolidone, 562
Fura-Zone, 1433
Furosemide, 563
Furosemide for Injection, 568
Furosemide Oral Solution, 568
Furosemide Tablets, 568
Furoxone, 562, 563
Gabapentin, 568
Gabapentin Enacarbil Oral Extended-
Release Tablets, 570
Gabapentin Oral Capsules/Tablets, 570
Gabapentin Oral Solution, 570
Gabbrovet, 988
Galastop, 165, 167
Gallimycin, 473
Galliprant, 594, 596
Galzin, 1329
Gamastan, 651
Gamithromycin, 571
Gamithromycin Solution for Injection, 572 
Gammagard Liquid, 651
Gammaked, 651
Gammaplex, 651
Gamunex-C, 651
Ganciclovir Ophthalmic, 1369
Garacin, 579
Garasol Injection, 579
Gastrocrom, 318
GastroGard, 953, 955
Gatifloxacin Ophthalmic, 1370
Gavilax, 1037
GCSF, 522
Gemcitabine, 572
Gemcitabine HCl Lyophilized Powder for 
Injection, 574
Gemcitabine Injection, 574
Gemfibrozil, 574
Gemfibrozil Oral Tablets, 576
Gemzar, 572
Gen-Gard Soluble Powder, 579
Generlac, 736
GenOne, 1479
Genoptic, 1370, 1371
Gentacalm, 1430
Gentak, 1370, 1371
Gentamicin and Prednisolone Acetate 
Ophthalmic, 1371
Gentamicin Ophthalmic, 1370 
Gentamicin Soluble Powder, 579 
Gentamicin Sulfate Injection, 579 
Gentamicin Sulfate Oral Solution, 579 
Gentamicin Sulfate, Otic, 1471, 1478, 1479 
Gentamicin Sulfate Soluble Powder, 579 
Gentamicin Sulfate Solution, 579 
Gentamicin, Systemic, 576
Gentamicin, Topical, 1413, 1414, 1429 
GentaOtic, 1479
Gentapoult, 579
GentaSoothe, 1430
GentaSpray, 1430
GentaVed, 1430, 1479
Genteal Moderate Lubricating Liquid, 1390 
Genteal Night-Time Ointment, 1391 
Gentizol, 1478
Gentocin, 576, 1370, 1430, 1471
GG, 598
Glargine Insulin, 658, 662, 1494 
Gleostine, 773, 775
Glipizide, 580
Glipizide Oral Extended-Release 
Tablets, 581
Glipizide Oral Tablets, 581
Gloperba, 311
Glostrips, 1366, 1399
Glow-in-the-dark Items, 1486
Glucagon, 582
Glucagon Powder for Injection, 583 
Glucantime, 819, 821
Glucobay, 1

===== PDF_PAGE_1558 =====
Index   15311532  Index
GlucaGen, 582, 583
Glucophage, 840, 842
Glucophage XR, 842
Glucosamine/Chondroitin Sulfate, 583 
Glucotrol, 580
Glucotrol XL, 581
Glucovance, 587
Glumetza, 842
Glyburide, 585
Glyburide/Metformin Tablets, 587 
Glyburide Oral Tablets, 587
Glycerin, Oral, 587
Glycerol, 587
GlycoBenz, 1428
GlycoLax, 1037
Glycolic Acid, 1436
Glycopyrrolate, 588
Glycopyrrolate for Injection, 590, 591 
Glycopyrrolate Oral Solution, 590 
Glycopyrrolate Tablets, 590
Glynase, 587
GnRH, 591
Goat Care-2X, 907
GoLYTELY , 1035, 1037
GONABreed, 592
Gonadorelin, 591
Gonadorelin Acetate for Injection, 592 
Gonadorelin Diacetate Tetrahydrate for 
Injection, 592
Gonadorelin HCl Solution for Injection, 593 
Gramicidin/Neomycin/Polymyxin B 
Ophthalmic, 1409
Granisetron, 593
Granisetron Injection Solution, 594 
Granisetron Oral Tablets, 594
Granulocyte Colony Stimulating Factor, 522 
Grapes, 1485
Grapiprant, 594, 1489
Grapiprant Flavored Tablets, 596
Gravol, 399
Green Glo, 1380
Griseofulvin, 596
Griseofulvin Microsize Oral 
Suspension, 598
Griseofulvin Microsize Powder, 598 
Griseofulvin Microsize Tablets, 598 
Griseofulvin Ultramicrosize Tablets, 598 
Gris-PEG, 596
Growth Hormone, 1166
Guaifenesin, 1099
Guaifenesin, Intravenous, 598
Guailaxin, 598
Happy Jack Mitex, 1472
Hartz, 1415
Hartz First Defense, 1454
Hartz InControl, 1459
Hartz UltraGuard, 1458, 1459, 1472
HCG, 259, 261
Heartgard, 709, 713, 714, 1094
Hemerocallis spp, 1486
Hemoglobin Glutamer-200 (Bovine), 601 
Heparin, 603
Heparin Sodium and 0.45% Sodium 
Chloride Injection, 606
Heparin Sodium and 0.9% Sodium 
Chloride Injection, 606
Heparin Sodium and 5% Dextrose 
Injection, 606
Heparin Sodium Injection, 605
Heparin Sodium Lock Flush Injection, 606 
Heparin Unit-Dose Sodium Injection, 606 
HES, 625
Hespan, 625, 627
Hetastarch, 625, 627
Hexa-Caine, 1423
HexaChlor-K, 1442
Hexaderm, 1444
Hexadrol Phosphate, 367
Hexasol, 544, 976
Hextend, 627
Hiprex, 848
Histall, 1098, 1099
HIVIG, 649
Hizentra, 651
HoneyCure, 1431
HoneyHeel, 1431
Honey, Topical, 1430
Horizant, 570
HTS, 633
HumaLOG, 666, 670
Human Albumin, 22
Human Chorionic Gonadotropin, 259, 261 
Humatin, 986
Humulin, 1494
Humulin N, 670, 673, 674
Humulin R, 677, 681
Hyalovet, 606, 607
Hyaluronate, 606
Hyaluronate Sodium, 607
Hyaluronic Acid-Containing Ocular 
Lubricants, 1388, 1389
Hycodan, 612, 615
Hydeltrone-TBA Suspension, 1063 
Hydralazine, 607
Hydralazine HCl Oral Tablets, 609 
Hydralazine Injection, 609
Hydramine Cough, 411
Hydrea, 628, 629
Hydro-B 1020, 1415, 1419 
Hydrochlorothiazide, 127, 610, 692, 771, 
1177, 1274
Hydrochlorothiazide Oral Capsules, 612 
Hydrochlorothiazide Oral Tablets, 612 
Hydrocodone, 612
Hydrocodone/Acetaminophen, 615 
Hydrocodone Bitartrate, 615 
Hydrocodone/Ibuprofen, 615 
Hydrocortisone, 615, 1491 
Hydrocortisone Ophthalmic, 1371 
Hydrocortisone Oral Sprinkle, 617 
Hydrocortisone Oral Tablets, 617 
Hydrocortisone, Otic, 1478, 1479 
Hydrocortisone Sodium Succinate 
Injection, 617
Hydrocortisone, Topical, 1414, 1419, 1425, 
1436, 1442, 1443, 1444
HydroDIURIL, 610
Hydrogen Peroxide 3% Oral Solution, 618 
Hydromet, 615
Hydromorphone, 619
Hydromorphone HCl Injection, 623 
Hydromorphone HCl Oral Liquid, 623 
Hydromorphone HCl Oral Tablets, 623 
Hydromorphone Suppositories, 623 
Hydro-Plus, 1415
Hydroxocobalamin, 304, 307 
Hydroxychloroquine, 623 
Hydroxychloroquine Sulfate Oral 
Tablets, 625
Hydroxyethyl Starch Colloids, 625 
Hydroxypropyl Guar-Containing Ocular 
Lubricants, 1389, 1390
Hydroxypropyl Methylcellulose-Containing 
Ocular Lubricants, 1388, 1390
5-Hydroxytryptophan, 1484
Hydroxyurea, 628
Hydroxyurea Oral Capsules, 629
Hydroxyurea Oral Tablets, 629
Hydroxyzine, 629
Hydroxyzine HCl Injection, 631
Hydroxyzine HCl Oral Syrup/Solution, 631
Hydroxyzine HCl Oral Tablets, 631
Hydroxyzine Pamoate Oral Capsules, 631
HyLyt, 1422
HyoMax, 633
Hyoscine Butylbromide, 164, 165
Hyoscyamine, 632
Hyoscyamine Injection, 633
Hyoscyamine Oral Elixir, 633
Hyoscyamine Oral Solution, 633
Hyoscyamine Oral Spray, 633
Hyoscyamine Oral Tablets/Capsules, 633
Hyperbaric Bupivacaine, 147
Hypertonic Saline, 633
Hypertonic Saline Injection Solution, 635
Hypertonic Saline Ophthalmic, 1400
Hypochlorous Acid, Otic, 1474, 1477
Hypochlorous Acid, Topical, 1449
HypoTears, 1390
Hyqvia, 651
Hysingla ER, 615
Hyvisc, 606, 607
IB-Stat, 633
Ibuprofen, 615, 1484
Ice Melts, 1486
Idoxuridine Ophthalmic, 1372
I-Drop Vet Plus Lubricant, 1389
Ifex, 635
Ifosfamide, 635
Ifosfamide Injection, 637
Ifosfamide Powder for Injection, 637
IGIV, 649
ILE, 766

===== PDF_PAGE_1559 =====
1532    Index Index  1533
Ilevro, 1387, 1388
Imaverol, 1435
Imepitoin, 637
Imepitoin Oral Tablets, 639 
Imidacloprid, 917
Imidacloprid Chewable Tablets, 640 
Imidacloprid/Imidacloprid Combinations, 
Topical, 1456, 1460, 1462, 1463 
Imidacloprid, Systemic, 639
Imidapril, 640
Imidapril Powder for Oral Solution, 642 
Imidazolines, 1484
Imidocarb, 642
Imidocarb Dipropionate for Injection, 644 
Imipenem/Cilastatin Powder for 
Injection, 646
Imipenem/Cilastatin Sodium, 644 
Imipramine, 646
Imipramine HCl Tablets, 648 
Imipramine Pamoate Capsules, 648 
Imiquimod, Topical, 1464
Imizol, 642, 644
Immiticide, 821, 823
Immune Globulin (Human), 
Intravenous, 649
Immune Globulin (Human) Lyophilized 
Powder for Solution, 651
Immunocidin, 919
ImmunoRegulin, 1079, 1080
Imodium, 775, 777
Impavido, 887, 888
Imrex, 1466
Imuran, 118, 120
Incurin, 483, 485
Inderal, 1086, 1089
InFeD, 693
INH, 698
InnoPran, 1089
Insta-Char, 1169
Instamag, 790
Insulin, 1494
Insulin Aspart, 651
Insulin Aspart Injection Solution 
Human, 654
Insulin Detemir, 655
Insulin Detemir Injection Human, 658 
Insulin Glargine, 658
Insulin Glargine Injection Human, 662 
Insulin Lente, 662
Insulin Lente Suspension, 665
Insulin Lispro, 666
Insulin Lispro Injection Human, 670 
Insulin NPH, 670
Insulin NPH Human, 674
Insulin Protamine Zinc, 674
Insulin Protamine Zinc Aqueous 
Suspension, 677
Insulin Regular, 677
Insulin Regular Injection Human, 681 
Intal, 317
Intensol, 846
Interceptor, 885, 887
Interceptor Plus, 1056
Interferon Alfa (Human 
Recombinant), 681
Interferon Alfa (Human Recombinant) 
Injection, 683
Interferon Alfa (Human Recombinant) 
Powder for Injection, 683
Interferon Omega (Feline Origin), 683 
Intermediate-acting Insulin, 1494 
Intralipid, 766, 769
Intravenous Lipid Emulsion, 766
Intron-A, 681, 683
Intropin, 422
Invanz, 472, 473
Inveltys, 1381, 1382
Iodide (Potassium-, Sodium-), 685 
Iodoject, 685
Iohexol, 687
Iohexol Injection, 689
Ionsys, 515, 519
Iopidine, 1343
Ipratropium, 27, 689
Ipratropium Bromide Aerosol for 
Inhalation, 690
Ipratropium Bromide Solution for 
Inhalation, 690
Irbesartan, 690
Irbesartan Tablets, 692
Irbesartan with Hydrochlorothiazide 
Tablets, 692
Iron, 1484
Iron Dextran, 692
Iron Dextran Injection, 693
Irrigating Solutions, Ophthalmic, 1373 
Isocaine, 834
Isoflo, 695, 697
Isoflupredone, 693, 1491
Isoflupredone Acetate Aqueous Suspension 
for Injection, 695
Isoflupredone Acetate, Otic, 1479 
Isoflupredone Acetate, Topical, 1416 
Isoflurane, 695
Isoflurane for Inhalation, 697
Isoflurane Liquid for Inhalation, 697 
IsonaRif, 700
Isoniazid, 698
Isoniazid Injection Solution, 699 
Isoniazid Oral Syrup, 699
Isoniazid Oral Tablets, 699
Isoniazid with Rifampin and Pyrazinamide 
Tablets, 700
Isoniazid with Rifampin Capsules, 700 
Isophane Insulin, 670, 673
Isopropyl Myristate, Topical, 1457, 1475 
Isoproterenol, 700
Isoproterenol HCl for Injection, 701
Isopto Atropine, 1343, 1344
Isopto Carpine, 1394, 1395
Isosol, 697
Iso-Thesia, 695
Isotretinoin, 701
Isotretinoin Oral Capsules, 703
Isoxsuprine, 703
Isoxsuprine HCl Oral Powder, 704
Isoxsuprine HCl Tablets, 704
Istalol, 1405, 1406
Isuprel, 700, 701
Itch-X, 1415, 1426
Itraconazole, 704
Itraconazole Capsules, 708
Itraconazole Ophthalmic, 1374
Itraconazole Oral Solution, 708
Itrafungol, 704, 708
Iverhart, 1094
Iverhart Max, 1057
Ivermectin, 709, 1489
Ivermectin/Clorsulon, 714
Ivermectin for Injection, 713, 714
Ivermectin Oral Chewable Tablets, 713
Ivermectin Oral Paste, 714
Ivermectin Oral Solution, 714
Ivermectin Oral Tablets, 713, 714
Ivermectin, Otic, 1473
Ivermectin Pour-On for Cattle, 714
Ivermectin/Praziquantel, 1056
Ivermectin/Praziquantel Oral Paste, 714
Ivermectin/Praziquantel Oral Syringes, 714
Ivermectin/Praziquantel/Pyrantel, 1057
Ivermectin/Pyrantel, 1094
Ivermectin/Pyrantel Oral Tablets, 714
Ivermectin/Pyrantel/Praziquantel, 1094
Ivermectin/Pyrantel/Praziquantel Oral 
Tablets, 714
Ivermectin Spot-On Solution, 714
Ivermectin Topical Lotion/Cream, 714
IVIG, 649
Ivomec, 709, 713, 714
Ivomec Plus, 714, 715
Jantoven, 1319
K9 Advantix, 1457, 1460, 1462
Kaolin/Pectin, 715
Kaolin/Pectin Antidiarrheal 
Suspension, 717
Kaopectolin, 715, 717
KBroVet-CA1, 137, 140
KC-Oto Pack, 1479
Keflex, 234, 237
Kefvet, 237
Kefzol, 201
Kenalog, 1273, 1418
Keppra, 746, 748, 749
Keralyt, 1468
KeraSeb, 1468
Ketaflo, 717
Ketaject, 724
Ketalar, 725
Ketamine, 717
Ketamine HCl for Injection, 724, 725
Ketaset, 717, 724
Keta-sthetic, 724
KetoChlor, 1436, 1444
Ketoconazole, Otic, 1471, 1474, 1475, 1479

===== PDF_PAGE_1560 =====
Index   15331534  Index
Ketoconazole, Systemic, 725 
Ketoconazole Tablets, 728
Ketoconazole, Topical, 728, 1415, 1436, 
1442, 1443, 1444, 1445, 1446, 1447 
Ketodan, 1437
Ketofen, 729, 731
KetoHex, 1436, 1437, 1444, 1445
Ketomax, 1447, 1474
Ketoprofen, 729, 1284
Ketoprofen Capsules, 731
Ketoprofen Extended-Release Capsules, 731 
Ketoprofen Injection, 731
Ketoprofen/Tulathromycin Solution for 
Injection, 731
Ketorolac, 732
Ketorolac Ophthalmic, 1375
Ketorolac Tromethamine Injection, 733 
Ketorolac Tromethamine Tablets, 733 
Ketoseb, 1436, 1437, 1445, 1446
Ketotifen Ophthalmic, 1376
Keveyis, 384, 385
Kidrolase, 99
KlearOtic, 1475
Klofensaid, 388
Klonopin, 292, 294
Kondremul Plain, 890
Kristalose, 735, 736
Kytril, 593
LA-200, 972
Lactic Acid, Otic, 1475, 1477
Lactoferrin, Topical, 1448 
Lactoperoxidase, Topical, 1448
Lactulose, 735
Lactulose Crystals for Oral Solution, 736 
Lactulose Solution, 736
Lamisil, 1210, 1213, 1441
Lamprene, 288, 289
Lanaprost Ophthalmic, 1376
Laniazid, 698
Lanoxin, 392, 396
Lanthanum, 736
Lanthanum Carbonate Oral Chewable 
Tablet, 738
Lanthanum Carbonate Oral Powder, 738 
Lantharenol, 736
Lantus, 658, 662
Lasix, 563, 568
Lastacaft, 1340
Latisse, 1348, 1349
Latrodectus mactans Antivenom, 86 
Laverdia-CA1, 1300, 1302
Laxade, 790
LC-4, 1424
LC-5, 1424
L-deprenyl, 1151
Leflunomide, 738
Leflunomide Tablets, 740
Legend, 606, 607
Lente Insulin, 662, 665
Leucovorin, 740
Leucovorin Calcium Injectable Solution, 741
Leucovorin Calcium Oral Tablets, 741 
Leucovorin Calcium Powder for 
Injection, 741
Leukeran, 243, 245
Leuprolide, 741
Leuprolide Acetate for SC Injection, 743 
Leuprolide Acetate Injection, 743 
Leuprolide Acetate Microspheres for IM 
Injection, 743
LevaMed, 743, 745
Levamisole, 743
Levamisole Hydrochloride Soluble Drench 
Powder, 745
Levamisole Hydrochloride Soluble 
Powder, 745
Levbid, 633
Levemir, 655, 658
Leventa, 749, 752
Levetiracetam, 746
Levetiracetam Concentrate for 
Injection, 749
Levetiracetam Extended-Release Oral 
Tablets, 748
Levetiracetam Oral Solution, 748 
Levetiracetam Oral Tablets, 748 
Levobunolol Ophthalmic, 1377 
Levocarnitine, 189, 190
Levofloxacin Ophthalmic, 1378 
Levophed, 943, 945
Levothroid, 752
Levothyroxine, 749
Levothyroxine Powder for Injection, 752 
Levothyroxine Sodium Liquid-filled Oral 
Capsules, 752
Levothyroxine Sodium Oral Solution, 752 
Levothyroxine Sodium Powder, 752 
Levothyroxine Sodium Tablets, 752 
Levothyroxine Solution for Injection, 752 
Levoxyl, 752
Levsin, 632, 633
Levsinex, 633
Lidocaine HCl for Injection, 755, 760 
Lidocaine Hydrochloride Injection, 760 
Lidocaine Hydrochloride with Dextrose 
Injection, 760
Lidocaine, Intravenous; Systemic, 756 
Lidocaine/Lidocaine Combinations, 
Topical, 1423
Lidocaine, Local Anesthetic, 752 
Lidocaine Ophthalmic, 1379
Lidocaine, Topical, 1445
Lidocaine with Epinephrine, 755 
Lidoderm, 1424
Lidosorb, 1424
Light Mineral Oil, 1475
Lignocaine, 752, 756
Lilium spp, 1486
LimePlus, 1438
Lime Sulfur, Topical, 1437
Lincocin, 760, 762
Lincomix, 760, 762
Lincomycin, 760
Lincomycin Injection, 762
Lincomycin Oral Solution, 762 
Lincomycin Soluble Powder, 762 
Lincomycin/Spectinomycin, 1172 
Lincomycin Sterile Injection, 762 
Linezolid, 762
Linezolid IV Solution, 764
Linezolid Powder for Oral Suspension, 764 
Linezolid Tablets, 764
Liothyronine, 752, 764
Liothyronine Sodium Injection 
Solution, 766
Liothyronine Sodium Tablets, 766
Lipid Emulsion, Intravenous, 766 
Lipofen, 510
Liquamycin, 976
Liquid Paraffin, 889
Liquid Potpourri, 1487
Liserdol, 839
Lisinopril, 769
Lisinopril Oral Solution, 771
Lisinopril Oral Tablets, 771
Lispro Insulin, 666, 670
Lissamine Green Ophthalmic, 1380 
Litium-Ion Disc Batteries, 1487
L-Lysine, 788
L-Lysine Powder-Pure, 789
L-Mesitran, 1431
LMX-4, 1424
Lodine, 489
Lodoxamide Ophthalmic, 1380
Lofibra, 510
Lokivetmab, 771
Lokivetmab Solution, 773
Lomotil, 412, 413
Lomustine, 773
Lomustine Capsules, 775
Long-acting Insulin, 1494
LongRange, 467, 469
Loperamide, 775, 1489
Loperamide HCl Oral Liquid, 777
Loperamide HCl Tablets and Capsules, 777
Lopid, 574, 576
Lopressor, 870, 872
Loratidine, 777
Loratidine Oral Solution/Syrup, 778
Loratidine Tablets, 778
Lorazepam, 778
Lorazepam Concentrated Oral
Solution, 781
Lorazepam Injection, 781
Lorazepam Tablets, 781
Losartan, 781
Losartan Oral Tablets, 783
Losat, 686
Lotemax, 1381, 1382
Lotensin, 123, 127
Lotensin HCT, 127
Loteprednol Ophthalmic, 1381
Lotilaner, 783
Lotilaner Chewable Tablets, 785
Lotrel, 127

===== PDF_PAGE_1561 =====
1534    Index Index  1535
Lotrimin, 1434, 1435
Lotrisone, 1414
Lovenox, 448, 450
LoZatom, 1479
L-Theanine, 733
L-Theanine Liquid, 734
L-Theanine Tablets, 734
Lubricants, Ocular, 1388
Lufenuron, 936
Lufenuron Flavor Tabs, 787
Lufenuron/Lufenuron Combination
Products, 785
Lufenuron/Milbemycin Oxime Oral 
Tablets, 787
Lufenuron/Milbemycin/Praziquantel, 1056 
Lufenuron/Milbemycin/Praziquantel 
Chewable Oral Tablets, 787, 887 
Lufenuron Oral Suspension, 787 
Lufenuron 6-Month Injectable, 787 
Lumigan, 1348, 1349
Luminal Sodium, 1011
Lumi-Sporyn, 1410
Lupron, 741, 743
Lutalyse, 405, 409
Luvox, 554, 556
Luxic, 1414
Lyrica, 1064, 1065
Lysine, 788
Lysodren, 899, 902
Lysozyme, Topical, 1448
Lysteda, 1264, 1266
M&L, 734
Maalox, 790
Macadamia Nuts, 1485
Macrobid, 936, 938
Macrodantin, 936, 938
Magnadex, 1022
Magnalax, 790
Magnesium Chloride, 791, 793
Magnesium Citrate, 1143, 1144 
Magnesium Hydroxide, 789, 1143, 1144 
Magnesium, Intravenous, 791
Magnesium Oxide, 1143
Magnesium Sulfate, 791, 793, 1143, 1144 
MalAcetic, 1442, 1474, 1477
MalAcetic ULTRA, 1436
MalAcetic ULTRA/HC, 1415
Mal-A-Ket, 1436, 1437, 1443, 1444, 1445, 
1446, 1471, 1474
Malarone, 109
Malarone Pediatric, 109
Malaseb, 1438, 1439, 1444, 1445
Malic Acid, Topical, 1468
Malmetazone, 1417, 1479
MalOtic, 1430, 1478
Mannitol, 793
Mannitol Injection, 795
Manuka Honey, 1431, 1432 
Marbofloxacin, 796
Marbofloxacin Oral Tablets, 798
Marboquin, 798
Marcaine, 144, 146
Maropitant, 799, 1489
Maropitant Citrate Injectable Solution, 802 
Maropitant Citrate Oral Tablets, 802 
Marquis, 1041, 1043
Mar-Spas, 633
Martin’s FLEE, 1454, 1455, 1459
Matrix, 41, 44
Matulane, 1071, 1073
Mavacoxib, 802
Mavacoxib Oral Chewable Tablets, 803 
Max Chlorhexidine, 1444
Maxidex, 1359, 1360
Maxi/Guard Zn7 Derm, 1426, 1477
Maxi-Otic, 1417, 1479
Maxipime, 203, 205
Maxitrol, 1359, 1360, 1410
MCT, 814
MCWF Immunomodulator, 918 
Mechlorethamine, 804 Mechlorethamine 
Powder for 
Injection, 805
Meclizine, 805
Meclizine HCl Oral Tablets, 807 
Medalone, 1418
Medetomidine, 807
Medetomidine HCl for Injection, 811 
Medetomidine/Vatinoxan, 811 
Medetomidine/Vatinoxan Injection, 814 
MediHoney, 1431, 1432
Medium Chain Triglycerides Oil, 814 
Medrol, 863, 867
Medroxyprogesterone, 815 
Medroxyprogesterone Acetate 
Injection, 817
Medroxyprogesterone Acetate Tablets, 817 
Mefoxin, 212
Megace, 817, 819
Megestrol, 817
Megestrol Acetate Oral Suspension, 819 
Megestrol Acetate Oral Tablets, 819 
Megestrol Acetate Tablets, 819 Meglumine 
Antimoniate, 819 Melarsomine, 821
Melarsomine Dihydrochloride Powder for 
Injection, 823
Melatonin, 823
Melatonin Capsules, 825
Melatonin Implant, 825
Melatonin Oral Solution, 825 Meloxicam, 
825
Meloxicam Capsules, 829
Meloxicam for Injection, 829
Meloxicam Oral Suspension, 829 
Meloxicam Tablets, 829
Melphalan, 829
Melphalan Oral Tablets, 831
Melphalan Powder for Injection, 831 
Menthol, Topical, 1420
Meperidine, 831
Meperidine HCl Injection, 834
Meperidine HCl Syrup/Oral Solution, 834
Meperidine HCl Tablets, 834
Mephyton, 1024, 1026
Mepivacaine, 834
Mepivacaine Hydrochloride Injection, 
836, 837
Mepron, 108, 109
Meropenem, 837
Meropenem and Sodium Chloride 
Injection Solution, 839
Meropenem Powder for Solution for 
Injection, 839
Merrem IV , 837, 839
Mestinon, 1094, 1096
Metacam, 825, 829
Metaldehyde, 1486
Metamizole, 413
Metamucil, 1090
Metergoline, 839
Metformin, 587, 840
Metformin HCl Extended-Release Oral 
Tablets, 842
Metformin HCl Oral Solution, 842
Metformin HCl Oral Tablets, 842
Methadone, 842
Methadone HCl Dispersible Tablets, 846
Methadone HCl Injection, 846
Methadone HCl Oral Liquid 
Concentrate, 846
Methadone HCl Oral Solution, 846
Methadone HCl Oral Tablets, 846
Methadose, 842, 846
Methanol, 1486
Methazolamide, 846
Methazolamide Tablets, 848
Methenamine, 848
Methenamine Hippurate Oral Tablets, 849
Methenamine Mandelate Tablets, 849
Methigel, 854
Methimazole, 849
Methimazole Tablets, 852
Methio-Form, 854
Methionine, 852
Methionine Powder, 854
Methionine Tablets, 854
Methionine Tablets Chewable, 854
Methocarbamol, 854
Methocarbamol Injection, 856
Methocarbamol Tablets, 856
Methoprene/Methoprene Combinations, 
Topical, 1454, 1455, 1458, 1460, 1461
Methotrexate, 856
Methotrexate Injection, 859
Methotrexate Oral Solution, 859
Methotrexate Powder for Injection, 859
Methotrexate Sodium Injection, 859
Methotrexate Tablets, 859
2-[1 Methyl-2-(4-Phenoxyphenoxy) 
Ethoxy] Pyridine, 1460, 1461
Methylchloroisothiazolinone, 1475
Methylcobalamin, 304

===== PDF_PAGE_1562 =====
Index   15351536  Index
Methylene Blue, 859
Methylene Blue Injection, 861
Methylin, 863
Methylisothiazolinone, 1475
Methylphenidate, 861
Methylphenidate Oral Chewable 
Tablets, 863
Methylphenidate Oral Tablets, 863
Methylpredisolone, 863
Methylpredisolone Acetate Injection, 867
Methylpredisolone Oral Tablets, 867
Methylpredisolone Sodium Succinate 
Powder for Injection, 867
Methylprednisolone, 1491
4-Methylpyrazole, 558
Meticortelone Acetate, 1063
Meticorten, 1063
Metoclopramide, 867
Metoclopramide HCl Injectable
Solution, 870
Metoclopramide HCl Oral Syrup, 870
Metoclopramide HCl Oral Tablets, 870
Metoclopramide Oral Dispersible 
Tablets, 870
Metopirone, 877, 878
Metoprolol, 870
Metoprolol Succinate Extended-Release 
Tablets, 872
Metoprolol Tartrate Injection, 872
Metoprolol Tartrate Oral Tablets, 872
Metozolv, 870
Metricure, 238
Metronidazole, 873
Metronidazole Injection, 877
Metronidazole Oral Capsules, 877
Metronidazole Oral Suspension, 877
Metronidazole Oral Tablets, 877
Metyrapone, 877
Metyrapone Oral Capsules, 878
Mexiletine, 878
Mexiletine Oral Capsules, 880
Mexitil, 878, 880
Miacalcin, 169
Mibemycin Oxime, Otic, 1473
Micardis, 1208, 1210
MicaVed, 1438, 1439, 1472
Micazole, 1438, 1439
MiconaHex, 1438, 1439, 1443, 1446
Miconazole Ophthalmic, 1382
Miconazole, Otic, 1472, 1474, 1479
Miconazole, Topical, 1438, 1443, 1444, 
1445, 1446, 1447
Miconosol, 1439, 1472
Micoseb, 1439
Micotil, 1240, 1242
Micro BP , 1428
Micronase, 585
Microsilver, 1444, 1446
MicroSilver BG, 1431
Microsilver, Otic, 1474, 1475
Microzide, 610, 612
Midazolam, 880
Midazolam HCl Injection, 885 
Midazolam HCl Nasal Spray, 885 
Midazolam HCl Syrup, 885
Milbemite, 887, 1473
Milbemycin 0.1% Otic Solution, 887 
Milbemycin, 936, 1489
Milbemycin/Lufenuron Oral Tablets, 887 
Milbemycin/Lufenuron/Praziquantel, 1056 
Milbemycin/Lufenuron/Praziquantel 
Chewable Oral Tablets, 887 
Milbemycin Oxime, 787, 885
Milbemycin Oxime Oral Tablets, 887 
Milbemycin/Praziquantel, 1056 
Milbemycin/Praziquantel Chewable Oral 
Tablets, 887
Milbemycin/Spinosad Chewable Oral 
Tablets, 887
Milbemycin/Spinosad Chewable Tablets, 1175 
Milk of Magnesia, 789, 790, 1144 
Millipred, 1063
Milteforan, 887, 888
Miltefosine, 887
Miltefosine Capsules, 888
Miltefosine Oral Solution, 888
Milytic, 1475
Mineral Oil, 889
Mineral Oil Emulsions, 890
Minipress, 1057, 1058
Minocin, 890, 893
Minocycline, 890
Minocycline Extended-Release Tablets, 893 
Minocycline HCl Oral Capsules, 893 
Minocycline HCl Oral Tablets, 893 
Minocycline HCl Powdered Microspheres, 
Extended-Release, Dental, 893 
Minocycline HCl Powder for Injection, 893 
MiraLAX, 1035, 1037
Mirataz, 893
Micro-Pearls Advantage Benzoyl-Plus, 1428 
Micro-Pearls Advantage Dermal Soothe, 
1425, 1426
Mirtazapine, 893
Mirtazapine Orally Disintegrating 
Tablets, 896
Mirtazapine Oral Tablets, 896 
Misoprostol, 896
Misoprostol Tablets, 898
Mita-Clear, 1473
Mitigare, 311
Mitomycin C, 1383
Mitomycin Ophthalmic, 1383
Mitosol, 1383, 1384
Mitotane, 899
Mitotane Tablets, 902
Mitoxantrone, 902
Mitoxantrone HCl for Injection Solution 
Concentrate, 904
MMF , 920, 922
Mobic, 829
Molybdates, 904
Molypen, 904
Mometamax, 1417, 1430, 1479
Mometasone Furoate, 1213
Mometasone Furoate, Otic, 1478, 1479 
Mometasone, Topical, 1416, 1430 
Mometavet, 1417, 1430, 1479
Monodox, 438
Montelukast, 905
Montelukast Sodium Oral Granules, 906 
Montelukast Sodium Oral Tablets, 906 
Monurol, 559, 560
Morantel, 906
Morantel Tartrate Medicated Pellets, 907 
Morantel Tartrate Medicated Premix, 907 
Morphine, 907
Morphine Ophthalmic, 1384
Morphine Sulfate for Injection, 912 
MotaZol, 1417, 1479
Mothballs, 1486
Motilium, 420
MoviPrep, 1037
Moxeza, 1385
Moxidectin, 552, 1489
Moxidectin and Fluralaner Topical 
Solution, 917
Moxidectin and Imidacloprid Topical 
Solution, 917
Moxidectin Injectable Solution, 917 
Moxidectin/Moxidectin Combination 
Products, 912
Moxidectin Oral Drench Solution, 917 
Moxidectin Oral Gel, 917
Moxidectin Pour-On for Cattle, 917 
Moxidectin/Praziquantel, 1056 
Moxidectin/Praziquantel Oral Gel, 918 
Moxidectin/Sarolaner/Pyrantel, 1094, 1144 
Moxidectin Sustained-Release 
Injectable, 917
Moxidectin Topical Solution, 917 
Moxidectin with Pyrantel Pamoate and 
Sarolaner Chewable Tablets, 918 
Moxifloxacin Ophthalmic, 1385
4-MP , 558
Mucomyst, 12
Mupirocin, Topical, 1432
Muricin, 1432
Murine Tears, 1390
Muro 128, 1400, 1401
Mu-Se, 1313
Mustargen, 804, 805
Myambutol, 485, 487
Mycobacterial Cell Wall Fraction
Immunomodulator, 918 
Mycophenolate, 920
Mycophenolate Motefil Lyophilized Powder 
for Injection, 922
Mycophenolate Motefil Oral Capsules, 922 
Mycophenolate Motefil Oral Tablets, 922 
Mycophenolate Motefil Powder for Oral 
Suspension, 922
Mydriacyl, 1410, 1411
Mylocel, 628
Myorisan, 703
Mytesi, 317

===== PDF_PAGE_1563 =====
1536    Index Index  1537
NAC, 12
N-Acetylcysteine, 12
Nafcillin, 1498
Nalbuphine, 923
Nalbuphine HCl Injectable Solution, 924
Nalbuphine Ophthalmic, 1385
Naloxone, 924
Naloxone HCl Auto-Injector, 926
Naloxone HCl Injection, 926
Naloxone Nasal Spray, 926
Naltrexone, 926
Naltrexone HCl Oral Tablets, 928
Naproxen, 1485
Naquasone Bolus, 366
Narcan, 924, 926
Naropin, 1135, 1137
Nasalcrom, 318
Nasonex, 1417
Natacyn, 1386, 1387
Natamycin Ophthalmic, 1386
Navelbine, 1307
Navigator, 934
Naxcel, 227, 229
Nayzilam, 885
NBB, 164, 165
N-Butylscopolammonium Bromide,
164, 165
Nebcin, 1247
Nedocromil Ophthalmic, 1387 
Nembutal, 998, 1000
Nemex, 1092, 1094
Neomix, 928
Neomycin, 928
Neomycin/Bacitracin/Polymyxin/
Hydrocortisone Ophthalmic, 1372 
Neomycin, Otic, 1473, 1479
Neomycin/Polymyxin B/Bacitracin 
Ophthalmic, 1409
Neomycin/Polymyxin B/Gramicidin 
Ophthalmic, 1409
Neomycin/Polymyxin B Sulfates/
Dexamethasone Ophthalmic, 1360 
Neomycin/Polymyxin/Hydrocortisone 
Ophthalmic, 1372
Neomycin Sulfate Oral Liquid, 929 
Neomycin Sulfate Soluble Powder, 929 
Neomycin Sulfate Tablets, 930 
Neomycin, Topical, 1416, 1418, 1427, 1440 
Neo-Predef with Tetracaine, 1416 
Neoral, 322, 327
Neosar, 318, 321
Neo-Sol 50, 930
Neosol, 633
Neosporin, 1410, 1427
Neostigmine, 930
Neostigmine Methylsulfate Injection, 932 
Neo-Synephrine, 1015
NeoVet, 929
Nepafenac Ophthalmic, 1387 
Neptazane, 846, 848
Neupogen, 522, 524
Neurontin, 568, 570
Neutral Protamine Hagedorn, 670
Nevanac, 1387, 1388
NexGard, 16, 18
NexHA, 607
NexIUM, 478, 481
Nexterone, 56
NFZ, 1433
Niacinamide, 932
Niacinamide Tablets and Capsules, 933
Nicotinamide, 932
Nitazoxanide, 933
Nitazoxanide Oral Paste, 934
Nitazoxanide Oral Tablets, 934
Nitazoxanide Powder for Oral 
Suspension, 935
Nitenpyram, 787, 935
Nitenpyram Oral Tablets, 936
Nitenpyram with Lufenuron, 936
Nitenpyram with Milbemycin and 
Lufenuron, 936
Nitro-Bid, 938, 939
Nitro-Dur, 939
Nitrofurantoin, 936
Nitrofurantoin Macrocrystalline Oral 
Capsules, 938
Nitrofurantoin Monohydrate/
Macrocrystals Oral Capsules, 938
Nitrofurantoin Oral Suspension, 938
Nitrofurazone, Topical, 1433
Nitroglycerin Topical Ointment, 939
Nitroglycerin, Transdermal, 938
Nitropress, 939, 941
Nitroprusside, 939
Nitroprusside Sodium Injection, 941
Nix, 1460
Nizatidine, 941
Nizatidine Capsules, 943
Nizatidine Oral Solution, 943
Nizatidine Tablets, 943
Nizoral, 725, 1437
No-Bite, 1472
Nocdurna, 354
Nocita, 147, 149
N-Octadecanoyl-phytosphingosine, 1475
N-Octyl bicycloheptene dicarboximide,
1460, 1461, 1462
Nolvasan, 1443, 1477 
Noradrenaline, 943 
Norcalciphos, 177, 793, 1022 
Norcuron, 1295 
Norepinephrine, 943 
Norepinephrine Bitartrate for 
Injection, 945
Norocarp, 190, 193 
Noromycin, 976
North American Coral Snake 
Antivenom, 90
Norvasc, 62, 65
Novantrone, 902
Nova Pearls, 1467
Novarel, 261
Novasome Microvesicles, 1428
Novobiocin, 945
Novobiocin Sodium and Penicillin G 
Procaine, 946
Novolin, 1494
Novolin N, 670, 673, 674
Novolin R, 677, 681
NovoLog, 651, 654
Novox, 190, 193
Noxafil, 1043, 1045
NPH Insulin, 670
NTG, 938
Nubain, 923, 1385
NuFlor, 528, 530
NuLev, 633
NuLytely, 1037
Numorphan, 969
Nutr-E-Sol, 1314
Nutrilipid, 769
NutriVed Chewable Zinpro, 1329 
Nutri-Vet Dog Eye Rinse, 1374 
Nyamyc, 1440
Nydrazid, 698
Nystatin, 946
Nystatin/Nystatin Combinations, Topical, 
1418, 1439
Nystatin Oral Suspension, 947
Nystatin Oral Tablets, 947
Nystatin, Otic, 1479
Nystop, 1440
Oclacitinib, 947
Oclacitinib Oral Tablets, 949
Octagam, 651
Octreotide, 950
Octreotide Acetate for Injection, 951 
Octreotide Acetate Powder for Injectable 
Suspension, 951
Ocufen, 1368, 1369
Ocuflox, 1391
Ocular Lubricants, 1388
Ofloxacin Ophthalmic, 1391
Ofloxacin, Otic, 1471
Olopatadine Ophthalmic, 1392 
Olsalazine, 952
Olsalazine Sodium Oral Capsules, 953 
Omega-3/6 Fatty Acids, 501
Omega-3/6 Fatty Acids, Topical, 1422 
Omeprazole, 953
Omeprazole Delayed-Release 
Capsules, 955
Omeprazole Delayed-Release Oral 
Suspension, 955
Omeprazole Delayed-Release Tablets, 955 
Omeprazole Oral Paste, 955 Omeprazole/
Sodium Bicarbonate 
Capsules, 955, 1164
Omeprazole/Sodium Bicarbonate Powder 
for Oral Suspension, 1164 Omeprazole/
Sodium Bicarbonate Powder 
for Suspension, 956
Omeprazole Suspension, 955

===== PDF_PAGE_1564 =====
Index   15371538  Index
Omnaris, 263
Omnipaque, 687, 689
Omnipen, 78, 81
Omnipred, 1397, 1398
Oncovin, 1304
Ondansetron, 956
Ondansetron HCl Injection, 958 
Ondansetron HCl Oral Solution, 958 
Ondansetron HCl Tablets, 958 
Ondansetron Orally Disintegrating Tablets 
or Oral Film, 958
Onguard, 1458
Onsior, 1124, 1126
Opana, 972
o,p’-DDD, 899, 902
Ophytrium, Topical, 1444, 1445, 1446 
Optimmune, 1357
Optixcare, 789
OptixCare Eye Lube, 1389
Oracea, 438
Orapred, 1063
Orbax, 958, 960
Orbenin-DC, 303, 304
Orbifloxacin, 958
Orbifloxacin Oral Suspension, 960 
Orbifloxacin Oral Tablets, 960 
Orbifloxacin, Otic, 1479
Orbifloxacin, Topical, 1416
Ormetoprim/Sulfadimethoxine, 1200 
Osaterone, 960
Osaterone Oral Tablets, 961
Oseltamivir, 961
Oseltamivir Phosphate Oral Capsules, 963 
Oseltamivir Phosphate Powder for Oral 
Suspension, 963
Osmitrol, 793, 795
Osmoglyn, 587
OSPHOS, 286, 287
Osteoform Improved, 177
Osurnia, 1479
Otibiotic, 1478
Oti-Clens, 1477
Otiderm, 1477
OtiRinse, 1477
OtoCetic, 1474
Otomax, 1430, 1478
Otomite, 1473
Otrexup, 859
Ovaban, 817, 819
Ovacyst, 592
Ovuplant, 352
Oxacillin, 963, 1498
Oxacillin Sodium Powder for Injection, 964 
Oxazepam, 964
Oxazepam Capsules, 966
Oxfendazole, 966
Oxfendazole Oral Suspension, 967 
Oxibendazole, 967
Oxibendazole Oral Paste, 968
Oxy 500 Calf Bolus, 976
Oxybuprocaine Ophthalmic, 1345 
Oxybutynin, 968
Oxybutynin Chloride Extended-
Release, 969
Oxybutynin Chloride Oral Syrup, 969 
Oxybutynin Chloride Oral Tablets, 969 
Oxyglobin, 601, 603
Oxymorphone, 969
Oxymorphone HCl for Injection, 972 
Oxymorphone Oral Tablets, 972 
Oxytetracycline, 544, 972
Oxytetracycline and Fluxinin 
Meglumine, 976
Oxytetracycline Base Injection, 976 
Oxytetracycline HCl Injection, 976 
Oxytetracycline HCl, Otic, 1471 
Oxytetracycline Oral Tablets, 976 
Oxytetracycline/Polymyxin B 
Ophthalmic, 1392
Oxytocin, 977
Oxytocin for Injection, 980
Oxytocin Solution for Injection, 980 
Oxytrol, 968, 969
Ozibenz-3, 1428
Pacerone, 56
Palladia, 1249, 1252
2-PAM, 1051
Pamidronate, 980
Pamidronate Disodium Injection, 981
Pamidronate Disodium Lyophilized Powder
for Injection, 981
Panacur, 505, 508
Panakare, 983
Panalog, 1418
Pancrelipase, 981
Pancrelipase Powder, 983
Pancrenzyme Powder, 983
Pancreplus, 983
Pancrepowder Plus, 983
Pancreved, 983
Pantoloc, 983
Pantoprazole, 983
Pantoprazole Lyophilized Powder for 
Injection Solution, 985
Pantoprazole Sodium Delayed-Release 
Granules for Suspension, 985 
Pantoprazole Sodium Delayed-Release 
Tablets, 985
Panzyga, 651
Paracetamol, 7
Parapox Ovis Virus Immunomodulator, 985
Parapox Ovis Virus Immunomodulator 
Injection, 986
Parastar, 1455
Paremyd, 1410, 1411
Parlodel, 140, 141
Parofor, 988
Paromomycin, 986
Paromomycin Oral Solution, 988
Paromomycin Powder, 988
Paromomycin Solution, 988
Paromomycin Sulfate Oral Capsules, 988
Paroxetine, 988
Paroxetine HCl Oral Suspension, 990 
Paroxetine HCl Oral Tablets, 990
Pataday, 1392
Patanol, 1392
Paxil, 988, 990
Pazeo, 1392
PCMX, 1446
Pedia-Lax, 790
Pediapred, 1063
Pediazole, 477
PEG 3350, 1035
Penicillamine, 990
Penicillamine Oral Capsules, 992 
Penicillamine Titratable Oral Tablets, 992 
Penicillin G, 257, 992, 1498
Penicillin G Benzathine Injection, 996 
Penicillin G Potassium Powder for 
Injection, 996
Penicillin G Premixed Injectable 
Solution, 995
Penicillin G Procaine, 946, 992
Penicillin G Procaine Injection, 996 
Penicillin G Sodium Powder for 
Injection, 995
Penicillin V, 996, 1498
Penicillin V Potassium Powder for Oral 
Solution, 998
Penicillin V Potassium Tablets, 997 
Pennox, 972, 976
Pennsaid, 388
Pentastarch, 625, 627
Pentobarbital, 493, 998
Pentobarbital Sodium and Phenytoin 
Sodium for Injection, 494
Pentobarbital Sodium for Injection, 494, 1000 
Pentobarbital Sodium Powder for 
Reconstitution and Injection, 494 
Pentolair, 1356, 1357
Pentosam Polysulfate, 1000
Pentosam Polysulfate Sodium 
Injectable, 1002
Pentosam Polysulfate Sodium Oral 
Capsules, 1002
Pentostam, 1164, 1165
Pentothal, 1225
Pentoxifylline, 1002
Pentoxifylline Controlled-/Extended-
Release Tablets, 1004
Pepcid, 499, 501
Peppermint Oil, 1485
Pepto-Bismol, 133, 135
Percorten-V , 355, 357
Performer, 1473
Pergolide, 1004
Pergolide Mesylate Tablets, 1006
Periactin, 327
Periostat, 438
Permethrin, 1485
Permethrin/Permethrin Combinations, 
Topical, 1453, 1455, 1457, 1458, 1459, 
1461, 1462, 1463

===== PDF_PAGE_1565 =====
1538    Index Index  1539
Peroxiderm, 1428, 1468
PetAction, 1454
PetArmor, 1452, 1458, 1459, 
1472, 1475
Pet-Cal, 177
Pet-Enema, 419
Pethidine, 831
Pet MD, 1468
Petrem, 1159
Petroleum-Based Ocular Lubricants, 1391 
Pexion, 637, 639
Pfizerpen-G, 996
Pharmasal-T, 1467
Pharmaseb, 1436, 1437, 1447, 1474 
Phenadoz, 1076
Phenazopyridine, 1485
Phenergan, 1075
Phenobarbital, 1006
Phenobarbital Elixir/Oral Solution, 1011 
Phenobarbital Sodium Injection, 1011 
Phenobarbital Tablets, 1011 
Phenobarbitone, 1006
Phenol, Topical, 1420 
Phenoxybenzamine, 1011 
Phenoxybenzamine HCl Capsules, 1013 
Phenoxymethylpenicillin, 996 
Phenylbutazone, 1013
Phenylbutazone Granules, 1015 
Phenylbutazone Injection, 1015 
Phenylbutazone Oral Powder, 1015 
Phenylbutazone Paste Oral Syringes, 1015 
Phenylbutazone Tablets, 1015 
Phenylephrine, 1015, 1485 
Phenylephrine HCl Injection, 1017 
Phenylephrine Ophthalmic, 1393 
Phenylephrine Oral Tablets, 1017 
Phenylpropanolamine, 1017 
Phenylpropanolamine Chewable 
Tablets, 1019
Phenylpropanolamine Extended-Release 
Tablets, 1019
Phenylpropanolamine Oral Liquid, 1019 
Phenytoin, 494
Pheromones, 1019
PHnotix, 1476
Phosphate, 1021
Physostigmine, 1022
Physostigmine Salicylate Injection, 1024 
Phyto CHX+KET, 1436
Phytonadione, 1024
Phytonadione Injection, 1026 
Phytonadione Oral Tablets and 
Gelcaps, 1026
Phyto P, 1426
Phytosphingosine HCl, Otic, 1474 
Phytosphingosine Hydrochloride, 1476 
Phytosphingosine, Otic, 1475 
Phytosphingosine, Topical, 1424, 1436, 
1437, 1443, 1445
Pilocarpine Ophthalmic, 1394
Pima, 686
Pimecrolimus Ophthalmic, 1395
Pimecrolimus, Topical, 1465 
Pimobendan, 1026
Pimobendan Chewable Tablets, 1029 
Pimobendan Injectable Solution, 1029 
Pimobendan Oral Solution, 1029
Pin-X, 1094
Piperacillin, 1499
Piperacillin Sodium and Tazobactam 
Injection, 1031
Piperacillin/Tazobactam, 1029 
Piperazine, 1031
Piperonyl Butoxide, Otic, 1472, 1473 
Piperonyl Butoxide, Topical, 1459, 1460, 
1461, 1462
Pirlimycin, 1032
Pirlimycin HCl Sterile Solution, 1033 
Piroxicam, 1033
Piroxicam Oral Capsules, 1035
Pirsue, 1032, 1033
Pitocin, 977, 980
Pivodine, 1450
Planipart, 282
Plaquenil, 623, 625
Plastet Syringe, 946
Platinol, 271, 274
Plavix, 297, 299
Polycitra-K, 276
Polyethylene Glycol 3350, 1035 
Polyethylene Glycol 3350 and Electrolyte 
Solutions, 1037
Polyethylene Glycol 3350 Powder for 
Solution, 1037
Polyethylene Glycol/Hyaluronate-
Containing Ocular Lubricants, 1391 
Polyflex, 78, 81
Polymag, 790
Polymixin B, Topical, 1427, 1439 
Polymyxin B/Bacitracin/Neomycin/
Hydrocortisone Ophthalmic, 1372 
Polymyxin B/Bacitracin/Neomycin 
Ophthalmic, 1409
Polymyxin B/Bacitracin Ophthalmic, 1409 
Polymyxin B/Gramicidin/Neomycin 
Ophthalmic, 1409
Polymyxin B/Neomycin Sulfate/
Dexamethasone Ophthalmic, 1360 
Polymyxin B, Otic, 1471, 1479 
Polymyxin B/Oxytetracycline 
Ophthalmic, 1392
Polymyxin B Sulfate for Injection, 1039 
Polymyxin B, Systemic, 1037
Polyox II, 790
POLYQUAD, 1350
Polysporin, 1427
Polysulfated Glycosaminoglycan, 1039 
Polysulfated Glycosaminoglycan for 
Intra-Articular Injection, 1041 
Polysulfated Glycosaminoglycan for 
Intramuscular Injection, 1041 
Polyurethane Glues, 1486
Polyvinyl Alcohol-Containing Ocular 
Lubricants, 1390
Polyvinylpyrrolidone-Containing Ocular 
Lubricants, 1388, 1390
Ponazuril, 1041
Ponazuril Oral Paste, 1043
Porcine Zinc Insulin, 662, 665 
Posaconazole, 1043
Posaconazole Delayed-Release 
Tablets, 1045
Posaconazole Injection, 1045 
Posaconazole Oral Suspension, 1045 
Posaconazole, Otic, 1479
Posaconazole, Topical, 1416
Posatex, 1045, 1416, 1479
Posatex Otic Suspension, 960
Posilac, 1166, 1167
Potassium, 1045
Potassium Acetate for Injection, 1048 
Potassium Bromide, 137
Potassium Bromide Chewable Tablets, 140 
Potassium Chloride for Injection, 1048 
Potassium Citrate, 274
Potassium Citrate/Cranberry Extract, 276 
Potassium Citrate/Fatty Acids, 276 
Potassium Citrate/Sodium Citrate, 276 
Potassium Citrate/Sodium Citrate/Citric 
Acid, 276
Potassium Gluconate Gel, 1048 
Potassium Gluconate Oral Powder, 1048 
Potassium Gluconate Tablets, 1048 
Potassium Iodide, 685, 686
Potassium Phosphate, 1021, 1022 
Poviderm, 1450
Povidine, 1450
Povidone-Iodine, 1423
Povidone-Iodine Ophthalmic, 1396 
Povidone-Iodine, Topical, 1449
PPS, 1000
Pradofloxacin, 1048
Pradofloxacin Oral Suspension, 1051 
Pradofloxacin Oral Tablets, 1051 
Pralidoxime, 1051
Pralidoxime Chloride for Injection, 1053 
Pramox-1, 1425, 1426
Pramoxine, Topical, 1421, 1424, 1425 
Prascend, 1004, 1006
Praziquantel/Emodepside, 442, 444, 1056 
Praziquantel/Eprinomectin, 465, 467, 1056 
Praziquantel/Febantel/Pyrantel, 1056 
Praziquantel Injection, 1056 
Praziquantel/Ivermectin, 714, 1056 
Praziquantel/Ivermectin/Pyrantel, 714 
Praziquantel/Milbemycin, 887, 1056 
Praziquantel/Milbemycin/Lufenuron, 787, 
887, 1056
Praziquantel/Moxidectin, 918, 1056 
Praziquantel Oral Tablets, 1057 
Praziquantel/Praziquantel Combination 
Products, 1053
Praziquantel/Pyrantel, 1056, 1094 
Praziquantel/Pyrantel/Febantel, 1094 
Praziquantel/Pyrantel/Ivermectin, 
1057, 1094

===== PDF_PAGE_1566 =====
Index   15391540  Index
Praziquantel Tablets, 1056
Prazosin, 1057
Prazosin Capsules, 1058
Precose, 1
Predef 2X, 693, 695
Pred Forte, 1397, 1398
Pred-G, 1371, 1397, 1398
Pred Mild, 1398
PrednisoLONE, 1058, 1491 
Prednisolone Acetate, Topical, 1439 
Prednisolone Acetate/Gentamicin 
Ophthalmic, 1371
PrednisoLONE Acetate Injection, 1063 
PrednisoLONE and Trimeprazine Tartrate 
Tablets, 1063
Prednisolone Ophthalmic, 1397 
PrednisoLONE Oral Tablets, 1063 
Prednisolone, Otic, 1479 
PrednisoLONE Sodium Phosphate Orally 
Disintegrating Tablets, 1063 
PrednisoLONE Sodium Succinate for 
Injection, 1063
PrednisoLONE Sodium Succinate Powder 
for Injection, 1063
PrednisoLONE Syrup/Oral Liquid or 
Solution, 1063
PrednisoLONE Tablets, 1063 
PrednisoLONE Tertiary Butylacetate 
Injection, 1063
Prednisolone/Trimeprazine, 1279 
Prednisolone/Trimeprazine Tablets, 1281 
Prednisone, 1058, 1491
Prednisone Injection, 1063
Prednis-Tab, 1063
Pregabalin, 1064
Pregabalin Oral Capsules, 1065 
Pregabalin Oral Solution, 1065
Pregnyl, 261
PresTab, 587
Prevalite, 257, 259
Preventic, 1450, 1451
Previcox, 525, 527
Priconazole, 1438, 1439
Prilium, 640, 642
Prilocaine, 1424
Prilosec, 953, 955
Primaquine, 1065
Primaquine Phosphate Oral Tablets, 1067 
Primaxin, 642, 644
PrimeX, 823, 825
Primor, 1200, 1202
Primsol, 1197
Princillin, 78, 81
Prinivil, 769, 771
Privigen, 651
Proact, 1452
Pro-Banthine, 1077, 1078
Probenecid, 1067
Probenecid Tablets, 1068
Procainamide, 1068
Procainamide HCl Extended-Release 
Tablets, 1071
Procainamide HCl Immediate-Release 
Capsules, 1071
Procainamide HCl Injection Solution, 1071
Procanbid, 1068
Procarbazine, 1071
Procarbazine HCl Capsules, 1073
Prochlorperazine, 1073
Prochlorperazine for Injection, 1074
Prochlorperazine Suppositories, 1074
Prochlorperazine Tablets, 1074
Procox, 1257
Profender, 442, 444, 1056
Pro-Force, 1460
Proglycem, 382, 384
Program, 785
Proguanil, 109
ProHeart, 912, 917
Proin, 1017, 1019
Prolensa, 1351, 1352
PromAce, 2
Promethazine, 1075
Promethazine HCl for Injection, 1076
Promethazine HCl Oral Syrup, 1076
Promethazine HCl Oral Tablets, 1076
Promethazine HCl Rectal 
Suppositories, 1076
Promethegan, 1076
Pronestyl, 1068
Pronyl OTC, 1454
Propalin, 1019
Propan-B, 1078
Propantheline, 1077
Propantheline Bromide Tablets, 1078
Proparacaine Ophthalmic, 1398
Propecia, 524, 525
Propionibacterium acnes Injection, 1079
PropoFlo, 1080, 1086
Propofol, 1080
Propofol Injectable Emulsion, 1086
Propofol Injection, 1086
Propothesia, 1086
Propranolol, 1086
Propranolol for Injection, 1089
Propranolol HCl Extended-Release 
Capsules, 1089
Propranolol HCl Oral Tablets, 1089
Propranolol Oral Solution, 1089
Propylene Glycol, 1485
Propylene Glycol, Otic, 1475
Proscar, 524, 525
Prospec, 1172
Prostaglandin F2-alpha, 405
Prostigmin, 932
Protamine Zinc Insulin, 1494
Protamine Zinc Recombinant Human 
Insulin, 674, 677
Protazil, 385, 387
Protonix, 983, 985
Protopam Chloride, 1051, 1053
Protopic, 1466
ProvayBlue, 859, 861
Provecta, 1457, 1462
Proventil, 24
Provera, 815, 817
Prozac, 547, 549
ProZinc, 674, 677
Pseudoephedrine, 615, 1089, 1099, 1485 
Pseudoephedrine HCl Capsules, 1090 
Pseudoephedrine HCl Extended-Release 
Tablets, 1090
Pseudoephedrine HCl Tablets, 1090 
Pseudoephedrine Liquid, 1090 
Pseudomonic Acid A, 1432
Psyllium, 1090
Pulmotil, 1240, 1242
PURITE, 1350
PYOclean, 1423
PYOspot, 1422
Pyrantel, 714, 1092
Pyrantel/Febantel/Praziquantel, 1094 
Pyrantel/Ivermectin, 1094
Pyrantel/Ivermectin/Praziquantel, 1057, 1094 
Pyrantel/Moxidectin/Sarolaner, 1094 
Pyrantel Pamoate, 918
Pyrantel Pamoate Chewable Oral 
Tablets, 1094
Pyrantel Pamoate Oral Paste, 1094
Pyrantel Pamoate Oral Suspension, 1094 
Pyrantel Pamoate Tablets, 1094
Pyrantel/Praziquantel, 1056, 1094
Pyrantel/Praziquantel/Febantel, 1056 
Pyrantel/Sarolaner/Moxidectin, 1146 
Pyrantel Tartrate Top Dress, 1094 
Pyrazinamide, 700
Pyrethrin/Pyrethrin Combinations, Otic, 
1472, 1473
Pyrethrin/Pyrethrin Combinations, Topical, 
1459, 1460, 1461
Pyridostigmine, 1094
Pyridostigmine Bromide Extended-Release 
Tablets, 1096
Pyridostigmine Bromide Injection, 1096 
Pyridostigmine Bromide Syrup, 1096 
Pyridostigmine Bromide Tablets, 1096 
Pyridoxine, 1096
Pyridoxine HCl Injection, 1098
Pyridoxine Tablets, 1098
Pyrilamine, 1098
Pyrilamine Granules, 1099
Pyrilamine/Guaifenesin Granules, 1099 
Pyrilamine Maleate/Pseudoephedrine 
Granules, 1099
Pyrilamine Maleate Solution for 
Injection, 1099
Pyrimethamine, 1099
Pyrimethamine/Sulfadiazine, 1101 
Pyrimethamine Tablets, 1101
Pyriproxyfen/Pyriproxyfen Combinations, 
Topical, 1452, 1455, 1457, 1459, 1460, 1462
Qbrelis, 771
Qdolo, 1264
Qoliana, 1349, 1350

===== PDF_PAGE_1567 =====
1540    Index Index  1541
Quadriguard, 1057
Quadritop, 1418, 1440, 1479
Quadruple, 1418
Qudexy XR, 1259
Quelicin, 1188
Quellin, 190, 193
Quest, 912, 917
Quest Plus, 918, 1056
Questran, 257, 259
Quinacrine, 1103
Quinidine, 1104
Quinidine Gluconate Sustained-Release 
Tablets, 1107
Quinidine Sulfate Tablets, 1107
Rabacfosadine, 1107
Rabacfosadine Injection, 1109 
Racemethionine, 852
Raisins, 1485
Ramipril, 1109
Ramipril Oral Capsules, 1111 
Ranitidine, 1111
Ranitidine HCl Injection, 1113 
Ranitidine HCl Oral Capsules, 1113 
Ranitidine HCl Oral Solution/Syrup, 1113 
Ranitidine HCl Oral Tablets, 1113 
Rapanofal, 1080, 1086
Rapid-acting Insulin, 1494
Rasuvo, 859
RattlerAntivenin, 87, 89, 90
Rayos, 1063
ReBalance, 1101, 1102
Reclast, 1329, 1331
Recombinant Human Erythropoietin, 463 
Recombinant Human Thyrotropin Powder 
for Injection, 1228
Reconcile, 547
Re-Covr, 1281, 1282
Reditrex, 859
Refissa, 1470
Reglan, 867, 870
Regonol, 1096
Regular Insulin, 677
Regulin, 823, 825
Regu-Mate, 41, 44
Relief, 1425
Remend Eye Lubricating Drops, 1389 
Remeron, 893, 896
Remifentanil, 1114
Remifentanil HCl Powder for 
Reconstitution, 1116
Renagel, 1155, 1156
Renakare, 1048
Renalzin, 738
Renova, 1470
Renvela, 1155, 1156
Requip, 1135
Reserpine, 1116
Resflor Gold, 530, 544
Resortin, 1418
Respiram, 428
Restasis, 1357, 1358
Resultix, 1457
Retin-A, 1470
Retrovir, 1326, 1327
Revatio, 1159, 1161
Revertidine, 106, 107
ReVia, 926, 928
Revolution, 1147, 1149
Revolution Plus, 1147, 1149, 1151 
Revonto, 340
Rezipres, 457
Rezvoglar, 662
rHuEPO, 463
Rid, 1462
Ridaura, 116, 118
Rifadin, 1118, 1120
Rifamate, 700
Rifampicin, 1118
Rifampin, 700, 1118
Rifampin Lyophilized Powder for 
Injection 
Solution, 1120
Rifampin Oral Capsules, 1120
Rifater, 700
Rifaximin, 1121
Rifaximin Tablets, 1122
Rilexine, 234, 236
Rimadyl, 190, 193
Riomet, 842
Ritalin, 861, 863
Rivaroxaban, 1122
Rivaroxaban Tablets, 1123
Robaxin, 854, 856
Robenacoxib, 1124
Robenacoxib Flavored Oral  
Tablets, 1126
Robenacoxib Flavored Tablets, 1126 
Robenacoxib Solution for Injection, 1126 
Robinul, 588, 590, 591
Robitussin 12 Hour Cough Relief, 376 
Rocaltrol, 170
Rocephin, 230, 232
Rocklatan, 1376, 1377
Rocuronium, 1127
Rocuronium Bromide for Injection, 1128 
Rodenticides, 1486
Romazicon, 537
Romifidine, 1129
Romifidine HCl for Injection, 1130 
Rompun, 1319, 1324
Ronidazole, 1131
Ropinirole, 1132
Ropinirole Ophthalmic Solution, 1135 
Ropinirole Tablets, 1135
Ropivacaine, 1135
Ropivacaine HCl Injection, 1137
Rose Bengal Stain, Ophthalmic, 1399 
Rovera, 190, 193
rPZI, 674, 677
Rubesol, 306
Rumatel, 906, 907
Rumen Bolus, 790
Ryanodex, 340
Ryzolt, 1264
S-Adenosyl-Methionine, 1137
S-Adenosyl-Methionine Chewable
Tablets, 1139
S-Adenosyl-Methionine Enteric-Coated
Tablets, 1139
S-Adenosyl-Methionine/Silybin, 1139
S-Adenosyl-Methionine/Silybin Chewable
Tablets, 1142
S-Adenosyl-Methionine/Silybin Enteric-
Coated Tablets, 1142
S-Adenosyl-Methionine/Silybin Hard
Tablets, 1142
Safe-Guard, 505, 508
Salbutamol, 24
Salex, 1468
Salicylic Acid, 1425, 1428, 1439
Salicylic Acid, Otic, 1474, 1476, 1477 
Salicylic Acid, Topical, 1447, 1466, 
1467, 1469
Saline Cathartics, 1143
Salix, 563, 568
Salmeterol, 554
Salvax, 1468
SAMe, 1137, 1139
Sandimmune, 322, 327
Sandostatin, 950, 951
Sarna Sensitive, 1426
Sarolaner, 918, 1144
Sarolaner Chewable Tablets, 1147 
Sarolaner/Moxidectin/Pyrantel, 1094, 1146 
Sarolaner/Selamectin, 1144, 1147, 1149 
Scalacort, 1415
Sebozole, 1439, 1447
Sedivet, 1129, 1130
Selamectin, 1147, 1489
Selamectin/Sarolaner, 1147, 1149 
Selamectin Topical Solution, 1149 
Selegiline, 1151
Selegiline HCl Tablets and Capsules, 1153 
Selegiline HCl Transdermal Patch, 1153 
Selegiline Orally Disintegrating 
Tablets, 1153
Selenium, 1311, 1313, 1314
Selenium Sulfide, Topical, 1440, 1468, 1469 
Selsun Blue, 1441
Semglee, 662
Semintra, 1208, 1210
Sensorcaine, 144, 146
Sentinel, 785, 887
Sentinel Spectrum, 785, 1056
Sentry, 1452, 1460, 1463
Sentry Fiproguard, 1454, 1458
Serax, 964
Seresto, 1456
Sergeant’s Vetscription MITEaway, 1472 
Sertraline, 1153
Sertraline HCl Oral Solution 
Concentrate, 1155
Sertraline HCl Tablets, 1155
Settle, 919
Sevelamer, 1155
Sevelamer Carbonate Oral Tablets, 1156

===== PDF_PAGE_1568 =====
Index   15411542  Index
Sevelamer Carbonate Powder for Oral 
Suspension, 1156
Sevelamer HCl Oral Tablets, 1156 
SevoFlo, 1156, 1159
Sevoflurane, 1156
ShieldTec, 1460, 1463
Short-acting Insulin, 1494
Siccaderm, 1468, 1469
Siklos, 629
Sildenafil, 1159
Sildenafil Citrate Injection Solution, 1161 
Sildenafil Citrate Oral Tablets, 1161 
Sildenafil Citrate Powder for Oral 
Suspension, 1161
Silenor, 430
Sileo, 367
Silvadene, 1399, 1434
Silver Honey, 1431
Silver L, 1423
Silver Sulfadiazine, 455
Silver Sulfadiazine Ophthalmic, 1399 
Silver Sulfadiazine, Otic, 1471
Silver Sulfadiazine, Topical, 1433 
Silybin/Silymarin, 1139, 1142
Simbadol, 150
Simbrinza, 1349, 1350, 1351
Simparica, 1144, 1147, 1151
Simparica Trio, 912, 918, 1094, 1144, 1147 
Simplicef, 214
Simply Pure, 1421
Sinequan, 429
Singulair, 905, 906
SkinGuard, 1424, 1425, 1476
SMOFlipid, 769
Sochlor, 1400, 1401
Socumb, 494
Sodium Bicarbonate, 1161
Sodium Bicarbonate Injection, 1164 
Sodium Bicarbonate Neutralizing Additive 
Solution, 1164
Sodium Bicarbonate Powder, 1164 
Sodium Bicarbonate Tablets, 1164 
Sodium Bromide, 137
Sodium Chloride (Hypertonic), 633, 635 
Sodium Chloride (Hypertonic) 
Ophthalmic, 1400
Sodium EDTA Ophthalmic, 1363 
Sodium Hypochlorite, Topical, 1449 
Sodium Iodide, 685, 686
Sodium Molybdate, 904
Sodium Pentosan Polysulfated, 1000 
Sodium Phosphate, 1021, 1022
Sodium Stibogluconate, 1164
Sodium Stibogluconate for Injection, 1165 
Sodium Sulfate, 1143, 1144
Sodium Thiosulfate, 1165, 1425, 1447 
Sodium Thiosulfate for Injection, 1166 
Sojourn, 1159
Solaraze, 388
Solensia, 561, 562
Solfoton, 1011
Solliquin, 734
Solodyn, 890, 893
Solu-Cortef, 615, 617
Solu-Delta Cortef, 1063
Solu-Medrol, 863, 867
Solva-Ker, 1467
Somatotropin, 1166
Somnopentyl, 1000
Soothe XP , 1391
Sorbitol, 1168
Sorbitol 70% Enema Solution, 1169
Sorbitol Granules, 1169
Sorbitol Oral Suspension, 1169
Sorine, 1171
Sotalol, 1169
Sotalol HCl Oral Solution, 1171
Sotalol HCl Tablets, 1171
Sotret, 703
Sotylize, 1171
Spectinomycin, 1171
Spectinomycin Dihydrochloride 
Injection, 1172
Spectinomycin Dihydrochloride Oral 
Tablets, 1172
Spectinomycin Dihydrochloride 
Pentahydrate Injection, 1172
Spectinomycin/Lincomycin, 1172
Spectinomycin Oral Solution, 1172
Spectinomycin Sulfate Injection, 1172
Spectinomycin Water Soluble Powder, 1172
Spectogard, 1171, 1172
Spectramast, 224, 226, 227
Spectra Sure, 1454
Spinetoram, Topical, 1463
Spinosad, 887, 1173
Spinosad Chewable Tablets, 1175
Spinosad/Milbemycin Chewable 
Tablets, 1175
Spinosad 0.9% Topical Suspension, 1175
Spironolactone, 1175
Spironolactone/Benazepril, 1177
Spironolactone/Benazepril HCl Chewable 
Tablets, 1180
Spironolactone/Benzapril Tablets, 1177
Spironolactone/Hydrochlorothiazide Oral 
Tablets, 612, 1177
Spironolactone Oral Tablets, 1177
SPL, 1182, 1183
Sporanox, 704, 708, 1374
Squalene, Otic, 1475
SSD, 1399, 1433, 1434, 1471
SSKI, 685, 686
Stadol, 157
Stanozolol, 1180
Staphage Lysate, 1182, 1183
Staphylococcus Aureus Phage Lysate, 1182
Stelfonta, 1232, 1235
Stimate, 354
Streptozocin, 1184
Streptozocin Powder for Injection, 1185
Stronghold, 1151
Strongid T, 1092, 1094
Sublimaze, 512, 514
Succimer, 1185
Succimer Capsules, 1186 
Succinylcholine, 1187
Succinylcholine Chloride Injection, 1188 
Sucralfate, 1189
Sucralfate Suspension, 1190
Sucralfate Tablets, 1190
SucroMate, 351, 352
Sudafed, 1017, 1089, 1090, 1485 
Sufenta, 1190, 1192
Sufentanil, 1190
Sufentanil Citrate Injection, 1192 
Suffusion, 1425, 1426
Sulbactam, 82, 1499
Sulfacetamide Ophthalmic, 1401 
Sulfadiazine/Pyrimethamine, 1101 
Sulfadiazine/Trimethoprim, 1193, 1197 
Sulfadimethoxine 12.5% Concentrated 
Solution, 1199
Sulfadimethoxine, 1197 
Sulfadimethoxine Injection, 1199 
Sulfadimethoxine Oral Boluses, 1199 
Sulfadimethoxine Oral Suspension, 1199 
Sulfadimethoxine Oral Tablets, 1199 
Sulfadimethoxine/Ormetoprim, 1200 
Sulfadimethoxine/Ormetoprim 
Tablets, 1202
Sulfadimethoxine Soluble Powder, 1199 
Sulfamethazine, 257 
Sulfamethoxazole/Trimethoprim, 
1193, 1197
Sulfasalazine, 1202
Sulfasalazine Delayed-Release  
Tablets, 1204
Sulfasalazine Tablets, 1204 
Sulfathiazole, 257
Sulfatrim, 1197
Sulfazine, 1204
Sulfisoxazole Acetyl, 477
Sulfodene, 1467, 1469, 1477
Sulfur & Tar, 1468, 1469
Sulfur Benz, 1428, 1469
Sulfur, Topical, 1466, 1467, 1468 
Suntheanine, 734
Super Guard Plus, 1225
Suprane, 349, 350
Suprax, 205, 206
Suprelorin F , 351, 352
Surfak, 419
Surolan, 1479
Surpass, 387, 388
Swimmer’s Ear Astringent, 1477
Symax, 633
Symjepi, 460
Symmetrel, 45
Synanthic, 966, 967
Synotic, 404, 1477
Synsac, 404
Synthroid, 749, 752
Syprine, 1274, 1275
Systane Lubricant Eye Gel, 1390

===== PDF_PAGE_1569 =====
1542    Index Index  1543
Tacrolimus Ophthalmic, 1402 
Tacrolimus, Topical, 1465
Tadalafil, 1204
Tadalafil Oral Tablets, 1205 
Tafluprost Ophthalmic, 1403 
Tagamet, 263, 265
Tamarinds, 1485
Tamiflu, 961, 963
Tamsulosin, 1205
Tamsulosin HCl Capsules, 1207 
Tanovea, 1107, 1109
Tapazole, 849, 852
Taurine, 1207
Taurine Liquid, 1208
Taurine Tablets, 1208
Tazicef, 219, 221
Tazidime, 221
Tazobactam, 1029, 1499
Tears Again, 1391
Tea Tree Oil, 1485
Telazol, 1236, 1240
Telmisartan, 1208
Telmisartan Oral Solution, 1210 
Telmisartan Oral Tablets, 1210 
Temaril-P , 1063, 1279, 1281
Tenormin, 103, 105
Tensilon, 440
Terbinafine, 1210
Terbinafine/Florfenicol/Mometasone 
Furoate Otic Solution, 1213 
Terbinafine HCl Oral Tablets, 1213 
Terbinafine, Otic, 1478, 1479 
Terbinafine, Topical, 1441 
Terbinafine Topical Cream/Spray, 1213 
Terbutaline, 1213
Terbutaline Injection, 1215 
Terbutaline Tablets, 1215 
Terramycin, 972, 976, 1392, 1393, 1471 
Terrell, 697
Tersi, 1441
Testopel, 1217
Testosterone, 1215
Testosterone Cypionate Injection, 1217 
Testosterone Enanthate Injection, 1217 
Testosterone Pellets for Subcutaneous 
Implantation, 1217
Testosterone Undecanoate Solution for 
Injection, 1217
Tetracaine HCl, Otic, 1479 
Tetracaine HCl, Topical, 1416 
Tetracaine Ophthalmic, 1404 
Tetrachlorvinphos, 1459 
Tetracosactide, 314
Tetracycline, 1217
Tetracycline HCl Capsules, 1220 
Tetracycline HCl Soluble Powder, 1220 
Tetrastarch, 625, 627
Tetravisc, 1404, 1405
TFT, 1408
Theo-24, 1223
Theochron, 1223
Theophylline, 1220
Theophylline Elixir, 1223
Theophylline Extended-Release Capsules 
and Tablets, 1223
TheraHoney, 1431, 1432
TheraTears, 1390
Therios, 237
Thermazene, 1399, 1434
Thiabendazole, Otic, 1473, 1479
Thiamazole, 849
Thiamine, 1223
Thiamine Capsules, 1225
Thiamine HCl Injection, 1225
Thiamine HCl Supplement, 1225
Thiamine Monohydrate Supplement, 1225
Thiamine Mononitrate Supplement, 1225
Thiamine Tablets, 1225
Thiola, 1245, 1246, 1247
Thiopental, 1225
Thiostrepton, Otic, 1479
Thiostrepton, Topical, 1418, 1440
Thonzonium Bromide, Otic, 1479
Thorazine, 253
Thyquidity, 752
Thyrogen, 1228
Thyroid Stimulating Hormone, 1227
Thyrosafe, 686
Thyro-Tabs Canine, 749, 752
Thyrotropin Alfa, 1227
Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone, 1228
Tiamulin, 1230
Tiamulin Medicated Premix, 1231
Tiamulin Solution as Hydrogen 
Fumarate, 1231
Tiamulin Solution for Injection, 1231
Tigilanol Tiglate, 1232
Tigilanol Tiglate Injection, 1235
Tildipirosin, 1235
Tildipirosin Injection, 1236
Tildren, 1242, 1243
Tiletamine/Zolazepam, 1236
Tiletamine/Zolazepam as Lyophilized 
Powder, 1240
Tilmicosin, 1240
Tilmicosin for Subcutaneous 
Injection, 1242
Tilmicosin Phosphate Aqueous 
Concentrate, 1242
Tilmovet, 1242
Tiludronic Acid Lyophilized Powder, 1243
Tiludronic Acid/Tiludronate, 1242
Timolol Maleate, 1350
Timolol Ophthalmic, 1405
Timoptic, 1405, 1406
Tindamax, 1244, 1245
Tinidazole, 1244
Tinidazole Tablets, 1245
Tiopronin, 1245
Tiopronin Delayed-Release Tablets, 1247
Tiopronin Tablets, 1246
Tirosint, 752
Tissue Plasminogen Activator, 1340
Tobradex, 1359, 1360, 1406, 1407, 1479
Tobramycin/Dexamethasone 
Ophthalmic, 1360
Tobramycin Ophthalmic, 1406 
Tobramycin, Otic, 1471, 1479 
Tobramycin Sulfate Powder for 
Injection, 1249
Tobramycin Sulfate Solution for 
Injection, 1249
Tobramycin, Systemic, 1247
Tobrex, 1406, 1407, 1471
Toceranib, 1249
Toceranib Phosphate Oral Tablets, 1252 
ToDAY, 237, 238
Tofranil, 646, 648
Tolazine, 1252, 1254
Tolazoline, 1252
Tolazoline HCl Solution, 1254 
Tolfedine, 1254
Tolfenamic Acid, 1254
Toltrazuril, 1255
Toltrazuril Sulfone, 1041 
ToMORROW, 237, 238
Topamax, 1257, 1259
Topicaine, 1424
Topical Diclofenac, 387
Topiragen, 1259
Topiramate, 1257
Topiramate Oral Solution, 1259 
Topiramate Oral Tablets and 
Capsules, 1259
Topiramate Sprinkle Capsules, 1259 
Topiramate Sprinkle Capsules Extended-
Release, 1259
Toprol XL, 870, 872
Toradol, 732
Torbugesic, 157, 164
Torbutrol, 157, 164
Torsemide, 1259
Torsemide Injection, 1261
Torsemide Oral Tablets, 1261
Toujeo, 659, 662, 1494
ToxiBan, 240, 242, 1169
tPA, 1340
Tracrium, 109, 112
Tramadol, 1261
Tramadol HCl Extended-Release Tablets 
and Capsules, 1264
Tramadol HCl Oral Solution, 1264 
Tramadol HCl Oral Tablets, 1264 
Tranexamic Acid, 1264
Tranexamic Acid for Injection, 1266 
Tranexamic Acid Tablets, 1266 
Transdermal Nitroglycerin, 938 
Tranxene, 301, 303
Travatan Z, 1407, 1408
Travel-Ease, 807
Travoprost Ophthalmic, 1407 
Travtabs, 400
Trazodone, 1266
Trazodone Oral Tablets, 1269
Trental, 1002
Tresaderm, 1473, 1479

===== PDF_PAGE_1570 =====
Index   15431544  Index
Tretinoin, Topical, 1469
Trexall, 859
TRH, 1228
Triamcinolone, 1269, 1491 
Triamcinolone Acetate, Topical, 1440 
Triamcinolone Acetonide Injection, 1273 
Triamcinolone Acetonide, Otic, 1479 
Triamcinolone, Topical, 1417, 1418 
Triaminic Children’s Allergy, 411 
Triamterene, 1273
Triamterene Capsules, 1274 
Triamulox, 1231
Trianex, 1418
Tribrissen, 1197
TriCalm, 1419
Trichlormethiazide, 366 
Triclabendazole, 918
TriCor, 508
Triderm, 1418
Trientine, 1274
Trientine HCl Oral Capsules, 1275 
Trifexis, 887, 1173, 1175
Trifluorothymidine, 1408
Trifluridine Ophthalmic, 1408
TriForce, 1463
Triglide, 510
Tri-Hist Granules, 1099 
Triiodothyronine, 765
Trilipix, 510
Trilostane, 1275
Trilostane Oral Capsules, 1278
TriLyte, 1037
Trimeprazine/Prednisolone, 1279 
Trimeprazine Tartrate, 1063 
Trimethoprim/Sulfadiazine, 1193, 1197 
Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole, 
1193, 1197
Trimidox, 1197
Triostat, 765, 766
Tri-Otic, 1430
Tripelennamine, 1281
Tripelennamine HCl for Injection, 1282 
Triple Antibiotic Ophthalmic, 1409 
Triptone, 400
Tris-EDTA, 1437, 1438, 1439
Tris-EDTA, Otic, 1471, 1474
Tritop, 1416, 1479
TrizCHLOR 4HC, 1415
TrizChlor, 1443, 1444, 1445, 1471 
TrizEDTA, 1443, 1444, 1445, 1446, 
1471, 1474
TrizUltra, 1437, 1471
Trocoxil, 802, 803
Trokendi, 1259
Tropicacyl, 1410, 1411
Tropicamide Ophthalmic, 1410 
Truprofen, 193
Trusopt, 1362, 1363
TSH, 1227
Tubex, 606, 996, 1000
Tulathromycin, 731, 1282
Tulathromycin and Ketoprofen 
Injection, 1284
Tulathromycin Injection, 1284
Tumil-K, 1048
Twinject, 460
Tylan, 1284, 1286
Tylenol, 7, 9
Tylosin, 1284
Tylosin Injection, 1286
Tylosin Tartrate Powder, 1286
UAA Gel, 243
Uceris, 142, 143
UDCA, 1287
UFH, 603
UlcerGard, 953, 955
Ultane, 1156, 1159
Ultiva, 1114, 1116
Ultracet, 1264
Ultram, 1261, 1264
UltraOtic, 1474, 1475, 1477
Unasyn, 82, 84
Unfractionated Heparin, 603
Uniferon, 693
Uniprim, 1193, 1197
Unisom Sleep, 411
Unithroid, 752
Universal Animal Antidote Gel, 243 
Universal Medicated Shampoo, 1468, 1469 
Untreated Raw Honey, 1431
Urecholine, 130, 132
Urex, 848
Urocit-K, 274, 276
Urosdeoxycholic Acid, 1287
URSO, 1287, 1288
Ursodiol, 1287
Ursodiol Oral Capsules, 1288
Ursodiol Oral Tablets, 1288
Valacyclovir, 1289
Valacyclovir Oral Tablets, 1290
Valbazen, 20, 22
Valchlor, 805
Valium, 378, 382
Valtrex, 1288, 1290
Vancocin, 1291, 1292
Vancomycin, 1291
Vancomycin for IV Injection in 
Dextrose, 1292
Vancomycin HCl Oral Capsules, 1292 
Vancomycin HCl Powder for IV Injection 
Solution, 1292
Vancomycin Ophthalmic, 1411 
Vancomycin Oral Solution, 1292
Vantin, 214, 216
Vasodilan, 703
Vasopressin, 1293
Vasopressin Injection, 1295
Vasostrict, 1293, 1295
Vasotec, 445, 448
Vasotop, 1109
Vatinoxan, 811
Vectra 3D, 1460, 1463
Vectra, 1453
Vecuronium, 1295
Vecuronium Bromide Powder for 
Injection, 1297
Vecuronium Bromide Solution for 
Injection, 1297
Velban, 1302, 1304
VenomVet, 87, 89, 90
Ventipulmin, 280, 282
Ventolin, 24
Veraflox, 1048, 1051
Verapamil, 1297
Verapamil HCl Extended-Release 
Capsules, 1299
Verapamil HCl for Injection, 1299 
Verapamil HCl Sustained-Release 
Tablets, 1299
Verapamil HCl Tablets, 1299 
Verdinexor, 1300
Verdinexor Coated Tablets, 1302 
Verelan, 1297, 1299
Veripred, 1063
Vermisol, 1094
Versed, 880
VetaDerm Tetrafect, 1418
Vetadine, 1450
VetaKet, 724
Vetalar, 717, 724
Vetalog, 1269, 1273, 1418
Vetasan, 1443
Vetasyl Fiber Tablets for Cats, 1091 
Vet Beta-Gen, 1430, 1479
Vetergen Hydrocortisone, 1415 
Vetericyn Antimicrobial Ear Rinse, 1474
Vetericyn Pink Eye Spray, 1449 
Vetericyn Plus, 1449, 1477
Vetericyn Plus Eye Wash, 1374 
Veterinary Formula, 1461
Veterinary Formula Clinical Care, 1460 
Vet-Kem Ovitrol Plus, 1459, 1461 
Vetmedin, 1026, 1029
Vetmulin, 1231
Vetoryl, 1275, 1278
VetOtic, 1477
Vetpen, 665
Vetprofen, 190, 193
VetraSeb, 1425, 1426, 1436, 1437, 1443, 
1444, 1445, 1474
Vetraseb HC, 1415
Vetrimycin, 976
Vetromax, 1430
Vetropolycin HC, 1372
Vet Solutions, 1475
Vetstarch, 625, 627
Vetsulin, 662, 665
Vfend, 1314, 1317, 1412
Viagra, 1159, 1161
Vibramycin, 433, 438
Vibra-Tabs, 438
Vicodin, 612, 615

===== PDF_PAGE_1571 =====
1544    Index Index  1545
Vicoprofen, 615
Victeon, 245
Vidalta, 184, 186
Vigamox, 1385
Vinblastine, 1302
Vinblastine Powder for Injection, 1304 
Vinblastine Sulfate Injection, 1304 
Vinca Alkaloids, 1489
Vincasar PFS, 1304, 1307 
Vincristine, 1304
Vincristine Sulfate Injection, 1307 
Vinegar, 11, 1486
Vinorelbine, 1307
Vinorelbine Sulfate Injection, 1309 
Viokase, 981, 983
Viralys, 789
Virbagen Omega, 683, 684 
Virbantel, 1056, 1094
Viroptic, 1408, 1409
Visine Tears Dry Eye Relief, 1390 
Vistaril, 629, 631
Vital E-500, 1313
Vitamin A, 1310, 1485
Vitamin A Acid, 1469
Vitamin A Oral Capsules, 1311 
Vitamin A Palmitate for IM  
Injection, 1311
Vitamin B1, 1223
Vitamin B6, 1096
Vitamin B9, 556
Vitamin B12, 304, 306
Vitamin C, 96
Vitamin D2, 470
Vitamin D3 Analogue, 170 
Vitamin D, 1485
Vitamin E + Selenium, 1311 
Vitamin E + Selenium Injection, 
1313, 1314
Vitamin E + Selenium Oral, 1313 
Vitamin E, 1311
Vitamin E Capsules, 1314 
Vitamin E Drops, 1314 
Vitamin E Injection, 1313 
Vitamin E Liquid, 1314 
Vitamin E Oral Liquid, 1313 
Vitamin E Tablets, 1314
Vitamin K1, 1024, 1486
Vita-Plus E, 1314
Vivlodex, 829
Voltaren, 1360, 1361
Voltaren Gel, 388
Voluven, 627
Voriconazole, 1314
Voriconazole Ophthalmic, 1412 
Voriconazole Powder for Injection, 1317 
Voriconazole Powder for Oral 
Suspension, 1317
Voriconazole Tablets, 1316
Vyzulta, 1376
Warfarin, 1317
Warfarin Sodium Oral Tablets, 1319 
White Mineral Oil, 1475
Winstrol-V, 1180
Xalatan, 1376, 1377  
Xanax, 39, 41
Xatmep, 859
Xarelto, 1122, 1123 
Xelpros, 1376, 1377
Xembify, 651
Xeno 50-Mini, 714
Xeno, 714
Xifaxan, 1121, 1122
Xolegel, 1437
Xolido, 1423
Xrylix, 388
Xylazine, 1319
Xylazine Injection, 1324 
Xylitol, 1485
Xylocaine, 752, 756, 760, 1424
Yeast Dough, 1485
Yobine, 1324, 1325 
Yohimbine, 1324 
Yohimbine Sterile Solution for 
Injection, 1325 
Ypozane, 960, 961
Zactran, 571, 572
Zaditor, 1376
Zanosar, 1184, 1185
Zantac, 1111, 1113
Zegerid, 955, 956
Zelapar, 1153
Zemuron, 1127
Zenalpha, 811, 814
Zeniquin, 796, 798
Zephrex D, 1090
Zestril, 769, 771
Zetonna, 263
Zidovudine, 1326
Zidovudine Injection Solution, 1327
Zidovudine Oral Capsules, 1327
Zidovudine Oral Syrup, 1327
Zidovudine Oral Tablets, 1327
Zimecterin Gold, 714, 1056
Zimeta, 413, 415
Zinacef, 232, 234
Zinc, 1487
Zinc Capsules, 1329
Zinc Gluconate (Neutralized), 
Topical, 1426
Zinc Injection, 1329
Zinc Oxide, Topical, 1468, 1469
Zinc, Systemic, 1327
Zinc Tablets, 1329
Zinecard, 372, 373
Zioptan, 1403, 1404
Zirgan, 1369
Zithromax, 120, 123
Zobuxa, 450, 455
Zodiac, 1452, 1458, 1460, 1461
Zofran, 956, 958
Zohydro ER, 615
Zolazepam/Tiletamine, 1236
Zoledronic Acid, 1329
Zoledronic Acid Injection, 1331
Zolicef, 201
Zoloft, 1153, 1155
Zometa, 1329, 1331
Zonegran, 1331, 1333
Zonisamide, 1331
Zonisamide Capsules, 1333
Zorbium, 150
Zosyn, 1029, 1031
Zovirax, 14, 16
Zuplenz, 958
Zuprevo, 1235, 1236
Zyclara, 1464, 1465
Zycortal, 355, 357
Zydax, 1002
Zylet, 1381, 1382, 1406, 1407
Zylexis, 985, 986
Zyloprim, 37, 39
Zymar, 1370
Zymaxid, 1370
Zymox, 1415, 1448, 1477, 1478
Zyrtec, 238, 240
Zyvox, 762, 764

===== PDF_PAGE_1572 =====


===== PDF_PAGE_1573 =====
 VETERINARY DRUG HANDBOOK
10TH EDITION
James A. Budde 
Dawn M. McCluskey
The Tenth Edition of Plumb’s® Veterinary Drug Handbook 
updates the most comprehensive, detailed, and trusted 
source of drug information relevant to veterinary medicine. 
Covering dosages, drug interactions, adverse effects, and 
contraindications, among other key drug details, this bestselling 
book is a must for practicing veterinarians and anyone requiring 
reliable information on the use of drugs in animals. Designed 
for ease of use, the book surveys an exhaustive list of drugs 
with applications for a wide variety of species, including 
dogs, cats, birds, small mammals, and farm animals.
This edition includes updates to all 738 drug monographs and  
adds 30 new monographs, including 9 new insulin monographs,  
to its exhaustive coverage of drugs used in the care of animals.  
This new edition:
•  Provides an extensively reviewed and updated version of  
    the must-have veterinary drug reference
•  Includes 30 new drug monographs, including 9 new  
    insulin monographs
•  Updates all 738 drug monographs, with robust citing of  
    new information
•  Covers a wide variety of species, including dogs, cats,  
    birds, small mammals, and farm animals
•  Presents detailed dosing information for an exhaustive list  
    of drugs used in animals
Plumb’s® exhaustive coverage of drugs relevant to the veterinary 
field makes this book an essential reference for veterinarians, 
veterinary technicians, veterinary pharmacologists, pharmacists 
with veterinary patients, and libraries that serve these groups.
Find drug dosages and other critical  
information for prescribing drugs to  
animals quickly and efficiently in this  
fully updated new edition of this 
must-have veterinary resource
 VETERINARY DRUG  HANDBOOK
10TH EDITION
Cover Design: VetMedux
www.wiley.com/go/veterinary
About the Authors
James A. Budde,  
PharmD, RPh, DICVP
Dr. Budde is Senior Pharmacy 
Officer for Plumb’s® and is  
based out of Madison,  
Wisconsin.
Dawn M. McCluskey, DVM
Dr. McCluskey is Veterinary  
Officer of Pharmacy for  
Plumb’s® and is based out 
of Madison, Wisconsin.
plumbs.com
