

=== BSAVA PDF PAGE 286 ===

BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline 270  Mirtazapine  (Zispin)   POM  Formulations:   Oral:   15 mg tablets, 15 mg/ml solution. Also  available as a transdermal formulation on a named patient basis.  Action:   Tricyclic antidepressant that acts on central alpha-2  receptors which leads to increased noradrenaline levels within the  brain. Also inhibits several types of serotonin receptors and  histamine (H1) receptors.  Use:  •   Appetite stimulation in dogs and cats. Efficacy in cats with stable  chronic kidney disease has been demonstrated.  •   Antiemetic role in conjunction with other drugs, but authorized  preparations should be used.  •   Anecdotal use beginning to appear concerning its use in the  management of social fears in dogs.  Monitor animal carefully when using mirtazapine, particularly if there  is also cardiac, hepatic or renal disease.  Safety and handling:   Normal precautions should be observed.  Contraindications:   Do not use in patients with pre-existing  haematological disease.  Adverse reactions:   Sedation is common and can be profound.  Can affect behaviour in many different ways, increased vocalization  and interaction with others. Has been associated with blood  dyscrasias in humans.  Drug interactions:   Several interactions known in humans,  principally involving other behaviour-modifying drugs.  DOSES  Dogs:   1.1–1.3 mg/kg p.o. q24h.  Cats:   1.9 mg/cat p.o. q48h (can double dose if needed or increase  frequency to q24h but not both).  Misoprostol  (Cytotec*)   POM  Formulations:   Oral:   200   μ g tablet.  Action:   Cytoprotection of the gastric mucosa: it inhibits gastric  acid secretion and increases bicarbonate and mucus secretion,  epithelial cell turnover and mucosal blood flow. It prevents,  and promotes healing of, gastric and duodenal ulcers, particularly  those associated with the use of NSAIDs. Some reports suggest  it may not prevent gastric bleeding associated with high doses  of methylprednisolone. It may also be useful in the management of  canine atopy, although other treatments are likely safer. Z  Y  X  W  V  U  T  S  R  Q  P  O  N  M  L  K  J  I  H  G  F  E  D  C  B  A

=== BSAVA PDF PAGE 287 ===

BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline 271 Z Y X W U  T  S  R  Q  P  O  N  M  L  K  J  I  H  G  F  E  D  C  B  A  V  Use:  •   Protection against NSAID-induced gastric ulceration. In humans,  higher doses (20   μ g (micrograms)/kg p.o. q6–12h) are used to  manage pre-existing NSAID-induced gastric ulceration, while  doses of 2–5   μ g/kg p.o. q6–8h are used prophylactically to  prevent ulceration.  •   Has been used in combination with aglepristone to induce  abortion in dogs and cats.  Give with food. Combinations with diclofenac are available for  humans, but are not suitable for small animals because of different  NSAID pharmacokinetics.  Safety and handling:   Women who are, or might be, pregnant  should avoid handling this drug.  Contraindications:   Do not use in pregnant animals.  Adverse reactions:   Diarrhoea, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting  and abortion.  Drug interactions:   Use of misoprostol with gentamicin may  exacerbate renal dysfunction.  DOSES  Dogs:  •   Protection against NSAID-induced gastric ulceration:   2–5   μ g  (micrograms)/kg p.o. q8–12h.  •   Atopic dermatitis:   3–6   μ g/kg p.o. q8h has been suggested.  Cats:   Protection against NSAID-induced gastric ulceration:   5   μ g  (micrograms)/kg p.o. q8h.  Mitotane   (o,p'-DDD)  (Lysodren*)   POM  Formulations:   Oral:   500 mg tablet or capsule.  Action:   Necrosis of the adrenal cortex reducing the production of  adrenal cortical hormones.  Use:  •   Management of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism  (HAC) in dogs. However, other medications are authorized for  this condition ( see Trilostane ).  •   Has been used in the management of adrenal-dependent HAC,  but with variable success.  Mitotane is available from Europe for animals that have failed  trilostane therapy. It should be given with food high in fat/oil to  improve its absorption. Closely monitor for any decrease in  appetite (typically seen within 3–10 days of therapy); an ACTH  stimulation test should be performed to monitor treatment  efficacy. In diabetic animals the insulin dose should be reduced  by 30%. The addition of prednisolone is generally not