

=== PDF PAGE 920 ===

Mirtazapine   893  Lyme borreliosis   (extra-label): 10 mg/kg IV or PO once or twice daily for 30 days 12  CATS :  Susceptible infections including respiratory tract infections  (extra-label): Based on a pharmacokinetic study and typical bacte- rial MIC, 8.8 mg/kg PO every 24 hours. 23,37  Anecdotal dosing rec- ommendations range from 5 – 25 mg/kg PO twice daily, whereas 5 – 12.5 mg/kg PO twice daily is commonly noted. Practically, 50 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 24 hours is recommended.  HORSES :  Susceptible (MIC less than or equal to 0.25 μg/mL) nonocu- lar infections   (extra-label): Based on pharmacokinetic data, 4 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. 25,40  Oral absorption is improved if hay is withheld for 2 hours after administration. 28  Monitoring  ■ Clinical efficacy: resolving signs of infection; culture and suscep- tibility testing if indicated  ■ Adverse effects (eg, nausea, vomiting)  Client Information  ■ Oral minocycline works best when given without food. If your an- imal vomits or acts sick after receiving the medicine on an empty stomach, try giving the next dose with a small amount of food or a treat.  ■ Do not give as a dry pill. Give this medicine with a moist treat or small amount of liquid to be sure it reaches the stomach. This is especially important in cats as minocycline may cause ulcers in the throat and esophagus if the pill gets stuck there before it reaches the stomach. If your animal has trouble swallowing or eat- ing, contact your veterinarian immediately.  ■ Do not give antacids, including sucralfate, oral iron, and antidiar- rheal medicine, within 2 hours before or after giving minocycline. These other medications will reduce the effectiveness of this an- tibiotic.  ■ This drug may make your animal’s skin more sensitive to sunlight and increase the risk for sunburn on hairless areas (eg, nose, ab- domen, around the eyelids and ears). Tell your veterinarian if you notice any reddening/sunburn on the skin while your animal is on this medication.  ■ For this medication to work, give it exactly as your veterinarian has prescribed. Always check the prescription label to be sure you are giving the drug correctly. Avoid missing doses and give the full course of medication as directed by your veterinarian even if your animal seems to be back to normal.  ■ Your veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is tak- ing this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.  Chemistry/Synonyms  Minocycline HCl is a semisynthetic tetracycline that occurs as a yellow crystalline powder. It is soluble in water and slightly soluble in alcohol. Commercial minocycline dosage forms contain minocy- cline hydrochloride. Minocycline may also be known as minocyclini hydrochloridum,  Arestin ®,   Minocin ® ,   or   Solodyn® ; many other trade names are   available.  Storage/Stability  Store oral preparations at room temperature in tight containers. Do not freeze oral suspensions. The injectable should be stored at room temperature   (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) and protected from light, moisture, and excessive heat. After reconstitution with sterile water for injection, solutions with a concentration of 20 mg/mL are stable for 4 hours at room temperature or for 24 hours if refrigerated.  Compatibility/Compounding Considerations  Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information. Minocycline lyophilized powder for injection should be reconsti- tuted with 5 mL sterile water for injection and immediately further diluted with sodium chloride injection USP, dextrose injection USP, dextrose and sodium chloride injection USP, Ringer’s injection USP, or lactated Ringer’s injection USP. Minocycline is   incompatible   with most medications. If the same IV line is being used for sequential drug administration, the line should be flushed with saline before and after minocycline infusion.  Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status  VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :   NONE  HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :  Minocycline HCl Oral Tablets: 50 mg, 75 mg, and 100 mg; generic; (Rx) Minocycline Extended-Release Tablets: 45 mg, 55 mg, 65 mg, 80 mg, 90 mg, 105 mg, 115 mg, and 135 mg;   Solodyn ®, generic; (Rx) Minocycline HCl Oral Capsules: 50 mg, 75 mg, and 100 mg; generic; (Rx) Minocycline HCl Pellet-Filled Oral Capsules: 50 mg and 100 mg;  Minocin ®; (Rx) Minocycline HCl Powder for Injection: 100 mg in vials;   Minocin ®; (Rx) Minocycline HCl Powdered Microspheres, Extended-Release, Den- tal: 1 mg;   Arestin ®; (Rx)  References  For the complete list of references, see   wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  Mirtazapine  (mir- taz -ah-peen)   Remeron®, Mirataz®  Tetracyclic Antidepressant; 5-HT 3  Antagonist  Prescriber Highlights  ▶   Transdermal formulation is labeled for management of weight loss in cats. Also used in tablet form as an appetite stimulant and antiemetic in dogs and cats with chronic kidney disease (CKD).  ▶   It can be used in conjunction with other antiemetics.  ▶   Primary adverse effect is sedation. In cats, vocalization and increased affection can be noted. Serotonin syndrome is possi- ble; check for drug interactions when administering with other medications.  ▶   The lowest effective dose should be used to reduce sedative properties. Doses should not exceed 30 mg/day in dogs when using it for appetite stimulation.  ▶   Gloves should be worn when handling transdermal mirtazap- ine. Humans and other animals in the household should avoid contact with the treated cat for at least 2 hours after transder- mal administration.  Uses/Indications  Transdermal mirtazapine is indicated in the management of weight loss in cats 1 ; the average weight gain in cats was 3.9% of body weight after a 2-week course of therapy. 2  Mirtazapine is an effective appetite stimulant and has antiemetic activity in cats with CKD. 3  Cats receiv- ing mirtazapine tablets ingested significantly more food as compared with placebo. Food ingestion did not correlate with mirtazapine dose, but high doses (ie, 3.75 mg/cat [NOT mg/kg]) of mirtazapine were associated with noticeable behavior changes. 4  In cats with stage 2 or 3 chronic kidney disease, administration of compounded trans-

=== PDF PAGE 921 ===

894   Mirtazapine  dermal mirtazapine demonstrated an increased appetite and weight gain; this formulation may benefit cats in countries where the com- mercial product is not available. 5 In a study of healthy dogs, mirtazapine accelerated gastric emp- tying and colonic transit without having an effect on small intestine transit. 6  Mirtazapine can also be used for the treatment of chemo- therapy-induced nausea and vomiting. 7  Pharmacology/Actions  The antidepressant activity of mirtazapine appears to be mediated by antagonism at central presynaptic alpha-2 receptors, which nor- mally act as a negative feedback mechanism, inhibiting further nor- epinephrine (NE) release. By blocking these receptors, mirtazapine overcomes the negative feedback loop and causes a net increase in NE. This mechanism may also contribute to the appetitestimulating effects of the medication, as NE acts at other α receptors to increase appetite. In addition, mirtazapine antagonizes several serotonin (5- HT) receptor subtypes. The drug is a potent inhibitor of the 5-HT 2 , 5-HT 3 , and histamine (H 1 ) receptors. Antagonism at 5-HT 3  receptors accounts for the antinausea and antiemetic effects of the drug, and its action at H 1  receptors produces prominent sedative effects. It is a moderate peripheral α 1 -adrenergic antagonist, a property that may explain the occasional orthostatic hypotension associated with its use; it is also a moderate antagonist of muscarinic receptors, which may explain the relatively low incidence of anticholinergic effects.  Pharmacokinetics  In a pilot study in healthy beagles, the mean clearance of mirtazapine was 1193 mL/kg/hour and the mean half-life was 6.17 hours after 20 mg/dog PO. 8 After administration of oral mirtazapine at either 1.88 mg (low dose [LD]) or 3.75 mg (high dose [HD]) in a study of healthy cats, median elimination half-lives were 9.2 hours and 15.9 hours, respectively. Mean clearance was 10.5 mL/kg/minute (LD) and 18 mL/kg/minute (HD). A single LD of mirtazapine was well toler- ated, and the half-life (9 hours) was compatible with 24-hour dose intervals in healthy cats. Mirtazapine does not appear to have lin- ear kinetics in cats. 4  A study in cats with CKD ( n   = 6) found that the mean half-life was 15.2 hours and the mean oral clearance was 0.6 L/hour/kg. 9  The authors concluded that the results were com- patible with administration every 48 hours in cats with CKD. 9  Liver disease delays time to peak concentration (4 hours vs 1 hour) and prolongs elimination half-life (14 hours vs 7 hours) in cats. 10 Transdermal mirtazapine bioavailability in cats is ≈65%, and peak drug concentration is reached ≈16 hours after administration of a single dose and ≈2 hours after repeated administration. 11  Half-life is 21 to 27 hours, 11  although a shorter half-life (10 to 11 hours) may reflect both topical and oral (ie, grooming) exposure. In healthy cats, transdermal mirtazapine has been shown to reach a steady-state within 14 days. Transdermal time to maximum concentration is 6 hours, with a peak plasma concentration (C max ) of 32.1 ng/mL. After a single PO dose of mirtazapine 2 mg/kg (fasted or fed) in horses, peak concentrations occurred at 2.2 hours (fasted) and 1.3 hours (fed) after administration. The mean residence time of mirtazapine was 6 to 7 hours, and elimination half-life was ≈4 to 5 hours. The authors concluded that mirtazapine might be amenable for long-term oral administration but obtaining additional infor- mation concerning safety and efficacy before it is used clinically is critical. 12 Following oral administration in humans, mirtazapine is rapid- ly and completely absorbed, but oral bioavailability is ≈50%. C max  is reached within ≈2 hours after oral administration. Food has minimal effects on both the rate and extent of absorption and does not require dose adjustment. Plasma protein binding (PPB) for mirtazapine ap- pears to be ≈70% to 72% in mice, rats, and dogs, whereas in humans and rabbits, it is ≈85%. Despite the interspecies differences in PPB, no displacement interactions or dose adjustments for mirtazapine are expected because of its large therapeutic window and nonspecif- ic, relatively low affinity for plasma proteins. Mirtazapine is metabo- lized via multiple pathways and varies by species. In all species tested (ie, humans and laboratory animals), the drug is metabolized via the following mechanisms: 8-hydroxylation followed by conjugation,  N -oxidation, and demethylation followed by conjugation. Humans and guinea pigs also produce metabolites via N + -glucuronidation, whereas mice are the only species that have been found to use de- methylation followed by CO 2  addition and conjugation and 13-hy- droxylation followed by conjugation as methods of mirtazapine breakdown. These processes are conducted primarily by CYP2D6, CYP1A2, and CYP3A4, but mirtazapine exerts minimal inhibition on these cytochromes. Several metabolic pathways of mirtazapine involve conjugation with glucuronide (glucuronidation). Because cats have a limited capacity for glucuronidation, mirtazapine is cleared less rapidly from the system; therefore, extended dosing in- tervals may be required. In humans, elimination occurs via urine (75%) and feces (15%). Renal impairment may reduce elimination by 30% to 50% as com- pared with normal subjects, and hepatic impairment may reduce clearance by up to 30%. The elimination half-life of mirtazapine ranges from 20 to 40 hours across age and gender subgroups, so dose increases should occur no more frequently than every 7 to 14 days. Females (both human and animal) of all ages exhibit significantly longer elimination half-lives than males (in humans, mean half-life of 37 hours for females versus 26 hours for males).  Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings  Mirtazapine is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it and in those that have received monoamine oxidase inhibitors (eg ,   sele- giline) in the past 14 days. Transdermal mirtazapine should not be administered orally or in the eye. Mirtazapine has been associated with orthostatic hypotension in humans and should, therefore, be used with caution in patients with known cardiac disease or cerebrovascular disease that could be exac- erbated by hypotension. Patients with renal impairment, renal fail- ure, or hepatic disease may require lower doses of mirtazapine and should be closely monitored while receiving mirtazapine. Mirtazap- ine has rarely been associated with hyponatremia in humans; caution should be used in patients receiving a diuretic or other medication that could decrease sodium levels. In humans, abrupt discontinuation of mirtazapine after long-term administration has resulted in withdrawal symptoms, (eg, nausea, headache, malaise). In general, antidepressants may affect blood glu- cose concentrations because of their indirect effects on the endocrine system; caution should be used in patients with diabetes mellitus. Mirtazapine exhibits very weak anticholinergic activity; conse- quently, vigilance should be used in patients that might be more sus- ceptible to these effects (eg, those with urinary retention; prostatic hypertrophy; acute, untreated closed-angle glaucoma, or increased intraocular pressure; GI obstruction or ileus). Effects of mirtazapine may also be additive to anticholinergic medications. Extra care should be taken in active animals, as mirtazapine may impair concentration and alertness. Although extremely rare, mir- tazapine has been associated with blood dyscrasias in humans and should be used cautiously in patients with the pre-existing hemato- logic disease, especially leukopenia, neutropenia, and/or thrombo- cytopenia. Prolongation of the QT interval has been reported, and risk may increase with other QT-prolonging drugs.  Adverse Effects  Mirtazapine appears to be well tolerated in both dogs and cats at the appropriately prescribed dosages. In a study evaluating the adverse

=== PDF PAGE 922 ===

Mirtazapine   895  effects of mirtazapine in cats, the 10 most common adverse effects seen (listed from most frequent to least frequent) were vocaliza- tion (56%), agitation (31%), vomiting (26.2%), abnormal gait/ataxia (16.7%), restlessness (14.3%), tremors/trembling (14.3%), hypersali- vation (13%), tachypnea (11.9%), tachycardia (10.7%), and lethargy (10.7%). 13  Only 1 cat that received a dose of 1.88 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) dose had adverse effects, whereas 25 cats that received a dose of 3.75 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) displayed adverse effects. Other adverse effects reported during the study included anorexia, disorientation, dyspnea, hypothermia, mouth breathing/panting, mydriasis, behavior changes, depression/sedation, fasciculations, hyperactivity, hypertension, pac- ing, dysphoria, inappropriate elimination, polyphagia, circling, dis- comfort, hiding, inappetence, seizures, and weakness. 13  Increases in liver enzymes have been reported in some cats receiving mirtazapine. Cats experienced more behavioral effects (vocalization, interactions) with 3.75 mg doses as compared with 1.88 mg doses. Transdermal mirtazapine may cause application site reactions (eg, erythema, crusting/scabbing, residue) in ≈10% of cats.  Reproductive/Nursing Safety  Reproductive studies in rats, rabbits, and dogs have shown no evi- dence of teratogenicity. Additional studies in hamsters, rabbits, and rats have shown no evidence of fetal genetic mutation or reduction in parental fertility, although there were increases in postimplanta- tion losses and pup deaths, as well as decreases in birth weight. Mirtazapine is distributed in human breast milk and can be de- tected in the serum of breastfed infants; caution should be used in nursing dams.  Overdose/Acute Toxicity  Clinical signs associated with mirtazapine overdose include agita- tion, lethargy, vocalization, panting, and tremors; cats may also de- velop tachycardia and ataxia. In humans, mirtazapine ingestion upwards of 10 times the ther- apeutic dose exhibits minimal toxicity, requiring no acute interven- tion and only 6 hours of observation. Similar effects were seen in patients receiving up to 30 times the recommended dose. However, serotonin syndrome is possible, and the package insert for mirtazap- ine recommends that activated charcoal be administered in addition to other standard monitoring activities in an overdose situation. For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex- perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta- tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information is recommended. For general information related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control centers, refer to   Appendix.  Drug Interactions  Mirtazapine is a substrate for several hepatic cytochrome P450 iso- enzymes, including 2D6, 1A2, and 3A4. The following drug inter- actions have either been reported or are theoretical in humans or animals receiving mirtazapine and may be of significance in veteri- nary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and perform addition- al monitoring when appropriate.  ■   Benzodiazepines   (eg,   diazepam, midazolam ): Concurrent use has minimal effects on mirtazapine blood levels, but use together may cause additive impairment of motor skills.  ■   Buprenorphine :   Concurrent use with mirtazapine may in- crease the risk for serotonin syndrome.  ■   Butorphanol :   Concurrent use with mirtazapine may increase the risk for serotonin syndrome.  ■   Cimetidine : May increase mirtazapine exposure  ■   Clonidine : Concurrent use with mirtazapine may cause in- creases in blood pressure.  ■   CNS Depressants   (eg,   acepromazine, antihistamines ,   gab- apentin ): Concurrent use with mirtazapine may increase the risk for sedation and CNS depression.  ■   Cyproheptadine : May negate the effects of mirtazapine  ■   Diuretics   (eg,   furosemide ): May increase the risk for hypona- tremia  ■   Erythromycin : May increase mirtazapine exposure  ■   Ketoconazole : May increase mirtazapine exposure  ■   Monoamine   Oxidase   Inhibitors   (MAOIs;   eg,   amitraz, linezolid, methylene blue, selegiline ): Increased risk for sero- tonin syndrome when used concurrently with mirtazapine. Con- current use or use within 14 days is contraindicated.  ■   Opioids   (eg,   morphine ): May increase the risk for hyponatre- mia, sedation, and CNS depression  ■   Serotonergic   Agents,   Miscellaneous   (eg,   buspirone, metoclopramide, ondansetron, trazodone ):   Concurrent   use with mirtazapine increases the risk for serotonin syndrome.  ■   Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs;   eg,   flu- oxetine, fluvoxamine ): Concurrent use with mirtazapine increas- es the risk for serotonin syndrome.  ■   Tricyclic   Antidepressants   (eg,   amitriptyline,   clomip- ramine ): Concurrent use with mirtazapine increases the risk for serotonin syndrome.  ■   Tramadol : Increased risk for serotonin syndrome when used concurrently with mirtazapine  ■   Warfarin : May prolong prothrombin time (PT) when used con- currently with mirtazapine  Laboratory Considerations  ■ No specific concerns were noted.  Dosages  DOGS :  Appetite stimulant and/or antiemetic   (extra-label): There is little data on mirtazapine pharmacokinetics or efficacy in dogs. Anecdotal dosages ranging from 3.75 – 30 mg/dog (depending on dog size; NOT mg/kg) PO every 24 hours have been suggested. Alternatively, 1.1 – 1.3 mg/kg PO every 24 hours. 14  Doses should not exceed 30 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO once daily.  Chemotherapy-induced anorexia :   0.5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours 7  CATS :  Management of weight loss   (label dosage; FDA-approved):   Using the transdermal formulation, apply 1.5-inch ribbon (≈2 mg/cat) to the inner pinna of the cat’s ear every 24 hours for 14 days. 1  The per- son applying medication should wear gloves. Alternate application of ointment between the left and right inner pinnae of the ears.  Appetite stimulant and/or antiemetic   (extra-label):   NOTE : Higher initial doses are not more effective and have more adverse effects. a)   Healthy cats : 1.88 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 24 hours. 4 Practically, ¼ of a 7.5 mg tablet or ⅛ of a 15 mg tablet PO every 24 hours b)   Cats with chronic kidney or hepatic disease :   1.88 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 48 hours. 3,10  Practically, ¼ of a 7.5 mg tablet or ⅛ of a 15 mg tablet PO every 48 hours  Chemotherapy-induced anorexia :   0.5 mg/kg PO every 24 to 72 hours 7  Monitoring  ■ Clinical efficacy   measured by the following parameters: increased appetite, decreased episodes of vomiting, and weight gain  ■ Liver enzymes in cats  ■ Adverse effects (eg, behavior, sedation) and signs of serotonin

=== PDF PAGE 923 ===

896   Misoprostol  syndrome (eg, sedation, GI signs, vocalization, agitation, tremors, difficulty breathing, hyperactivity, hyperthermia)  Client Information  ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. If your animal vomits after receiving the medication on an empty stomach, give it with food or a small treat. If vomiting continues, contact your veterinarian.  ■ Mirtazapine is usually tolerated well in dogs. Contact your veter- inarian if your cat develops side effects as the dose may need to be adjusted. Common side effects include vocalization, behavior changes, and tremors/shaking. Report excessive drowsiness or vocalization to your veterinarian.  ■ If your animal is receiving   orally disintegrating tablets, make sure your hands are dry before handling the tablet. Place the tablet un- der the animal’s tongue and hold the animal’s mouth closed for several seconds to allow it to dissolve (should occur quickly). Af- ter the tablet has melted, offer the animal water.  ■ You should wear gloves when handling the transdermal formula- tion and dispose of them afterward in the regular trash. Be sure you understand how to give this medicine to your animal. Apply the medicine to the inner side of the ear flap and not into the ear canal. After applying the medication, wash your hands with soap and water. Caregivers should avoid contact with the treated area for 2 hours after administration, as the medicine can be absorbed through the skin.  Chemistry/Synonyms  Mirtazapine, a member of the piperazinoazepine group of compounds, is classified as an atypical tetracyclic antidepressant and is not chemi- cally related to other antidepressants. Mirtazapine occurs as a white to creamy white crystalline powder that is slightly soluble in water. Mirtazapine may also be known as 6-azamianserin, Org-3770, mepirzapine, and   Remeron ®; many trade names for international products are available.  Storage/Stability  Store mirtazapine transdermal ointment at 25°C (77°F) and use it within 30 days after opening. Store the coated tablets and orally disintegrating tablets between 20°C and 25°C (68°F and 77°F), with excursions permitted between 15°C and 30°C (59°F and 86°F). Protect from light and moisture. The orally disintegrating tablets must be used immediately upon removal from the tablet blister and cannot be stored.  Compatibility/Compounding Considerations  Compounded preparation stability: Mirtazapine 10 mg/mL oral sus- pension can be compounded from commercially available tablets. Triturate 10 mirtazapine 30 mg tablets with 15 mL of   Ora-Plus ® and qs ad to 30 mL with   Ora-Sweet ®. The resulting suspension retains 90% potency for 90 days stored at both 5°C (41°F) and 25°C (77°F).  Compounded mirtazapine suspensions should be protected from light and shaken well before use. 15 Mirtazapine powder compounded into a transdermal   Lipoderm ® gel at concentrations of 1.88 mg/0.1 mL and 3.75 mg/0.1 mL did not reliably meet compendial standards for potency, as mirtazapine concentration within the gel varied by greater than 10% of target despite concerted efforts of the compounding staff. 5  Transdermal mirtazapine gel prepared by commercial compounding pharma- cies have also demonstrated significant variation from the intended product concentration. 16  Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status  VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :  Mirtazapine Transdermal Ointment: 100 mg/tube in 5 g tube (20 mg/1 g);   Mirataz ®, (Rx)  HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :  Mirtazapine Oral Tablets: 7.5 mg, 15 mg, 30 mg, and 45 mg;   Remer- on ®, generic; (Rx) Mirtazapine Orally Disintegrating Tablets (ODT): 15 mg, 30 mg, and 45 mg;   Remeron SolTab ®, generic; (Rx).   NOTE : Some generic ODTs may contain xylitol (unknown quantity).  References  For the complete list of references, see   wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  Misoprostol  (mye-soe- prost -ole)   Cytotec®  Prostaglandin Analogue  Prescriber Highlights  ▶   Prostaglandin E1 analogue for treatment or prevention of GI lesions, especially those associated with aspirin therapy; may also be useful for reproductive purposes. Appears ineffective in prevention of glucocorticoid-induced lesions  ▶   Contraindications include pregnant animals (but has been used in horses mid-gestation and intravaginally for cervical ripening) and nursing dams (diarrhea in the nursing offspring).  ▶   Caution is advised in patients sensitive to prostaglandins or prostaglandin analogues.  ▶   Adverse effects include GI distress (eg, diarrhea, abdominal pain, vomiting, flatulence) and potentially uterine contractions and vaginal bleeding in female dogs.  ▶   The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) classifies misoprostol as a hazardous drug; use appro- priate precautions when handling.  Uses/Indications  Misoprostol may be useful as primary or adjunctive therapy in   pre- venting   gastroduodenal ulceration in dogs, especially when caused or aggravated by NSAIDs. 1  Although misoprostol can be used for  treatment   of gastric ulcers, other drugs may be equally effective and better tolerated; it does not appear to be effective in reduction of gas- tric ulceration secondary to glucocorticoid therapy. 2-6  Misoprostol reduces basal gastric acid secretion in horses. 7 There is limited evidence of efficacy for misoprostol in the treat- ment of atopic dermatitis in dogs. 8 Misoprostol’s effects on uterine contractility and cervical ripening make it effective as an adjunct treatment for reproductive indications (eg, abortifacient, pyometra) in multiple species.  Pharmacology/Actions  Misoprostol is a synthetic prostaglandin E 1  analogue. It has 2 main pharmacologic effects that make it a potentially useful agent in pre- vention of upper GI ulceration. It acts via direct action on parietal cells to inhibit basal and nocturnal gastric acid secretion as well as gastric acid secretions stimulated by food, pentagastrin, or hista- mine—pepsin secretion is decreased under basal conditions, but not when stimulated by histamine. Misoprostol also has a cytoprotective effect on gastric mucosa, likely by increasing production of gastric mucosa and bicarbonate and increasing turnover and blood sup- ply of gastric mucosal cells. Misoprostol enhances mucosal defense mechanisms and healing in response to acid-related injuries. Other pharmacologic effects include increased amplitude and frequency of uterine contractions, cervical thinning and relaxation, stimulation of uterine bleeding, and total or partial expulsion of uterine contents in pregnant animals.  Pharmacokinetics  Approximately 88% of an oral dose of misoprostol is rapidly ab- sorbed from the GI tract in humans, but a significant amount is me-