
--- PAGE 71 ---
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline 55 Z Y X W U  T  S  R  Q  P  O  N  M  L  K  J  I  H  G  F  E  D  C  B  A  V  and 4 hours. Butorphanol is metabolized in the liver and some  prolongation of effect may be seen with impaired liver function.  Butorphanol crosses the placenta and may exert sedative effects in  neonates born to bitches and queens treated prior to parturition.  Butorphanol is unlikely to be adequate for the management of severe  pain. Higher doses of full mu agonists may be needed to provide  additional analgesia after butorphanol but it is not necessary to wait 4  hours after butorphanol administration to give other opioids. Response  to all opioids appears to be very variable between individuals;  therefore, assessment of pain after administration is imperative.  Safety and handling:   Protect from light.  Contraindications:   Animals with diseases of the lower respiratory  tract associated with copious mucus production. Premedication  when administration of potent opioids during surgery is anticipated.  Adverse reactions:   As a kappa agonist/mu antagonist, side  effects such as respiratory depression, bradycardia and vomiting are  rare after clinical doses. Cough suppression following torbugesic  tablets may be associated with mild sedation.  Drug interactions:   In common with other opioids, butorphanol  will reduce the doses of other drugs required for induction and  maintenance of anaesthesia. Combination with full mu agonists is  not recommended for analgesia, addition of butorphanol will reduce  analgesia produced from the full mu agonist.  DOSES  When used for sedation is generally given as part of a combination.  See Appendix for sedation protocols in cats and dogs.  Dogs:  •   Analgesia:   0.2–0.5 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c.  •   Antitussive:   0.05–0.1 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c., 0.5–1 mg/kg p.o.  q6–12h.  Cats:   Analgesia:   0.2–0.5 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c.  References  Simon BT, Steagall PV, Monteiro BP   et al . (2016) Antinociceptive effects of intravenous  administration of hydromorphone hydrochloride alone or followed by buprenorphine  hydrochloride or butorphanol tartrate to healthy conscious cats.   American Journal of  Veterinary Research   77 , 245–251  Butylscopolamine   (Hyoscine)  (Buscopan)   POM-V, POM  Formulations:   Injectable:   4 mg/ml butylscopolamine + 500 mg/  ml metamizole in 100 ml multidose bottle (Buscopan Compositum);  20 mg/ml butylscopolamine only, in 2 ml ampoules.   Oral:   10 mg  tablet containing butylscopolamine only.  Action:   Inhibits M1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in the GI  and urinary tracts causing smooth muscle relaxation but does not  cross the blood–brain barrier.

--- PAGE 72 ---
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline 56  Use:  •   Control of diarrhoea in dogs, particularly when pain or  abdominal discomfort is present.  •   Control of pain associated with urinary obstruction in dogs.  Should only be used in combination with investigations into the  cause of abdominal pain or definitive relief of urinary obstruction.  Safety and handling:   Avoid self-injection: metamizole can cause  reversible but potentially serious agranulocytosis and skin allergies.  Protect solution from light.  Contraindications:   Intestinal obstruction.  Adverse reactions:   Dry mouth, blurred vision, hesitant  micturition and constipation at doses acting as gut neuromuscular  relaxants. The i.m. route may cause a local reaction.  Drug interactions:   Metamizole should not be given to dogs that  have been treated with a phenothiazine, as hypothermia may result.  Effects may be potentiated by concurrent use of other  anticholinergic or analgesic drugs.  DOSES  Dogs:   Control of diarrhoea and/or abdominal discomfort:   0.1 ml/  kg i.v., i.m. q12h (Buscopan Compositum); 0.5 mg/kg i.m., p.o. q12h  (butylscopolamine only).  Cats:   Do not use. Z  Y  X  W  V  U  T  S  R  Q  P  O  N  M  L  K  J  I  H  G  F  E  D  C  B  A
