
=== PAGE 440 ===
Dipyrone   413  ■   CNS Depressant Drugs   (eg,   anesthetic agents, barbiturates, cannabidiol ): Concurrent use may cause increased CNS or re- spiratory depression when used with opioid antidiarrheal agents.  ■   Digoxin : Concurrent use may result in increased serum digoxin concentrations.  ■   Laxatives   (eg,   oral magnesium salts, polyethylene glycol 3350 ): Concurrent use may decrease efficacy of diphenoxylate.  ■   Monoamine   Oxidase   Inhibitors   ( MAOIs ;   eg,   amitraz, linezolid,   methylene   blue ,   selegiline ):   Opioid   antidiarrheal agents are contraindicated in human patients receiving systemic MAOIs for at least 14 days after receiving MAOIs because of an increased risk of a hypertensive crisis.  ■   Opioids   (eg,   buprenorphine, morphine, tramadol ): Therapeu- tic duplication. Concurrent use may increase risk of CNS or respi- ratory depression and have additive anticholinergic effects.  ■   Phenothiazines   (eg,   acepromazine, chlorpromazine ): Con- current use may increase risk of CNS depression and have addi- tive anticholinergic effects.  ■   Potassium Salts, Oral :   Reduced GI motility may increase the risk for GI irritation and ulceration caused by potassium salts. The use of solid oral forms of potassium concurrently with drugs that decrease GI motility is contraindicated in humans; consider use of liquid/gel potassium formulations.  ■   Prokinetic Agents   (eg,   cisapride, erythromycin, metoclopr- amide ): Concurrent use may result in decreased efficacy of both agents.  ■   Tricyclic   Antidepressants   (eg,   amitriptyline,   clomip- ramine ): Concurrent use may increase risk of CNS depression and have additive anticholinergic effects.  Laboratory Considerations  ■ Opioids may increase biliary tract pressure, resulting in increased plasma   amylase   and   lipase   values up to 24 hours following their administration.  Dosages  DOGS :  Antidiarrheal agent   (extra-label): Dosage is based on the diphe- noxylate component: a)   0.05 – 0.1 mg/kg PO 3 to 4 times daily  7–9 b)   0.1 – 0.2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours  Antitussive agent   (extra-label): 0.2 – 0.5 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours 2  CATS :  Antidiarrheal agent   (extra-label): 0.08 – 0.1 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 10 ;   NOTE : Not usually recommended for cats.  Monitoring  ■ Clinical efficacy: as antidiarrheal, decrease in volume and fre- quency of diarrhea; for tracheal collapse, improved cough sup- pression  ■ Monitor hydration and serum electrolytes in patients with severe diarrhea  ■ Adverse effects: respiratory and CNS depression, constipation, vomiting  Client Information  ■ This medicine may be used to treat diarrhea or as a cough   suppressant.  ■ May be given with or without food. If your animal vomits or acts sick after receiving the drug on an empty stomach, try giving the next dose with food or a small treat. If vomiting continues, con- tact your veterinarian.  ■ Constipation and sleepiness are the most common side effects in dogs.  ■ Must use cautiously in cats as they can get overly excited  ■ This medicine is a controlled drug in the United States. It is against federal law to use, give away, or sell this medication to others than for whom it was prescribed.  ■ Contact your veterinarian if diarrhea does not improve or if your animal appears listless.  Chemistry/Synonyms  Structurally related to meperidine, diphenoxylate HCl is a synthetic phenylpiperidine-derivative opioid agonist. It occurs as an odorless, white, crystalline powder that is slightly soluble in water and spar- ingly soluble in alcohol. Commercially available preparations also contain a small amount of atropine sulfate as a bittering agent to dis- courage abuse of diphenoxylate for its narcotic effects; at therapeutic doses, the atropine component has no clinical effect in humans. This combination may be known as co-phenotrope in the Unit- ed Kingdom and elsewhere. Other synonyms include R 1132, NIH 7562, or difenoxilato. A commonly used trade name is   Lomotil ®.  Compatibility/Compounding Considerations  No specific information is noted.  Storage/Stability  Diphenoxylate/atropine tablets should be stored at room tempera- ture of 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F). Diphenoxylate/atropine oral solution should be stored at room temperature of 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F); avoid freezing. Follow applicable local, state, and federal rules regarding con- trolled drug storage, waste, and disposal.  Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status  VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :   NONE  HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :  Diphenoxylate HCl and Atropine Sulfate Tablets: Diphenoxylate 2.5 mg and Atropine 0.025 mg;   Lomotil ®, generic; (Rx, C-V) Diphenoxylate HCl and Atropine Sulfate Liquid: Diphenoxylate 2.5 mg and Atropine Sulfate 0.025 mg per 5 mL;   Lomotil ®, generic; (Rx, C-V) Report prescribing and/or dispensing to state monitoring programs where required.  References  For the complete list of references, see   wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  Dipyrone Metamizole  ( dye -purr-own)   Zimeta®  Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug (NSAID)  Prescriber Highlights  ▶   Approved for short-term (up to 3 days) control of pyrexia in horses  ▶   Not approved for use in food-producing animals in the United States  ▶   May also be useful for analgesia in dogs and cats  ▶   Use with caution in horses at risk for hemorrhage or those receiving nephrotoxic drugs (eg, aminoglycosides).  ▶   Do not administer concurrently with other NSAIDs or with corticosteroids.  ▶   Adverse effects include increased serum sorbitol dehydroge- nase, hypoalbuminemia, and gastric ulcers. Prolongation of coagulation parameters (eg, PT, aPTT) may occur.  Uses/Indications  Dipyrone injection is indicated for the control of pyrexia in horses.

=== PAGE 441 ===
414   Dipyrone  The drug was deemed effective (decrease of rectal temperature by more than 1.1°C [2°F] or return to normothermia by 6 hours after drug administration) in ≈75% of treated horses. 1 Historically, dipyrone was FDA-approved for use in humans but was withdrawn from the market in 1977 due to reports of agranulo- cytosis. Dipyrone had been used in a variety of veterinary species as an analgesic, antipyretic, and muscle relaxant. An unapproved dipy- rone product continued to be sold for equine use until 1996 when the FDA removed the product due to concerns of use in food-producing animals. Veterinary use of compounded dipyrone formulations in- creased after its withdrawal. A commercially prepared formulation for use in horses is now available and is strongly recommended over use of a compounded product. In countries outside the United States, dipyrone may be approved for use in other species as an analgesic and/or antipyretic. Dipyrone has demonstrated analgesic properties in dogs. 2–5  In cats, dipyrone may be useful for postoperative analgesia 6  but efficacy is unclear. 7  Pharmacology/Actions  Dipyrone is an NSAID. It is a prodrug that is rapidly hydrolyzed to the active compound 4-methylaminoantipyrine (4-MAA). 8 Dipyrone is thought to inhibit peripheral cyclooxygenase COX-1 and COX-2 mediated production of prostaglandins. Dipyrone also inhibits cyclooxygenase (COX-3) within the CNS 9  and may have agonist activity on cannabinoid and opioid systems. In addition to its antipyretic effects, the drug has analgesic and weak anti-inflam- matory properties. It may also have antispasmodic activity on bra- dykinin-induced spasms on the intestinal tract without appreciably altering spontaneous intestinal motility. 10–12 Dipyrone inhibits platelet aggregation in dogs. 13  In horses, it pro- longs coagulation parameters (eg, PT, aPTT) at higher doses. 8  Pharmacokinetics  Dipyrone circulates only briefly before rapid hydrolysis into the active primary metabolite 4-methylaminoantipyrine (4-MAA). In humans, 4-MAA is hepatically metabolized to 4-aminoantypyrine (4-AA) and other inactive end metabolites that are renally excreted. 8 4-MAA and 4-AA are both considered active metabolites in humans and therefore pharmacokinetic studies focus primarily on 4-MAA and 4-AA. In veterinary species, it is unknown if 4-AA contributes to analgesic activity as plasma concentrations are very low compared with 4-MAA. 14,15 In healthy dogs, peak 4-MAA concentration occurs ≈2 hours after oral dosing and ≈0.6 hours after IM injection. Volume of distribu- tion is ≈5 to 7.5 L/kg, clearance is 552 to 921 mL/kg/hour, and elim- ination half-life is ≈6 hours. Plasma 4-MAA concentrations remain at or above human inhibitory concentrations (IC50) for COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes for ≈12 and 8 hours, respectively. 15,16  Rectal admin- istration produces low levels of 4-MAA and is likely the least effec- tive route in dogs. 15 In healthy cats, oral absorption is high with maximum concentra- tions achieved ≈6 hours after dosing. Volume of distribution is ≈1 to 1.4 L/kg, clearance is ≈92 to 131 mL/kg/hour, and half-life is ≈6 to 7 hours. Low absorption was seen after IM administration compared to both IV and PO routes. 17 In healthy horses receiving dipyrone, 4-MAA elimination half-life is reported as 3 to 5 hours and clearance is 230 to 285 mL/kg/hour. 14,18 4-MAA has a large volume of distribution (1 to 1.9 L/kg), moderate protein binding (low compared with other NSAIDs), and readily penetrates into the CNS. 10   When dipyrone was given IM, time to peak concentration was ≈1.2 hours and the maximum concentration was lower than when given IV, but otherwise the pharmacokinetic profiles were similar between routes. 14  When dipyrone was given to horses at the labeled dose every 12 hours, minimal accumulation was seen after 9 days. However, higher doses and more frequent dosing did result in drug accumulation and increases in trough concen- trations and AUC that were not proportional to increases in dose alone, which suggests the possibility of nonlinear pharmacokinetics at higher doses. 19 In healthy donkeys, 4-MAA volume of distribution is 0.5 to 0.8 L/kg, clearance is 160 to 300 mL/kg/hour, and elimination half- life is ≈1.9 hours. 20  Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings  Dipyrone is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to it. Safe use in horses younger than 3 years has not been evaluated. 8  Due to the potential for prolongation of PT, dipyrone should not be given more frequently than every 12 hours. 8 The drug should be used with caution in horses at risk for hem- orrhage and those that are dehydrated, receiving diuretics, or with preexisting renal, cardiac, or hepatic dysfunction. Use with caution in animals with a history of or current hematologic or bone marrow abnormalities. In humans, a significant decrease in clearance was seen in patients with liver cirrhosis. In humans with renal impairment, elimination of end metabolites was impaired, but 4-MAA clearance was not sig- nificantly altered. 21  It is unclear how this translates to veterinary spe- cies, but dipyrone should be used with caution in animals with renal or hepatic dysfunction. Do not use dipyrone in horses intended for human consumption or in any food-producing animal. 8 Due to risk for agranulocytosis in humans, those preparing or administering the drug should avoid direct contact with skin or ac- cidental injection. 8 Do not confuse meTAMizole with meTHIMazole. Do not con- fuse ZImeta (dipyrone) with ZOmeta (zoledronic acid).  Adverse Effects  Adverse effects associated with administration of dipyrone to horses during an FDA field study were elevated serum sorbitol dehydro- genase (SDH; an acute marker of hepatocellular injury) (5%), hy- poalbuminemia (3%), and gastric ulcers (2%). 8  In addition, one of each of the following occurred in different horses: hyperemic mu- cosa right dorsal colon, prolonged aPTT, elevated creatinine, injec- tion site reaction, and anorexia. Bloody nasal discharge and death occurred in one horse during a safety study. Clinical signs associated with NSAID intolerance may include colic, diarrhea, and decreased appetite. 8 Reported adverse effects in dogs and cats include vomiting and salivation. 15,17  In dogs, dipyrone has been shown to inhibit platelet aggregation. 22 Experience in EU countries suggests the drug is well tolerated in horses at approved dosages. 23  Historically, the occurrence of agran- ulocytosis and leukopenia was associated with high doses and pro- longed treatment. In humans, dipyrone seems to have a lower risk for GI bleeding as compared with other NSAIDs such as piroxicam and aspirin. 24  Reproductive/Nursing Safety  Safe use in horses used for breeding, or in pregnant or lactating hors- es has not been evaluated. Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to offspring. Decreased   pup   survival   was   observed   in   rats   treated   with 250 – 625 mg/kg/day prior to and throughout pregnancy. 23  Overdose/Acute Toxicity  Dipyrone 30 mg/kg given every 8 hours did not demonstrate an ad- equate margin of safety due to prolongation of PT and aPTT, clinical signs of coagulopathy, and hepatotoxicity (increased bilirubin and liver weight). In healthy horses receiving 60 mg/kg or 90 mg/kg IV 3

=== PAGE 442 ===
Dipyrone   415  times daily, the following adverse effects were noted: cough, depres- sion, tachypnea or dyspnea, epistaxis, nasal discharge, inappetence, loose manure, colic, and fever. PT was prolonged in both treatment groups and minimal or mild renal tubular dilation was noted; how- ever, there were no clinical signs of renal dysfunction. Two horses receiving 90 mg/kg IV developed epistaxis and pneumonia, and one died. Treatment of an overdose consists of supportive therapy based on clinical signs. Monitor for coagulopathy.  Drug Interactions  The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the- oretical in humans or animals receiving dipyrone and may be of sig- nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.  ■   Acetaminophen : Combined use may increase risk for hepato- cellular injury.  ■   Anticoagulants   (eg,   clopidogrel, heparins, rivaroxaban, warfarin ): Risk for bleeding may be increased.  ■   Chloramphenicol : Combined use may increase risk for mye- losuppression.  ■   Chlorpromazine : Concurrent use may cause profound hypo- thermia. 25  Effect of other phenothiazines (eg,   acepromazine ) is uncertain.  ■   Corticosteroids : Concomitant use of dipyrone with cortico- steroids should be avoided. 8  ■   Diuretics   (eg,   furosemide ): Concurrent use increases risk for adverse renal effects.  ■   Naloxone :   May block antinociceptive effect of dipyrone  ■   Nephrotoxic Drugs   (eg,   amphotericin B, aminoglycosides, cyclosporine, trimethoprim ): Concurrent use with nephrotoxic drugs should be avoided. 8  ■   NSAIDs   (eg,   flunixin, phenylbutazone ):   Concomitant use of dipyrone with NSAIDs should be avoided. 8  Consider appropri- ate washout time when switching between NSAIDs. Concomitant administration of dipyrone and meloxicam resulted in more pro- longed inhibition of platelet function than dipyrone alone 13 ; how- ever, this combination has been used clinically in dogs. 5  ■   Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors   ( SSRIs ; eg,   flu- oxetine ): Risk for bleeding may be increased.  ■   Tricyclic Antidepressants   ( TCAs , eg,   amitriptyline, clo- mipramine ): Risk for bleeding may be increased.  Laboratory Considerations  ■ None noted  Dosages  DOGS :  Analgesic   (extra-label): 25 mg/kg IV prior to 2  or immediately following 4  surgery. The results of one study suggest that dipy- rone should not be used as the sole analgesic in the perioperative  period. 26  CATS :  Analgesic   (extra-label):   25   mg/kg   IV   every   24   hours   and 12.5 mg/kg IV every 12 hours have been reported for postopera- tive analgesia. 6  HORSES :  Control of pyrexia   (label dosage; FDA-approved): 30 mg/kg IV once or twice daily (at 12-hour intervals) for up to 3 days. Un- der field conditions, pyrexia was controlled in most horses with once-daily treatment. 8  Monitoring  ■ Body temperature  ■ Level of pain control  ■ Hydration status  ■ Baseline and periodic CBC and serum chemistry profile  ■ Adverse effects  ■ Signs of coagulopathy  Client Information  ■ The manufacturer’s client information sheet should be provided to the person(s) treating the animal or providing care.  ■ Dipyrone can cause bone marrow suppression in humans. Avoid contact with skin. Immediately wash skin with soap and water in case of accidental contact. Seek medical care urgently in cases of self-injection. •   Side effects include colic, decreased appetite, depression, and diarrhea. If serious side effects occur, discontinue treatment, and contact your veterinarian. •   Check with your veterinarian before administering any other medications. •   Overdoses can be very serious; measure liquid doses very care- fully and keep out of reach of children or animals.  Chemistry/Synonyms  A pyrazolone derivative, dipyrone occurs as an odorless, bitter, white or yellowish-white crystalline powder. One gram of dipyrone is very soluble in water and soluble in alcohol. The commercial solution for injection is preserved with benzyl alcohol. Dipyrone may also be known as metamizole sodium, dipyronium, methamizole, and methampyrone. Many trade names exist, including  Analate ®,   Analgin ®,   Myovin ®,   Novin ®,   Novalgin ®,   Vetalgin ®, and   Zimeta ®.  Storage/Stability  Store dipyrone injection protected from light, at controlled room temperature of 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F) with excursions permitted between 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F). Use multi-dose vial within 30 days of first puncture.  Compatibility/Compounding Considerations  Compounding of dipyrone is no longer necessary given the availabil- ity of an FDA-approved dipyrone formulation (as well as the avail- ability of therapeutically equivalent drugs such as flunixin).  Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status  VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :  Dipyrone Injection: 500 mg/mL in 100 mL multi-dose vial;   Zimeta ®, (Rx). NADA #141-513. Not for use in horses intended for human consumption or in food-producing animals The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has designated dipyrone as a drug class 4 substance. See   Appendix   for more information. Use of this drug may not be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regulations before entering in a competition while this medication is being administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. In some countries, dipyrone may be found in combination with bu- tylscopolamine ( Buscopan® Compositum   solution for injection).  HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE  References  For the complete list of references, see   wiley.com/go/budde/plumb

=== PAGE 443 ===
416   Dobutamine Dobutamine  ( doe -byoo-ta-meen)   Dobutrex®  Beta-Adrenergic Inotrope  Prescriber Highlights  ▶   Parenteral, rapid-acting inotropic agent used in a variety of species to improve cardiac output  ▶   Contraindications in humans (may not be applicable to animals) include patients with known hypersensitivity to the drug or to the preservative (sodium bisulfite); patients with idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis (IHSS).  ▶   Use with caution in patients with pre-existing arrhythmias.  ▶   Animals with atrial fibrillation should receive a digoxin prepa- ration prior to dobutamine administration.  ▶   Most common adverse effects include facial twitching (dogs), tachycardia; CNS effects (eg, tremors, seizures) may be seen in cats receiving higher doses.  ▶   Dobutamine should be used in critical care settings with con- tinuous monitoring of heart rate/rhythm and blood pressure.  Uses/Indications  Dobutamine is an injectable, rapid-onset positive inotropic agent for short-term adjunctive treatment (usually less than 72 hours) of congestive heart failure. It is also useful in shock patients when flu- id therapy alone does not restore acceptable arterial blood pressure, cardiac output, or tissue perfusion. Dobutamine is also used to treat hypotension caused by decreased cardiac contractility in patients undergoing general anesthesia. Dobutamine is administered as an IV CRI and should be used only in critical care settings where adequate monitoring (eg, contin- uous BP, ECG, cardiac output, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure) can be provided.  Pharmacology/Actions  Dobutamine is considered a direct beta-1-adrenergic agonist. At therapeutic doses, it also has mild beta-2- and alpha-1-adrenergic effects, which balance each other and cause little direct effect on the systemic vasculature. In contrast to dopamine, dobutamine does not cause the release of norepinephrine. Dobutamine has relatively mild chronotropic, arrhythmogenic, and vasodilative effects, but higher doses can cause tachycardia. Increased myocardial contractility and stroke volumes result in increased cardiac output. However, increased myocardial contrac- tility may increase myocardial oxygen demand and coronary blood flow. Blood pressure and heart rate generally are mildly increased because of increased cardiac output.  Pharmacokinetics  Because dobutamine is rapidly metabolized in the GI tract and is not systemically absorbed after oral administration, dobutamine is only administered intravenously as a constant rate infusion (CRI). After IV administration, the onset of action generally occurs within 2 minutes and peaks within 10 minutes. Dobutamine is metabolized rapidly in the liver and other tissues and has a plasma half-life of ≈2 minutes in humans. The drug’s ef- fects diminish rapidly after cessation of therapy. Pharmacokinetic data for domestic animals is unavailable.  Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings  Dobutamine is contraindicated in patients with known hypersen- sitivity to the drug or its preservative, sodium bisulfite, which has been documented to cause allergic-type reactions in humans. Dobu- tamine is also contraindicated in humans with idiopathic hypertro- phic subaortic stenosis (IHSS). Adequate vascular volume is required for dobutamine use; hypo- volemic states must be corrected before use. Use with extreme caution in patients with ventricular tachyar- rhythmias or atrial fibrillation because dobutamine can enhance atrioventricular   conduction.   In   animals   with   atrial   fibrillation,  digoxin (ie, digitalization) is recommended before dobutamine ad- ministration to slow AV nodal conduction. In horses that will re- ceive electrocardioversion for atrial fibrillation, dobutamine should be stopped for at least 5 minutes before shock delivery. 1 Do not confuse DOBUTamine with DOPamine. Writing part of the drug’s name in upper case on prescriptions/orders may reduce the risk of errors.  Adverse Effects  Adverse effects reported in dogs include tachycardia, facial twitching, and seizures. Infusions greater than 20 μg/kg/minute IV may cause tachycardia. One published study has reported dobutamine-induced bradycardia. 2  Tachyphylaxis (a rapid decrease in drug response; in- creased dosages may be required to achieve the desired effect) may occur, and in dogs, can become apparent within 48 to 72 hours of starting dobutamine therapy. In cats, doses greater than 5 μg/kg/minute may cause CNS effects such as tremors or seizures. In this species, dobutamine can be ad- ministered under general anesthesia but should be discontinued be- fore recovery. Dobutamine is a weaker proarrhythmic drug than most other catecholamines, and arrhythmias observed at 3 – 5 μg/kg/minute in horses are usually limited to bradyarrhythmias, second-degree atrioventricular blocks, premature atrial complexes, and isorhythmic atrioventricular dissociation. Use parasympatholytics (eg, atropine) with caution, as the risk for tachyarrhythmias 3  and ileus is increased. In humans, the most commonly reported adverse effects are in- creased heart rate (5 to 15 bpm) and increased blood pressure (10 to 20 mm Hg). Ectopic beats, chest pain, and palpitations may also occur. At usual doses, these effects are generally mild and will not necessitate halting therapy; modify dose as clinically indicated. Oth- er, less common, adverse effects reported include nausea, headache, hypotension, vomiting, hypokalemia, leg cramps, paresthesia, and dyspnea. Phlebitis and infusion-site reactions may occur.  Reproductive/Nursing Safety  Fetal toxicity was not demonstrated in rats or rabbits at doses used clinically. It is unknown if dobutamine crosses the placenta or enters maternal milk. Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to offspring.  Overdose/Acute Toxicity  Clinical signs reported with excessive doses include tachycardia, hy- pertension, nervousness, vomiting, fatigue, tremor, and seizures. Be- cause of the drug’s short duration of action, temporarily halting ther- apy usually reverses these effects. Tachyarrhythmias may be treated with propranolol or lidocaine. For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe- rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta- tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information is recommended. For general information related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control centers, refer to the   Appendix .  Drug Interactions  The following drug interactions have either been reported or are theoretical in humans or animals receiving dobutamine and may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.  ■   Anticholinergics   (eg,   atropine; butylscopolamine, glycopy-

=== PAGE 444 ===
Dobutamine   417  rrolate ):   May increase the risk for tachyarrhythmias in horses; use with caution.  ■   Beta - Adrenergic Receptor Antagonists   (eg,   atenolol ,  metoprolol, propranolol ): May antagonize the cardiac effects of dobutamine and result in a preponderance of alpha-adrenergic effects and increased total peripheral resistance  ■   Nitroprusside : Synergistic effects (increased cardiac output and reduced wedge pressure) can result if dobutamine is used with nitroprusside.  Laboratory Considerations  ■ None  Dosages  NOTE : Dobutamine is administered as an IV CRI and should be used only in critical care settings where adequate monitoring (eg, continuous BP, ECG, cardiac output, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure) can be provided.  DOGS :  Short-term treatment of low cardiac output and acute conges- tive heart failure   ( CHF ; extra-label): Dosages are usually started on the low end and titrated upward. Most recommendations fall in the 2 – 15 μg/kg/minute IV CRI range, 4-7  but suggested lower end dosages ranging from 1 – 5 μg/kg/minute and upper end dos- ages of up to 40 μg/kg/minute can be found.  CHF   associated   with   myxomatous   mitral   valve   disease (MMVD ; extra-label):  Acute management of patients in stage C heart failure   (either current or past clinical signs of heart failure): Start with dobu- tamine 2.5 μg/kg/minute IV CRI and increase as needed up to 10 μg/kg/minute. 8  Dobutamine should be used in addition to other treatments to improve the left ventricular function in pa- tients that fail to respond adequately to diuretics, pimobendan, sedation, oxygen, and comfort care measures.  Acute management of patients in stage D heart failure   (end- stage, in which clinical signs of heart failure are refractory to standard treatment): Start with dobutamine 1 μg/kg/minute IV CRI and up-titrate every 15 to 30 minutes to a maximum of ≈10 – 15 μg/kg/minute. 8  May be administered concomitantly with nitroprusside to provide afterload reduction. Use for 12 to 48 hours to improve hemodynamics and refractory cardiogen- ic pulmonary edema.  Hypotension during general anesthesia   (extra-label): a)   5 μg/kg/minute IV CRI during propofol anesthesia 9 b)   2 – 12 μg/kg/minute during isoflurane anesthesia 10  CATS :  Short-term treatment of low cardiac output and acute conges- tive heart failure   (extra-label): 1 – 5 μg/kg/minute IV CRI. 7  Dos- age suggestions tend to be lower for cats (than dogs). Dosages are usually started on the low end and titrated upward. Titrate dose to effect, but doses above 5 μg/kg/minute have anecdotally been associated with seizures.  Hypotension   during   general   anesthesia   (extra-label):  2 – 20 μg/kg/minute IV CRI 11  HORSES :  Cardiovascular support in anesthetized horses   (extra-label): a)   1 – 1.5 μg/kg/minute IV CRI, arterial blood pressure increases, but cardiac output is marginally affected. At higher rates, both cardiac output and arterial blood pressure are increased, but the risk for arrhythmias is increased. 3 b)   Hypotension during inhalant anesthesia   (extra-label): Doses between 0.5 – 3 μg/kg/minute IV CRI have been used to treat hypotension caused by inhalational agents (ie, isoflurane and sevoflurane). At these doses, an increase in blood pressure, right atrial pressure, stroke volume, jejunum and colon blood flow, cardiac output, oxygen content, and oxygen delivery is noted. 12-15  Foals (after volume repletion)   (extra-label): 2 – 20 μg/kg/minute IV CRI 16  BIRDS :  Isoflurane-induced severe hypotension in Hispaniolan Am- azon parrots   (extra-label): In the study, dobutamine CRI at 15   μg/kg/minute   caused   the   greatest   increases   in   arterial blood pressure of the 3 tested dobutamine infusions (5, 10, or 15 μg/kg/minute). 17  Monitoring  ■ Blood pressure, heart rate and rhythm, including continuous ECG  ■ Mucous membrane color, capillary refill time, hydration status  ■ Serum potassium  ■ Baseline and periodic renal parameters (eg, BUN, creatinine) as needed for underlying problem being treated  ■ Urine output  ■ Ideally, measurement of central venous or pulmonary capillary wedge pressures and cardiac output  Client Information  ■ Dobutamine should only be administered by professionals famil- iar with its use and in a setting in which adequate patient moni- toring can be performed.  Chemistry/Synonyms  Dobutamine HCl is a synthetic inotropic agent related structurally to dopamine. It occurs as a white, to off-white, crystalline powder with a pKa of 9.4. Dobutamine is sparingly soluble in water and alcohol. Dobutamine HCl may also be known as 46236, compound 81929, dobutamini hydrochloridum, and LY-174008; many trade names are available.  Storage/Stability  Dobutamine injection should be stored at room temperature, 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F); diluted solutions should be used within 24 hours.  Compatibility/Compounding Considerations  To prepare solution : The solution for injection must be further  diluted to a concentration no greater than 5 mg/mL (total of at least 50 mL of diluent/20 mL of dobutamine) before administering. Generally, dobutamine is added to D 5 W, normal saline (if ani- mal not severely sodium restricted), or other compatible IV solu- tions. The following approximate concentrations will result if 1 vial (250 mg) is added to 250 mL, 500 mL, or 1000 mL IV solutions: 250 mL: ≈1000 μg/mL; 500 mL: ≈500 μg/mL; 1000 mL: ≈250 μg/mL. A mechanical fluid administration control device (eg, fluid pump) should be used to administer dobutamine. To calculate a dobuta- mine CRI 18 : 6 times body weight (in kg) = the number of mg (NOT mL) of dobutamine added to a sufficient quantity of 0.9% NaCl to obtain a total volume of 100 mL. When this solution is delivered at 1 mL/hour IV, 1 μg/kg/min is administered. Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information. Dobutamine is physically   compatible   with the following IV solu- tions: D 5 W, sodium chloride 0.45% and 0.9%, dextrose-saline combi- nations, and lactated Ringer’s. Dobutamine is physically   compatible  with the following drugs: amiodarone, atropine sulfate, dopamine, epinephrine,   hydralazine,   isoproterenol,   lidocaine,   meperidine, morphine   sulfate,   nitroglycerin,   norepinephrine,   phentolamine, phenylephrine, procainamide, propranolol, and verapamil. Dobutamine may be physically   incompatible   with the following
