Dipyrone   413  ■   CNS Depressant Drugs   (eg,   anesthetic agents, barbiturates, cannabidiol ): Concurrent use may cause increased CNS or re- spiratory depression when used with opioid antidiarrheal agents.  ■   Digoxin : Concurrent use may result in increased serum digoxin concentrations.  ■   Laxatives   (eg,   oral magnesium salts, polyethylene glycol 3350 ): Concurrent use may decrease efficacy of diphenoxylate.  ■   Monoamine   Oxidase   Inhibitors   ( MAOIs ;   eg,   amitraz, linezolid,   methylene   blue ,   selegiline ):   Opioid   antidiarrheal agents are contraindicated in human patients receiving systemic MAOIs for at least 14 days after receiving MAOIs because of an increased risk of a hypertensive crisis.  ■   Opioids   (eg,   buprenorphine, morphine, tramadol ): Therapeu- tic duplication. Concurrent use may increase risk of CNS or respi- ratory depression and have additive anticholinergic effects.  ■   Phenothiazines   (eg,   acepromazine, chlorpromazine ): Con- current use may increase risk of CNS depression and have addi- tive anticholinergic effects.  ■   Potassium Salts, Oral :   Reduced GI motility may increase the risk for GI irritation and ulceration caused by potassium salts. The use of solid oral forms of potassium concurrently with drugs that decrease GI motility is contraindicated in humans; consider use of liquid/gel potassium formulations.  ■   Prokinetic Agents   (eg,   cisapride, erythromycin, metoclopr- amide ): Concurrent use may result in decreased efficacy of both agents.  ■   Tricyclic   Antidepressants   (eg,   amitriptyline,   clomip- ramine ): Concurrent use may increase risk of CNS depression and have additive anticholinergic effects.  Laboratory Considerations  ■ Opioids may increase biliary tract pressure, resulting in increased plasma   amylase   and   lipase   values up to 24 hours following their administration.  Dosages  DOGS :  Antidiarrheal agent   (extra-label): Dosage is based on the diphe- noxylate component: a)   0.05 – 0.1 mg/kg PO 3 to 4 times daily  7–9 b)   0.1 – 0.2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours  Antitussive agent   (extra-label): 0.2 – 0.5 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours 2  CATS :  Antidiarrheal agent   (extra-label): 0.08 – 0.1 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 10 ;   NOTE : Not usually recommended for cats.  Monitoring  ■ Clinical efficacy: as antidiarrheal, decrease in volume and fre- quency of diarrhea; for tracheal collapse, improved cough sup- pression  ■ Monitor hydration and serum electrolytes in patients with severe diarrhea  ■ Adverse effects: respiratory and CNS depression, constipation, vomiting  Client Information  ■ This medicine may be used to treat diarrhea or as a cough   suppressant.  ■ May be given with or without food. If your animal vomits or acts sick after receiving the drug on an empty stomach, try giving the next dose with food or a small treat. If vomiting continues, con- tact your veterinarian.  ■ Constipation and sleepiness are the most common side effects in dogs.  ■ Must use cautiously in cats as they can get overly excited  ■ This medicine is a controlled drug in the United States. It is against federal law to use, give away, or sell this medication to others than for whom it was prescribed.  ■ Contact your veterinarian if diarrhea does not improve or if your animal appears listless.  Chemistry/Synonyms  Structurally related to meperidine, diphenoxylate HCl is a synthetic phenylpiperidine-derivative opioid agonist. It occurs as an odorless, white, crystalline powder that is slightly soluble in water and spar- ingly soluble in alcohol. Commercially available preparations also contain a small amount of atropine sulfate as a bittering agent to dis- courage abuse of diphenoxylate for its narcotic effects; at therapeutic doses, the atropine component has no clinical effect in humans. This combination may be known as co-phenotrope in the Unit- ed Kingdom and elsewhere. Other synonyms include R 1132, NIH 7562, or difenoxilato. A commonly used trade name is   Lomotil ®.  Compatibility/Compounding Considerations  No specific information is noted.  Storage/Stability  Diphenoxylate/atropine tablets should be stored at room tempera- ture of 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F). Diphenoxylate/atropine oral solution should be stored at room temperature of 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F); avoid freezing. Follow applicable local, state, and federal rules regarding con- trolled drug storage, waste, and disposal.  Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status  VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :   NONE  HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :  Diphenoxylate HCl and Atropine Sulfate Tablets: Diphenoxylate 2.5 mg and Atropine 0.025 mg;   Lomotil ®, generic; (Rx, C-V) Diphenoxylate HCl and Atropine Sulfate Liquid: Diphenoxylate 2.5 mg and Atropine Sulfate 0.025 mg per 5 mL;   Lomotil ®, generic; (Rx, C-V) Report prescribing and/or dispensing to state monitoring programs where required.  References  For the complete list of references, see   wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  Dipyrone Metamizole  ( dye -purr-own)   Zimeta®  Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug (NSAID)  Prescriber Highlights  ▶   Approved for short-term (up to 3 days) control of pyrexia in horses  ▶   Not approved for use in food-producing animals in the United States  ▶   May also be useful for analgesia in dogs and cats  ▶   Use with caution in horses at risk for hemorrhage or those receiving nephrotoxic drugs (eg, aminoglycosides).  ▶   Do not administer concurrently with other NSAIDs or with corticosteroids.  ▶   Adverse effects include increased serum sorbitol dehydroge- nase, hypoalbuminemia, and gastric ulcers. Prolongation of coagulation parameters (eg, PT, aPTT) may occur.  Uses/Indications  Dipyrone injection is indicated for the control of pyrexia in horses.