CHAPTER 329
•
Mammary Gland Tumors
2301
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
bMGT benign mammary 
gland tumor
CBC complete blood count
DFI disease-free interval
IMGC inflammatory 
mammary gland 
carcinoma
MGT mammary gland 
tumor
mMGT malignant 
mammary gland tumor
OHE ovariohysterectomy
OS overall survival
PE physical examination
SLN sentinel lymph node
UA urinalysis
US ultrasound
Mammary Gland Tumors
Juan Borrego
PREVALENCE AND RISK FACTORS
M
ammary gland tumors (MGTs) 
are the most common tumor in 
intact female dogs and the sec-
ond to third most common tumor overall 
in cats.1-3 e incidence varies geographi-
cally, mostly due to dierent attitudes about 
neutering. A common risk factor for both 
species is advancing age. Dogs with malig-
nant mammary gland tumors (mMGTs) 
are older. mMGTs are rare in dogs <5 years 
of age.4 In cats, the mean age at diagno-
sis is 10-12 years. One recent study noted 
a trend in higher rates of mMGTs versus 
benign mammary gland tumors (bMGTs) 
in dogs, similar to epidemiologic trends in 
women.2
Exposure to ovarian hormones during the rst 2 years of life is 
a recognized risk factor for the development of MGTs, and ovar-
iohysterectomy (OHE) greatly decreases risk of MGT in both spe-
cies.5 6 Dogs spayed before their rst estrus have a risk of 0.5%; 
aer the rst estrus, the risk increases to 8%; and aer a second 
estrus, risk increases to 26%. Aer the third estrus cycle and/or 
approximately 4 years of age, OHE provides only modest protec-
tion. Some studies, however, show a decreased risk of developing 
new tumors if OHE is performed at MGT removal. Addition-
ally, histologic progression with increasing tumor size has been 
reported in dogs with multiple tumors, suggesting a continuous 
eect of hormones throughout the dog’s lifespan.7 Studies suggest 
MGTs progress not only from benign to malignant, but also from 
low to highly malignant.8 Neutering before the rst estrus in cats 
provides 91% risk reduction; before the second estrus, an 86% risk 
reduction; and before the third estrus, an 11% risk reduction. Aer 
the age of 2 years, OHE provides no MGT protection.6 Exogenous 
hormone exposure also increases risk of MGTs, more frequently 
benign than malignant. Estrogen and progesterone receptors have 
been identied in dog and cat MGTs; the less dierentiated the 
canine tumor, the fewer hormone receptors expressed. Male dogs 
and cats uncommonly develop MGTs, usually benign in dogs 
(Figure 329.1) but both bMGTs and mMGTs in cats.9-11 Small 
dog breeds may be overrepresented. Breeds reported to be at risk 
include Siamese cats and Poodles, English Cocker Spaniels, Brit-
tany Spaniels, English Setters, and German Shepherd Dogs. Breed 
predispositions tend to vary by country.11 12 Obesity at a young 
age and high-fat diets have been linked to an increased risk of 
MGTs in dogs, and tumors in these dogs are associated with a 
higher grade and younger age of onset.13
STAGING
Traditionally dogs with MGTs are staged according to the modied 
World Health Organization (WHO) TNM system (T, size of tumor; 
N, lymph node involvement; M, distant metastasis).11 is staging 
system does not provide prognostic information regarding tumor 
types or lympho-vascular invasion. Newer “bio-scoring” pathologic 
staging systems have been proposed that more accurately predict 
survival, although further studies are needed.14 15 Feline MGTs are 
staged as are dog MGTs, using a modication of the original sys-
tem. In the modied system, stages increase from I (<2 cm in size), 
to II (2-3 cm), to III (>3 cm).11 Use of newer histopathologic staging 
systems have sought to rene prognosis assessment.16-18
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION (PE) AND DIFFERENTIAL 
DIAGNOSES
Dogs and cats may have single or multiple nodules within the 
mammary gland chain (ch. 3). Solitary tumors are more common 
in cats; multiple tumors are more common in dogs (>50%).4 17
If more than 1 MGT is recognized on PE, each mass could be 
dierent (bMGT vs mMGT); therefore, histopathologic assess-
ment of each mass is recommended.19 bMGTs tend to be small, 
well-circumscribed, and rm. e caudal mammary glands are 
the most oen involved in dogs and in cats,4 8 20 although some 
studies describe MGTs in all glands of cats (Figure 329.2).11 MGTs 
may be freely movable or adherent to the skin or abdominal wall 
(Video 329.1). ey may be ulcerated, inamed, edematous, or 
have a discharge from the nipple. Inammatory mammary gland 
carcinomas (IMGCs) are typically rapidly growing, painful, and 
can occasionally cause edema of the extremities (Figure 329.3). 
Dierentials for MGTs include other skin neoplasms, mastitis, 
lobular hyperplasia, and broepithelial hyperplasia in cats.
DIAGNOSTIC TESTING AND TREATMENT
COMPLETE BLOOD COUNT (CBC), CHEMISTRY PROFILE, 
URINALYSIS (UA), HISTOLOGIC FEATURES
Evaluation of dogs and cats with a MGT should include a CBC, 
serum biochemistry prole, and UA. ese results are used to 
assess general health, check for concurrent conditions, and to 
identify paraneoplastic conditions (ch. 331). Histologic examina-
tion of the mass(es) via excisional biopsy is the gold standard for 
diagnosing canine MGTs. Some studies have shown good cor-
relation between cytologic and histologic ndings (ch. 85).11 21
Histologic evaluation of tissue is needed to avoid underestimating 
malignant potential.1 Cytologic evaluation of aspirates is helpful 
CHAPTER 329
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Video and 2 Client Information Sheets.

SECTION XXII
•
Cancer
2302
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
in ruling out dierentials, detecting locoregional lymph node 
metastasis (Figure 329.4), and when dermal extension is sus-
pected (aggressive MGTs or IMGCs) (Figure 329.5).
METASTATIC DISEASE RECOGNITION
Metastatic spread of mMGTs is usually via lymphatic vessels 
to regional lymph nodes or hematogenously. e lungs are the 
most frequent site of distant metastases.11 oracic radiographs 
must be evaluated for metastases and/or lymph node histologic 
assessment is required to denitively diagnose metastasis, which 
worsens the prognosis. Detection of micrometastasis has not 
consistently been associated with a worse outcome.22 Although 
sentinel lymph node (SLN) mapping is standard in humans, it is 
rarely performed in dogs or cats. A few studies have explored SLN 
mapping using various tools, e.g., contrast-enhanced ultrasonog-
raphy (US), computed tomographic (CT) or radiographic indirect 
lymphography using contrast agents/iodized oil and intraopera-
tive dyes. Knowledge of the lymphatic drainage of the neoplastic 
mammary glands, which tends to vary and can even drain to con-
tralateral nodes, is extremely important. Decisions will need to 
be made during surgery in an attempt to achieve complete MGT 
excision and for an accurate postoperative prognosis. e size and 
shape of the lymph nodes are less reliable criteria.11 23 oracic 
radiographs are important to evaluate for metastatic disease or 
pleural eusion (common in cats). Abdominal US can be used for 
staging by assessing locoregional (supercial inguinal and axillary 
lymph nodes) or intra-abdominal nodes for metastatic lymph-
adenopathy, especially when the MGT involves caudal glands. US 
suspicion of metastasis should be conrmed by cytological analy-
sis via ne needle capillary sampling (ch. 85). Mammary mass US 
has been reported but correlations with histopathologic changes 
and the diagnosis of malignancy has not been consistent.24
HISTOLOGIC FEATURES OF MAMMARY GLAND 
TUMORS (MGTs)
Histologic Predictors of Biologic Behavior in Dogs
e new classication of MGTs,25 replacing the Goldsmith 2011 
system,26 is used worldwide for mMGTs.27 is system has given 
pathologists a tool for accurate diagnosis and prognosis of canine 
MGTs.28 29 In dogs, up to 60% of MGTs are benign,26 most oen 
broadenomas (benign mixed tumors). e most common 
malignancies in dogs are solid carcinomas and then tubular ade-
nocarcinomas; only about 3-5% are sarcomas, and 1% are IMGCs. 
Of the 50% mMGTs, 50% recur, metastasize, or develop aer the 
rst surgical resection.2 30 Mortality related to canine invasive 
mammary carcinoma is relatively high: over 40% of dogs and cats 
with invasive MC die within a year of diagnosis.31 Ductal carci-
nomas, carcinomas arising in mixed tumors, and complex carci-
nomas had lower risks of lymphovascular invasion. In contrast, 
carcinosarcoma (Video 329.1), invasive micropapillary carci-
noma, anaplastic carcinoma, comedocarcinoma, solid carcinoma, 
adenosquamous carcinoma, and lipid-rich carcinoma behave 
aggressively.11 12 Poorly dierentiated tumors, sarcomas, and 
inammatory carcinomas also have a worse prognosis. Despite 
the relevance of molecular subtyping in human breast cancer, it is 
not commonly performed in dogs or cats. Triple-negative tumors 
account for approximately half of canine invasive MC (58.6%)31
and show a signicantly shorter disease-free interval (DFI) and 
overall survival (OS) in comparison to luminal A tumors.32
Figure 329.1
Multiple mammary adenomas in a male dog.
Figure 329.2
Large inguinal mammary gland tumor. Clinical pres-
entation characteristics are prognostic, including the growth pattern, 
xation and ulceration.
Figure 329.3
Twelve-year-old female Shepherd mix with an inam-
matory mammary carcinoma. ese are generally rapidly growing and 
painful tumors.
