CHAPTER 176
•
Nonneoplastic White Blood Cell Disorders and Pancytopenia
905
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
to various underlying bone marrow disorders, including IMHA, 
sepsis (ch. 18), hemic neoplasia infiltrating bone marrow 
(ch. 3), and drugs/medications.
MYELODYSPLASIA
Primary Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS)
True primary MDS are clonal (neoplastic) disorders arising from 
mutations in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Testing for 
clonality to conrm primary MDS is not available for dogs and 
cats, and the dierentiation between primary MDS and second-
ary dysmyelopoiesis therefore can be dicult.6 A combination 
of consistent history, clinical signs and accurate categorization 
of hematopathologic abnormalities is needed for diagnosis.7
Nonregenerative anemia is a necessary feature in primary MDS 
of both dogs and cats (ch. 17). Feline retroviruses, particularly 
FeLV, can cause MDS and dysmyelopoiesis (ch. 199); a clonal 
origin to FeLV-associated myelodysplasia and acute myeloid 
leukemia is proven.8 Primary MDS is rare in dogs and a clonal 
origin has not been proven.9 Morphologic changes in blood or 
bone marrow that suggest primary MDS instead of secondary 
dysmyelopoiesis include higher numbers of immature precur-
sors, dysplastic cells, and/or megaloblastic erythroid precursors 
(Figure 176.1, G-J). Additionally, a history of drug/toxin expo-
sure or concurrent disease may support secondary dysmyelopoi-
esis instead of primary MDS. Primary MDS is similar to chronic 
myeloid leukemia: both feature anemia or multiple cytopenias 
and normal/hypercellular bone marrow. Marrow blast cells com-
prise less than 0% of nucleated cells (a few veterinary references 
cite a cuto of 30%30) in both disorders. A key dierence is the 
lack of increased myeloid cells (predominantly mature) in circu-
lation of patients with primary MDS.
Modied versions of the French-American-British (FAB) 
working group scheme for classication of MDS in human medi-
cine are oen used in small animal medicine.7 e following is 
one modied-FAB scheme for classication of primary MDS in 
small animals.9 Note that the 016 revision to the World Health 
Organization (WHO) classication of human myeloid neoplasms 
includes reclassication of MDS subtypes,31 but published veteri-
nary classication schemes do not currently reect this revision.
MDS–Excess Blasts (MDS-EB) MDS-EB is likely the 
most common MDS in dogs and is associated with more severe 
clinical signs and a poor prognosis at presentation.3 Neutrope-
nia, thrombocytopenia and nonregenerative anemia are associ-
ated with MDS-EB. Increased myeloblasts (up to 0%; note that 
>0% myeloblasts is considered diagnostic for acute myeloid 
leukemia per WHO classification but >30% erythroblasts in mar-
row is required to diagnose erythroid leukemia33) and dyspla-
sia of all three cell lines are found in bone marrow. Dysplastic 
changes include asynchronous maturation in all cell lines, hyper-
segmented granulocytes, dispersed megakaryocyte nuclei, and 
erythroid dysplasia as described below for MDS-refractory cyto-
penia. The prognosis for dogs with MDS-EB is worse than that 
for other forms of MDS.34 MDS-EB is reported in cats from 1 to 
17 years old.35 Cats with MDS-EB comprise between 31-65% of 
all cats with primary MDS if cats with secondary dysmyelopoiesis 
are excluded.35 In one study, 6 of 13 cats with MDS-EB tested pos-
itive for FeLV infection. Other studies found higher percentages 
of FeLV-positivity; discrepant results may be due to decreasing 
FeLV prevalence and/or differing prevalence between geographic 
regions. As for dogs, the prognosis for cats with MDS-EB tends 
to be worse and the risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia 
higher than with other forms of feline MDS.
MDS–Refractory Cytopenia (MDS-RC) MDS-RC tends 
to occur in older dogs and it has an insidious onset of clinical 
signs due to progressively worsening nonregenerative anemia. 
Other cytopenias, including neutropenia, can occur but are 
uncommon. Bone marrow may be hypercellular due to ery-
throid hyperplasia, or normocellular. Erythroid dysplasia includ-
ing nuclear:cytoplasmic asynchrony, binucleation, and nuclear 
fragmentation is a characteristic finding.3 Rubriblasts may be 
increased (up 30% of all nucleated bone marrow cells). Descrip-
tions of MDS-RC in cats often include cytopenias and dysplastic 
changes in multiple blood cell lineages; it is proposed that such 
cases represent MDS-RCMD (see below) rather than MDS-RC in 
this classification scheme.
MDS–Refractory Cytopenia With Multilineage Dys-
plasia (MDS-RCMD) MDS-RCMD is defined as dysplasia in 
at least  cell lineages in bone marrow, similar to MDS-EB but 
without a substantial increase in myeloblasts (<5% myeloblasts 
for MDS-RCMD). MDS characterized by refractory anemia with 
sideroblastic differentiation can be included in this category, as 
dysplasia occurs in multiple lineages.9 In cats, experimental 
infection with FeLV produced hematologic disease resembling 
MDS-RCMD, with cytopenias and dysplasia in multiple cell 
lines.36 Several cats with sideroblastic forms of MDS-RCMD are 
Differential Diagnosis for Pancytopenia due to Bone 
Marrow Disease
Responsive (Hypercellular or Normocellular Marrow) = 
Ineffective Hematopoiesis
•
Immune-mediated destruction of hemic precursors of multiple
lineages
•
Dysplasia: Primary or secondary myelodysplastic syndrome or
secondary dysmyelopoiesis
•
Medications: Cephalosporins,14 phenobarbital and primidone,6
and vincristine (note that these drugs may cause pancytopenia 
via dysplasia, immune-mediated destruction, and/or general
bone marrow suppression (see below)
•
Ehrlichia canis infection
Non-responsive (Hypocellular or Acellular Marrow) = 
General Marrow Suppression
•
Infectious diseases: Viral (e.g., parvoviral), fungal, Cytauxzoon 
felis, Ehrlichia canis
•
Toxins/medications/hormones: Increased estrogens (exoge
nous estrogens, Sertoli cell tumors, or ovarian granulosa cell 
tumors),15 16 azathioprine,17 griseofulvin,18 phenylbutazone,19
cephalosporins,14 
meclofenamic 
acid,20 
trimethoprim-
sulfadiazine and fenbendazole,20 albendazole,21 quinidine,20
chloramphenicol,22 captopril,23 and potentially phenobarbital 
and/or primidone (some reports of toxicosis in dogs do not
describe bone marrow alterations)
•
Chemotherapy drug administration or radiation therapy
•
Immune-mediated suppression or destruction of hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells
•
Neoplastic marrow infiltration or effacement: Leukemia, lym
phoma, multiple myeloma, and histiocytic sarcoma are the 
most common neoplastic processes causing pancytopenia (note 
that histiocytic sarcoma is also suspected to cause bone marrow 
suppression independent of marrow infiltration)
•
Non-neoplastic myelophthisis (replacement of hematopoietic
tissue by abnormal cells/tissue): Osteopetrosis and myelofibro
sis
•
Myelonecrosis
BOX 176.1

SECTION X
•
Hematologic and Immunologic Disease
906
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
reported. Note that the updated WHO classification for MDS in 
human patients combines all forms of MDS with ring sideroblasts 
into a single category regardless of the presence or absence of 
multilineage dysplasia, based on recent genetic information.31
Secondary Myelodysplastic Syndromes
Secondary MDS in humans are clonal disorders. Mutations are 
induced by chemotherapeutic agents, toxin exposure, and/or 
radiation therapy. Dysmegakaryopoiesis and myeloproliferative 
disorders following radiation are reported in dogs, suggesting 
these syndromes may occur in small animals as well.
SECONDARY DYSMYELOPOIESIS
e most common diseases associated with secondary dysmy-
elopoiesis, a non-clonal disorder, in dogs are ITP (ch. 175) and 
IMHA (ch. 174), pure red cell aplasia (ch. 174), and lymphoma 
(ch. 3).9 Other causes include drugs/medications (e.g., che-
motherapeutic agents, chloramphenicol, estrogens, and pheno-
barbital37 [ch. 138]), endogenous overproduction of estrogens, 
heavy metal toxicosis, iron deciency, adenocarcinoma, and 
leishmaniasis (ch. 197). Diseases associated with secondary dys-
myelopoiesis in cats include IMHA and ITP, pure red cell aplasia, 
lymphoma, glomerulonephritis (ch. 30), feline infectious perito-
nitis (ch. 00) and feline immunodeciency virus (FIV) infection 
(ch. 198). Dysplasia can aect one or multiple blood cell lin-
eages, oen depending on the underlying etiology. For example, 
sideroblastic forms of disease are associated with inammatory 
disorders and myelobrosis.9 Bone marrow cytology alone can 
be insucient to distinguish primary MDS from secondary dys-
myelopoiesis. Lower percentages of dysplastic cells and/or normal 
blast cell percentages may suggest secondary dysmyelopoiesis, but 
exceptions may include recovery from sepsis or toxic bone mar-
row injury. Dierentiation of primary MDS vs. secondary dys-
myelopoiesis may instead rely on history or clinical evidence to 
support potential underlying cause(s) of dysmyelopoiesis.
TREATMENT OF PANCYTOPENIC DISORDERS
If possible, elimination or withdrawal of the underlying cause 
(e.g., medications, infectious causes, neoplastic disorders) is indi-
cated. Cytotoxic treatment agents for dogs and cats with MDS 
or suspected immune-mediated pancytopenic disorders have 
included cyclophosphamide, cytosine arabinoside, prednisone, 
cyclosporine, daunorubicin, vincristine, hydroxycarbamide, 
and cytarabine (chs. 169 and 17).38 Additional therapeu-
tic options regardless of the underlying cause of pancytopenia 
include transfusion if indicated (ch. 14), and stimulation of 
blood cell production via exogenous growth factors (e.g., EPO, 
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor [G-CSF]) and/or receptor 
agonists.3 39 40
PARANEOPLASTIC LEUKOCYTOSIS
Neoplastic processes can cause a secondary, non-neoplastic 
increase in production of specic mature leukocyte subtypes. 
Paraneoplastic neutrophilia and eosinophilia are infrequently rec-
ognized in small animals. Paraneoplastic leukocytosis resulting 
in mature neutrophilia is most oen associated with carcinoma 
(e.g., squamous cell,41 renal,4 or pulmonary43 carcinoma) or 
rectal polyps.44 ese tumors can cause increased production of 
G-CSF and/or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating fac-
tor.443 Note that tumors can cause substantial neutrophilia due 
to inammation, and paraneoplastic leukocytosis is considered 
an uncommon or rare cause of neoplasia-associated neutrophilia 
by comparison. Paraneoplastic eosinophilia is most oen associ-
ated with T-cell lymphoma45 and mast cell neoplasia.46 A possible 
association with leiomyosarcoma is also reported (ch. 34).47 See 
ch. 331 for additional information on paraneoplastic syndromes.
INFECTIOUS DISEASES CAUSING CYTOPENIAS OR 
OTHER LEUKOCYTE ABNORMALITIES
PARVOVIRUS INFECTION
Canine and feline parvoviral infections (ch. 01) cause bone mar-
row injury and leukopenia. Neutropenia occurs in some but not 
all cases of severe canine parvovirus infection; leukopenia has 
been reported in less than half of infected dogs on presentation.48
Neutropenic dogs may have marked evidence of le shi and/or 
neutrophil toxic change in blood smears (Figure 176.1, C-F and 
ch. 58); 9% of clinically ill dogs and 84% of cats with parvoviral 
infection had acellular bone marrow on evaluation.49 Survival is 
strongly predicted by a patient’s ability to maintain total leukocyte 
counts >4500/mcL and lymphocyte counts >1000/mcL.50
DISTEMPER AND PARAMYXOVIRUS INFECTION
Canine distemper virus (ch. 04) infects numerous tissues and 
cells, including lymphoid and other hematopoietic cells. Immu-
nosuppression occurs early in infection due to viral-mediated lysis 
of lymphocytes; grossly enlarged lymph nodes and thymic atro-
phy develop. Secondary lymph node follicles are microscopically 
absent. Lymphopenia can occur, and cytoplasmic (rarely nuclear) 
viral inclusions may be seen in white blood cells in peripheral 
blood smears (Figure 176.1, K) in early infection.51 Immunosup-
pression can be prolonged in some dogs and may exacerbate viral 
replication and spreading.
FELINE LEUKEMIA VIRUS (FeLV) INFECTION
Bone marrow suppression is a frequent clinical syndrome associ-
ated with FeLV infection (ch. 199 and above section on Myelo-
dysplastic Syndromes). Erythroid precursors are most commonly 
aected, but suppression of hematopoiesis can occur in all cell 
lineages. Neutropenia is reported in approximately 50% of cats 
presenting with FeLV-related illness.5 Cyclic hematopoiesis has 
also been reported in infected cats. Cats with myelodysplasia and 
myelobrosis are frequently FeLV-positive. Myelophthisis due to 
myelobrosis and/or other causes, particularly hemic neoplasia, 
can contribute to decreased leukocyte production.
FELINE IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS (FIV) INFECTION
Acute FIV infection (ch. 198) may trigger mild leukocyte abnor-
malities. No dierences were found between FIV-infected and 
non-infected cats in the occurrence of peripheral leukocyte abnor-
malities in one study.53 In another, FIV infection increased the 
odds ratio of neutropenia.54 Panlymphopenia can occur in acute 
infection.55 Viral strain is an important factor: severe neutrope-
nia with lymphocytosis of granular lymphocytes was seen dur-
ing acute experimental infection with FIV-CPGammar.56 Chronic 
infection is associated with decreased CD4+:CD8+ T-cell ratios 
and development of secondary neoplastic and inammatory 
disorders.55
RICKETTSIAL INFECTIONS
In dogs, the rickettsial agents most oen associated with leukocyte 
abnormalities are Ehrlichia canis, Ehrlichia chaeensis, Ehrlichia 
ewingii, Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Neorickettsia helminthoeca, 
Neorickettsia risticii and Rickettsia rickettsii (ch. 193). Natural and/
or experimental infections with E. canis, A. phagocytophilum or N. 
risticii causing clinical signs are reported in cats. Acutely, E. canis
