SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
1974
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
BG blood glucose
BGC blood glucose curve
CBC complete blood count
CGMS continuous glucose 
monitoring system
CoA coenzyme A
cPLI canine pancreatic 
lipase immunoreactivity
DKA diabetic ketoacidosis
DM diabetes mellitus
FFAs free fatty acids
FGMS flash glucose moni-
toring system
GAD65 glutamic acid 
decarboxylase 65
GH growth hormone
HbA1c glycated hemoglo-
bin
IA-2 insulinoma antigen 2
IG interstitial glucose
MHC major histocompati-
bility complex
NIDDM non-insulin-
dependent diabetes mel-
litus
NPH neutral protamine 
Hagedorn
PBGM portable blood glu-
cose meter
PD polydipsia
PE physical examination
Pg progesterone
PP polyphagia
PU polyuria
PZI protamine zinc insulin
RBC red blood cell
SQ subcutaneous(ly)
UA urinalysis
US ultrasound
INTRODUCTION
D
iabetes mellitus (DM) is a hetero-
geneous group of diseases with 
multiple etiologies characterized by 
hyperglycemia resulting from inadequate 
insulin secretion, inadequate insulin action, 
or both.1 e prevalence of DM in dogs has 
been estimated from about 0.3% in rst opin-
ion practices to about 1% in referral institu-
tion practices.2-5 e reported incidence 
of DM in a population of 182,087 Swedish 
insured dogs was about 13 cases per 10,000 
(0.13%) dog-years at risk.6
CLASSIFICATION AND ETIOLOGY
“TYPES” OF DIABETES MELLITUS
ere are two predominant forms of DM in 
people, one involving a permanent and abso-
lute loss of insulin and the other involving 
insulin resistance that may not be permanent. 
ese 2 conditions were referred to as “juvenile-
onset” and “adult-onset” DM, respectively, then 
updated to “insulin-dependent DM” (IDDM) 
and “non-insulin-dependent DM” (NIDDM). 
e terms type 1 and type 2 DM are now 
employed, with about 10% of diabetic people 
worldwide having type 1 disease and about 
90% with type 2, a condition almost identical 
to the previous NIDDM.7 Several classication 
systems for canine DM have been proposed 
based on the underlying cause of their beta-cell 
dysfunction.8 9 More recently, the European 
Society of Veterinary Endocrinology’s project 
(Agreeing Language in Veterinary Endocrinol-
ogy) proposed a common terminology (Box 
291.1).1 e most common form of DM in dogs 
resembles type 1 DM in people. It is characterized by permanent hypo-
insulinemia, no increase in endogenous serum insulin or C-peptide 
concentrations following administration of an insulin secretagogue 
(e.g., glucose, glucagon, amino acids), and an absolute need for exog-
enous insulin to control glycemia, avoid diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA, 
ch. 290), and survive.10 With rare exceptions, all diabetic dogs require 
exogenous insulin therapy to manage their hyperglycemia.
HISTOLOGY AND POSSIBLE PRIMARY CAUSES
Common histologic observations in pancreatic tissue from 
dogs with DM include reduced size and number of pancreatic 
islets and reduced number of beta cells within islets. Beta-cell 
vacuolization, enlargement, and degeneration are common.11 12
The cause of pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction or destruction 
in dogs has not been established. Genetic predisposition to 
DM is recognized and based on familial associations, pedigree 
analyses of Keeshonden and several other breeds, and genomic 
studies to identify susceptibility and protective major histo-
compatibility complex (MHC) haplotypes.2 13-15 A number of 
genes linked to susceptibility to DM in people are also asso-
ciated with increased risk in dogs.14-16 Canine DM has been 
associated with MHC class II genes (dog leukocyte antigen; 
DLA).17 Similar haplotypes and genotypes have been identi-
fied in the most susceptible breeds.
e American Diabetes Association has recommended sub-
categorizing human type 1 DM (T1DM) into types 1A (immune-
mediated) and 1B (idiopathic severe insulin deciency).18 Type 
1A DM is characterized by lymphocytic inltration of the islets, 
known as “insulitis,” and by the presence of serum autoantibod-
ies to pancreatic components (e.g., insulin, intracellular glutamic 
Diabetes Mellitus in Dogs
Federico Fracassi
CHAPTER 291
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 8 Videos and 1 Client Information Sheet.
Classification of Canine Diabetes Mellitus1
I. Insulin Deficient DM (IDD) (Beta-Cell-Related Disorders)
a. Reduced insulin secretion due to beta-cell destruction
Beta-cell loss associated with exocrine pancreatic disease
Immune-mediated
Toxic (e.g., diazoxide)
Infection
Idiopathic
b. Reduced insulin secretion due to beta-cell death (apoptosis)
Glucotoxicity
Lipotoxicity
Idiopathic
c. Reduced insulin secretion due to beta-cell aplasia/atrophy/
hypoplasia
d. Production of defective insulin
II. Insulin Resistant DM (IRD) (Target-Organ Disorder)
a. Endocrine influence
Growth hormone (endogenous/exogenous)
Steroids (glucocorticoids/progestogens/other)
Catecholamines
Thyroid hormones
b. Obesity
c. Drugs
Thiazide diuretics
Beta-adrenergic agonists
d. Inflammatory mediators
e. Disorders of receptor and intracellular signaling
BOX 291.1

CHAPTER 291
•
Diabetes Mellitus in Dogs
1975
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
acid decarboxylase 65 [GAD65] or insulinoma antigen 2 [IA-2]) 
prior to the development of hyperglycemia.19 ere is evidence 
that a small percentage of diabetic dogs have an immune-
mediated component contributing to the beta cell loss, leading to 
insulin deciency. However, studies are conicting, and pancre-
atic lymphocytic inltration is rare in diabetic dogs.11 20-22 Also, 
circulating serum antibodies to beta-cell autoantigens, such as 
GAD65, IA-2 and insulin, were only rarely identied in aected 
dogs at diagnosis.11 21 23 us, autoimmunity may not be a con-
tributory factor in most dogs. A few dogs with juvenile-onset 
DM (i.e., onset <1 year of age) have been reported, with higher 
prevalence in some breeds, e.g., Labrador Retrievers.24 25 Most 
reports describe various pancreatic histopathologic abnormali-
ties in diabetic dogs, but no clear etiology. Congenital hypoplasia 
of islet beta cells has been described in Keeshond puppies and 
other breeds.26-28
EXOCRINE PANCREATIC DISEASE
DM may occur secondary to disease of the exocrine pancreas 
or any process that diusely injures the pancreas, most notably 
pancreatitis (chs. 276, 277), a recognized cause of human dia-
betes.29 e incidence of histologically identiable, oen severe 
pancreatitis in diabetic dogs ranges from 30-40%. It is a likely 
contributor to the development of DM and DKA (ch. 290).30-32
Any inammatory process involving exocrine pancreatic tissue 
could negatively impact beta-cell viability because beta cells are 
particularly sensitive to the action of proapoptotic mediators, 
such as tumor necrosis factor alpha.33-35
INSULIN-RESISTANT DM
Progesterone
Insulin-resistant DM can follow the antagonistic eects of the 
progesterone (Pg)-dominated phase of diestrus or pregnancy 
(see Females in Diestrus, below). Following estrus, all normal 
bitches (pregnant or not) enter the luteal, PG-dominated phase 
(diestrus) of their ovarian cycle. Diestrus lasts 60 to 90 days, every 
6 to 12 months. Pg stimulates growth hormone (GH) secretion 
from mammary tissue and both hormones antagonize insulin 
action.36 Older females are frequently diagnosed with DM while 
in diestrus (whether or not pregnant), when serum Pg and GH 
concentrations are increased.37-39 Treatment with ovariohysterec-
tomy removes the source of Pg and, in turn, the stimulus for GH 
secretion. If an adequate population of functional beta cells is still 
present in the pancreas, hyperglycemia may resolve without insu-
lin treatment. Failure to quickly correct insulin resistance oen 
results in progressive loss of beta cells and a greater likelihood of 
permanent insulin dependency.38
Glucocorticoids
Glucocorticoids cause insulin resistance and decrease insulin secre-
tion directly by reducing the incretin eect and by direct cytotoxic 
eects (ch. 293).40-43 DM had been documented in about 10% of 
dogs with hypercortisolism.44 45 In 1 study, 38% of dogs with hyper-
cortisolism had moderate hyperglycemia.46 Sustained hyperglyce-
mia has been shown to damage canine islets and lead to DM.47 It 
is possible that hypercortisolism merely exposes pre-existing pan-
creatic damage that has otherwise remained subclinical, which can 
explain the progression of DM in some but not all dogs.
Obesity
Despite the increasing prevalence of obesity in dogs, there is no evi-
dence that insulin resistance unmasks beta-cell dysfunction result-
ing in type 2 DM as in people and cats (chs. 20, 150). Obese dogs 
show evidence of insulin resistance but compensate appropriately 
through increased insulin secretion.48
“HONEYMOON PERIOD”
A “honeymoon period” occurs in some dogs with newly diagnosed 
DM, characterized by excellent glycemic control in response to 
small doses of insulin (<0.2 U/kg/injection), presumably due to 
residual beta-cell function. Glycemic control in these dogs usually 
becomes more dicult (the honeymoon ends), requiring increas-
ing insulin doses within months of beginning treatment, as the 
residual functioning beta cells die and fail to be replaced.49
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
DM is the result of a relative or absolute insulin deciency. Insu-
lin deciency causes decreased tissue utilization of glucose, amino 
acids, and fatty acids, accelerated hepatic glycogenolysis and gluco-
neogenesis, and accumulation of glucose in the circulation, caus-
ing hyperglycemia.50 Intestinal glucose absorption and glucose 
entry into erythrocytes, kidney or brain is not aected. As renal 
tubular capacity for glucose reabsorption is exceeded, usually when 
blood glucose (BG) concentrations are >180 to 220 mg/dL (>10-
12.2 mmol/L), glycosuria occurs. Glucose-induced osmotic diure-
sis causes polyuria (PU), water loss, and activation of the thirst 
mechanism leading to polydipsia (PD). e negative calorie bal-
ance resulting from an inability to utilize glucose, loss of calories in 
urine, and tissue catabolism leads to polyphagia (PP).
e physiological consequences of DM are similar to those of 
starvation. Protein metabolism shis from synthesis to proteolysis 
and available amino acids increase hepatic gluconeogenesis. ese 
are short-term protective mechanisms. But, in DM, enhanced glu-
cose synthesis exacerbates hyperglycemia, creates negative nitrogen 
balance, decreases muscle mass, and eventually leads to cachexia (ch. 
151).51 e continuing lack of insulin prevents glucose from entering 
cells, accelerates lipid catabolism, mobilizes triglycerides, and causes 
increased levels of plasma free fatty acids (FFAs). FFAs are transported 
to the liver where they undergo beta-oxidation to acetyl coenzyme A 
(CoA), which may exceed the need for adenosine triphosphate pro-
duction via oxidation in the Krebs cycle. Excess acetyl CoA is metabo-
lized into ketones. In starvation, ketones are an acceptable short-term 
source for energy but aer prolonged starvation or in DM, excessive 
production of ketones can lead to ketosis and, in DM, DKA. Increased 
hepatic concentration of FFAs also increases hepatic synthesis of both 
triglycerides and very low density lipoproteins (VLDLs), causing 
hyperlipidemia (chs. 63, 156) and hepatic lipidosis (ch. 274).
SIGNALMENT
DM is most commonly diagnosed in middle-aged and older 
dogs, 5 to 12 years of age.1-6 Rarely, DM is diagnosed in a juve-
nile dog.26-28 Peak prevalence is 7 to 10 years; most studies place 
females at a greater risk.2-6 Regional dierences in breed popu-
larity or variation in neutering practices may inuence sex pre-
dispositions within a population, although associations identied 
between neutering and diagnosis of DM also vary. Genetic predis-
position for or against the development of DM in dogs has been 
suggested (Table 291.1), e.g., Boxer dogs are seldom reported 
in epidemiologic studies on DM. Genetic dierences within the 
same breed due to dierent blood-lines also impact predisposi-
tions, e.g., Swedish and Norwegian Elkhounds, Australian Terri-
ers, and Samoyeds have the highest incidence of DM in Sweden 
while English Setter dogs are overrepresented in Italy.6,52
ANAMNESIS
Dogs with DM almost always have the classical clinical signs of 
PU/PD/PP and weight loss. PU/PD are constant in diabetic dogs. 
PP may be diminished by a concurrent condition that decreases 
appetite (e.g., pancreatitis, ketosis, DKA; chs. 277 and 290). 
