SECTION XIV
•
Cardiovascular Disease
1422
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF 
SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION
S
ystemic hypertension (SH) is dened 
as a pathologic elevation in systemic 
arterial blood pressure (BP) usually 
recognized with sustained elevations in 
systolic blood pressure (SBP). e complex 
neurohormonal interactions between the 
kidneys, nervous system, vasculature, and 
heart may lead to altered BP control (Figure 
236.1).1 2 Guidelines for identication and 
evaluation of SH have been devised based 
on the probability of developing target-
organ damage (TOD), and both monitor-
ing and therapeutic guidelines have been 
established.1-3 Feline studies have docu-
mented a normal SBP range of 111-162 mm 
Hg depending on measurement method.3
Canine studies suggest a narrower range of 
131-154 mm Hg.2 Methods for measuring 
BP are described in ch. 91
e prevalence of SH has been reported 
as 19.5% for cats, and in dogs 0.5-13%.2 4
Cats aged >9 years have signicantly higher 
BP than cats aged 3-9 years, and risk of SH 
also increases with age,5 whereas a slight 
increase in BP (13 mm Hg/year) has been 
reported in dogs.6 e association between 
SH and age is likely multifactorial and unclear at this time. No 
relationship exists between breed and BP in cats;5 however, certain 
breed variations likely exist in dogs.
TYPES OF HYPERTENSION
SH can be divided into three broad categories: secondary hyper-
tension, idiopathic hypertension and situational hypertension. 
Secondary hypertension is induced by clinical disease or medi-
cations and is most common. Idiopathic hypertension occurs in 
absence of a readily identiable cause. Situational hypertension is 
most oen caused by the “white coat” eect.
Secondary Hypertension
Obesity (ch. 150) There is either a small or no correlation 
between obesity and SH in dogs. Furthermore, SH in obese dogs 
is more likely related to endocrinopathies, renal disease or cardiac 
disease. In cats, no studies correlate sex, breed, and body weight 
with increased SH risk.2 3
Renal Disease (ch. 301) The most common cause of SH in 
dogs and cats is renal disease. Impaired renal function is noted 
in 60-100% of cats presenting with SH and TOD.7-9 Whereas 
cats with chronic kidney disease (CKD) have a prevalence of 
SH between 20-65%, the severity of CKD does not correlate 
with magnitude of BP elevation or prevalence.2 10 The patho-
physiologic mechanism is multifactorial and involves systemic 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) activation (Figure 
236.2), local (tissue-specific) RAAS activation, impaired sodium 
(Na+) excretion, increased intravascular volume, sympathetic 
stimulation, structural arterial changes, endothelial dysfunction, 
reduced nitric oxide (NO)-mediated vasodilation, increased vas-
cular endothelin production, and reactive oxygen species gen-
eration/oxidative stress (Figure 236.1).3 10 Excessive angiotensin 
II (ATII) and aldosterone (ALDO) are directly nephrotoxic and 
likely contribute to fibrotic remodeling of glomeruli.11
ATII is also locally produced in the renal parenchyma. is 
intrarenal RAAS likely contributes to and maintains SH, pro-
motes glomerular hypertension, worsens proteinuria, and leads to 
oxidative damage and renal brosis.7 11 Systemic RAAS concen-
tration may not reect intrarenal RAAS. No consistent associa-
tion between plasma ALDO or renin concentrations, and SH and 
feline CKD, have been observed.3 10 However, ALDO concentra-
tions are higher in cats with CKD, indicating that elevated ALDO 
concentrations may contribute to SH. is may be independent 
of RAAS, as SH did not respond to treatment with angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and plasma renin activ-
ity was found to be low to normal in cats.12 Increased vascular 
tone may explain the response to treatment with calcium chan-
nel blockers (CCBs) in cats with SH.3 erefore, systemic RAAS 
activation may less be responsible for SH in feline CKD patients.
Proteinuria is an independent variable that is signicantly 
associated with survival in cats with CKD and with all causes of 
SH.8 Both glomerular and tubular protein loss likely stimulate the 
production of inammatory mediators and cytokines, leading to 
glomerular hypertension, glomerular sclerosis, and renal brosis.10
Glomerular disease, independent of cause, has been associated with 
the development of SH from sodium retention as well as excessive 
RAAS and sympathetic activity.1 SH is more common in dogs with 
glomerular disease (ch. 302) and leishmaniasis (ch. 197) than in 
dogs with other forms of CKD.9 SH may also increase intraglo-
merular hypertension and independently contribute to proteinuria.
SH is common in acute kidney injury (AKI; ch. 300) and 
with the use of erythropoiesis-stimulating agents.13 14 Cats 
with AKI have a prevalence of SH of almost 59%, and it is not 
related to grade of AKI or serum creatinine concentration.15
SH is present in 75% of dogs with AKI, 56% of them severe 
(SBP >180 mm Hg). No association is known to exist among 
Systemic Hypertension
Serge Chalhoub | Douglas Palma
CHAPTER 236
ACRONYMS
ACEI angiotensin-
converting enzyme 
inhibitor
ACVIM American College 
of Veterinary Internal 
Medicine
AKI acute kidney injury
ALDO aldosterone
ARBs angiotensin-receptor 
blockers
ATII angiotensin II
BP blood pressure
CKD chronic kidney disease
CO cardiac output
CRI constant rate infusion
DM diabetes mellitus
HAC hyperadrenocorticism
LVH left ventricular concen-
tric hypertrophy
NO nitric oxide
RAAS renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system
SBP systolic blood pressure
SH systemic hypertension
SVR systemic vascular 
resistance
TOD target-organ damage
VD vascular dementia
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets on Elsevier eBooks+: 1 Video and 1 Client Information Sheet.

CHAPTER 236
•
Systemic Hypertension
1423
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Sympathetic
nervous
system
Kidneys
Sodium
retention
Vascular
smooth
muscle
Vessels
Endothelium
Increased
preload
HR
SV
CO
PVR
Increased arterial pressure
×
×
Increased RAAS,
local and
systemic
Increased
aldosterone
Endothelin,
TXA,
decreased
NO
Figure 236.1
Possible mechanisms for the development of systemic hypertension (SH). Kidney disease is likely the most common cause of SH in cats and 
dogs. Increased sympathetic nervous system activation, vascular smooth muscle dysfunction, and endothelial disease are other known mechanisms. 
CO, Cardiac output; HR, heart rate; NO, nitric oxide; PVR, peripheral vascular resistance; RAS, renin angiotensin aldosterone system; SV, stroke vol-
ume; TXA, thromboxane. (Modied from Syme H. Hypertension in small animal kidney disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2011;41:63-89.)
AT1
• Vasoconstrictor
• Increased PVR
• Increased Na reabsorption
  in proximal tubule
• Increased aldosterone and
  increased Na collecting ducts
• Increased vascular growth
  factors
• Atherogenesis
• Increased ADH, thirst, CO
• Decreased GFR
• Cardiac hypertrophy
• Fibrosis
• Reactive oxygen species
• Inflammation cytokines
• Vasodilation
• Natriuresis
• Anti-growth
  factors
• Anti-fibrosis
• Tissue
   regeneration
ANG-2
AT2
Figure 236.2
Main mechanisms of action of angiotensin-2 (ANG-2). 
ADH, Antidiuretic hormone; AT1, angiotensin II type-1 receptor; AT2,
angiotensin II type-2 receptor; CO, cardiac output; GFR, glomerular ltra-
tion rate; Na, sodium; PVR, peripheral vascular resistance.
AKI grade, SH, and survival to discharge.16 Iatrogenic volume 
overload in patients with reduced urine output is a major con-
tributor to SH.
Hyperadrenocorticism (ch. 293) SH is reported in 
59-86% of all dogs with hyperadrenocorticism (HAC); dogs 
with unilateral adrenal tumors have a higher prevalence.17
Severe SH can be found in 46% of cases, and thrombocytosis 
may be 100% specific and 61% sensitive in identifying these 
dogs.18 Increased intrinsic mineralocorticoid activity, activation 
of RAAS, and glucocorticoid-induced suppression of vasodila-
tory mechanisms (i.e., NO) have been suggested in people. No 
clear evidence of decreased NO or increased ALDO concentra-
tions exists in dogs. Glucocorticoids may also contribute to SH 
by increasing cardiac output (CO), total peripheral resistance 
and renal blood flow. Furthermore, development of glomerular 
dysfunction or glomerulosclerosis and proteinuria may contrib-
ute in some patients.19 Many dogs remain hypertensive even 
after the diagnosis and treatment of HAC, and some become 
hypertensive after treatment; therefore, it is important to mea-
sure BP at every recheck visit.17,20
Adrenal Tumors/Hyperplasia (chs. 295 and 298) Over 
90% of cats with primary hyperaldosteronism have SH (i.e., SBP 
>180 mm Hg), with SH resolving in all cats when BP is measured 
following adrenalectomy.7,17 SH does not appear to be negatively 
associated with survival. This is rarely seen in dogs.21
Pheochromocytomas reported in dogs and cats can result in 
increased catecholamine secretion and excessive alpha- and beta-
adrenergic stimulation. is may cause sustained or paroxysmal 
SH. At least half of these dogs will present SH at some point.17
