CHAPTER 128
•
Sepsis and the Systemic Inammatory Response Syndrome
667
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Sepsis and the Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome
Amy E. DeClue
DEFINITIONS
S
epsis is derived from the Greek word 
meaning “to make rotten” or “to 
putrefy.” It is an infection-induced 
innate antimicrobial response disorder 
dened as bacteremia or as a concurrent 
infection with evidence that the infection is 
causing the systemic inammatory response 
syndrome (i.e., SIRS). Immune system dys-
regulation is the key pathologic process, not 
just a pro-inammatory response and/or 
widespread infection (ch. 227). Infection-
induced innate antimicrobial response 
disorders encompass a wide range of syn-
dromes including SIRS, the compensatory 
anti-inammatory 
response 
syndrome 
(CARS), mixed antagonist response syn-
drome (i.e., concurrent SIRS and CARS) 
(MARS), the persistent inammation and 
immune suppression catabolism syndrome 
(PICS), and the multiple organ dysfunc-
tion syndrome (MODS) (Table 128.1, Box 
128.1).
PATHOGENESIS
TRIGGERS OF SEPSIS AND THE INNATE IMMUNE 
SYSTEM (IIS)
Triggers
Sepsis is a complex, variable, prolonged host response triggered 
by infection (ch. 183). Manifestations of sepsis vary by pathogen 
(type, load, virulence, site of inoculation) and host (genetics, site 
of infection, comorbidities). In dogs and cats, Gram-negative bac-
terial infections are the most common cause of sepsis, with E. coli
being the most common isolate (Figure 128.1).1-10 However, any 
pathogen (e.g., fungus, parasite, virus, protozoan) could cause 
sepsis. In dogs, sepsis most commonly originates from abdominal 
and respiratory tract infections.1 2 In cats, abdominal and pleural 
space infections are most common.6-11
Innate Immune System (IIS)
e IIS is predominately responsible for the initial manifestations of 
sepsis, activated by danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), 
e.g., pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs; endotoxin 
from Gram-negative bacteria; exotoxins, peptidoglycans and supe-
rantigens from Gram-positive bacteria; and fungal cell wall material 
from pathogens) and alarmins (e.g., high-mobility group protein B1 
[HMGB-1], S100 proteins, RNA, DNA and histones) produced by 
the host. Pattern-recognition receptors of the IIS recognize DAMPs 
via toll-like receptors (TLRs), C-type lectin receptors, retinoic acid 
inducible gene 1-like receptors, and nucleotide-binding oligomer-
ization domain-like receptors to activate innate immune cells and 
induce systemic inammation. For example, in Gram-negative sep-
sis, the glycolipid component of Gram-negative bacteria cell walls 
(lipopolysaccharide [LPS]) is released. e lipid A portion of LPS 
binds to LPS binding protein, recognized via macrophage cell surface 
receptors like CD14. e main function of CD14 is to transfer LPS to 
TLR-4 and myeloid dierentiation factor-2 (MD-2) for subsequent 
cellular activation. Once LPS binds to cell surface receptors, the mac-
rophage or other cells become activated.
Activation of innate immune cells results in “genomic” and “cyto-
kine” storms. As numerous genes that encode various inammatory 
mediators, signal transducers, and cellular adhesion molecules are 
activated, inammatory mediators are produced. Tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF)-alpha, interleukin (IL)-6, chemokine (C-X-C motif) 
ligand-8 (CXCL-8), keratinocyte-derived chemokine (KC)-like 
chemokine, chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2), HMGB-1, 
nitric oxide and leukotrienes are examples of important mediators 
contributing to the pathologic process of sepsis in dogs and cats.12-19
Production of these inammatory mediators results in activation of 
vascular endothelial cells and upregulation of adhesion molecules. 
ese inammatory mediator signals cause neutrophils, monocytes 
and/or lymphocytes to travel to the site of infection, secrete a second 
wave of inammatory mediators, and provide killing mechanisms 
for microorganism clearabnce. Neutrophils release extracellular 
traps, lamentous DNA containing histones and granular proteins, 
to enhance bacterial killing and promote thrombosis. e transition 
from a localized infection/ inammation to sepsis is dependent on 
the systemic circulation of inammatory messages and activation of 
distant immune cells (Figure 128.1).
THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE SYSTEM
e adaptive immune system is involved in the pathogenesis of sep-
sis. Antigen presenting cells that have ingested a pathogen activate 
the adaptive immune response, causing naïve T cells to proliferate 
and eector cells to be generated. Naïve T cells dierentiate into 1/
17 cells or 2 cells and pro-inammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF, 
IL-2, IL-12, interferon-gamma, and leukotrienes or IL-17A) and/or 
anti-inammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, IL-10 and IL-13). 
e balance between the 1/17 and 2 responses contributes to 
the clinical manifestations of pro- vs anti-inammatory shis.
THE COMPENSATORY ANTI-INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE 
SYNDROME (CARS)
CARS is characterized by cyclic immunosuppression/immunopa-
ralysis, a relative failed immune response to infection.20-22 Immu-
noparalysis is characterized by apoptosis of lymphocytes, dendritic 
cells, endothelial cells, gastrointestinal (GI) epithelial cells, and thy-
mocytes; production of IL-10; suppressed CD8+ T cell function; 
reduced monocytic production of pro-inammatory cytokines; 
expression of inhibitory receptors on T cells; increases in regulatory 
CHAPTER 128
ACRONYMS
AKI acute kidney injury
CARS compensatory anti-
inflammatory response 
syndrome
DAMPs danger-associated 
molecular patterns
GI gastrointestinal
HMGB-1 high-mobility 
group protein B1
IIS innate immune system
IL interleukin
IV intravenous
LPS lipopolysaccharide
MARS mixed antagonist 
response syndrome
MODS multiple organ dys-
function syndrome
PICS persistent inflamma-
tion and immune sup-
pression catabolism 
syndrome
SIRS systemic inflammato-
ry response syndrome
TLR toll-like receptor
TNF tumor necrosis factor

SECTION VI
•
Emergency Medicine
668
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
T cells; downregulation of human leukocyte antigen-DR expres-
sion; increases in myeloid-derived suppressor cells; and immune 
cell quiescence.21 23 24 e neuroinammatory reex contributes to 
CARS through multiple mechanisms, including activation of the 
cholinergic anti-inammatory pathway, which results in reduced 
pro-inammatory cytokine production. Clinically, immunoparalysis 
leads to an inability to ght and eliminate infection and the develop-
ment of new infections from opportunistic or otherwise weak organ-
isms.23 Reactivation of latent viruses is another possible development.
PROGRESSION OF SEPSIS
Classically, sepsis was considered the result of systematic progres-
sion through a hyper-inammatory phase followed by resolution 
during hypo-inammation.21 It is now appreciated that sepsis is a 
waxing/waning continuum, where the animal may vacillate between 
pro- and anti-inammatory/immunosuppressive response states. 
Resolution is an orchestrated independent process.21 22 erefore, 
the response during sepsis could be activation of resolution path-
ways and recovery or continued illness due to a pro-inammatory 
response, an anti-inammatory/immunosuppression response 
and/or uctuating/interweaving responses. is concept of vacil-
lating or concurrent responses is termed MARS. Ultimately, mul-
tiple organ failure and/or opportunistic infections could result in 
chronic critical illness or death.23 Lack of resolution and develop-
ment of chronic critical illness is termed persistent inammation 
and immune suppression catabolism syndrome (PICS).
CLINICAL OBSERVATIONS
DOGS
Dogs have either hyperdynamic or hypodynamic responses dur-
ing sepsis. e hyperdynamic response is characterized by fever, 
brick red mucous membranes, tachycardia, and bounding pulses. 
As the disease process progresses, a hypodynamic response may be 
observed: hypotension, pale mucous membranes and hypothermia. 
GI or respiratory signs may be associated with endotoxemia. Hyper-
or hypoglycemia, hypoalbuminemia, azotemia, hyperbilirubinemia, 
increased serum alanine aminotransferase and/or alkaline phospha-
tase concentrations, leukocytosis, neutrophilia with a le shi, leuko-
penia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia have been variably identied 
in dogs with sepsis. Evidence of coagulopathy (decreased protein C 
and antithrombin concentrations, prolonged prothrombin time and 
partial thromboplastin time, increased D-dimer concentrations) 
have been documented in dogs with naturally acquired sepsis (ch. 
170).1 25 Many dogs with sepsis have myocardial dysfunction and 
vasodilation, leading to hypotension. Poor perfusion, tissue hypoxia 
and cellular metabolic derangement can lead to metabolic acidosis.
CATS
Cats with sepsis may develop most of the clinical signs and clini-
copathologic abnormalities observed in dogs with sepsis, but bra-
dycardia, hypothermia and abdominal pain are frequent, unique, 
and poorly understood observations in cats with sepsis.4 9 11 Cats 
also appear to develop septic shock more readily than dogs do, 
and typically the hyperdynamic phase is not recognized.
MULTIPLE ORGAN DYSFUNCTION SYNDROME (MODS)
e pathogenesis of MODS is multifactorial, including development 
of mitochondrial dysfunction secondary to circulatory collapse, 
microcirculatory changes, hypoxemia, and inammation.26 MODS 
is dened in dogs as ≥2 forms of organ dysfunction (Table 128.2) in 
an animal with appropriate risk factors. However, criteria for dening 
individual forms of organ dysfunction vary and are conicting.26 27
e incidence of sepsis-induced MODS is not known in dogs or cats 
although cardiovascular, GI, hepatic, renal, endocrine and respira-
tory dysfunction/failure have been recognized.28-33
Definitions Pertaining to Sepsis and SIRS
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS): A pulmonary inflamma-
tory disorder characterized by non-cardiogenic pulmonary
edema, neutrophilic inflammation and hypoxemia.
Bacteremia: The presence of viable bacteria in the blood stream.
Compensatory anti-inflammatory response syndrome (CARS):
Global deactivation of the immune system resulting in immuno-
suppression and immunoparalysis.
Infection-induced innate antimicrobial response disorders: Umbrella 
term encompassing the different forms of immune system dys-
regulation which develop in response to infection.
Mixed antagonist response syndrome (MARS): SIRS and CARS exist-
ing concurrently during infection; dysequilibrium of pro- and 
anti-inflammatory response during infection.
Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS): Altered function of  
or more organs secondary to SIRS such that homeostasis cannot 
be maintained without intervention.
Persistent inflammation and immune suppression catabolism syn-
drome (PICS): Maladaptive, self-perpetuating cycle of persistent 
inflammation, reduced effective immunity and organ injury result-
ing in loss of muscle mass and function, altered bone marrow 
function, failure of metabolic adaption and chronic critical illness.
Sepsis: . Systemic inflammatory response to infection or . Life-
threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host 
response to infection.
Septic shock: . The systemic inflammatory response to infection 
with hypotension despite adequate fluid resuscitation along with 
the manifestations of hypoperfusion; or . Subset of sepsis in 
which underlying circulatory and cellular/metabolic abnormali-
ties are profound enough to substantially increase mortality. 
Generally, this is sepsis with either persisting hypotension 
requiring vasopressors to maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP)
 mm Hg or a serum lactate concentration > mmol/L despite 
adequate volume resuscitation in people.
Severe sepsis: This term has fallen out of favor and is generally not 
used.
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS): A clinical syndrome 
caused by systemic inflammation of infectious (i.e., sepsis) or non-
infectious origin. The diagnosis of SIRS is based on fulfillment of at 
least  of  criteria in dogs: tachycardia, tachypnea, hypo- or hyper-
thermia, and leukocytosis, leucopenia or >% bands; or  of  cri-
teria in cats: bradycardia or tachycardia, tachypnea, hypo- or hyper-
thermia, and leukocytosis, leukopenia or >% bands (Table .).
BOX 128.1
TABLE 128.1
SIRS Criteria in Dogs and Cats
SIRS CRITERIA
DOG
CAT
Temperature
>102.6°F (>37.2°C) or 
<99°F (<39.2°C)
>103.5°F (>39.7°C) or 
<100°F (<37.8°C)
Heart rate (beats/
minute)
>140
>225 or <140
Respiratory rate 
(breaths/min-
ute)
>40
>40
White blood cell 
count
>19,500/mcL or <5,000/
mcL or >5% bands
>19,500/mcL or 
<5,000/mcL or 
>5% bands
SIRS, Systemic inflammatory response syndrome.
