SECTION XXII
•
Cancer
2250
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
the importance of molecular diagnostics, e.g., ow cytometry and 
cytochemistry on blood and/or BM when evaluating a pet with 
acute leukemia.
A diagnosis of acute leukemia is based on >20% blasts in 
either the peripheral blood or BM; some older studies used >30% 
blasts.106-109 Classically, acute leukemias can be distinguished 
from LSA by being CD34+, but it is estimated that up to 25% of 
canine acute leukemias are CD34
21 101 106 Commercially avail-
able ow cytometry tests have specic antibodies for lymphocytes 
and for granulocytes/monocytes. However, about 20-25% of acute 
leukemias cannot be denitively classied despite use of these 
markers (so-called acute undierentiated leukemias).21 107 Addi-
tional cytochemical or immunocytochemical stains are available 
through some universities. PARR is not helpful because not all 
lymphoid cancers test positive for a clonal rearrangement, and 
>60% of dogs with AML test positive for clonal or biclonal rear-
rangements.110 When lineage can be determined, about 50-55% of 
acute leukemias in dogs are ALL, and 45-50% are AML.100 106-108
In dogs with ALL, there is not a consistent predominance of B- or 
T-cell.106-108 Both B- and T-cell ALL have been reported in cats, 
but there are too few to make meaningful comparisons.111
Clinical Signs
Most dogs and cats with acute leukemia are clinically ill at time of 
initial presentation. Anorexia and lethargy are common108 109 111; 
other clinical signs include vomiting, diarrhea, weakness, and neu-
rologic abnormalities. Mild lymphadenopathy is reported in over 
half of dogs, but it is not reported in cats. Other PE ndings include 
cranial abdominal organomegaly, fever, pallor, petechia, and epi-
staxis. T-cell ALL can cause paraneoplastic hypercalcemia, causing 
PU/PD. FeLV (ch. 199) is associated with acute leukemias in cats.3
Diagnostics
Greater than 90% of dogs and cats with acute leukemia have neo-
plastic cells seen on peripheral blood smears (ch. 58). In some, 
the number of neoplastic cells is small or they are not detectable 
at all.106-109 111 Total white blood cell counts can be increased due 
to neoplastic cells, normal, or even low in a pet with few neo-
plastic circulating cells and concurrent neutropenia. Anemia 
and thrombocytopenia are common (chs. 57 and 59). Many have 
cytopenias in multiple cell lines due to neoplastic cells displacing 
normal hematopoietic cells, termed myelophthisis. e percent-
age of neoplastic cells circulating in the peripheral blood does not 
correlate with the severity of concurrent cytopenias, emphasizing 
the importance of BM cytology not only to assist with diagnosis 
but also to assess normal hematopoietic function.106
Treatment, Support, and Prognosis
Treating acute leukemias is challenging. Most dogs and cats are 
clinically ill and myelosuppressive drugs must be given to pets that 
are already cytopenic and have impaired hematopoiesis. Severe 
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia are common. Even 
with intensive supportive care, e.g., blood transfusions and broad-
spectrum antibiotics, clients must be prepared for life-threatening 
treatment-associated adverse events (ch. 321).
When choosing a more intensive treatment approach, ALL is 
commonly treated with L-CHOP, which consists of the CHOP 
protocol with the addition of L-asparaginase. e inclusion of 
L-asparaginase at induction is strongly advised because it is does 
not further impair normal hematopoietic function. Even with 
the most intensive treatment approach, the prognosis is grave. 
Reported MSTs in dogs and cats are <3 months and survival >6 
months is rare.105 107 108 111 ere are no established chemotherapy 
protocols for AML. erapies used include L-asparaginase, CHOP, 
and cytosine arabinoside.109 MSTs for dogs treated with aggressive 
chemotherapy was <2 months, comparable to using only predni-
sone. None of these aicted pets lived beyond 6 months.
MYELOPROLIFERATIVE NEOPLASMS, MYELODYSPLASTIC 
SYNDROME
Definitions and Diagnosis
Myeloproliferative neoplasms, previously termed chronic myelo-
proliferative disorders, are characterized by excessive production 
of dierentiated BM cells, resulting in accumulation of erythro-
cytes (primary erythrocytosis, also called polycythemia vera; ch. 
173), granulocytes and/or monocytes (chronic myeloid leukemias 
[CMLs]), or platelets (essential thrombocythemia). Because these 
cells are morphologically similar to their non-neoplastic counter-
parts, diagnosis centers around ruling out physiologic or paraneo-
plastic etiologies for the increases in blood cell counts (chs. 57-59).
Treatment and Prognosis
Primary erythrocytosis is reviewed in ch. 173. A subset of dogs 
with CML have the same breakpoint cluster region-ABL (BCR-
ABL) chromosomal translocation (“Raleigh chromosome”) as the 
“Philadelphia chromosome” translocation associated with CML 
in people.112 Use of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor toceranib (Pal-
ladia, Zoetis) has been successful in a dog with CML. Additional 
studies are warranted. Historically, hydroxyurea (20-25 mg/kg 
PO q12h) has been used to treat CML in dogs1 and continued 
until the leukocyte is <15,000-20,000/mcL. e dose can then be 
reduced (10-15 mg/kg PO q24h or to 50 mg/kg PO once every 2 
or 3 weeks). Essential thrombocythemia is rare in dogs and cats. 
ere is no established therapy in dogs or cats and in people it 
is controversial whether to implement therapy in asymptomatic 
patients.1
Myelodysplastic syndromes (ch. 176) are uncommon in dogs 
and cats. Patients have cytopenias involving multiple cell lines: 
neutropenia with or without le shi, nonregenerative anemia, 
and/or thrombocytopenia. Other blood abnormalities can include 
macrocytic erythrocytes and metarubricytosis. e BM is usually 
normocellular to hypercellular with dysplastic changes in multiple 
cell lines. ere usually are increased blast cells, but they constitute 
<20% of all nucleated cells (a blast percentage >20% is diagnostic 
for AML). Myelodysplasia is sometimes referred to as preleukemia 
because in some it will progress to AML. ere is no standard ther-
apy for myelodysplasia. Darbepoetin alfa, retinoic acid analogs, 1,25 
dihydroxyvitamin D3, interferon-alpha, 6-thioguanine, and cyto-
sine arabinoside can induce dierentiation of hematopoietic cells.1
MYELOMA-RELATED DISORDERS (MRD)
DEFINITIONS
MRD arise from neoplastic transformation of plasma cells or Ig-
secreting B-cell precursors,113 and include a variety of clinical 
syndromes. Multiple myeloma (MM), the most common MRD, 
is the systemic proliferation of malignant plasma cells arising as a 
clone of a single cell with multifocal or diuse involvement of the 
BM.114,115 ese cells most commonly produce IgG or IgA immu-
noglobulins. Production of IgM immunoglobulins is less common 
and is called IgM macroglobulinemia (Waldenström’s macroglobu-
linemia) because IgM normally exists as a high molecular weight 
pentamer, and this larger size increases risk of serum hyperviscos-
ity.54,116 Plasma cell tumors involving the BM can be seen as a soli-
tary osseous plasmacytoma, although most eventually progress to 
MM.117 Plasma cell tumors also can arise outside of BM, either in 
the skin (cutaneous extramedullary plasmacytoma, ch. 323) or vis-
ceral organs (non-cutaneous extramedullary plasmacytoma). Cats 
with MRD can have BM involvement, multicentric abdominal 
organ involvement (most commonly liver and/or spleen), or both, 
blurring distinction between MM and non-cutaneous plasmacy-
toma.113,118,119 Lastly, MRD also includes Ig-secreting lymphoma
and leukemias (including plasma cell leukemia).

CHAPTER 322
•
Hematopoietic Tumors
2251
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
MULTIPLE MYELOMA (MM)
Prevalence
MM accounts for <10% of all hematopoietic tumors in dogs.114
In cats, the relatively rare MM and multicentric noncutaneous 
extramedullary plasmacytomas together account for <2% of all 
hematopoietic tumors,1 119 with no FeLV or FIV association.
Pathophysiology
Because MM arises from a single clone of plasma cells or their pre-
cursors, the neoplastic cells typically synthesize an overabundance of 
1 Ig component, referred to as the M component, which can repre-
sent an entire Ig molecule of any class, or a molecular portion, such 
as light or heavy chains (ch. 60).55 Biclonal gammopathies also have 
been reported in both dogs and cats.113 115 119 Nonsecretory MM with 
no M component is rare but has been reported in dogs.120
Clinical Signs
In some dogs and cats, diagnosis is incidental, identifying hyperglob-
ulinemia on routine serum biochemistries. Clinical signs vary widely, 
as they result from tumor inltration of various organ systems, from 
complications of excess M-component, and/or other paraneoplastic 
syndromes, e.g., hypercalcemia.113-115 119 e most common signs in 
dogs and cats are lethargy, weakness, and decreased appetite. Tumor 
cells inltrating BM can cause anemia, thrombocytopenia, and less 
commonly neutropenia. Bone lesions, classically discrete osteolytic 
painful lesions, occasionally with concurrent pathologic fractures, 
occur most commonly in bones engaged in active hematopoiesis: 
vertebrae, ribs, pelvis, and long bones. Vertebral lesions also can 
secondarily compress the spinal cord and cause neurologic decits 
(Figure 322.7). Paraneoplastic hypercalcemia (ch. 331), thought to 
arise more commonly due to bone lysis than via PTHrP,114 121 can 
cause PU/PD, and renal failure (ch. 69).
M components can interfere with coagulation primarily by coat-
ing platelets, inhibiting platelet aggregation to damaged endothelial 
surfaces, and release of platelet factor 3 (chs. 171, 175).54 55 116 e 
resulting functional thrombopathy commonly causes epistaxis or 
petechia. Intact Ig molecules are usually released by plasma cells, 
but occasionally there is an imbalance in heavy and light chain pro-
duction. Excess free light chains excreted in the urine, called Bence 
Jones proteins (ch. 70), can cause renal tubular casts, interstitial 
nephritis and possibly renal failure.54 55 116 Despite having a high 
serum globulin level, normal Ig levels can be severely depressed, 
placing patients at risk for secondary infections.116
Hyperviscosity syndrome refers to a constellation of clinical 
signs caused by an increase in blood viscosity. e clinical signs of 
hyperviscosity result from sludging of blood in small vessels, inef-
fective delivery of oxygen and nutrients, and coagulation abnor-
malities. Reported neurologic abnormalities include stuporous 
mentation, ataxia, and seizures.54 116 122 123 Ocular abnormalities 
include enlarged and tortuous retinal vessels, retinal hemorrhages, 
and retinal detachment, oen resulting in acute-onset blindness 
(ch. 13).116 122 124 Bleeding diathesis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
and congestive heart failure also can occur.55 116 122 125
Diagnostic Evaluation
MM is diagnosed by identifying ≥2 of the following criteria: BM 
plasmacytosis (>20%), serum monoclonal gammopathy, osteo-
lytic lesions, and/or Bence-Jones proteinuria.115 e author 
depends on BM plasmacytosis and at least 1 other criterion. e 
diagnostic criteria may be modied in cats because BM involve-
ment is not as consistent; thus, it includes plasma cell morphology 
and visceral organ involvement.113 118 119 Identifying a monoclo-
nal gammopathy alone is not sucient to diagnose MM. B-cell 
LSA, B-cell CLL, and some chronic infectious diseases (e.g., 
ehrlichiosis, leishmaniasis, feline infectious peritonitis) can also 
cause monoclonal gammopathies. A benign monoclonal gam-
mopathy not associated with osteolysis, BM inltration, or Bence-
Jones proteinuria, has rarely been reported in dogs.126
Any animal suspected of a plasma cell tumor should be 
assessed with CBC, platelet count, serum biochemistry prole, 
and UA. Serum electrophoresis discriminates proteins into dis-
tinct groups based on electrical charge and size. A tall, narrow 
peak, due to a predominance of same-size globulins, is consistent 
with a monoclonal gammopathy (ch. 60). Spikes are usually in the 
gamma region of the electrophoretogram (hence the term gam-
mopathy), but occasionally it can be seen in the beta-2 region.55
Routine electrophoresis cannot determine Ig class; immunoxa-
tion is required if this information is needed.127 Urine electro-
phoresis is needed to detect Bence Jones proteins.128 In pets with 
bleeding disorders, platelet count, buccal mucosal bleeding time 
(ch. 79), prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time 
(PTT) should be evaluated (ch. 170).
oracic radiographs are recommended, with careful inspec-
tion of all bony structures. Additional radiographs may be indi-
cated by skeletal pain or other clinical signs. While whole-body CT 
is not routinely indicated, it is more sensitive than radiography for 
identifying bone lysis and can be useful to direct biopsy procedures 
when standard BM sites are inconclusive. CT is helpful for conrm-
ing focal disease in dogs thought to have solitary osseous plasmacy-
toma. Abdominal US is recommended, especially in cats because of 
the high prevalence of abdominal visceral involvement. Denitive 
diagnosis usually requires BM aspirate or core biopsy. Because MM 
can be multifocal, occasionally sampling multiple sites might be 
needed to identify BM plasmacytosis. US-guided ne needle aspi-
ration of abnormal abdominal organs is also recommended in cats 
since BM involvement is not as consistent (ch. 84).
Treatment
e initial treatment of choice is a combination of melphalan and 
prednisone in dogs. Two dierent melphalan protocols have been 
evaluated: 0.1 mg/kg PO q24h for 10 days and then 0.05 mg/kg 
PO q24h indenitely, or 7 mg/m2 PO q24h for 5 days repeated 
every 3 weeks.114 115 With both melphalan dosing protocols, pred-
nisone is given for 10 days (0.5 mg/kg PO q24h) and then 0.5 mg/
kg PO q48h for 60 days. A single dose of cyclophosphamide (200-
250 mg/m2 IV or PO) is sometimes given at the start of therapy 
in dogs with more severe clinical signs in the hopes of inducing a 
remission more quickly.1 114
In cats with MRD, melphalan has been used but is not routinely 
recommended due to idiosyncratic severe and refractory myelo-
suppression.113 129 130 Cyclophosphamide (200 mg/m2 IV of PO 
q2-3wk, or 25 mg/cat PO twice a week) has been used in place of 
melphalan with a comparable prognosis1 130 Prednisolone (1 mg/kg 
PO q24h × 14 days, then 1 mg/kg PO every other day indenitely). 
COP protocols have been used,113 and are preferred by the author.
*
*
*
Figure 322.7
Midline sagittal T1-weighted magnetic resonance im-
age post gadolinium contrast administration in a dog with multiple 
myeloma. Brightly contrast-enhancing lesions are identied through-
out the lumbar vertebrae, most notably in the vertebral bodies of L1, L3, 
and L4 (arrows), and the dorsal laminae of L1, L2, and L3 (asterisks).
