SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
1920
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
CNS central nervous system
cTSH canine-specific thy-
roid stimulating hormone
DLA dog leukocyte antigen
DM diabetes mellitus
ED equilibrium dialysis
fT4 free thyroxine (T4)
GFR glomerular filtration rate
GH growth hormone
GI gastrointestinal
IGF-1 insulin-like growth 
factor type 1
IV intravenous
LC-MS/MS liquid 
chromatography-tandem 
mass spectrometry
NTI non-thyroidal illness
PU/PD polyuria/polydipsia
rhTSH human recombinant 
thyroid stimulating hor-
mone
RIA radioimmunoassay
SDMA symmetric dimethyl-
arginine
T3 triiodothyronine
T3AA T3 autoantibodies
T4 thyroxine
T4AA T4 autoantibodies
TCTU technetium thyroid 
gland uptake
TgAA thyroglobulin auto-
antibody
THRT thyroid hormone 
replacement therapy
TPO thyroid peroxidase
TRH thyrotropin releasing 
hormone
TSH thyroid stimulating 
hormone
TT3 total triiodothyronine 
(T3)
TT4 total thyroxine (T4)
US ultrasonography
vWf:Ag von Willebrand 
factor antigen
Hypothyroidism in Dogs
Carmel T. Mooney
INTRODUCTION AND ANATOMY
H
ypothyroidism is the most com-
mon thyroid disease and one of 
the most common endocrine dis-
orders in dogs. Its prevalence has been esti-
mated between 0.2 and 0.8%.1-3 A survey on 
insured dogs from Sweden, however, sug-
gested a lower prevalence (0.07%) despite 
including a large number of pedigree dogs 
more likely to have hypothyroidism.4 5 Breed 
predisposition can be signicant. A preva-
lence as high as 15% has been recognised in 
Swedish Giant Schnauzers and Hovawarts.6
e thyroid gland of dogs has two sepa-
rate lobes, one on either side of the trachea 
(ch. 283, Figure 283.1). Each lobe is com-
posed of microscopic follicles lined by a sin-
gle layer of thyroid epithelium. e lumen of 
each follicle contains “colloid,” a thyroglobu-
lin storage material secreted by follicular 
cells. yroglobulin is a large glycoprotein 
containing iodotyrosines, precursors of thy-
roid hormones.
PHYSIOLOGY
THYROID HORMONES
e thyroid gland synthesizes and secretes 
the hormones 3,5,3′,5′-L-tetraiodothyronine 
(thyroxine [T4]) and 3,5,3′-L-triiodothyronine 
(triiodothyronine [T3]) (Figure 285.1). Sev-
eral steps in thyroid hormone synthesis are 
catalysed by thyroid peroxidase (TPO). y-
roid hormones are highly protein-bound in 
the circulation. Approximately 60% of T4
and T3 are bound to thyroxine binding glob-
ulin, 17% to transthyretin, 12% to albumin, 
and 11% to various lipoprotein fractions. 
Since binding anities are lower in dogs 
than in people, total concentrations in dogs 
are lower, free fractions higher (estimated 
at approximately 0.1-0.3% for T4 and 1% 
for T3), and serum half-lives shorter (10-16 
hours for T4 and 5-6 hours for T3). Only the free fraction is meta-
bolically active. e protein-bound moiety serves as a passive res-
ervoir to buer hormone delivery to tissues. T3 is approximately 
3-5 times more potent than T4. Up to 60% of T3 is produced not by 
the thyroid gland but by peripheral outer ring mono-deiodination 
of T4, a step that may be autoregulated. Inner ring deiodination 
results in the formation of metabolically inactive reverse T3 (rT3). 
yroid hormones aect most body tissues by interacting with 
specic nuclear receptors to modify the expression of a diverse 
array of genes. yroid hormones inuence multiple metabolic 
processes from regulation of mitochondrial oxygen demand to 
control of protein synthesis.
REGULATION OF THYROID HORMONE SYNTHESIS AND 
FUNCTION
yroid hormone production is controlled by the hypothalamus 
and pituitary (Figure 285.2). e hypothalamus secretes thyrotro-
pin releasing hormone (TRH) that acts on the anterior pituitary to 
promote synthesis and secretion of thyroid stimulating hormone 
(thyrotropin; TSH). TSH promotes thyroid gland iodide trapping, 
synthesis, and release of thyroid hormones. e secreted circulat-
ing free T4 and T3 provides negative feedback to the hypothala-
mus and anterior pituitary, decreasing TRH and TSH synthesis 
and release and, subsequently, thyroid hormone production.
yroid hormones have numerous functions. eir major 
inuence is on metabolic rate, growth, development of the neuro-
logical system, and tissue turnover. ey have positive inotropic 
and chronotropic eects on the heart, are necessary for lipid syn-
thesis and metabolism, and can stimulate erythropoiesis. When 
decient, the spectrum of possible abnormalities is extensive.
PATHOGENESIS OF HYPOTHYROIDISM
OVERVIEW
Clinical signs of hypothyroidism are the result of decreased 
T4 and T3 production due to an abnormality in any part of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis. Hypothyroidism is cat-
egorized by lesion location. Primary hypothyroidism implies an 
abnormality with the thyroid gland, secondary disease involves 
the pituitary gland and tertiary disease implies abnormalities 
with the hypothalamus. Distinguishing between secondary and 
tertiary disease is not always possible and the term central hypo-
thyroidism may be used to describe either. Hypothyroidism can 
also be described as congenital or acquired.
CONGENITAL HYPOTHYROIDISM
Congenital is less common than acquired hypothyroidism.7 It 
results from thyroid hypoplasia or aplasia, dysgenesis or dyshor-
monogenesis. Congenital hypothyroidism may be more prevalent 
than currently recognized because some die at birth or shortly 
thereaer without a denitive diagnosis. Central hypothyroid-
ism (resulting from TSH or TRH deciency) has been reported 
CHAPTER 285
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic asset onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Client Information Sheet.

CHAPTER 285
•
Hypothyroidism in Dogs
1921
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
sporadically and in one family of Giant Schnauzers and related 
Miniature Schnauzers.8 TSH deciency is also a feature of pitu-
itary dwarsm, although signs of hypothyroidism are variably 
present and may be delayed. ere are a few reports suggestive 
of thyroid dysgenesis. Congenital hypothyroidism with goiter 
as a result of dyshormonogenesis and TPO deciency has been 
reported sporadically and as an autosomal recessive disorder in 
French Bulldogs, Spanish Water Dogs and, Tentereld, Toy Fox 
and Rat Terriers; breed-specic genetic tests are commercially 
available.9-11 Congenital hypothyroidism with goiter has also been 
anecdotally reported in Papillons7 and in Shih Tzus caused by a 
mutation in the sodium iodide symporter.12 Congenital hypothy-
roidism may develop in pups born to dams fed an iodine-decient 
diet, dams given a variety of drugs or alternatively because of 
iodine deciency or excess in early life.
ACQUIRED HYPOTHYROIDISM
Central
Central disease is rare, accounting for <5% of hypothyroid dogs. Pitu-
itary neoplasia and surgical hypophysectomy account for most. Sec-
ondary hypothyroidism arising from trauma (ch. 246), nontraumatic 
intracranial hemorrhage (ch. 243), and adenohypophysitis has been 
described.13-15 Tertiary hypothyroidism is extremely rare. Secondary 
hypothyroidism is an uncommon feature of glucocorticoid excess 
that is reversible. Central hypothyroidism results in atrophic degen-
eration of the thyroid gland, characterized by follicles distended with 
colloid and attening of the follicular epithelium, changes readily dis-
tinguishable from primary thyroid abnormalities.
Primary
Acquired primary thyroid disease accounts for most of the diag-
noses of hypothyroidism in dogs. Histologically, lymphocytic 
Basolateral membrane
TSH
NIS
D2
D1
PLC
AC
DAG
IP3
cAMP
T4
T3
TPO
NADP+
NADPH
Hydrolysis
DUOX2
DUOX2A
Ca2+
H2O2
PDS
MIT
DIT
DEHAL1
TSHR
Apical membrane
Capillary
Colloid
+
+
Tg
H 2O2
Tg
Iodinated
Tg
Iodinated
I
2 Na+
1 I
I
Na+
Na/K-ATPase
2 K+
K+
3 Na+
Na+
I
I
I
?
Figure 285.1
Synthesis of thyroid hormones. Schematic illustration of a thyroid follicular cell showing the key aspects of thyroid iodine transport and 
thyroid hormone synthesis. AC, Adenyl cyclase; ATPase, adenosine triphosphatase; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; D1, thyroidal deiodinase 
type 1; D2, thyroidal deiodinase type 2; DAG, diacylglycerol; DEHAL1, iodotyrosine dehalogenase 1 (1YD); DIT, diiodotyrosine; DUOX, dual oxidase; 
IP3, inositol triphosphate; MIT, monoiodotyrosine; NADP, oxidized form of nicotinamide adenosine dinucleotide phosphate; NADPH, reduced nicoti-
namide adenosine dinucleotide phosphate; NIS, sodium-iodide symporter; PDS, pendrin (SLC26A4); PLC, phospholipase C; T3 triiodothyronine; T4
thyroxine; Tg, thyroglobulin; TPO, thyroid peroxidase; TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone (thyrotropin); TSHR, thyrotropin receptor. (From Salvatore, 
D, Davies TF, Schlumberger M-J, etal. yroid physiology and diagnostic evaluation of patients with thyroid disorders. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, 
Larsen PR, etal, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 12th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2011:327-361.)
Hypothalamus
TRH
TSH
Pituitary
Thyroid glands
T4
T3
Blood




Figure 285.2
Regulation of thyroid hormone concentrations. y-
roid hormone concentrations are controlled by the hypothalamic-
pituitary-thyroid axis, which operates as a negative feedback loop. 
yrotropin (TSH) causes synthesis and release of T4 and lesser 
amounts of T3 from the thyroid gland. Intracellular T3, derived from 
deiodination of T4 within the pituitary gland, causes decreased TSH 
synthesis and secretion and is the main determinant of TSH concen-
tration. yrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), secreted by the hypo-
thalamus, modulates TSH release from the pituitary gland. Increased 
thyroid hormone concentrations are also believed to decrease TRH 
synthesis and secretion. Hormones that inhibit TSH secretion include 
dopamine, somatostatin, serotonin, and glucocorticoids. TRH, pros-
taglandins, and alpha-adrenergic agonists increase TSH secretion. 
(From Scott-Moncrie CR. Hypothyroidism. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman 
EC, eds. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 7th ed. Elsevier; 
2010:1751-1761.)
