CHAPTER 198
•
Feline Immunodeciency Virus Infection
1037
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus Infection
Julia Beatty | Paweł M. Bęczkowski
OVERVIEW
F
eline immunodeciency virus (FIV) 
infection is common among domestic 
cats worldwide. Transmission occurs 
primarily 
during 
aggressive 
territorial 
encounters. Infection with FIV is lifelong. 
Although the immunological consequences 
of FIV infection in cats mirror many of those 
seen in human immunodeciency virus 
(HIV)-infected humans, the clinical mani-
festations of most FIV infections are mild 
or absent. Cats that die from FIV-associated 
diseases have no pathognomonic signs, 
which makes assigning clinical relevance 
to FIV infection in an individual cat chal-
lenging. Diagnostic investigation of ill, FIV-
infected cats with clinical signs frequently 
reveals treatable problems. Screening diag-
nostic tests detect circulating antibodies to 
the virus. Depending on the circumstances, additional serologic 
or molecular testing can assist in determining a cat’s true infec-
tion status. Connement of uninfected cats is the most eective 
way to prevent transmission. FIV presents no known zoonotic 
risk.
ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Feline immunodeciency virus (FIV), family Retroviridae, sub-
family Orthoretrovirinae, genus Lentivirus, describes a large group 
of closely related viruses that are endemic in domestic and wild 
cats, as well as spotted hyenas.1 FIV of the domestic cat is classi-
ed into distinct subtypes or clades (currently designated A to E) 
based on sequence diversity (up to 26%) of the variable region of 
the env gene. e true genetic diversity of FIV at the population 
level is likely higher due to the frequent occurrence of recombina-
tion.2 3 Virus diversity has implications for the design and inter-
pretation of molecular diagnostic tests as well as the ecacy of 
FIV vaccines (ch. 185).
Antibodies to FIV are found in domestic cat populations 
across the globe. Seroprevalence varies from <2.5% to >14%,4
depending on the region and the population tested. Risk fac-
tors for FIV infection include age, sex, environment, breed, and 
health status; adult, male, free-roaming, crossbred, and sick cats 
are at increased risk.5 e average age of FIV-infected cats is 5 
to 6 years.6 FIV is transmitted by direct inoculation of saliva or 
blood during ghting.7 Other routes of transmission are of minor 
epidemiological signicance. Horizontal transmission of FIV 
between cats in stable households is rare, in sharp contrast to the 
major feline retroviral pathogen, feline leukemia virus (FeLV) 
(ch. 199), which spreads rapidly between housemates.6 Verti-
cal or perinatal transmission of naturally acquired FIV is docu-
mented infrequently, but primary infection of the queen during 
pregnancy may increase risk of maternal transmission.8 Natural 
sexual transmission of FIV is not documented, but the virus can 
be recovered from semen.9
In veterinary hospitals, no additional biosecurity precautions 
over and above those for any feline patient are necessary for deal-
ing with FIV-infected cats. Virus shed in secretions is rapidly 
inactivated in dry conditions; routine cleaning and disinfection 
procedures to prevent the spread of feline herpesvirus 1 (FHV-1) 
(ch. 205), feline calicivirus (FCV) (ch. 205), and feline panleu-
kopenia virus (FPV) (ch. 201) eectively eliminate any residual 
risk of environmental contamination. Nosocomial transmission 
of FIV infection is virtually impossible unless there is parenteral 
inoculation of contaminated blood or saliva from an FIV-infected 
cat. Cats used as blood donors must be free from FIV infection 
since iatrogenic transmission by this route is inevitable.10 Cats 
should not be housed in isolation facilities on the basis of FIV 
status alone, since this places potentially immunosuppressed cats 
at risk of exposure to other infectious diseases.
FIV presents no known zoonotic risk. However, immuno-
suppressed humans, e.g., transplant recipients, should minimize 
contact with FIV-infected cats or observe meticulous hygiene 
precautions to avoid possible exposure to shared opportunistic 
pathogens
PATHOGENESIS
FIV infection can be broadly considered to progress in three 
stages: a transient primary stage, a chronic subclinical stage, and 
a terminal stage (Figure 198.1). In contrast to HIV, where with-
out antiretroviral treatment patients progress through predict-
able, well-characterized clinical stages to the terminal acquired 
immunodeciency syndrome (AIDS) stage, the consequences of 
FIV infection are less predictable.11 12 A majority of FIV-infected 
cats remain free from signicant disease and have a normal life 
expectancy.11
CLINICAL SIGNS
All FIV-infected cats are at risk of developing immune dysfunc-
tion, which can manifest as immune deciency or immune-
mediated disease. Healthy FIV-infected cats should be carefully 
CHAPTER 198
ACRONYMS
ABCD European Advisory 
Board on Cat Diseases
AIDS acquired immunode-
ficiency syndrome
ELISA enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent 
assay
FCV feline calicivirus
FeLV feline leukemia virus
FHV-1 feline herpesvirus 1
FPV feline panleukopenia 
virus
FIV feline immunodeficien-
cy virus
HIV human immunodefi-
ciency virus
PCR polymerase chain 
reaction
POC point-of-care
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic asset onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Client Information Sheet.
VIRAL DISEASES

SECTION XI
•
Infectious Disease
1038
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
examined and even minor problems fully assessed. Immune 
dysfunction can be seen clinically as atypical and refractory 
bacterial, viral, or parasitic infections. Respiratory infections, 
bacterial pyoderma, generalized demodicosis, mycobacterial 
infection, disseminated cowpox, pulmonary cryptococcosis, and 
lungworm infections are reported. Persistent cytopenias, partic-
ularly neutropenia or lymphopenia, are described in advanced 
FIV infection (chs. 172, 175, and 180).13 FIV infection has been 
linked to feline chronic gingivostomatitis (FCGS), a painful and 
debilitating condition that can severely impact quality of life 
(Figure 198.2).14 Risk of lymphoma is increased in FIV-infected 
cats by 5- to 6-fold.15 is increased risk is small in compari-
son to the 60-fold increase in risk of lymphoma associated with 
FeLV infection. FIV-associated lymphomas are typically high-
grade, extranodal, B-cell tumors, similar to HIV-associated dif-
fuse large B-cell lymphoma (Figure 198.3).
Severe unexplained weight loss (ch. 18) can occur in the terminal 
stage of FIV infection. is presentation resembles “wasting syn-
drome,” an AIDS-dening condition in HIV infection, indicating 
weight loss of 10% or more over 30 days with no identiable cause 
other than HIV infection. FIV-associated neuropathology has been 
studied extensively as an experimental model for neurodegenera-
tive diseases in HIV infection.16 e incidence of neurological signs 
accompanying natural FIV infection is unknown.
DIAGNOSIS
CATS THAT SHOULD BE TESTED
FIV-infected cats should be identied to optimize individual 
health care and to prevent new infections. Ideally, the current 
retrovirus status of all cats should be known. Priorities for FIV-
testing include free-roaming cats, ill cats, cats with ght wounds, 
blood donors, adult cats being rehomed, kittens born to FIV-
infected queens, and any cat prior to FIV vaccination.17
TESTING OVERVIEW
Determining the true FIV infection status of an individual cat 
may involve repeat testing. Advising owners of this possibility at 
the outset can be helpful for maintaining condence. Commercial 
FIV tests detect either anti-FIV antibodies by immunoassays or 
viral nucleic acid by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (ch. 184). 
Other serologic assays, including immunouorescent antibody 
(IFA) assays and Western blotting, have limited availability, are 
technically demanding, and are subject to interoperator inter-
pretation variability. Western blotting appears to be less sensitive 
than enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in some lab-
oratories.18 Virus isolation from peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells is not commercially available.
Serologic assays are the rst line for testing. Point-of-
care (POC) tests, utilizing bidirectional-ow ELISA or lateral 
ow immunochromatography technologies, and diagnostic 
laboratory-based ELISA assays have high sensitivities and speci-
cities for antibody detection.17 In cats over 6 months of age that 
have not been vaccinated against FIV, anti-FIV antibodies are a 
marker for FIV infection.
Infection
Acute stage
(2–8 weeks)
Chronic stage
(several years)
CTL
Anti p24 antibodies
CD4+ T cells
PVL
Terminal stage
(several weeks)
Death
Figure 198.1
Course of feline immunodeciency virus (FIV) infection. During the acute stage, plasma virus load increases. An adaptive immune response 
suppresses viremia within approximately 8 weeks. e chronic stage follows, lasting for several years and is characterized by relatively low viral load, and pro-
gressive decline of CD4+ T lymphocytes. In a minority of FIV-infected cats, an immunodeciency-like syndrome (terminal stage) develops, which can last 
for several weeks and ends with euthanasia on humane grounds or death. CTL, Cytotoxic T lymphocytes; PVL, plasma viral load; p24, viral capsid protein.
Figure 198.2
Gingivostomatitis with marked involvement of the fau-
ces. (Courtesy Matthew Oxford.)
