CHAPTER 314
•
Prostatic Diseases
2193
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
to neoplasia. Aseptic prostatitis is rare. Septic prostatitis, the most 
common inammatory disease, can be acute or chronic, and may 
be associated with prostatic abscesses (Figure 314.6).44 Multiple 
organisms are usually demonstrated in dogs with septic pros-
tatitis; infection by a single bacterium is uncommon.45 Aerobic 
organisms are most common, e.g., Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus
sp., Streptococcus sp., Proteus sp., Pseudomonas spp., Brucella canis, 
Klebsiella sp. Infections are oen traced to bacteria ascending the 
urethra. Local dissemination from urogenital organs or hematog-
enous spread is possible.36 Conditions that reduce normal defence 
mechanisms or that alter prostatic architecture (BPH, cysts, meta-
plasia, neoplasia) can predispose to prostatic infection.1 5
Quantitative cultures of prostatic uid may help in understand-
ing a positive prostatic uid culture (ch. 104). Denitive diagno-
sis of infection is made by growth >10,000 bacteria/mL.46 It has 
been suggested that a 2-log dierence between prostatic and urine 
colony-forming unit counts is consistent with bacterial prostati-
tis.47 When semen collection or prostate massage is not possible, 
US-guided FNA (ch. 85) of parenchyma, cysts, or abscesses usu-
ally provides adequate material for cytologic analysis, culture, and 
sensitivity (Figure 314.6). Value of a FNA must be weighed against 
risk. One can drain a cystic or abscess cavity completely to reduce 
risk of leakage into the abdomen. Cysts, especially those with urine, 
can become infected secondary to prostatitis.
ACUTE PROSTATITIS (AP)
Common Signs, Physical Examination
A presumptive diagnosis of AP should be based on the history, 
signs (Box 314.2), PE, laboratory ndings, urine culture results, 
and prostatic imaging. AP may be conrmed with prostatic cyto-
logic examination of slides from aspirates, and bacterial culture 
(ch. 104).45 Common clinical signs include fever, anorexia, leth-
argy, vomiting, caudal abdominal pain, diculty rising, painful 
sti gait, low sperm quality, poor libido, and subfertility. Some 
dogs have signs of peritonitis or septic shock (ch. 128). Hema-
tospermia, pyospermia, hematuria, pyuria, and/or a constant or 
intermittent urethral discharge may be observed. Signs of prosta-
titis may hide signs or evidence of other prostatic disorders. On 
PE, the prostate can be rm, painful, normal or large in size and 
shape, and can feel asymmetric with an irregular surface; uctu-
ant areas may be palpated if there are cysts or abscesses.
Test Results
Neutrophilic leukocytosis with le shi, increased alkaline phos-
phatase activity, hematuria, and bacteriuria are common. On US, 
prostatic parenchyma and the surrounding tissues may appear 
diusely or focally hypoechoic. Sublumbar lymphadenopathy can 
be present. Focal hypoechoic lesions can develop into abscesses. 
Evidence of BPH, mineralization, cysts, or abscesses can be 
observed with US. Cytologic evaluation of prostatic samples (uid 
or tissue) show neutrophilia, usually with degenerative changes 
and sometimes with intracellular bacteria. If present, prostatic 
cells may be normal or damaged (Figure 314.4).
CHRONIC PROSTATITIS (CP)
Presumptive diagnosis of CP should be based on the history, signs 
(Box 314.2), and PE. Laboratory ndings are usually unremark-
able; urinalysis may reveal pyuria, hematuria, and/or bacteriuria. 
Cytologic evaluation of prostatic samples, culture and sensitivity 
results can conrm a diagnosis (ch. 104). CP is oen subclinical. 
Signs, when present, include mild lethargy, urethral discharge, 
and poor semen quality. Many dogs with CP have recurrent uri-
nary tract infections (ch. 307)1 and hypo/infertility. e prostate 
is not usually painful; is usually rm, with an irregular surface; 
and its size and shape can be normal or small. On US, focal or dif-
fuse increases in prostatic echogenicity are oen observed, areas 
of mineralization may be present, surrounding tissue appears 
normal. Cytologic evaluation of prostatic samples (uid or tissue) 
usually shows macrophages, plasma cells, lymphocytes,48 and few 
prostatic cells. Presence of bacteria varies (Figure 314.4).
PROSTATIC ABSCESSATION (PA)
PA can occur as a primary condition, but more frequently as a 
sequela to AP. PA has also been associated less frequently in dogs 
with squamous prostatic metaplasia or neoplasia. PA can be sus-
pected from the history, clinical signs (Box 314.2), and PE. Neu-
trophilic leukocytosis is common with inammation, sepsis, and/
or endotoxemia. PA can be conrmed with US, and prostatic 
cytology (Figure 314.4), culture, and sensitivity results (ch. 104). 
Clinical signs, similar to those of AP, may be complicated by tenes-
mus and dysuria when large abscesses compress the colon and/or 
Clinical Signs of Prostate Diseases
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH)
Blood dripping from prepuce (due to increased prostatic vasculariza-
tion) +++
Hematospermia (st and rd fraction), hematuria ++
Subfertility (no offspring or small litters) +
With large prostate/large cysts:
Tenesmus (with thin, tape-shaped feces), constipation, dyschezia ++
Dysuria, urinary incontinence +
Acute Prostatitis
Fever, anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, caudal abdominal pain, diffi-
culty rising, painful stiff gait, low sperm quality, poor libido, 
subfertility +++
Hematospermia, pyospermia, hematuria, pyuria, urethral discharge 
++
Dysuria, tenesmus, peritonitis/septic shock +
Chronic Prostatitis
Subclinical +++
Recurrent urinary tract infection, low sperm quality, hypo/infertility 
++
Mild lethargy, urethral discharge +
Prostatic Abscess
Fever, anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, caudal abdominal pain, difficult 
rising, painful stiff gait, low sperm quality, poor libido, subfertil-
ity +++
Hematospermia, pyospermia, hematuria, pyuria, urethral discharge, 
dysuria and tenesmus (due to compression caused by abscess), 
peritonitis/septic shock ++
Squamous Metaplasia
Feminization syndrome: nonpruritic symmetric alopecia, skin 
hyperpigmentation, gynecomastia, penis sheath ptosis and ery-
thema +++
Prostatitis signs +++
Attracting males ++
Neoplasia
No pathognomonic signs: lameness, painful prostate, stiff gait, cau-
dal abdominal pain, paresis of the hind limbs, lethargy, weight 
loss +++
Symptoms of other prostatic disorders ++
BOX 314.2
+++, Frequent; ++, possible; +, uncommon.

SECTION XXI
•
Lower Urinary Tract Disease
2194
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
A
C
D
B
E
F
G
Figure 314.4
Cytological images of: benign prostatic hyperplasia (ne needle aspiration [FNA], 200×) (A), retention cyst (FNA, 400×) (B), prostatic 
abscess (FNA, 400×) (C), acute prostatitis (prostatic massage, 400×) (D), prostatic neoplasia, (FNA, 200×) (E), prostatic metaplasia (prostate, FNA, 
400×). Both F and G are samples from dogs with prostatic metaplasia; F is from a FNA, 400× and G is from a preputial swab, 400×.
