SECTION XIV
•
Cardiovascular Disease
1288
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
GENERATION OF THE NORMAL 
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
K
nowledge of the generation of the 
normal electrocardiogram (ECG) is 
essential before being able to com-
prehend arrhythmogenesis. Coordinated 
electrical activation of the heart depends 
upon the interplay of a complex apparatus 
of impulse formation, conduction, and dis-
tribution to the contractile myocardium. 
Impulse generation normally begins in the 
sinoatrial node (SAN), the dominant cardiac 
pacemaker, and propagates through the atria 
to the atrioventricular node (AVN). Aer 
more slowly conducting through the AVN, 
the impulse rapidly propagates through the 
His-Purkinje system (HPS) to the ventricu-
lar myocardium, triggering coordinated 
ventricular contraction.1 e various car-
diac regions are distinguished electrically by 
specic action potential (APo) morphology 
and duration as a result of regionally distinct 
collections of ionic currents. APos in vari-
ous cardiomyocytes and the currents under-
lying various phases of the APo in dierent 
cardiac cells are shown in Figure 230.1
As the primary pacemaker of the heart, 
the SAN is no longer considered compact and 
discrete, but is now known to be a more dif-
fuse, elaborate, anatomically and electrophysi-
ologically heterogenous cellular collection. It 
is a crescent-shaped, subepicardial structure 
located along the crista terminalis (CT) in the 
right atrium (RA) with an extensive paranodal 
area.2 SAN APos are distinctly dierent from 
those of working atrial myocytes, exhibiting 
diastolic (phase 4) depolarization, a relatively 
depolarized diastolic membrane potential, and 
a slow upstroke driven primarily by L-type cal-
cium (Ca2+) current (ICa-L), rather than the fast 
sodium (Na+) current (INa) responsible for the 
upstroke in atrial and ventricular myocytes.3
ere are two main hypotheses for the mecha-
nism underlying SAN diastolic depolariza-
tion, and it is likely the tight integration of the 
two that forms the overall pacemaker clock.4 5
e rst mechanism is the membrane or voltage clock, referring 
to time and voltage-dependent membrane ion channels underly-
ing pacemaking activity. ese membrane channels include decay 
of outward-rectifying potassium (K) currents (IKr and IKs) and the 
activation of multiple inward currents, principally the funny current 
(If; a mixed Na+ and K+ current), but also ICa-L and ICa-T 3 e cal-
cium clock is the second hypothesis for mechanisms responsible for 
SAN diastolic depolarization. Spontaneous, rhythmic Ca2+ release 
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum via the ryanodine receptor in SAN 
cells activates the Na+-Ca2+ exchange current (INa-Ca) in the forward 
mode, generating a net inward current that causes late diastolic depo-
larization to increase exponentially.3-5 SAN cells are heavily regulated 
by autonomic inputs, which determine the rate of phase 4 depolariza-
tion by phosphorylation-dependent gradation of the speed at which 
the calcium clock cycles. is allows quick adaption of the heart rate 
(HR) to the needs of the organism.2 Sinus arrhythmia, which is a nor-
mal rhythm in the dog but typically only seen in the resting cat on 
Holter monitoring at home, is complexly mediated by alterations in 
parasympathetic tone on both SAN cells and the pathways leading 
from the SAN to the atria (see below).6 7
It is important to remember that the SAN is a long, banana-
shaped structure located along the epicardial groove of the sulcus 
terminalis, with cells at its cranial portion depolarizing at a higher 
frequency (generating faster HRs) than slower depolarizing cells 
at its tail.4 8 9 SAN cells are electrically insulated from surround-
ing atrial myocytes, apart from a small number of preferential exit 
pathways that allow transmission of SAN impulses to the atrial 
myocardium. is electrical insulation is critical to protect SAN 
cells from being hyperpolarized by the much larger atrial myo-
cardial “sink,” while restricting impulse delivery to the branch-
ing myobers of the sinoatrial conduction pathways. is slows 
conduction from the SAN to allow sucient time to build up the 
charge needed to depolarize the atria.9 10 e surface ECG is only 
able to record electrical activity from large myocardial masses, 
namely the atria and ventricles. SAN and AVN activities are not 
recordable from the body surface. Figure 230.2 shows normal 
sinus arrhythmia in a dog with intracardiac recordings in the 
atria, AVN region, and right ventricle.
Once the impulse leaves the SAN, it excites the atrial myocar-
dium via 2-5 (in the dog) sinoatrial conduction pathways.9 Le 
atrial (LA) activation preferentially occurs over Bachmann’s bun-
dle, a bundle of parallel aligned myocardial bands that pass from 
the cranial vena cava across the interatrial groove and to the LA 
appendage.11 Atrial and ventricular APos are distinctly dierent, 
which, coupled with the anatomy of the atria, can help explain 
dierences in arrhythmias arising from these chambers and 
their response to antiarrhythmic (AA) drugs. e atrial resting 
Cardiac Arrhythmias
Kathy Wright | Yanni Giatis
CHAPTER 230
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 11 Videos.
ACRONYMS
AA antiarrhythmic
AF atrial fibrillation
AFL atrial flutter
AIVR accelerated idioven-
tricular rhythm
ANS autonomic nervous 
system
AP accessory atrioventricu-
lar pathway
APo action potential
ARVC arrhythmogenic 
right ventricular cardio-
myopathy
AT atrial tachycardia
AV atrioventricular
AVB atrioventricular block
AVN atrioventricular node
AVNRT atrioventricular node 
reentrant tachycardia
Ca2+ calcium ion
CHF congestive heart failure
CL cycle length
CRI constant rate infusion
CT crista terminalis
CTI cavotricuspid isthmus
DCCV direct current cardio-
version
DCM dilated cardiomyopa-
thy
ECG electrocardiogram
EP electrophysiologic
EPS electrophysiologic 
study
FAT focal atrial tachycardia
FJT focal junctional tachy-
cardia
HB His bundle
HPS His-Purkinje system
HR heart rate
ICa-L L-type calcium current
INa fast sodium current
INE inferior nodal exten-
sions
IW Irish Wolfhound
LA left atrial
LBBB left bundle branch 
block
Continued

CHAPTER 230
•
Cardiac Arrhythmias
1289
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
membrane potential (RMP) is more depo-
larized than the ventricular RMP due to a 
5-6 fold decrease in the density of the inward 
rectier K+ current (IK1) in atrial versus ven-
tricular myocytes.12 IK1 is the major current 
determining RMP. Maximal APo upstroke 
velocity in atrial myocytes is less than that 
of ventricular myocytes. Dierences in INa
and the more depolarized RMP of atrial cells 
account for this dierence.13 Delayed recti-
er K+ currents contribute to repolarization 
and dier in atrial and ventricular myocytes. 
e ultrarapid delayed rectier K+ current 
(IKur) is present only in atrial cells and is a 
major contributor to atrial repolarization.14 In atrial myocytes, IKr
and IKs have small densities and are unable to fully activate due 
to the relatively negative membrane voltage in the plateau phase. 
is is in contrast to the ventricles, in which IKr and IKs are the 
major repolarizing currents. e atrial-selective nature of IKur
makes it an attractive target for AA drug development for use in 
atrial tachyarrhythmias.13 e net result of these ionic dierences 
between atrial and ventricular myocytes results in a triangular-
shaped atrial APo versus the spike-and-dome shape of the ven-
tricular APo (Figure 230.1).15 Electrical heterogeneities exist in 
dierent regions of the atria, including between the le and right 
atria, due to dierences in densities and biophysical properties of 
respective ionic currents in these regions. Excitation of the atrial 
myocardium produces the P wave on the surface ECG, which 
A
Time (msec)
Time (msec)
Atrium
AP
(mV)
INa
ICa
INCX
Ito
IKur
IKr
IKs
IK1
40
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
-40
-80
200 A/F
5 A/F
1.5 A/F
10 A/F
1 A/F
1 A/F
1 A/F
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
500
500
0
0
0
Ventricle
Figure 230.1
A, Atrial (le) and ventricular (right) myocyte action potentials with the currents underlying each phase of the action potential. Action 
potential phases are labeled. Phase 0: Rapid upstroke representing membrane depolarization. Phase 1: Initial repolarization. Phase 2: Plateau phase. Phase 
3: Late repolarization. Phase 4. Diastolic or resting membrane potential. Inward currents (blue) depolarize the membrane, while outward currents (red) 
contribute to repolarization. e ventricular action potential has a more negative resting phase, longer duration, and higher voltage plateau phase.
ACRONYMS—CONT’D
LV left ventricular
MRAT macroreentrant 
atrial tachycardia
NCT narrow complex 
tachyarrhythmia
OAVRT orthodromic atrio-
ventricular reciprocating 
tachycardia
Na+ sodium ion
PAS persistent atrial stand-
still
RA right atrium/right atrial
RBBB right bundle branch 
block
RFCA radiofrequency cath-
eter ablation
RMP resting membrane 
potential
SAN sinoatrial node
SND sinus nodal disease/
dysfunction
SSS sick sinus syndrome
STach sinus tachycardia
TCL tachycardia cycle 
length
TICM tachycardia-induced 
cardiomyopathy
VA ventricular arrhythmia
VF ventricular fibrillation
VPC ventricular premature 
complex
VPE ventricular preexcita-
tion
VT ventricular tachycardia
WCT wide complex 
tachyarrhythmia/tachy-
cardia
WPW Wolff-Parkinson-
White syndrome
Continued
