eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
SECTION XI
•
Infectious Disease
1030
ACRONYMS
ALP alkaline phosphatase
CBC complete blood count
CNS central nervous 
system
CSF cerebrospinal fluid
DIC disseminated intravas-
cular coagulation
ELISA enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay
GI gastrointestinal
IFA indirect fluorescent 
antibody
PCR polymerase chain 
reaction
PE physical examination
Systemic Protozoal Diseases
Jonathan David Dear
P
rotozoal pathogens that disseminate 
widely in the bodies of cats and dogs 
belong to the family Apicomplexa. 
ese protozoa are intracellular parasites of 
vertebrate hosts with cellular tropism vary-
ing from blood cells (including erythrocytes 
and leukocytes) as well as epithelial and con-
nective tissues.
BABESIA
PATHOGENESIS
e genus Babesia encompasses a group of 
intracellular pathogens capable of infect-
ing human, dog, cat, horse, and wild mam-
malian erythrocytes. Like other apicomplexan parasites, Babesia
spp. undergo a complex lifecycle with both sexual and asexual 
reproductive phases. Sexual reproduction occurs in the denitive 
host (generally Ixodidae ticks) and asexual reproduction occurs 
in mammalian hosts. Inoculation of the parasite occurs primar-
ily via tick bite: the parasite is injected by the tick into the host 
interstitium. e parasite then migrates into the vascular space 
where it invades erythrocytes and undergoes schizogony or 
binary ssion to form clones. Babesia can also be transmitted via 
blood transfusion and direct inoculation during ghting between 
infected animals. Intravascular and extravascular hemolysis can 
occur due to parasitemia. Clinical signs depend on the species 
infecting the animal, the host immune response, and co-existing 
diseases. Dogs infected but subclinical are common and may be a 
reservoir of infection.
LARGE BABESIA SPECIES
Prior to availability of molecular methods, Babesia organisms in 
dogs were classied by size and morphology, resulting in broad 
categories of “large” and “small” Babesia species. e most com-
mon large (2.4 × 5 micrometers) Babesia species belong to the 
Babesia canis species complex, previously recognized as 3 sub-
species of B. canis, but now subdivided into their own species: B. 
canis, Babesia vogeli, and Babesia rossi 1 Geographic distribution 
of these species is constrained by their denitive host (i.e., tick 
vectors). B. canis is found throughout Europe and into Asia (ch. 9); 
it is transmitted by Dermacentor ticks. Babesia vogeli, identied 
in the Americas, southern Europe, and Africa, is transmitted by 
Rhipicephalus sanguineus ticks. is species causes the least dis-
ease. e prevalence of B. canis infection in dogs in the US has 
ranged from 4-60%, and is higher in adults, kenneled dogs, and 
greyhounds. Babesia rossi is limited to sub-Saharan Africa and is 
transmitted by Haemaphysalis leachi and Haemaphysalis elliptica
ticks.
SMALL BABESIA SPECIES
e small (1-2.5 micrometers) species include Babesia gibsoni, 
Babesia conradae, and Babesia vulpes. e epidemiology of small 
Babesia species is less understood and their transmission oen 
occurs via non-tick vectors. B. gibsoni was rst recognized in 
Asia and is vectored by the Haemaphysalis tick. In the US, this 
tick is rare; transmission is more likely via direct transmission 
during dog ghts, vertical transmission, or blood transfusion. 
Babesia were identied with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
in up to 55% of kenneled dogs and pet Pit Bull Terriers in Ala-
bama, but not identied in other breeds surveyed.2 B. conradae
was initially called the “California isolate” and was misidenti-
ed as B. gibsoni. It has been detected in dogs in California and 
other southern US states and has been associated with coyote 
ghting.3-5
CLINICAL SIGNS
Clinical signs of Babesia infection range from subclinical to ful-
minant. Dogs with B. vogeli infection may have no signs of illness 
unless immunosuppressed due to chemotherapy or splenectomy. 
Dogs with B. canis, B. rossi, B. conradae, and B. gibsoni infection 
typically are evaluated for illness caused by parasitemia.2 3 6 7
ese dogs might have anemia and fever. Pallor and hypotensive 
shock with tachycardia and tachypnea may be present on physical 
examination (PE) in peracutely and acutely aected dogs. Icterus 
and splenomegaly may be evident, and petechiae may occur in 
animals with disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC, ch. 
171) or immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (ITP, ch. 175). In 
severe B. rossi or B. canis infections, increased erythrocyte adher-
ence may cause neurologic signs, rhabdomyolysis, and/or acute 
kidney injury (AKI, ch. 300).6 Kidney damage may result from 
immune-mediated glomerulonephritis (ch. 302) or hypoxia. Aer 
recovery from acute infection, the immune system can fail to 
eliminate infection and dogs can become chronic carriers.
ROUTINE DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
Most dogs infected with B. vogeli in the US are subclinical car-
riers.8 B. gibsoni infection causes regenerative anemia, apparent 
2-3 weeks aer infection, and the packed cell volume (PCV) may 
normalize over a period of 2-3 months (ch. 57). Severe throm-
bocytopenia can occur early in the disease and mild thrombocy-
topenia can persist for months (chs. 59, 175).9 Neutropenia has 
been reported in dogs infected with B. conradae (chs. 58, 176).3
CHAPTER 197
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic asset onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Client Information Sheet.

CHAPTER 197
•
Systemic Protozoal Diseases
1031
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
A Coombs’ test may be positive. Serum chemistry abnormali-
ties include hypoalbuminemia and increased serum liver enzyme 
activities.2 6 Hyperbilirubinemia is common in dogs infected with 
B. canis, B. rossi, and B. gibsoni 6 9
DEFINITIVE DIAGNOSIS
Denitive diagnosis rests on visualization of the organism in 
erythrocytes using cytologic examination aer staining with 
Wright’s or Giemsa stains (Figure 197.1), or via molecular tech-
niques. Genus-wide PCR assays and those specic for detection of 
B. canis, B. conradae, B. gibsoni, B. vulpes, or B. vogeli are commer-
cially available and are the most sensitive and specic methods for 
diagnosing infection. Sequencing of DNA that is amplied using 
genus-wide assays is required to identify infection with unnamed 
Babesia species.10 11 Aer the initial episode of parasitemia, 
organisms can be dicult or impossible to nd via cytology.9
Dogs infected with B. conradae have recovered and had disease 
recrudescence, with worse parasitemia. Serologic testing to detect 
anti-Babesia antibodies uses indirect uorescent antibody (IFA) 
or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing. Recent 
infection can be documented via rising antibody titers over 2-3 
weeks. Current tests are designed to detect antibodies to B. vogeli
and B. gibsoni, and because only limited cross reactivity occurs 
among species, they are not reliable for detecting antibodies to 
B. conradae
TREATMENT
Treatment with azithromycin (10 mg/kg PO q24h) and atova-
quone (13.3 mg/kg PO q8h) for 10 days has led to remission in 
dogs infected with B. conradae, B. gibsoni, or B. vulpes, though 
relapses occur.4 12 13 Imidocarb (IM or SQ; 5-6.6 mg/kg, twice, 
14 days apart, or 7.5 mg/kg, once) has been used to treat infec-
tions with B. vogeli, B. canis, or B. rossi 14 15 Diminazene acetu-
rate (3.5 mg/kg, IM, once) has also been used in treating dogs 
with B. rossi infection, as well as dogs with relapsing B. gibsoni
infection and suspected resistance to atovaquone (in combination 
with clindamycin 25 mg/kg PO q12h).16 Even when treated, dogs 
can remain persistently infected. erefore, anti-Babesia therapy 
should be reserved for dogs with clinical disease, as treatment has 
been associated with selection of antimicrobial-resistant strains.17
Some dogs develop a state of premunition, becoming subclinical 
carriers and unlikely to recrudesce without immunosuppression 
(such as splenectomy or cancer chemotherapy).
CYTAUXZOON
DESCRIPTION, PATHOGENESIS
Cytauxzoonosis is a tick-borne protozoan disease of domestic 
cats, caused primarily by Cytauxzoon felis. In the US, it has been 
reported from the southeast, mid-Atlantic and Midwest loca-
tions.18 19 Disease usually occurs in outdoor cats between May 
and September. In the US, Amblyomma americanum is the pri-
mary tick vector.20 21 Reservoir hosts include the North American 
bobcat, which appears to be subclinically infected, and potentially 
domestic cats that recover following acute infection.22 23
Cytauxzoon infection develops in two phases. During the 
schizogonous phase in the mammalian host, the organism infects 
mononuclear cells in the spleen, lung, liver, and lymph nodes. 
ere, it replicates by binary ssion, forming large, distinct nucle-
ated schizonts. Infected cells line vascular beds, causing vas-
cular occlusion. e infected mononuclear cells then rupture, 
releasing organisms into the blood or tissues. is phase usu-
ally results in shock, DIC, and a rapidly fatal illness. e intra-
erythrocytic phase occurs 1-3 days aer merozoites appear in 
macrophages. is phase is associated with hemolytic anemia and 
intra-erythrocytic piroplasms (chs. 57, 174). e prevalence of 
the intra-erythrocytic phase has been reported in up to 78% of 
free-ranging bobcats and between 6 and 28% of domestic cats in 
endemic areas in the US.19 22
CLINICAL SIGNS AND ROUTINE LABORATORY RESULTS
Cytauxzoonosis is a peracute and rapidly fatal disease in most 
infected domestic cats; ∼90% of untreated cats die following infec-
tion. Prognostic factors associated with survival are unclear.24 25
Clinical signs include anorexia and lethargy. On PE, cats are 
typically febrile although some are hypothermic. Dehydration, 
icterus, and/or pale mucous membranes are common. Aected 
cats tend to be pancytopenic (ch. 176) with hyperbilirubinemia, 
increased liver enzyme activities, and hypoalbuminemia; hyper-
glycemia may be seen.18 Due to consumption of coagulation 
factors, cats can be coagulopathic with signicantly prolonged 
clotting times (ch. 170).
A
B
Figure 197.1
A, Blood smear from a dog diagnosed with Babesia conradae demonstrating the intraerythrocytic organism in characteristic signet 
shape as well as red cell anisocytosis and polychromasia due to the resultant regenerative anemia. B, Blood smear from a dog with hepatozoonosis 
showing several gamonts within granulocytes in peripheral circulation. (Images courtesy the UC Davis Clinical Pathology service (A) and Dr. Andrew 
Burton (B).)
