CHAPTER 233
•
Myocardial Diseases of Dogs
1367
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
M
yocardial diseases are those that 
aect the heart muscle (cardiomy-
ocytes and interstitium), distinct 
from those primarily aecting the valves 
(chs. 231 and 232), endocardium (ch. 231), 
or pericardium (ch. 235). e most common 
myocardial diseases in dogs are in the group 
of cardiomyopathies, including dilated car-
diomyopathy and arrhythmogenic right 
ventricular cardiomyopathy. Hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, while very common in cats 
(ch. 234), is rare in dogs. Other canine myo-
cardial diseases include myocarditis, myo-
cardial infarction, muscular dystrophies, 
and neoplasia (chs. 235 and 325).
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is the sec-
ond most common acquired heart disease in 
dogs aer degenerative mitral valve disease. 
DCM is classically characterized by le ven-
tricular (LV) or biventricular systolic dys-
function and dilatation (Figure 233.1) that 
is not attributable to underlying disorders 
that cause abnormal cardiac loading condi-
tions such as volume overload states, shunts 
or other congenital cardiac disease, valve dis-
ease, primary tachyarrhythmias, or systemic 
hypertension.1 e importance of the latter 
is recognition that ventricular dilatation and 
systolic dysfunction can represent a morpho-
logic and functional response common to a 
variety of potential insults, and the identi-
cation of these features (phenotype) alone 
does not automatically indicate a diagnosis of 
DCM. Furthermore, while the classic pheno-
type is a dilated and hypokinetic heart, DCM 
can manifest as a spectrum of functional 
and electrical abnormalities, which oen dier by breed, including 
arrhythmic and intermediate phenotypes.1 2
PREVALENCE, BREED AND AGE DISTRIBUTION
e prevalence of DCM among the general canine population is 
unknown. e reported prevalence in historical canine referral 
populations has been 0.5-1% (1-2 cases per 200 patients exam-
ined),3 but this may be inuenced by geographic dierences in 
breeds and ages examined, degree of prospective screening of 
high-risk breeds, and true changes in epigenetic factors over time. 
Large breeds are predominantly aected and highly predisposed 
breeds include the Doberman Pinscher (DP), Great Dane, Irish 
Wolound (IW), Newfoundland, Boxer, Saint Bernard, Labra-
dor and Golden Retriever, while the Cocker Spaniel, Portuguese 
Water Dog, and Toy Manchester Terrier are smaller aected 
breeds.3-9 DCM is typically an adult-onset disease; however, juve-
nile forms are reported including in the Portuguese Water Dog, 
DP, and Toy Manchester Terrier.5 9 10
More is known about breed-specic prevalence. Prevalence 
estimates in the DP increase from 10% in 2- to 4-year-olds to 44% 
in dogs over 6 years of age, around the median age of diagnosis.11
ere are sex dierences in how the disease manifests in DPs, with 
females having a higher incidence of an arrhythmic phenotype and 
males having LV dilatation and systolic dysfunction at an earlier 
age.11 Prevalence in the IW is up to 25% in large screening stud-
ies, with earlier mean age of onset (4 years) and males more com-
monly aected and at a younger age.12 Prevalence up to 36% has 
been reported in the Great Dane13 and 10% in the Newfoundland.14
ETIOLOGY
DCM may have a genetic or non-genetic etiology, with the for-
mer likely playing a role in many canine cases (Table 233.1).6 15
e nature of genetic etiology is complex, with increasing recog-
nition of interplay between genetic and non-genetic factors such 
as lifestyle, diet, and environment (epigenetics), potential for 
multiple gene involvement (oligogenic inheritance rather than 
monogenic), and variability in both penetrance (probability of 
manifesting the phenotype) and expression (wide spectrum of 
phenotypes when expressed).6 15 Familial DCM accounts for 30% 
or more of human DCM cases, with mutations in over 50 genes 
identied to date. Most encode for sarcomeric or cytoskeletal pro-
teins leading to altered cardiac protein structure and function.1
By comparison, the proportion of canine DCM cases attributable 
to inherited genetic mutations is unknown and specic genetic 
mutations identied to date are few. Mutations in two genes 
(pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4, a mitochondrial enzyme; and 
titin, a sarcomeric protein) with autosomal dominant inheritance 
are associated with DCM in the DP in North America.16 ese 
mutations do not account for all cases in this breed, and another 
unidentied locus is suggested to be associated with DCM in 
European DP, highlighting the genetic heterogeneity that exists 
even within a breed.17 A mutation in the phospholamban gene (a 
protein regulating the calcium pump of the sarcoplasmic reticu-
lum) was recently identied in a family of Welsh Springer Spaniels 
with highly penetrant DCM causing sudden death.18
Myocardial Diseases of Dogs
M. Lynne O’Sullivan
CHAPTER 233
ACRONYMS
AA antiarrhythmic
ACEI angiotensin convert-
ing enzyme inhibitors
AF atrial fibrillation
ARVC arrhythmogenic 
right ventricular cardio-
myopathy
AV atrioventricular
CHF congestive heart fail-
ure
cTnI cardiac troponin-I
DCM dilated cardiomyopa-
thy
DLVOTO dynamic left ven-
tricular outflow tract 
obstruction
DP Doberman Pinscher
ECG electrocardiography
HCM hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy
HR heart rate
IW Irish Wolfhound
LV left ventricular
MRB mineralocorticoid 
receptor blocker
MRI magnetic resonance 
imaging
NT-proBNP N-terminal pro-
B-type natriuretic pep-
tide
PVC premature ventricular 
complex
RAAS renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system
RV right ventricular
TICM tachycardia-induced 
cardiomyopathy
VA ventricular arrhythmias
VT ventricular tachycardia
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 12 Videos.

SECTION XIV
•
Cardiovascular Disease
1368
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Non-genetic causes of DCM include nutritional, drugs or toxins, 
and chronic manifestation of myocarditis. An association between 
taurine deciency and canine DCM has been described in American 
and English Cocker Spaniels, Golden Retrievers, and sporadically in 
other breeds.4 19-22 Taurine is a free amino acid with important roles 
in bile acid conjugation, central nervous system development, and 
cardiac contractility and osmoregulation, and deciency may occur 
through insucient dietary intake or bioavailability of taurine or 
its precursors, or abnormal utilization or excretion.23 Myocardial 
L-carnitine deciency was described in a small family of Boxer dogs 
with DCM; however, there is little other information linking cause 
and eect in this or other breeds.24 Other speculated nutritional 
causes of DCM include chronic consumption of low-protein diets, 
limited and novel ingredient diets, and possibly some legume-rich 
or grain-free diets (ch. 157).23 25 26 e most common drug toxi-
cosis associated with development of a DCM phenotype in dogs is 
doxorubicin (also see ch. 321).27 e incidence of cardiotoxicosis 
appears to be similar to humans (<5% with the typical doses used 
in veterinary medicine), though factors associated with increased 
risk include higher cumulative dose, higher body weight, and breeds 
already predisposed to DCM.28 Several causes of myocarditis are 
known to cause a DCM phenotype in the chronic phase of infection 
(see below). e above-mentioned non-genetic causes may account 
for a low percentage of total DCM cases, but are worthy of consider-
ation as contributing factors depending on clinical presentation and 
geographic area because of potentially important dierences in treat-
ment and prognosis.
PHENOTYPES AND CLINICAL STAGES
Dogs with DCM experience a preclinical phase (occult phase) during 
which there is echocardiographic or electrocardiographic evidence of 
disease but clinical signs are absent as perceived by the dog’s owner. 
e duration of this phase may last months to years and importantly 
may be modied by treatment.29-31 Both the phenotype expressed 
and the duration of the preclinical phase may vary between breeds. 
Some dogs manifest arrhythmias before echocardiographic changes: 
ventricular arrhythmias (VA) in DPs11 32 and Great Danes,13 and 
atrial brillation (AF) in IWs.33 34 Alternatively, ventricular dilatation 
and systolic dysfunction may oen be recognized rst (Video 233.1). 
Intermediate forms characterized by either ventricular dilatation or 
systolic dysfunction in isolation may also be recognized and may rep-
resent very early or developing forms of DCM (Video 233.2).2 14 Fur-
thermore, there are subtle but recognized dierences among breeds 
regarding ventricular geometry and function in DCM. DP with 
DCM tend to have quite profound systolic dysfunction, while IWs 
and some Newfoundlands may exhibit more ventricular dilatation 
(le and right) and less severe systolic dysfunction.12 14 33
e clinical phase of DCM is the result of progressive systolic dys-
function, ventricular dilatation, and/or worsening arrhythmias pre-
cipitating heart failure, syncope, and/or sudden death (Videos 233.3 
and 233.4). Heart failure may manifest as backward failure—that is, 
congestive heart failure (CHF) causing uid congestion in the lungs 
(le-sided CHF) or cavitary spaces (right-sided CHF), and/or as for-
ward heart failure, in which signs of poor cardiac output predomi-
nate (ch. 229). Sudden death may be the rst clinical sign or may 
occur aer the onset of CHF, and is more common in some breeds 
than others. It is the rst clinical sign for 25-30% of DP with DCM.32
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Dogs with preclinical DCM are identied through active cardiac 
screening programs (high-risk breeds, breeding dogs) or follow-
ing detection of a cardiac abnormality on physical examination 
such as a heart murmur or arrhythmia. Many dogs in this phase 
will have a normal physical examination.
In most clinical settings, dogs are presented due to the onset of 
clinical signs, with respiratory signs due to le-sided CHF includ-
ing tachypnea, dyspnea, and cough being most common (ch. 
37) (Video 233.5).7 8 Other signs include those associated with 
forward heart failure like weakness, exercise intolerance, and 
syncope, which may predominate in some cases (ch. 40).7 8 It is 
common for Newfoundlands, IWs, and dogs with AF to present 
with signs of right heart failure (tachypnea/dyspnea due to pleural 
eusion and ascites).35-37 Nonspecic signs including weight loss 
and hyporexia may also be noted. Physical examination (ch. 3) 
may reveal a low intensity heart murmur (≤ grade 3/6) over the 
mitral or tricuspid area (ch. 38) and weak femoral pulses (ch. 39). 
1 cm
Figure 233.1
Cardiac gross pathologic specimen from a Boston Ter-
rier with dilated cardiomyopathy, showing marked le and right ven-
tricular dilatation. (Image courtesy Dr. Alfonso López, Atlantic Veteri-
nary College.)
TABLE 233.1
Causes of Dilated Cardiomyopathy vs. Phenocopies 
(Imposters)
GENETIC
NON-GENETIC
Breed-specific genetic mutations 
of cardiac proteins
•Doberman Pinscher: titin and
PDK
•Welsh Springer Spaniel: phos-
pholamban
Idiopathic
•Many cases deemed idiopath-
ic may have an unrecognized 
genetic etiology
Potential modifying epigenetic 
factors
•Environment
•Diet
•Lifestyle
Nutritional deficiencies
•Taurine
•Carnitine
•Low-protein diets
•Other limited ingredient diets
Toxins
•Doxorubicin and other che-
motherapeutics
•Monensin
Myocarditis—chronic phase
•Infectious
•Inflammatory
Phenocopies: Imposters for DCM Phenotype
Tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy (TICM)
Acquired or congenital valvular disease
Endocardial fibroelastosis
Acquired or congenital extracardiac shunt/fistula
Conditioned athlete
Myocardial ischemia
Other systemic disease resulting in systolic dysfunction (e.g., hypo-
thyroidism, sepsis)
