SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
2004
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
THE HISTORY OF 
HYPERADRENOCORTICISM AND 
DEFINITIONS
T
he most common manifestation of 
hyperadrenocorticism (hypersecre-
tion of adrenocortical hormones) 
in dogs is hypercortisolism (HC). Chroni-
cally increased circulating glucocorticoids 
can be caused by long-term glucocorticoid 
administration (iatrogenic) or it can be 
naturally occurring, caused by excessive 
endogenous cortisol production.1 e clini-
cal condition associated with chronic corti-
sol excess is oen referred to as Cushing’s 
syndrome, aer the eminent neurosurgeon 
Harvey Cushing. Cushing’s clinical descrip-
tion of his patient Minnie G., published in 
his monograph in 1912, incorporated all the 
features that are now considered classic for 
HC. He speculated that the disorder may be 
related to the adrenal gland (hyperadrenal-
ism). In his later survey, published in 1932, 
he associated the condition with a basophil 
adenoma of the pituitary gland. e descrip-
tion of this fascinating discovery makes 
Harvey Cushing one of the greatest gures 
in endocrinology.2 In veterinary medicine 
the rst mention of HC appeared in 1939, 
when Verstraete and oonen reported the 
rst 2 dogs with “pituitary disorders.”3
Naturally occurring HC is usually 
the result of inappropriate excess secre-
tion of pituitary adrenocorticotropic hor-
mone (ACTH) or due to autonomous 
adrenal glucocorticoid secretion. ese 
are classied as ACTH-dependent HC 
and 
ACTH-independent 
HC, 
respec-
tively. 
ACTH-dependent 
HC 
includes 
pituitary-dependent HC (PDH; Cush-
ing’s disease) and the ectopic ACTH syn-
drome. ACTH-independent HC includes 
functional adrenocortical tumors (ATs) 
and primary ACTH-independent adreno-
cortical hyperplasia, such as food-induced 
HC. While PDH and functional ATs are 
well-recognized, reports of primary ACTH-
independent adrenocortical hyperplasia 
and ectopic ACTH syndrome are limited to 
individual case reports.4
PHYSIOLOGY: HYPOTHALAMUS-PITUITARY-
ADRENOCORTICAL AXIS (HPAA)
HYPOTHALAMUS AND PITUITARY GLAND
e hypothalamus is a part of the diencephalon located dorsal 
to the pituitary gland and ventral to the thalamus (ch. 241). e 
hypothalamus is intimately related to the pituitary gland through 
a portal vascular system and an anatomic link, as the pituitary is 
attached to the ventral part of the hypothalamus (median emi-
nence) via part of the neurohypophysis, the infundibular stalk.5
In dogs, the pituitary gland is divided into 3 functional units: the 
anterior lobe, the neurohypophysis or posterior lobe, and between 
them, the pars intermedia. e mature anterior lobe is populated 
by at least 5 distinct endocrine cell types distinguished by the 
tropic (stimulating) hormone each synthesizes: somatotrophs: 
growth hormone (GH); lactotrophs: prolactin; thyrotrophs: 
thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH); corticotrophs: the precur-
sor molecule pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), which is broken 
down to ACTH and related peptides; and gonadotrophs: lutein-
izing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). e 
pars intermedia contains 2 distinct cell types that can synthesize 
POMC: predominant “A” cells are similar to corticotrophs and the 
less common “B” cells in which ACTH is cleaved into alpha-mela-
nocyte stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH) and corticotropin-like 
intermediate-lobe peptide (ACTH18-39 or CLIP).5
Secretion of ACTH from the anterior lobe is regulated by the 
hypothalamus and central nervous system via neurotransmit-
ters that release corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and 
vasopressin (VP). CRH is released from small neurons in the 
paraventricular nucleus in response to neural signaling. VP is 
primarily released from CRH-containing neurons and is distinct 
from the VP involved in water homeostasis. When CRH and VP 
are released, the ACTH precursor, POMC, is secreted from the 
anterior lobe.6 e POMC is cleaved to produce ACTH. e pars 
intermedia is poorly vascularized and is predominantly inner-
vated by dopaminergic nerve bers from the hypothalamus.7 e 
POMC-producing cells of the pars intermedia are resistant to 
glucocorticoid suppression due to an absence of glucocorticoid 
receptors.
ADRENAL CORTEX
e adrenal cortex consists of three functional and morphologi-
cal layers: the outermost zona glomerulosa (zG), the middle zona 
fasciculata (zF) and the inner zona reticularis (zR). e zG is 
responsible for the production of the mineralocorticoid aldoste-
rone, regulated by plasma concentrations of potassium (K) and 
angiotensin-II. Acute increases in circulating ACTH also induce 
aldosterone secretion. e zF and zR function together as a unit 
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing’s Syndrome) in Dogs
Sara Galac
CHAPTER 293
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 8 Videos and 1 Client Information Sheet.
ACRONYMS
ACTH adrenocorticotropic 
hormone
ACTHst ACTH stimulation test
ALP alkaline phosphatase
AT adrenocortical tumor
BG blood glucose
BP blood pressure
BUN blood urea nitrogen
Ca calcium
cAMP cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate
CBC complete blood count
CDI central diabetes insipidus
C-EUS contrast-enhanced 
ultrasonography
CI confidence interval
[cortisol] cortisol 
concentrations
cPLI canine pancreatic lipase 
immunoreactivity
CRH corticotropin-releasing 
hormone
CT computed tomography
CYP11B1 11-beta-hydroxylase
CYP17A1 17-alpha-
hydroxylase
DA dopamine
DHEA dehydroepian-
drosterone
DM diabetes mellitus
DRD2 dopamine receptor 
subtype 2
eACTH endogenous ACTH
FSH follicle-stimulating 
hormone
GI gastrointestinal
GIP gastric-inhibitory 
polypeptide
GNAS G-protein alpha 
subunit
HC hypercortisolism
HDDST high-dose 
dexamethasone 
suppression test
Hp haptoglobin
HPAA hypothalamus-
pituitary-adrenocortical axis
K potassium
LDDST low-dose dexa-
methasone suppression test
Continued

CHAPTER 293
•
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing’s Syndrome) in Dogs
2005
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
and are the sole source of glucocorticoids, 
strictly regulated by the HPAA. e zR also 
produces androgens, e.g., dehydroepian-
drosterone (DHEA) and androstenedione.4
Adrenal steroidogenesis is initiated 
by ACTH, which binds to the G-protein 
alpha subunit (GNAS)-coupled melano-
cortin 2 receptor (MC2R), assisted by the 
melanocortin 2 receptor accessory protein 
(MRAP), and activates the cyclic adenos-
ine monophosphate (cAMP) and protein 
kinase A (PKA) pathways. Cholesterol is 
the precursor molecule for all adrenocor-
tical hormones and its availability is the 
limiting step for adrenal steroidogenesis. 
Cholesterol is converted to adrenocortical 
hormones in several steps, each catalyzed 
by enzymes (Figure 293.1).
Each zone in the adrenal cortex 
expresses a dierent set of steroidogenic 
enzymes. Dog steroidogenesis is unique 
with 
only 
one 
11-beta-hydroxylase 
enzyme (CYP11B1). Canine adrenals lack 
aldosterone-synthetase (CYP11B2), a spe-
cic enzyme involved in the last step in 
aldosterone synthesis in humans and many 
other species. is implies that in dogs the 
expression of the 17-alpha-hydroxylase 
enzyme (CYP17A1) in the zF is crucial for 
cortisol synthesis, while lack of CYP17A1 
in the zG restricts steroidogenesis to 
mineralocorticoid production.8 Activa-
tion of several transcription factors and 
steroidogenic enzymes in adrenocortical 
cells increase cortisol production, which 
in turn exerts negative feedback suppress-
ing hypothalamic CRH and VP while also 
suppressing ACTH secretion from the 
anterior lobe. Adrenal cortisol secretion has no eect on ACTH 
secretion from pars intermedia. ACTH and cortisol secretion are 
pulsatile and there is no circadian rhythm.9
PATHOGENESIS
ACTH-DEPENDENT HYPERADRENOCORTICISM
Pituitary-Dependent Hypercortisolism (PDH)
PDH, diagnosed in 80-85% of dogs with HC, is the most common 
naturally occurring form. PDH is caused by a functional, auton-
omous, ACTH-secreting, pituitary tumor that causes bilateral 
adrenocortical hyperplasia and chronic excessive secretion of glu-
cocorticoids (Figure 293.2).1 Pituitary tumors may arise from the 
anterior lobe or the pars intermedia. Tumors in the pars interme-
dia tend to grow larger and are resistant to dexamethasone sup-
pression. Endocrine testing is oen not discriminative, as large 
tumors from the anterior lobe may also be dexamethasone-resis-
tant.9 Most of these pituitary tumors are histologically classied 
as adenoma (well delineated from adjacent parenchyma). Inva-
sive adenomas (exhibiting local invasion of brain parenchyma or 
adjacent structures), carcinomas (with distant metastasis), and 
pituitary hyperplasia have also been described.10
Not much is known about the genetic background of canine 
HC. An activating mutation in the corticotropin releasing hor-
mone receptor gene (CRHR1) was detected in just 1 Poodle from a 
series of 50 dogs, failing to support the theory that ACTH-secreting 
adenomas develop aer chronic increases in positive feedback sig-
nals by constitutively activated CRH receptors.11 e research on 
oncogenesis of canine pituitary tumors has predominantly focused 
on candidate genes involved in pituitary tumorigenesis in humans. 
e high prevalence of HC in dogs and similarities in clinical 
presentation make the dog a suitable animal model for study-
ing Cushing’s disease in humans, but more molecular studies are 
needed. e gain-of-function of the Ubiquitin Specic Peptide 8 
gene (USP8) is a main driver behind the formation of corticotroph 
adenomas in humans. is peptide was not identied in dogs.12
Mutation of a T-box transcription factor (Tpit), obligate for the 
expression of POMC in humans and dogs, is not present in canine 
pituitary tumors.13 14
Ectopic ACTH Syndrome
Various tumor types, from well-dierentiated and indolent car-
cinoids to highly aggressive small-cell carcinomas, can secrete 
ACTH which, in turn, leads to HC. Dogs with resistance to dexa-
methasone, negative pituitary imaging, severely elevated endog-
enous ACTH (eACTH) concentrations, severe hypokalemia, 
and obvious clinical signs are candidates for the diagnosis of 
ectopic ACTH syndrome. A neuroendocrine tumor originating 
in the pancreas has been described as source of ectopic ACTH 
in dogs (Figure 293.2).15 16 Ectopic ACTH syndrome is rare and 
likely underdiagnosed in dogs. Ectopic ACTH-secreting tumors 
are usually small, dicult to visualize, and only identied aer 
extensive diagnostic imaging. Furthermore, treatment targeting 
the adrenal glands will resolve clinical signs of HC regardless 
of the ACTH source. Although typically slow-growing, most 
ectopic ACTH secreting tumors are malignant. e prognosis 
is unpredictable.
ACTH-INDEPENDENT HYPERADRENOCORTICISM
Autonomous Cortisol-Secreting ATs
Such tumors occur in about 15-20% of dogs with naturally occur-
ring HC, causing “adrenal-dependent” HC (AHC). Excessive 
production of cortisol by the AT negatively feeds back on the 
hypothalamus and pituitary gland, suppressing CRH and ACTH 
secretion. is causes atrophy of cortisol-secreting cells within 
the contralateral adrenal gland and the non-neoplastic cortisol-
secreting cells of the aected adrenal gland (Figure 293.2).1 One 
of the mechanisms behind ACTH-independent cortisol secretion 
is an activating mutation in the G-protein alpha-subunit gene 
(GNAS), described in about one-third of investigated cases.17
An activating GNAS mutation constitutively induces the PKA
pathway, which can lead to continuous and uncontrolled cor-
tisol production, can stimulate proliferative activity, and may 
be responsible for AT growth. is mutation is present in both 
benign and malignant ATs.
e histological criteria for dierentiating adrenocortical 
adenomas from carcinomas include tumor size, peripheral bro-
sis, capsular invasion, a trabecular growth pattern, hemorrhage, 
necrosis, single-cell necrosis, hematopoiesis, brin thrombi, 
cytoplasmic vacuolation, and the Ki67 proliferation index.18 In 
the largest case series of functional ATs, most were carcinomas 
(63% and 75%).18 19 e dierentiation, however, is challenging 
and the most reliable criterion of AT malignancy remains metas-
tases. Histopathological parameters can also serve as prognostic 
indicators aer adrenalectomy. ree parameters were signi-
cantly associated with survival: the percentage cells with clear/
vacuolated cytoplasm, the presence of necrosis, and the Ki67 
proliferation index. Together, they comprise the Utrecht score, 
an easy-to-use histopathological scoring system that can help to 
assess post-surgery prognosis (Figure 293.3) 20
LH luteinizing hormone
MC2R melanocortin 2 receptor
MRI magnetic resonance 
imaging
Na sodium
P/B value ratio of pituitary 
height vs the area of the 
brain
PDH pituitary-dependent 
hypercortisolism
PE physical examination
PKA protein kinase A
PO4 phosphate
POMC pro-opiomelanocortin
PP polyphagia
PT pulmonary 
thromboembolism
PU polyuria
PU/PD polyuria, polydipsia
SOAT1 sterol-O-acyl-
transferase 1
SST somatostatin
SSTR2 somatostatin receptor 
subtype 2
SSTR5 somatostatin receptor 
subtype 5
TSH thyroid stimulating 
hormone
TT4 total thyroxine
UCCR urine cortisol to 
creatinine ratio
US ultrasonography
USG urine specific gravity
UTI urinary tract infection
VP vasopressin
zF zona fasciculata
zG zona glomerulosa
zR zona reticularis
ACRONYMS—CONT’D
