CHAPTER 289
•
Insulin-Secreting Tumors
1959
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
ATP adenosine triphos-
phate
CRI continuous rate infu-
sion
CT computed tomography
CTA computed tomogra-
phy angiography
GH growth hormone
IV intravenous
US ultrasonography
Insulin-Secreting Tumors
Johan P. Schoeman
INTRODUCTION
I
nsulinoma” is a neoplasm of pancreatic 
beta cells that synthesizes and secretes 
excessive quantities of insulin, oen 
causing clinical signs of hypoglycemia. It is 
an uncommon condition in dogs and rare 
in cats. Insulinoma was rst described in the 
dog in 1935 and in the cat in 1974.1 2 Subse-
quently, approximately 360 canine cases have 
been described as compared with merely 
10 well-documented feline cases. Consequently, this chapter will 
focus on canine insulinoma and conclude with a short section on 
the comparative aspects of feline insulinoma.
PATHOLOGY
THE PRIMARY TUMOR
Insulin-secreting pancreatic beta cells comprise approximately 
70% of the cells of the islets of Langerhans which, in turn, com-
prise only 1-2% of pancreatic volume. Most canine insulinomas 
are malignant. In one report utilizing immunocytochemical stain-
ing, 17 of 18 were carcinomas, 1 was an adenoma.3 About 80% 
of insulinomas are solitary, located in either limb rather than the 
body of the pancreas (Figure 289.1).4-6 Occasionally no discrete 
nodule is seen or palpated during gross pancreatic examination 
because some of these tumors are microscopic in size. In these, 
histologic examination is required to locate the tumor within a 
section of surgically removed pancreatic tissue or at necropsy.
METASTASES
e rate of detected metastatic lesions in dogs with insulinoma 
ranges from 45-64%, higher in necropsy-based studies than those 
using surgically-obtained samples.6-8 Clinical staging of pancre-
atic tumors denes stage I as T1N0M0 (presence of a primary 
Tumor and absence of regional lymph Node or distant Metas-
tases), stage II as T1N1M0, and stage III as T1N1M1 or T1N0M1
(ch. 316). A majority of dogs with an insulinoma have stage II 
or III disease at diagnosis. e most common sites of metastases 
are regional lymph nodes and liver, but they have an unlimited 
distribution.9
GROWTH HORMONE INVOLVEMENT
e etiology of insulinoma is not known, but local growth hor-
mone (GH) production, not associated with changes in circu-
lating concentrations, has been documented in primary and 
metastatic canine insulinoma. is GH is postulated to promote 
islet cell proliferation via paracrine or autocrine mechanisms.10
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Neoplastic proliferation of pancreatic beta cells causes autono-
mous and excessive secretion of insulin with resultant episodes 
of hypoglycemia. e most important compensatory mechanisms 
for hypoglycemia are inhibition of insulin secretion and concur-
rent stimulation of counter-regulatory hormone secretion. Glu-
cose is the primary regulator of insulin secretion. Glucose enters 
beta cells and is metabolized to adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 
which closes ATP-sensitive K+ channels. Closure of these chan-
nels decreases K+ eux, causing build-up of K+ ions inside beta 
cells, resulting in their depolarization and the opening of voltage-
sensitive Ca2+ channels. e inow of Ca2+ through these opened 
channels increases cytoplasmic Ca2+ which is the primary driver 
for the fusion of insulin-containing vesicles with the cell mem-
brane. Rupture of the external cell membrane allows insulin exo-
cytosis into the extracellular environment and blood in equimolar 
amounts to C-peptide (“connecting” peptide: the chain of amino 
acids cleaved from within proinsulin’s single amino acid chain. 
Cleavage of C-peptide from the chain simultaneously creates 
insulin: 2 amino acid chains connected by 2 disulde bridges). In 
healthy animals, insulin secretion is completely inhibited when 
blood glucose is <80 mg/dL (<4.4 mmol/L). In contrast, insulin 
secretion from neoplastic beta cells oen persists despite low blood 
glucose concentrations. e biochemical hallmark of insulinoma is 
a normal or increased blood insulin concentration despite concur-
rently low blood glucose concentration. Interestingly, insulinomas 
are notorious for their unpredictable but oen excess response to 
CHAPTER 289
“
Insulinoma
Pancreas
Figure 289.1
Solitary insulinoma surrounded by pancreatic tissue. 
(Courtesy Dr. Lillian Aronson.)

SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
1960
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
feeding or glucose administration. e four counter-regulatory 
hormones secreted in response to hypoglycemia are glucagon, 
catecholamines, GH, and glucocorticoids. Glucagon and catechol-
amines are most important in the short-term response to hypogly-
cemia (ch. 298).
CLINICAL FEATURES
SIGNALMENT
e mean age of dogs with insulinoma is 9 years, with a range 
of 3 to 15 years. Although any breed of dog can develop insuli-
noma, it appears most common in medium- to large-breed dogs. 
Canine breed risk and sex predilection for insulinoma have not 
been established.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Neuroglycopenia and Counter-Regulation
Glucose is the most important source of energy for the brain. 
Brain cell function is dependent on a continuous glucose supply 
because the brain’s ability to store carbohydrate and utilize other 
fuels is limited. Clinical signs of hypoglycemia usually result from 
its eects on the central nervous system (neuroglycopenia), or to 
hypoglycemia-induced counter-regulatory release of catechol-
amines. Clinical signs attributable to neuroglycopenia include 
mental dullness, disorientation (Video 61.1), weakness, ataxia 
(staggering as if drunk; Video 61.2), visual disturbances (acting 
blind), collapse and seizures (Video 61.3). Clinical signs related 
to catecholamine release and its stimulation of the sympathetic 
nervous system include nervousness and hunger.
Severity of clinical signs is partly correlated to the blood glu-
cose nadir. Severe hypoglycemia can ultimately result in coma 
and death. However, clinical signs may also be related to the 
duration and the rate at which hypoglycemia develops. Gradual 
decreases in blood glucose concentration are less potent stimu-
lators of catecholamine secretion. Insulin secretion from insu-
linomas and resulting clinical signs are episodic. Secretion of 
counter-regulatory hormones increase blood glucose concentra-
tions and can transiently resolve neuroglycopenic signs. Similarly, 
eating raises blood glucose and can resolve signs. However, while 
feeding can transiently resolve signs of hypoglycemia, that same 
feeding can in turn exacerbate a rebound in clinical signs by stim-
ulating further insulin secretion. Moreover, fasting, exercise, or 
excitement can worsen clinical signs by decreasing blood glucose 
concentration or increasing sympathetic stimulation. e clini-
cal signs of canine insulinoma are summarized in Table 289.1. 
Although most dogs have more than one of these clinical signs, 
some dogs have none. Some dogs may be overweight due to the 
anabolic eects of insulin.
Post-ictal Changes and Paraneoplastic Weakness
Post-ictal changes may be apparent if there has been recent sei-
zure activity. A peripheral polyneuropathy (ch. 252) character-
ized by hind limb paresis or tetraparesis and decreased or absent 
appendicular reexes has been described in 13 dogs with insuli-
noma.9 11 12 e etiology of this insulinoma-associated peripheral 
neuropathy has not been rmly established, yet it is most likely a 
paraneoplastic immune-mediated disorder, unrelated to the met-
abolic changes associated with insulinoma (ch. 331).11
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
e dierential diagnoses for conrmed hypoglycemia (rul-
ing out a spurious result or insulin administration to a diabetic 
dog) may be classied into those caused by excess secretion of 
insulin or insulin-like factors, those caused by decreased glucose 
production, those caused by excess glucose consumption, and 
those due to various drug-associated scenarios (ch. 61). Disorders 
causing excess secretion of insulin or insulin-like factors include 
insulinoma, extra-pancreatic tumors (i.e., hepatic tumors) or 
beta cell hyperplasia (nesidioblastosis). Conditions associated 
with decreased glucose production, aside from the hypoglyce-
mia occasionally diagnosed in neonates and juvenile toy breeds, 
include liver insuciency (ch. 266), hypoadrenocorticism (ch. 
296), hypopituitarism, GH deciency (chs. 280, 281), and gly-
cogen storage diseases (ch. 244). Fasting, malnutrition, or preg-
nancy may cause hypoglycemia. Excess glucose consumption may 
occur secondary to sepsis or extreme exercise (especially in hunt-
ing dogs). Artefactual hypoglycemia may occur when blood cells 
are not promptly separated from serum or in animals with severe 
polycythemia or leukocytosis (Figure 289.2).
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
MINIMUM DATABASE, SERUM GLUCOSE AND INSULIN 
CONCENTRATIONS
Complete blood count (CBC), serum chemistry screen and uri-
nalysis are usually unremarkable in dogs with insulinoma, aside 
from hypoglycemia.4 8 Mild hypokalemia and increased alkaline 
phosphatase and/or alanine aminotransferase activities have been 
documented in some.5 8 Clinical suspicion of insulinoma results 
from the documentation of appropriate clinical signs, persistent 
fasting hypoglycemia (blood glucose concentration <60 mg/dL 
[<3.3 mmol/L]), and concurrent normo- or hyperinsulinemia 
(serum insulin concentrations within or above reference inter-
vals).13 Although hypoglycemia is observed on randomly obtained 
blood from most dogs with insulinoma, especially if repeated, it is 
important to note that blood glucose concentrations do uctuate, 
explaining why some dogs are euglycemic when tested.8 14
TABLE 289.1
Clinical Signs of Insulinoma Reported in 198 Dogs 
From Several Studies4-6,8,9,29
CLINICAL SIGN
NUMBER OF DOGS (%)
Seizure
95 (48)
Collapse
79 (40)
Generalized weakness
74 (37)
Shaking/trembling/muscle 
twitching (Video 42.3)
40 (20)
Ataxia
40 (20)
Exercise intolerance
30 (15)
Hind limb weakness
28 (14)
Disorientation/bizarre behavior/
hysteria
19 (10)
Polyphagia
16 (8)
Polyuria and polydipsia
16 (8)
Stupor/lethargy
12 (6)
Focal facial seizures
6 (3)
Obesity or weight gain
6 (3)
Blindness
5 (2.5)
Anorexia
5 (2.5)
Diarrhea
4 (2)
Head tilt
2 (1)
Nervousness
2 (1)
