CHAPTER 220
•
Pleural Space Diseases
1211
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
lymphoma), small lymphocytes, neutrophils, bacteria or fungi, 
red blood cells, macrophages and/or mesothelial cells.6 In 
longstanding eusions, mesothelial cells may assume bizarre 
cytological appearances, which may make distinction from neo-
plastic cells dicult.13
Biochemical assessment of pleural effusion is useful in some 
cases. In human medicine, Light’s criteria are widely applied 
to pleural effusion, and have been described in cats.14 Light’s 
criteria evaluate the ratio of effusion protein to serum protein, 
as well as lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) concentrations. Exu-
dates have higher ratios (>0.5) and higher concentrations of 
LDH.7 In people, biochemical analysis of pleural effusion is 
more commonly pursued than in dogs and cats. Biochemical 
properties of pleural effusion include glucose, amylase, pH, 
creatinine, cholesterol, triglycerides and variety of other sub-
stances.15 16 In people, pleural fluid amylase has been used to 
confirm esophageal perforation, but dogs and cats do not pro-
duce salivary amylase.10 Biochemical analysis of pleural effu-
sion in dogs and cats has been limited although recently there 
has been increased interest.15 16 Glucose levels do not routinely 
identify sepsis as they do in abdominal effusion. NT pro-BNP
concentration in pleural effusion is high in cats with CHF.18
High effusion triglyceride concentration can be used for iden-
tifying an effusion as chylous. It may be that further studies 
of biochemical properties of pleural effusion will add useful 
information to individual case evaluation.
Identification of Organisms
Bacterial culture and sensitivity testing is warranted in cases with 
suspected infection or with evidence of neutrophilic inamma-
tion. Recurrent thoracocentesis could predispose a patient to iat-
rogenic infections. Bacterial culture is most frequently used for 
evaluating for aerobic organisms, although pyothorax is oen due 
to mixed infections that include anaerobic organisms. Anaerobic 
bacterial cultures may be hard to perform, and limited sensitivity 
data may be gained. In some cases, invitro culture may identify 
only a more robust, easily cultured pathogen. More fastidious 
organisms may require a special media and a dedicated micro-
biological laboratory. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing 
is also very useful for identication of infectious organisms, and 
may be pursued, especially for more atypical pleural space infec-
tions (e.g., Bartonella [ch. 191]).19
FURTHER DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
Other diagnostic testing in patients with pleural eusion should 
be guided by signalment, physical examination and results of uid 
analysis. Routine laboratory testing, including a complete blood 
count, serum biochemistry prole and urinalysis are advised to 
look for systemic disease. yroid testing in cats (ch. 287) and 
heartworm testing of dogs and cats (ch. 237) in endemic areas are 
also recommended.20 21
Thoracic radiographs after removal of the pleural effusion 
are often useful to evaluate for mass lesions, diaphragmatic 
hernia, or an enlarged cardiac silhouette. Echocardiography 
(ch. 97) is essential to look for evidence of right-sided heart 
disease (dogs, cats), left-sided heart disease (cats), or pericar-
dial effusion. Thoracic ultrasound may be useful to evaluate 
and biopsy mass lesions and to evaluate the integrity of the 
diaphragm (ch. 222). CT is also helpful to investigate the 
underlying cause of the effusion. Exploratory thoracotomy or 
thoracoscopy may be used for more completely evaluating the 
chest and obtaining biopsies.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF PLEURAL EFFUSIONS
In cats, pleural eusion is associated with heart disease (41%), 
neoplasia (26%), pyothorax (15%), idiopathic chylothorax (6%), 
trauma (4%), and feline infectious peritonitis (3%).22
Low-protein transudates (formerly called pure transudates) 
are the type of pleural eusion most oen noted in animals with 
chronic protein-losing nephropathy (ch. 302) or enteropathy (ch. 
262), other causes of hypoalbuminemia, or overzealous paren-
teral uid administration. Macroscopically, the eusion looks 
similar to water and microscopically it is relatively acellular. York-
shire Terriers with lymphangiectasia appear particularly likely to 
develop pleural eusions.
High-protein transudates (formerly called modied transu-
dates) are the most common type of pleural eusion observed in 
dogs and cats. Common causes include CHF (ch. 229), pericardial 
disease/cardiac tamponade (ch. 235), lung lobe torsion (ch. 217), 
and neoplasia (e.g., ch. 322).
Exudates can be caused by penetrating trauma, esophageal 
rupture (ch. 259), ruptured abscess (ch. 217), or foreign body 
(pyothorax), and feline infectious peritonitis (ch. 200).
SELECT PLEURAL EFFUSIONS
Pyothorax-
Affected animals often have systemic signs of sepsis (e.g., 
lethargy, fever [ch. 16], leukocytosis or leukopenia [ch. 58]). 
Cytologic evaluation of infectious effusions may demonstrate 
degenerative neutrophils, and possibly intra- and extracellular 
pathogens. Infections may be aerobic or anaerobic. Anaerobic 
infections may be particularly foul-smelling, although deliber-
ate assessment of odor should be avoided due to zoonotic risk. 
In cats, bite wounds were long considered to be the most fre-
quent source of infection, but recent work has identified para-
pneumonic extension (aspiration of organisms) from upper 
respiratory tract infection as more common.27 In dogs, bite 
wounds and penetrating foreign bodies (sticks/plant awns) 
Figure 220.4
oracocentesis from a cat with pyothorax, conrming 
purulent material.

SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1212
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
are frequently responsible. Occasionally, pleural effusions are 
identified secondarily to bacterial pneumonias (i.e., parap-
neumonic effusions), but these are rare in contrast to people 
and horses. Other less common infectious causes of effusion 
include Bartonella (ch. 191), Mycobacterium (ch. 188), Toxo-
plasma (ch. 197), and viral infections (ch. 205). PCR testing is 
particularly useful in atypical infections.
Therapy for pyothorax involves drainage (usually via chest 
tube) and antibiotics based on culture and sensitivity, with 
coverage for presumed anaerobic pathogens even if anaerobic 
culture was not performed (ch. 140). Some animals, particu-
larly dogs, may require surgical intervention for resection and 
drainage of affected tissues.25,26 The prognosis for pyothorax 
is frequently good if the pet does not present in a moribund 
condition and comprehensive treatment can be provided. Pyo-
thorax is one of the few effusions that can be cured.
Hemothorax
Hemothorax can result from bleeding disorders such as antico-
agulant rodenticide intoxication (e.g., brodifacoum; ch. 138), 
trauma, lung lobe torsion, or neoplasia.28 In hemothorax, the 
packed cell volume of the effusion is >20%, or more than 50% 
of the patient’s peripheral hematocrit. Clinical signs of hemo-
thorax more commonly reflect hypovolemia than the presence 
of pleural effusion. In dogs with anemia and pleural effusion, 
it is prudent to check coagulation status prior to thoracocen-
tesis in order to exclude coagulopathy although in recent years 
the frequency of anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication has 
decreased. Therapy of hemothorax depends on the underly-
ing cause and may include blood transfusion (type depends 
on presence of coagulopathy (plasma) and anemia (packed 
red blood cells, whole blood)), vitamin K therapy, surgery or 
rest (ch. 124). Autotransfusion may be considered except in 
cases of malignancy. Rib tumors may result in hemothorax, 
with resection required to control hemorrhage. Small-volume 
traumatic or intoxication-induced hemothoraces that are not 
affecting ventilation may be left alone to re-absorb.
Chylothorax
Cats (mean age 6.3 years; range, 0.5-14 years)29 and dogs 
(mean age 4 years; range, 1.5-12 years)22 can develop chylous 
pleural effusion, termed chylothorax. The most frequent pre-
senting concern is rapid and/or labored breathing (78% of 
cats,29 79% of dogs30); interestingly, 4/37 (11%) of cats in 1 
series had cough as the only historical finding.29 15/37 affected 
cats (41%) and 24/39 affected dogs (62%) have been described 
as having muffled heart sounds on auscultation of the ventral 
thorax.29,30 Both increased and decreased bronchovesicular 
sounds have been reported, presumably depending on the 
region of the thorax being ausculted.
No clinicopathologic finding is specific for chylothorax. A 
hypoadrenocorticism-like profile (hyponatremia, hyperkale-
mia) has been documented in dogs with chylothorax.31 Radio-
graphic findings have been described above (Figure 220.3), 
and rounding of lung lobes to suggest chronic, fibrosing pleu-
ritis is associated with chylothorax in cats.6,7
Grossly, chylous eusion appears milky white or pinkish. It 
has a high triglyceride content: mean in cats, 1464 mg/dL (16.5 
mmol/L) (range, 303-4670 mg/dL [3.4-52.87 mmol/L], ver-
sus mean 84 mg/dL (1.0 mmol/L) (range, 28-210 mg/dL [0.3-
2.4 mmol/L]) in serum29 and median in dogs, 877 mg/dL (9.9 
mmol/L) (range, 158-2750 mg/dL [1.8-31.1 mmol/L], versus 
median 73 mg/dL (0.8 mmol/L) (range, 35-544 mg/dL [0.4-
6.2 mmol/L]) in serum.22 e predominant cell type is small 
lymphocytes. ese characteristics are the basis for the diagnosis 
of chylothorax.
There are many potential causes of chylothorax, with 
idiopathic disease accounting for about 50% of cases. The 
pathophysiologic mechanism involves extravasation of chyle 
from the thoracic duct on its course from the cisterna chyli 
in the abdomen to its insertion in the cranial vena cava in 
the cranial thorax. Physical disruption of the thoracic duct 
(spontaneous leakage or rupture, iatrogenic laceration), high 
intraductal hydrostatic pressure (heartworm disease, other 
disorders of the right heart, pericardial disease including 
fibrosing/constrictive pericarditis induced by chylothorax 
itself) or both, are implicated. Evaluation of a patient with 
chylous effusion includes a careful search for an underlying 
cause, such as cardiac disease, cranial vena cava thrombus 
or mass (ch. 239), lung lobe torsion (ch. 217), heartworm 
disease (ch. 237), or neoplasia, notably cranial mediastinal 
masses (ch. 322); these are implicated in a minority of cases 
of chylothorax, but finding them offers the possibility of 
addressing the inciting cause. Postoperative chylothorax has 
been described.32 Idiopathic effusion is associated with dila-
tion of the lymphatics (lymphangiectasia), but the mecha-
nism of this remains elusive.
If a specific cause is found, therapy may be directed against 
that. In idiopathic effusion, medical treatment (e.g., low fat 
diet, rutin, octreotide) is seldom effective and surgical inter-
vention is often preferred. The various surgical techniques for 
palliating chylous effusion have been reviewed.33,34 No therapy 
is universally successful, and cure rates hover around 50-70%. 
Missed ducts during thoracic duct ligation, and the existence 
of collaterals that become patent after thoracic duct ligation 
are possible explanations for persistence of chylothorax post-
operatively.35 In a study of 15 cats with chylothorax, the median 
survival time after thoracic duct ligation plus subphrenic peri-
cardectomy was 774 days (range, 3-2844 days).36 In dogs, 50% 
of chylothorax patients that undergo thoracoscopic thoracic 
duct ligation and pericardectomy are alive at a median of 43 
months post-operatively.22 The best surgical outcome appears 
to be associated with a meticulous and experienced surgeon.22
Without surgery, palliation can be provided with periodic tho-
racocenteses, with the interval between centeses varying from 
one to many weeks depending on rate of reaccumulation of 
effusion and respiratory comfort.
Mesothelioma
Mesothelioma, a neoplasm arising directly from mesothelial cells, 
aects the pleura (79%), pericardium (64%), and peritoneum 
(7%) in dogs.37 It is rare in cats.38 e cause of mesothelioma is 
unknown; exposure to asbestos has been signicantly associated 
with intrathoracic mesothelioma in dogs.39,40 Transformation 
over time from idiopathic benign inammation to mesothelioma 
has been documented in dogs.41 Chronic body cavity eusions 
that accumulate slowly (oen, over periods of weeks to months 
initially) are common.37,41
Macroscopically, aected pleura shows varying degrees of 
thickening. Cytologic examination is rarely diagnostic, although 
a block preparation technique involving immunohistochemistry 
has been described.42 e diagnosis requires histologic analysis 
of a pleural biopsy sample,43 typically obtained via thoracotomy 
or thoracoscopy.
Treatment has been administered systemically and via intra-
cavitary (IC) infusion using an indwelling subcutaneous pleu-
ral port.37 Reported protocols in dogs include 5-fluorouracil 
150-200 mg/m2 IC q 2 weeks or weekly × 4 weeks then q 2 
weeks until either progressive disease occurs or effusion does 
not recur37 or carboplatin 250-300 mg/m2 IV or IC q 3 weeks 
