SECTION XI
•
Infectious Disease
1012
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
and dogs sampled in these studies have varied enormously, from 
healthy to anemic patients or retrovirus-infected cats, and from 
client-owned indoor only cats to outdoor feral cats or ghting 
dogs. ese factors contribute to the variation in reported preva-
lence as well as the dierent risk factors identied for infection. 
Additionally, geographic variation in prevalence exists. Dier-
ent polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods, with likely dif-
fering sensitivities and specicities, also likely contribute to the 
variation.
FELINE HEMOPLASMAS
Ca. M. haemominutum’ is the most common species (Table 194.1); 
with infection prevalences ranging from 4.4-46.7% (median 15.5%) 
of cats. Reported prevalences for M. haemofelis range from 0.4-
27.0% (median 5.1%) and for ‘Ca. M. turicensis’ from 0-26.0% 
(median 1.9%). Variable numbers of cats infected with more than 
one hemoplasma species were also reported in dierent studies. 
Ca. M. turicensis’ infected cats are oen co-infected with another 
hemoplasma species, particularly ‘Ca. M. haemominutum.’
In many studies, feline hemoplasma (especially ‘Ca. M. hae-
mominutum’) infections were more common in male, older, 
non-pedigree cats with outdoor access. Some studies have shown 
associations between hemoplasma infection and positive retrovi-
ral status (particularly feline immunodeciency virus [FIV]) and 
between hemoplasma infection and anemia or being unhealthy.
CANINE HEMOPLASMAS
Reported hemoplasma prevalences in dogs also vary widely in 
dierent studies (Table 194.1); generally M. haemocanis is more 
prevalent, ranging from 0-48.6% (median 6.9%) but occasionally 
Ca. M. haematoparvum’ is more common, with 0-33.3% of dogs 
infected (median 1.5%). Geographic variation is marked, possi-
bly due to the presence of the proposed canine hemoplasma tick 
vector Rhipicephalus sanguineus.18 19 Ticks are oen identied as 
risk factors for canine hemoplasma infection. In contrast to cats, 
age and sex are less commonly associated with infection. Fighting 
dogs have been associated with hemoplasma infection. Associa-
tions may exist between canine hemoplasma infections and vec-
tor borne infections,20 particularly Babesia spp. (notably Babesia 
vulpes and Babesia gibsoni; ch. 197).21-23
PATHOGENESIS OF INFECTION
FELINE HEMOPLASMAS
M. haemofelis is the most pathogenic hemoplasma species in cats. 
Untreated cats that die from M. haemofelis infection need not be 
immunocompromised or splenectomized.
Acute infection oen results in severe hemolytic anemia (usually 
extravascular), but some have only mild anemia (chs. 57, 174). In 
experimental studies, clinical signs typically occur around 2-34 
days aer infection, with anemia lasting from 18-30 days. Onset 
of anemia is usually followed by a signicant regenerative response 
with reticulocytosis. Chronic infection is not usually associated 
Figure 194.1
Scanning electron photomicrography showing Myco-
plasma haemofelis as a rounded organism within an indentation on the 
surface of erythrocytes in an infected cat (×1000).
TABLE 194.1
Feline and Canine Hemoplasma Species, Their Prevalences (Evaluated Using PCR in Global Studies) and Their 
Pathogenicity
SPECIES NAME
USUAL HOST
REPORTED PREVALENCE 
RANGE (MEDIAN)
PATHOGENICITY
Mycoplasma haemofelis
Cat
0.4-27.0% (5.1%)
Acute infection often results in hemolytic anemia. Can be 
associated with IMHA.
‘Candidatus Mycoplasma haemo-
minutum’
Cat
4.4-46.7% (15.5%)
Acute infection can induce a drop in erythrocyte parameters but 
not usually severe enough to cause anemia unless the cat 
has concurrent disease or is immunocompromised, e.g., ret-
rovirus infection. ‘Ca. M. haemominutum’, and sometimes  
‘Ca. M. turicensis’, may occasionally cause IMHA.
‘Candidatus Mycoplasma turicensis’
Cat
0-26.0% (1.9%)
Mycoplasma haemocanis
Dog
0-48.6% (6.85%)
Infection can result in hemolytic anemia primarily in splenect-
omised dogs. Little evidence as a cause of IMHA.
‘Candidatus Mycoplasma haematopar-
vum’
Dog
0-33.3% (1.5%)
Anemia not usually reported unless the dog has concurrent 
disease or is immunocompromised, e.g., chemotherapy.
IMHA, Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
Some species have the status Candidatus, which is the name used for newly described organisms for which genetic sequence data are available but which cannot be 
phenotypically characterised to meet the needs of the International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria due to the inability to grow them invitro. The species Mycoplasma 
haemofelis and Mycoplasma haemocanis do not have the Candidatus status, even though they cannot yet be grown invitro, because they represent the renamed previ-
ously existing Haemobartonella felis and Haemobartonella canis species, respectively. Bacterial nomenclature forbids the ‘demotion’ of any bacterial species, including 
during renaming.

CHAPTER 194
•
Hemotropic Mycoplasmas
1013
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
with signicant anemia. Experimental studies have demonstrated 
that the numbers of M. haemofelis blood organisms can uctuate 
in brief time periods, especially in the rst few weeks of infection. 
Antigenic variation, to evade host immune systems, may explain 
these uctuations:24 a large portion (62%) of the M. haemofelis
genome encodes a set of uncharacterized hypothetical proteins 
arranged in series of paralogous repeats which could mediate dif-
fering expression of hemoplasma surface proteins over time. Young 
cats may be more susceptible to severe clinical disease from M. hae-
mofelis infection. As discussed, not all studies demonstrate associa-
tion between anemia and M. haemofelis infection, maybe because 
these studies oen include chronically M. haemofelis-infected cats 
without clinical signs.
Persistent autoagglutination or positive Coombs’ test results, 
indicating presence of erythrocyte-bound antibodies, have been 
seen in anemic cats with acute M. haemofelis infection.25 However, 
antibodies appeared only aer anemia had developed, suggesting 
that erythrocyte-bound antibodies may be due to hemoplasma-
induced hemolysis rather than initiating it. Further, antibodies 
disappear with antibiotic and supportive treatment, without need 
for glucocorticoid treatment.25 Nevertheless, M. haemofelis infec-
tion remains an important potential cause of immune-mediated 
hemolytic anemia (IMHA) in cats (ch. 174).26 Osmotic fragility 
and reduced erythrocyte lifespan have also been reported with M. 
haemofelis infection.
Although acute ‘Ca. M. haemominutum’ infection is asso-
ciated with decreases in erythrocytes,25 anemia is not com-
mon except in cats with concurrent diseases or infections, e.g., 
lymphoma or feline leukemia virus (FeLV) infection.27 28 e 
pathogenicity of this organism does not appear to be increased 
in splenectomized cats.29 ‘Ca. M. haemominutum’ infection has 
been associated with development of myeloproliferative diseases 
in cats with experimental FeLV infection.28 Since anemia has been 
reported in association with ‘Ca. M. haemominutum’ infection 
without concurrent disease or infection,30 infection alone may 
cause anemia in cats.
Ca. M. turicensis’ infection has caused anemia31 or mild 
erythrocyte parameter decreases in some experimental studies.25
Anemia is uncommon. Immunosuppression or concurrent dis-
eases may be involved in the pathogenesis.32 Determining the 
pathogenicity of ‘Ca. M. turicensis’ in naturally infected cats 
has been dicult in epidemiological studies as cats are oen co-
infected with other hemoplasma species.
CANINE HEMOPLASMAS
Studies regarding the pathogenicity of canine hemoplasmas are 
sparse. Hemoplasma infection only causes hemolytic anemia 
in splenectomized or immunocompromised dogs.33-36 Latent 
M. haemocanis infections can be reactivated following splenec-
tomy. Some infected dogs have evidence of erythrocyte-bound 
antibodies with positive Coombs’ tests.37 Nevertheless, little 
evidence exists for canine hemoplasmas being a major cause 
of IMHA.26
OVERALL PATHOGENESIS
e pathogenicity of dierent hemoplasma species varies. Not all 
studies show an association between infection and anemia. M. 
haemofelis and M. haemocanis (splenectomized dogs), are most 
likely to be associated with clinical signs during acute infection, 
whereas ‘Ca. M. haemominutum,’ ‘Ca. M. turicensis’ and ‘Ca. M. 
haematoparvum’ are not generally associated with clinical signs 
unless concurrent disease or immunosuppression is present. 
Health status and transmission route of infection may determine 
the outcome of hemoplasma infection with any species.
CARRIER STATUS
Long-term feline hemoplasma carrier state, without clinical signs, can 
occur, particularly with ‘Ca. M. haemominutum.’38 39 Many M. hae-
mofelis–infected cats and some with ‘Ca. M. turicensis’ naturally clear 
infection from peripheral blood within a few months of acute infec-
tion. However, general statements regarding long-term carrier status 
cannot be made since great variation exists. Variations likely reect 
dierent host-organism interactions and dierent hemoplasma spe-
cies. Carrier cats oen have subclinical infections and, uncommonly, 
reactivation of infection and clinical disease can occur.30 Little work 
has been done regarding the time course of carrier status with canine 
hemoplasmas, but subclinical carrier dogs infected with ‘Ca. M. hae-
matoparvum’ and M. haemocanis are thought to exist.19
TRANSMISSION
e natural route of transmission of hemoplasma infection to cats 
and dogs has not yet been determined. Dierent routes may pre-
dominate for dierent hemoplasma species.
Canine and feline hemoplasma DNA has been found in eas, 
ticks, and mosquitoes. However, the DNA found in potential vec-
tors could just reect their hematophagous activity on infected 
hosts. e cat ea, Ctenocephalides felis, has been implicated in 
transmission of feline hemoplasma, but only transient M. hae-
mofelis infection without clinical signs has been reported in cats 
experimentally infected via the hematophagous activity of eas.40
Transmission of M. haemocanis by the brown dog tick, Rhipiceph-
alus sanguineus, has been suggested but remains unconrmed.20 41
e association between hemoplasma infection and male sex 
and/or retrovirus status (particularly FIV) seen in some stud-
ies could suggest that cat ghts are involved in transmission of 
infection. Studies suggest subcutaneous inoculation of ‘Ca. M. 
turicensis’-containing blood resulted in infection, whereas the 
same inoculation method using ‘Ca. M. turicensis’-containing 
saliva did not.42 is suggests that hemoplasma transmission by 
social contact (e.g., saliva via mutual grooming) is less likely than 
via aggressive interaction (e.g., blood transmission during a cat 
bite incident), as inferred with rodent hemoplasmas.43 Further, 
high prevalence of hemoplasma infection has been reported in 
ghting dogs, supporting blood as a transmission route.44 45 Ver-
tical transmission has been strongly suggested for M. haemocanis
but has not been denitively shown for feline hemoplasmas.46
Blood transfusion is another route of transmission. Blood donors 
should be screened for hemoplasma (ch. 124).
CLINICAL SIGNS AND LABORATORY ABNORMALITIES
In pathogenic infections, common clinical signs of hemoplasmo-
sis are lethargy (ch. 10), pallor (Video 194.1; ch. 25) and weak-
ness (ch. 23). Inappetence, dehydration, weight loss (ch. 18) and 
intermittent fever (ch. 16) are also reported. Splenomegaly may 
be evident with feline hemoplasmosis (ch. 182). is is not com-
mon in dogs with clinical hemoplasmosis because most clinically 
aected animals have been previously splenectomized (e.g., for 
tumor removal). Animals with severe anemia may have tachycar-
dia, tachypnea (ch. 37), weak or bounding femoral pulses (ch. 39), 
and cardiac murmurs (ch. 38). Icterus is rare, despite the severe 
anemia. Moribund cats may be hypothermic.
Pathogenic hemoplasma infection typically causes a regen-
erative macrocytic hypochromic anemia (ch. 57), although pro-
nounced reticulocytosis is not always evident. Normoblasts may 
be present. Positive Coombs’ test results, particularly with cold 
agglutinins, and persistent autoagglutination have been reported 
in acute hemoplasmosis (ch. 174). Hyperproteinemia and hyper-
bilirubinemia are occasionally seen. Hypoxic liver damage may 
