CHAPTER 59
•
rombocytopenia, rombocytosis
279
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Thrombocytopenia, Thrombocytosis
Marjory B. Brooks
Q
uantitative defects of platelet number 
are detected as increased or decreased 
platelet count in the hemogram and 
blood smear. A consistent diagnostic strategy 
helps streamline dierentiation among the 
many primary and secondary disease pro-
cesses that inuence platelet number.
PLATELET LIFE CYCLE
Platelets are small anucleate cell fragments produced from bone 
marrow megakaryocytes. Platelets circulate for approximately 
5 to 9 days in dogs and cats. The cytokine thrombopoietin 
(TPO) is the major regulator of megakaryocyte maturation; 
however, additional growth factors act synergistically with 
TPO.1 2 The liver is the primary site of TPO synthesis, which 
upon release binds to a ligand (c-Mpl) expressed on mega-
karyocytes and platelets. As platelet count falls, free TPO levels 
increase to stimulate thrombopoiesis. Conversely, as platelet 
count rises, free TPO falls and thrombopoiesis slows. Platelet 
mass is further regulated through clearance of senescent plate-
lets lacking sialic acid residues by engagement with hepato-
cyte Ashwell-Morell receptors and subsequent increased TPO 
production.3
Platelets in circulation undergo transient splenic seques-
tration. Approximately one third of total platelet mass is 
compartmentalized within the spleen in healthy individu-
als.2 Prothrombotic and inammatory stimuli induce platelet 
activation and incorporation into a hemostatic plug or egress 
into tissues from the microvasculature. Non-activated platelets 
undergo gradual apoptotic death and subsequent clearance by 
hepatic and splenic macrophages.4
Disease processes that upset the balance of platelet produc-
tion, activation, and clearance result in an increase or decrease 
in platelet count. rombocytopenia is among the most common 
acquired bleeding disorders in small animal practice, whereas 
thrombocytosis is typically identied as a laboratory abnormality 
without specic clinical signs.
DIAGNOSIS OF THROMBOCYTOPENIA
CLINICAL SIGNS
e characteristic signs of thrombocytopenia include petechiae, 
ecchymoses, mucosal hemorrhage (e.g., epistaxis, hematemesis, 
hematuria, melena; ch. 29) and prolonged bleeding aer injury 
(chs. 29 and 124). Signs may overlap with those of acquired or 
hereditary platelet dysfunction (ch. 175), coagulopathies (ch. 171), 
von Willebrand disease (ch. 175), vasculopathies (ch. 181), or vas-
cular injury. A platelet count is indicated to conrm thrombocyto-
penia and guide subsequent testing. While risk of bleeding is not 
strictly correlated with platelet count, thrombocytopenia is rarely 
the sole cause of severe or spontaneous hemorrhage at counts 
above 30,000/mcL. Hemorrhage may be exacerbated, however, by 
concurrent coagulation disorders or vascular defects.
DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
Platelet Count and Blood Smear Examination
Platelet number for healthy dogs and cats ranges from approxi-
mately 200,000 to 500,000/mcL.1 2 5 Hematology analyzers also 
measure mean platelet volume (MPV), an indicator of platelet 
size that may be useful in characterizing and monitoring throm-
bocytopenia. Species-specic reference intervals should be devel-
oped for in-house methods or provided by each testing laboratory 
(Table 59.1). rombocytopenia detected by manual or auto-
mated count should prompt a careful blood smear examination.
Blood smear examination conrms a low platelet number and 
rules out spurious thrombocytopenia. Platelets are highly reactive 
and subject to activation and clumping in the process of blood 
collection or storage.6 ese artifacts are minimized by atrau-
matic venipuncture, blood collection directly into anticoagulant, 
limited storage time, and avoidance of cold temperatures. Aer 
review of the smear edges to detect platelet margination, platelet 
count is estimated from counting 10 oil immersion elds (100×) 
on the blood lm monolayer as follows: platelet count (per mcL) 
= average platelets/eld × 15,000.2
CHAPTER 59
ACRONYMS
DIC disseminated intravas-
cular coagulation
ITP immune-mediated 
thrombocytopenia
MPV mean platelet volume
TPO thrombopoietin
TABLE 59.1
Reference Intervals for Canine and Feline Platelet Count and Mean Platelet Volume*
PLATELET COUNT (× 103 /mcL)
MEAN PLATELET VOLUME (fL)
Canine
186 to 545
8.4 to 14.1
Feline
195 to 624
9.1 to 24.3
*Advia  Hematology System (Siemens Healthcare).
Values current , Clinical Pathology Laboratory, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.

SECTION III
•
Dierential Diagnosis for Clinicopathologic Abnormalities
280
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Ancillary Diagnostics
Hemogram and blood smear review should be followed by thor-
ough drug and travel history (ch. 9), physical examination (ch. 
3) to include funduscopic examination (ch. 13), and evaluation 
of spleen, liver, and lymph nodes. Subsequent work-up may 
include bone marrow examination (ch. 84), serologic or direct 
detection of pathogens (ch. 183), imaging with collection of 
cytology or biopsy specimens, and coagulation testing (ch. 170; 
Table 59.2).
CLASSIFICATION OF THROMBOCYTOPENIA 
(FIGURE 59.1)
Patients with a variety of systemic diseases may develop transient, 
mild to moderate thrombocytopenia (platelet count 100,000 to 
150,000/mcL) that resolves as the patient recovers.7 8 In contrast, 
persistent or progressive thrombocytopenia indicates ongoing 
imbalance in platelet production or consumption, or more com-
plex combined defects.
Production Defects
rombocytopenia combined with leukopenia and/or anemia is 
oen an indicator of defective hematopoiesis caused by an under-
lying bone marrow disorder.2 7 9 High MPV and thiazole orange-
stained or “reticulated” platelets are characteristic of newly 
released platelets; however, direct examination of the bone mar-
row is the best means to evaluate thrombopoiesis.8-10
•Inĕltrative disorders: bone marrow inĕltration by neoplas
tic cells typically results in hematopoietic failure and systemic 
signs resulting from thrombocytopenic hemorrhage. e clini-
cal course, hemogram, and bone marrow examination are used 
for classication of acute versus chronic leukemia and lymphoid 
versus myeloid leukemia (ch. 322).2 9 11 Beyond cell morpholo-
gy, immunophenotyping to dene cell surface markers provides 
more detailed classication.5 10 Bone marrow exam may reveal 
non-leukemic neoplastic inltrates, e.g., lymphoma, multiple 
myeloma, mast cells, histiocytes, and metastatic carcinoma.9 12
Clonal expansion of hematopoietic precursors (myelodysplasia) 
also causes dysregulated cell maturation and cytopenias.12
•Myelobrosis describes a non-cellular, brous matrix that re-
places bone marrow stroma. Myelobrosis results from exces-
sive proliferation of bone marrow broblasts in response to 
injury. Inciting causes of myelobrosis include chronic drug 
therapy, hemolytic anemia, bone marrow neoplasia, and pro-
longed inammation.
•Drug toxicosis: drug-induced thrombocytopenia may result
from bone marrow suppression or immune-mediated destruc-
tion (chs. 138, 175, 176).13 Drugs with stem cell toxic eects 
cause pancytopenias, although signs of thrombocytopenia 
may develop rst. rombocytopenia is a known side-eect 
of many chemotherapeutic agents (ch. 321), and is a complica-
tion of drugs such as estrogen, chloramphenicol, methimazole, 
penicillin, procainamide, and sulfa antibiotics13 14 (Box 59.1).
•Infectious thrombocytopenias: infectious agents may cause
bone marrow suppression, peripheral platelet activation or se-
questration, and immune-mediated destruction (ch. 183). e 
prevalence of infectious thrombocytopenias is increasing due 
to pet-friendly travel and international pet adoption (ch. 9), 
suburbanization, and climate change–induced vector range ex-
pansion15-17 (Box 59.2). In addition to thrombocytopenia, in-
fectious agents oen cause systemic illness. Disease diagnosis is 
based on these physical exam and laboratory abnormalities and 
pathogen-detection (e.g., antigen assays, PCR amplication, 
isolation and culture, direct visualization) and/or antibody as-
says that measure host immune response to the infectious agent.
•Endocrine disorders: estrogen is bone marrow suppressive in
dogs and may cause severe thrombocytopenia or pancytope-
nia.14 Functional ovarian granulosa cell tumors and Sertoli cell 
tumors produce excess endogenous estrogen and are typically 
diagnosed and treated through examination and surgical exci-
sion (ch. 315). Although now uncommon, drug history may 
reveal exogenous estrogen prescribed for pseudopregnancy, 
mismating, incontinence, or prostatic hypertrophy. Hypothy-
roidism is associated with general bone marrow depression; 
however, clinically relevant thrombocytopenia is unlikely to 
occur due to thyroid insuciency alone (ch. 285).
•Hereditary thrombocytopenias (ch. 169): a large survey of 
Greyhounds revealed a subclinical, mild reduction in platelet 
count.18 A more severe hereditary macrothrombocytopenia of 
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels is caused by aberrant platelet 
microtubule assembly due to a point mutation in the beta1 tu-
bulin gene.19 e same mutation has been identied in other, 
unrelated breeds including Chihuahuas, Labrador Retriev-
ers, and Shih Tzus. Homozygotes have high MPV and platelet 
counts from 25,000 to 75,000/mcL. A second, distinct beta1 
tubulin mutation was found in Norfolk and Cairn Terriers.20 A 
beta1 tubulin structural variant unique to felids is also specu-
lated to cause the relatively wide variation in platelet size and 
count in domestic cats.21 In spite of low count, platelet mass is 
preserved in macrothrombocytopenic defects and the traits do 
not cause a bleeding tendency or require therapy.
TABLE 59.2
Diagnostic Tests for rombocytopenia and 
rombocytosis
TESTS
SPECIFIC ASSESSMENTS
Hemogram
Platelet count, MPV, morphology, % reticu-
lated platelets
Abnormal cell morphology, cellular inclu-
sions, infectious agents, neoplastic cells
Bone marrow 
cytology/biopsy 
(ch. )
Megakaryocyte maturation, iron stores, 
infectious agents, lymphoid and myeloid 
neoplasia, myelodysplasia, myelofibrosis
Spleen/lymph node 
cytology/biopsy 
(ch. )
Infectious agents, neoplastic cells, extra 
medullary hematopoiesis, hemophago-
cytosis
Immunophenotyping
Expression of cell surface and cell-type spe-
cific markers on peripheral blood, bone 
marrow, lymph node or splenic cells
Imaging
Hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, 
gastrointestinal and urinary tract integrity
Serologic assays
Detection of pathogen-associated antigens, 
antibodies directed against pathogens, or 
autoantibodies to nuclear antigens (ANA) 
or platelet antigens
Molecular assays
PCR, microarray, sequencing for specific 
pathogens
Isolation and culture
Pathogen detection
Coagulation assays
Coagulation screening tests (aPTT, PT) 
fibrinogen, antithrombin, D-dimer
Platelet-associated 
antibody
Detection of immunoglobulin (IgG, IgM) 
bound to platelets
Mutation detection
Beta tubulin mutations in Cavalier Spaniels, 
Norfolk and Cairn Terriers, other breeds
aPTT, Activated partial thromboplastin time; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PT,
prothrombin time.
