SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
1940
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
ACE-i angiotensin convert-
ing enzyme inhibitors
ARBs angiotensin receptor 
blockers
BCS body condition score
BP blood pressure
CBC complete blood count
CKD chronic kidney dis-
ease
fT4 free thyroxine
GI gastrointestinal
GNAS Gαs subunit
131I radioactive iodine
IRIS International Renal 
Interest Society
MCS muscle condition 
score
PE physical examination
PP polyphagia
SHIM-RAD severe hyper-
thyroidism, huge thyroid 
masses, intrathoracic in 
location, multifocal with 
resistance to anti-thyroid 
drugs
T3 triiodothyronine
T4 thyroxine
TSH thyroid stimulating 
hormone or thyrotropin
TT4 total thyroxine
UA urinalysis
Hyperthyroidism in Cats
Sylvie Daminet
INTRODUCTION
H
yperthyroidism is the most com-
mon 
feline 
endocrine 
disease, 
aecting about 10% of senior 
cats, and one of the most common geriat-
ric diseases of cats.1 Hyperthyroidism is a 
progressive disease with disastrous conse-
quences if untreated. Early diagnosis has 
been facilitated by the inclusion of serum 
total thyroxine concentrations (TT4) in rou-
tine screening panels for older cats. Aected 
thyroid nodules contain single or multiple 
hyperplastic and/or adenomatous tumor 
nodules resembling toxic nodular goiter seen 
in humans (i.e., Plummer’s disease).2 Patho-
logic changes are bilateral in about 70% of 
aected cats and unilateral in about 25%.3
Ectopic disease is the least common form, 
occurring in around 4%. Although most cats 
have an adenoma, carcinomas are diagnosed 
in about 1-2%. Some benign thyroid tumors 
may transform into malignant carcinomas if 
untreated or aer chronic oral anti-thyroid 
drugs.4 Histologic evaluation of feline thy-
roid tumors is rarely available, and carcino-
mas are indistinguishable from adenomas on 
thyroid scintigraphy. A classication scheme 
was developed for more aggressive tumors 
that require a dierent therapeutic approach. 
Some thyroid tumors cause severe hyperthy-
roidism, may become huge thyroid masses, 
some are intrathoracic in location or multifocal with resistance to 
anti-thyroid drugs (SHIM-RAD tumors).4 ese are usually best 
managed with high dosages of radioactive iodine (131I).
PATHOGENESIS
Evidence of an immune-mediated cause as observed in humans 
with autoantibodies activating thyroid stimulating hormone 
(TSH) receptors (i.e., Graves’ disease) has not been identied 
in cats.5 6 Although the etiology is unclear, diet (i.e., iodine or 
selenium deciency) or chronic exposure to thyroid-disrupting 
compounds (i.e., bisphenol A, polybrominated diphenyl ethers 
[PBDEs]) in food, water, and the environment may contribute 
to the pathogenesis of feline hyperthyroidism.7-9 In some hyper-
thyroid humans, activating mutations mostly in the TSH recep-
tor gene and less commonly in the adenylate cyclase stimulation 
protein Gαs subunit (GNAS) have been identied.10 In cats, recent 
work has identied Met-452-r and GNAS mutations.11 12
CLINICAL FEATURES
HISTORY
Most hyperthyroid cats are ≥9 years of age with a mean of about 13. 
Occasionally, the disease is diagnosed in younger cats.13-15 Common 
clinical signs (Table 287.1) include weight loss, polyphagia (PP), gas-
trointestinal (GI) signs (especially vomiting), hyperactivity, polyuria/
polydipsia (PU/PD), panting (Video 287.1), poor grooming, and 
behavioral changes. Despite their age, some hyperthyroid cats become 
hyperactive and/or aggressive. Due to increased awareness and rou-
tine screening, the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism is oen made in cats 
with subtle (or absent) clinical signs. Occasionally hyperthyroid cats 
are hypo- or anorexic and lethargic, which is sometimes referred to as 
“apathetic” hyperthyroidism. Most of these “apathetic” cats, however, 
have hyperthyroidism and a concomitant disease.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION (PE)
Body Weight, Body and Muscle Condition Scores (BCS 
and MCS), Thyroid Palpation
A palpable thyroid nodule(s) and muscle wasting are the most 
common ndings on PE. e weight loss typical of hyperthy-
roidism decreases skin elasticity, causing some hyperthyroid cats 
to appear dehydrated when they are not. Good thyroid palpation 
technique (Video 287.2) is important. Losses in weight, BCS, or 
MCS (see textbook’s inside covers) in middle-aged and senior cats 
are key clues for early detection of hyperthyroidism. yroid lobes 
are not palpable in healthy cats. One or more thyroid nodules are 
palpable in most hyperthyroid cats.16 yroid palpation is sensitive 
but not specic for hyperthyroidism since small thyroid nodules 
can occasionally be palpated in euthyroid cats and some “nodules” 
are not thyroid.17 A scoring system has been described.18-20 Hyper-
thyroid cats tend to have larger goiters (large thyroids) than those 
without the disease. In general, goiter sizes are tending to be smaller 
nowadays than in the past, reecting earlier diagnosis.21 Presence 
of no palpable thyroid nodule in hyperthyroid cats has been seen 
with ectopic thyroid masses, identied anywhere from under the 
tongue to being intrathoracic and as low as the base of the heart.
Cardiac and Blood Pressure (BP) Abnormalities
yroid hormones directly have positive inotropic and chro-
notropic eects and indirectly cause peripheral vasodilation.22
Hyperthyroid-induced tachycardia, heart murmurs (29%), and/
or arrhythmias are common.16 Myocardial changes (ch. 234) are 
CHAPTER 287
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 3 Videos and 1 Client Information Sheet.

CHAPTER 287
•
Hyperthyroidism in Cats
1941
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
common and oen reversible with adequate therapy for hyper-
thyroidism (Video 287.3). e prevalence of cardiac abnormali-
ties increases with severity of hyperthyroidism.23 About 10-30% 
of hyperthyroid cats have secondary hypertension (ch. 236).24
In some, systemic hypertension develops following success-
ful treatment of hyperthyroidism, regardless of the treatment 
modality.25 Hence, BPs (ch. 91) and fundic examinations (ch. 
13) should be monitored before, during, and aer treatment of 
hyperthyroidism.
ROUTINE LABORATORY FINDINGS
Overview
A variety of hematologic, biochemical, and urinary changes 
have been observed in hyperthyroid cats. While many of these 
changes are nonspecic and mild, assessing these parameters is 
important. Test results may be consistent with hyperthyroidism 
(e.g., increased liver enzyme activities in an older cat), they may 
aid in identifying other explanations for some signs (e.g., PP due 
to diabetes mellitus), or they can help assess for any concurrent 
disorders (e.g., chronic kidney disease [CKD]) that could aect 
prognosis and choice of therapy (Table 287.2).
Complete Blood Count (CBC)
Mild erythrocytosis in a non-dehydrated cat should alert the clini-
cian to consider hyperthyroidism. e erythrocytosis likely follows 
direct thyroid hormone stimulation of the bone marrow and/or 
erythropoietin synthesis stimulated by increased oxygen consump-
tion. Anemia is not typical and should alert the clinician of the pos-
sible presence of concurrent disease.
Serum Biochemistries
More than 80% of hyperthyroid cats have increased alanine 
aminotransferase activities and >50% have increased alkaline 
phosphatase activities.13 26 e cause for these increases are mul-
tifactorial and presumably related to metabolic hepatic stress, 
passive congestion, and a direct eect of thyroid hormone excess. 
Increased liver enzyme activities in an older cat should prompt 
investigation for hyperthyroidism. In an untreated hyperthyroid 
cat with expected clinical signs (e.g., PP, weight loss), mild to 
moderately increased liver enzyme activities can be assumed 
to be secondary to the hyperthyroidism. However, in presence 
of hypo- or anorexia, icterus, or disproportionate increases in 
hepatic enzyme activities, concurrent liver disease is possible. 
Liver enzyme activities rapidly return to normal once perma-
nent euthyroidism is restored, but oral anti-thyroid drugs may 
cause increases in liver enzyme activities. Lower concentrations 
of fructosamine and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) are 
expected in hyperthyroid cats,27 28 which can complicate diag-
nosing acromegaly and/or monitoring of diabetes mellitus (chs. 
280 and 292). A tendency for hyperthyroid cats to have hyper-
coagulability has been reported, although its clinical relevance 
remains unknown.29
Urinalysis (UA)
ere are no UA ndings specic for hyperthyroidism. Isosthe-
nuria and mild proteinuria are common.30 In contrast to earlier 
reports, the prevalence of subclinical bacteriuria (∼5%) is low.31 32
Urine culture is not routinely recommended unless clinical signs 
of urinary tract disease are present and subclinical bacteriuria is 
not an indication for therapy.33
CONFIRMING THE DIAGNOSIS
HORMONE TESTING
Total Thyroxine (TT)
A randomly obtained serum TT4 concentration is the most 
common rst-line screening test for hyperthyroidism. Assays 
are readily available, inexpensive, and results are similar across 
laboratories. Results are abnormally increased in 90-95% of 
hyperthyroid cats on a single randomly obtained blood sample, 
with the balance having TT4 results in the middle-to-high end 
of the reference interval. e occasional “normal” TT4 value 
in these cats is probably due to TT4 values that uctuate from 
high-normal to high. e presence of non-thyroidal illness may 
decrease TT4 results. Reference interval or borderline results 
are more common in cats with mild disease.34 35 e clinical 
severity of hyperthyroidism correlates with the magnitude of 
TT4 increase. Hence, very high values are expected in severely 
hyperthyroid cats. If normal TT4 results are obtained from a cat 
strongly suspected to have hyperthyroidism, the TT4 should be 
repeated aer several days to weeks. Alternatively, measuring 
free T4 (fT4) and/or thyrotropin (TSH) as well as obtaining thy-
roid scintigraphy should be considered. Basal serum total tri-
iodothyronine (T3) results are not oen useful because of the 
overlap in results among normal cats, hyperthyroid cats, and 
cats with non-thyroidal illness.34
Free Thyroxine (fT)
Measurement of serum fT4 can be of value in diagnosing hyper-
thyroidism, if the indications and pitfalls are understood. Overall, 
fT4 is abnormal in about 98% of hyperthyroid cats, which is bet-
ter sensitivity than the TT4. Interestingly, in mild hyperthyroid-
ism, 85-95% of cats have an abnormal fT4 versus “only” 60-80% 
with an abnormal TT4 35 is particular setting, namely a clinical 
suspicion of hyperthyroidism and a TT4 within reference interval 
(upper half of the reference interval), is when the fT4 has most 
value. Important limitations prevent using the fT4 in cats as the 
rst-line screening test for hyperthyroidism. Increases in fT4 are 
not specic for hyperthyroidism. False positives are obtained 
from 10-30% of euthyroid cats without evidence of concurrent 
TABLE 287.1
Common Clinical Findings From History and 
Physical Examination in 462 Hyperthyroid Cats (% 
are shown)
Historical Findings
Weight loss
92
Polyphagia (increased appetite)
55
Vomiting
47
Hyperactivity
41
Polyuria/polydipsia
33
Diarrhea
21
Decreased activity
13
Heat intolerance
13
Findings on Physical Examination
Palpable thyroid nodule
98
Muscle wasting
77
Dental disease
45
Thin body condition
35
Tachycardia
31
Heart murmur
29
Modified from Peterson ME, Castellano CA, Rishniw M. Evaluation of body weight, 
body condition, and muscle condition in cats with hyperthyroidism. J Vet Intern 
Med. ;:-.
