CHAPTER 300
•
Acute Kidney Injury
2073
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
154. Ochoa VB, DiBartola SP, Chew DJ, etal. Perinephric pseudocysts in 
the cat: a retrospective study and review of the literature. J Vet Intern Med
1999;13(1):47-55.
155. Valdes-Martinez A, Cianciolo R, Mai W. Association between renal 
hypoechoic subcapsular thickening and lymphosarcoma in cats. Vet Radiol 
Ultrasound. 2007;48(4):357-360.
156. Mantis P, Lamb CR. Most dogs with medullary rim sign on ultrasonography 
have no demonstrable renal dysfunction. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2000;41(2):
164-166.
157. Hart DV, Winter MD, Conway J, etal. Ultrasound appearance of the 
outer medulla in dogs without renal dysfunction. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
2013;54(6):652-658.
158. Jakovljevic S, Rivers WJ, Chun R, etal. Results of renal ultrasonography 
performed before and during administration of saline (0.9% NaCl) solution 
to induce diuresis in dogs without evidence of renal disease. Am J Vet Res
1999;60(4):405-409.
159. Neuwirth L, Mahaey M, Crowell W, etal. Comparison of excretory 
urography and ultrasonography for detection of experimentally induced 
pyelonephritis in dogs. Am J Vet Res. 1993;54(5):660-669.
160. Adin CA, Herrgesell EJ, Nyland TG, etal. Antegrade pyelography for 
suspected ureteral obstruction in cats: 11 cases (1995-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2003;222(11):1576-1581.
161. Etedali NM, Reetz JA, Foster JD. Complications and clinical utility of 
ultrasonographically guided pyelocentesis and antegrade pyelography in cats and 
dogs: 49 cases (2007-2015). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2019;254(7):826-834.
162. Lemieux C, Vachon C, Beauchamp G, etal. Minimal renal pelvis dilation in 
cats diagnosed with benign ureteral obstruction by antegrade pyelography: a 
retrospective study of 82 cases (2012–2018). J Feline Med Surg. 2021;23(10):892-899.
163. Novellas R, Ruiz de Gopegui R, Espada Y. Assessment of renal vascular 
resistance and blood pressure in dogs and cats with renal disease. Vet Rec
2010;166(20):618-623.
ACRONYMS
4-MP 4-methylpyrazole
ACE-I angiotensin converting 
enzyme inhibitor
ADH antidiuretic hormone
AKD acute kidney disease
AKI acute kidney injury
BUN blood urea nitrogen
Ca calcium
caAKI contrast-associated 
acute kidney injury
CBC complete blood count
CKD chronic kidney disease
Cl chloride
CRl constant rate infusion
DDS dialysis disequilibrium 
syndrome
ECG electrocardiographic/
electrocardiogram
FeNa fractional excretion 
of sodium
GFR glomerular filtration rate
GI gastrointestinal
HES hydroxyethyl starch
hyperK hyperkalemia
hypoK hypokalemia
iCa ionized calcium
IRIS International Renal 
Interest Society
IV intravenous(ly)
K potassium
Na sodium
NSAIDs nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs
Acute Kidney Injury
JD Foster
DEFINITIONS, PHASES, AND 
CATEGORIZING ACUTE KIDNEY 
INJURY (AKI)
DEFINITIONS AND THE 4 PHASES
T
he term “acute renal failure” has been 
replaced with “acute kidney injury” 
(AKI) to better describe the impor-
tance of mild-to-moderate damage that does 
not result in overt kidney failure, as well as 
emphasizing the maintenance and recovery 
phases of kidney injury. ere are 4 phases 
of intrinsic AKI: induction, extension, main-
tenance, and recovery.1 e induction phase 
begins with an ischemic or nephrotoxic 
insult and continues until a change in renal 
function occurs, such as decreased urine 
output (UOP) or glomerular ltration rate 
(GFR). e duration of this phase is variable, 
depending on the nature and severity of the 
insult. During this stage early intervention 
may prevent progression; however, clinical 
signs are oen not apparent, which makes 
recognition of AKI dicult. During the 
extension phase the kidney is further injured 
via alterations in renal perfusion, contin-
ued hypoxia, secondary inammation, and 
ongoing epithelial and endothelial injury. 
e maintenance phase occurs aer a critical 
amount of damage has been established. e 
resulting decreased GFR and renal hypo-
perfusion manifest as azotemia and clini-
cal signs of uremia. Elimination of inciting 
factors at this phase will not decrease existing damage nor expedite 
the rate of recovery. e recovery phase is the period where renal 
tissue undergoes regeneration and repair with varying restoration 
of renal function.
GRADING AKI
e International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) has provided a cat-
egorization scheme for both chronic kidney disease (CKD) and 
AKI (Table 300.1). Each grade can be sub-graded by UOP (non-
oligoanuric vs. oligoanuric) and the need for renal replacement ther-
apy. e trend of increasing serum creatinine in a hospitalized dog or 
cat should increase concern for active kidney injury, even if the patient 
is not azotemic. Monitoring serum creatinine is recommended for 
hospitalized dogs and cats. Dogs with IRIS Grade I AKI have a higher 
in-hospital mortality (58%) than those without AKI (16%).1 2 Recog-
nition of non-azotemic AKI should allow earlier intervention with the 
potential to minimize the magnitude of developing AKI.
STRUCTURE-FUNCTION CATEGORIZATION OF AKI
AKI is a clinical syndrome of varying severity initiated by a mul-
titude of causes that can be accompanied by rapid decline in GFR 
and renal function. Injury may occur to the nephron, however, 
while GFR is preserved. Many injuries are reversible (at least 
partially); however, the recovery phase of AKI may take days to 
months. Traditionally, AKI is divided into categories based on the 
underlying etiology:
1. Prerenal (hemodynamic) AKI: renal hypoperfusion; the renal 
parenchyma is not damaged.
2. Intrinsic Renal AKI: ischemia or a nephrotoxin damages the 
renal parenchyma.
3. Postrenal or Obstructive AKI: acute obstruction of the urinary 
tract.
CHAPTER 300
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 3 Videos.
Continued

SECTION XX
•
Renal Disease
2074
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
TABLE 300.1
International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) Acute Kidney Injury (AKI) Grading
AKI GRADE
SERUM CREATININE
CLINICAL FEATURES
Grade I
<1.6 mg/dL (<140 mcmol/L)
Non-azotemic AKI
•Historical, clinical, laboratory, or imaging evidence of AKI
•Progressive non-azotemic increase in serum creatinine ≥. mg/dL (≥. mcmol/L) within  
hours
•≥-hour duration of oligoanuria
Grade II
1.7-2.5 mg/dL (141-220 mcmol/L)
Mild AKI
•Documented AKI with static or progressive azotemia
•Progressive increase in serum creatinine ≥. mg/dL (≥. mcmol/L) within  hours
•≥-hour duration of oligoanuria
Grade III
2.6-5.0 mg/dL (221-439 mcmol/L)
Moderate to severe AKI
Grade IV
5.1-10 mg/dL (440-880 mcmol/L)
Severe AKI
Grade V
>10.0 mg/dL (>880 mcmol/L)
Severe AKI
TABLE 300.2
Summary of Renal Biomarkers
LOCATION
BIOMARKER
Estimate of Glomerular Filtration
Serum creatinine
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
Serum symmetric dimethylargi-
nine (SDMA)
Serum cystatin C
Increased Glomerular 
Permeability
Urine protein
Urine albumin
Urine immunoglobulin (Ig) A, G, 
M
Urine C-reactive protein (CRP)
Proximal Tubular Injury
Retinol-binding protein (RBP)
Alpha-1 and beta-2 microglobu-
lins
N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase 
(NAG)
Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 
(GGT)
Kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1)
Urine cystatin C
Serum inosine
Distal Tubular Injury
Interleukin-18
Generalized Nephron Injury
Neutrophil gelatinase-associated 
lipocalin (NGAL)
Clusterin
KIDNEY INJURY CATEGORIZED BY 
BIOMARKERS
The prerenal/renal/postrenal categoriza-
tion of AKI can be incomplete, since inju-
ries develop on a continuum. Prolonged 
prerenal and postrenal AKI can progress 
to intrinsic AKI. Since the term “prer-
enal” is often assumed to mean “hypo-
volemia,” inappropriate IV fluid therapy 
may ensue. Development of kidney-
specific biomarkers has helped create a 
new categorization of AKI.3 4 Biomarkers 
such as creatinine, blood urea nitrogen 
(BUN), 
symmetric 
dimethylarginine 
(SDMA), and serum cystatin C (CC) 
provide information on GFR (ch. 62).4 5
Serum creatinine does not rise immedi-
ately following renal injury; it may take 72 hours after renal 
injury for increases to be detected and another 2-3 days are 
required for increases to reach equilibrium.6 Other biomarkers 
(Table 300.2; ch. 299, Table 299.1) provide evidence of injury 
and dysfunction of various parts of the nephron. Fractional 
excretion of sodium (FeNa; ch. 299) represents the percent of 
sodium (Na) reabsorbed by the tubules, which should be 99% 
(FeNa <1% is normal). Tubular injury often reduces the abil-
ity to reabsorb Na, increasing the FeNa. Dogs surviving AKI 
had improvement in GFR and lowering FeNa throughout hos-
pitalization, whereas the non-survivors had no improvement 
in GFR and increases in FeNa.7 Increased availability of vali-
dated kidney-specific biomarker assays facilitates an updated 
categorization of AKI, using both functional and structural 
assessments (Table 300.3).8 This structure/function relation-
ship allows for the assessment and monitoring of broader kid-
ney status. Renal injuries may be identified even when GFR is 
preserved. Structural changes can be assessed with decreases 
in GFR.
REPEAT VS SUSTAINED AKI
Following an episode of AKI, dogs and cats may continue to 
have active kidney injury due to the inciting cause. Ischemia and 
inammatory changes may perpetuate or exacerbate injury. If 
such injury is not stopped, renal recovery may not occur, which 
could progress to CKD (ch. 301). Other pets may recover from 
1 AKI episode, only to have a second distinct AKI event shortly 
aer. It is challenging to dierentiate sustained kidney injury 
with partial recovery from multiple episodes of AKI within a 
short timeframe. In humans, a minimum of 48 hours of sustained 
improvement is needed between AKI events to characterize 
them as separate episodes.9 Patients with partial improvement 
in kidney function for <48 hours before subsequent worsening 
should be evaluated for a second injury, but continued kidney 
dysfunction from the initial cause of AKI is possible. Owners of 
pets with repeated episodes of AKI should be asked to provide 
a detailed review of medications to identify any with potential 
for nephrotoxicity (chs. 135 and 139). Medication review may 
reveal failure to account for decreased kidney function when 
determining doses. Evaluating each pet for hypoperfusion or 
PCR polymerase chain 
reaction
PE physical examination
PU polyuria
PU/PD polyuria/polydip-
sia
RAAS renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system
SDMA symmetric dimeth-
ylarginine
SQ subcutaneous(ly)
SUB subcutaneous ureter-
al bypass
UA urinalysis
UOP urine output
US ultrasound
USG urine specific gravity
ACRONYMS—CONT’D
