SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1212
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
are frequently responsible. Occasionally, pleural effusions are 
identified secondarily to bacterial pneumonias (i.e., parap-
neumonic effusions), but these are rare in contrast to people 
and horses. Other less common infectious causes of effusion 
include Bartonella (ch. 191), Mycobacterium (ch. 188), Toxo-
plasma (ch. 197), and viral infections (ch. 205). PCR testing is 
particularly useful in atypical infections.
Therapy for pyothorax involves drainage (usually via chest 
tube) and antibiotics based on culture and sensitivity, with 
coverage for presumed anaerobic pathogens even if anaerobic 
culture was not performed (ch. 140). Some animals, particu-
larly dogs, may require surgical intervention for resection and 
drainage of affected tissues.25,26 The prognosis for pyothorax 
is frequently good if the pet does not present in a moribund 
condition and comprehensive treatment can be provided. Pyo-
thorax is one of the few effusions that can be cured.
Hemothorax
Hemothorax can result from bleeding disorders such as antico-
agulant rodenticide intoxication (e.g., brodifacoum; ch. 138), 
trauma, lung lobe torsion, or neoplasia.28 In hemothorax, the 
packed cell volume of the effusion is >20%, or more than 50% 
of the patient’s peripheral hematocrit. Clinical signs of hemo-
thorax more commonly reflect hypovolemia than the presence 
of pleural effusion. In dogs with anemia and pleural effusion, 
it is prudent to check coagulation status prior to thoracocen-
tesis in order to exclude coagulopathy although in recent years 
the frequency of anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication has 
decreased. Therapy of hemothorax depends on the underly-
ing cause and may include blood transfusion (type depends 
on presence of coagulopathy (plasma) and anemia (packed 
red blood cells, whole blood)), vitamin K therapy, surgery or 
rest (ch. 124). Autotransfusion may be considered except in 
cases of malignancy. Rib tumors may result in hemothorax, 
with resection required to control hemorrhage. Small-volume 
traumatic or intoxication-induced hemothoraces that are not 
affecting ventilation may be left alone to re-absorb.
Chylothorax
Cats (mean age 6.3 years; range, 0.5-14 years)29 and dogs 
(mean age 4 years; range, 1.5-12 years)22 can develop chylous 
pleural effusion, termed chylothorax. The most frequent pre-
senting concern is rapid and/or labored breathing (78% of 
cats,29 79% of dogs30); interestingly, 4/37 (11%) of cats in 1 
series had cough as the only historical finding.29 15/37 affected 
cats (41%) and 24/39 affected dogs (62%) have been described 
as having muffled heart sounds on auscultation of the ventral 
thorax.29,30 Both increased and decreased bronchovesicular 
sounds have been reported, presumably depending on the 
region of the thorax being ausculted.
No clinicopathologic finding is specific for chylothorax. A 
hypoadrenocorticism-like profile (hyponatremia, hyperkale-
mia) has been documented in dogs with chylothorax.31 Radio-
graphic findings have been described above (Figure 220.3), 
and rounding of lung lobes to suggest chronic, fibrosing pleu-
ritis is associated with chylothorax in cats.6,7
Grossly, chylous eusion appears milky white or pinkish. It 
has a high triglyceride content: mean in cats, 1464 mg/dL (16.5 
mmol/L) (range, 303-4670 mg/dL [3.4-52.87 mmol/L], ver-
sus mean 84 mg/dL (1.0 mmol/L) (range, 28-210 mg/dL [0.3-
2.4 mmol/L]) in serum29 and median in dogs, 877 mg/dL (9.9 
mmol/L) (range, 158-2750 mg/dL [1.8-31.1 mmol/L], versus 
median 73 mg/dL (0.8 mmol/L) (range, 35-544 mg/dL [0.4-
6.2 mmol/L]) in serum.22 e predominant cell type is small 
lymphocytes. ese characteristics are the basis for the diagnosis 
of chylothorax.
There are many potential causes of chylothorax, with 
idiopathic disease accounting for about 50% of cases. The 
pathophysiologic mechanism involves extravasation of chyle 
from the thoracic duct on its course from the cisterna chyli 
in the abdomen to its insertion in the cranial vena cava in 
the cranial thorax. Physical disruption of the thoracic duct 
(spontaneous leakage or rupture, iatrogenic laceration), high 
intraductal hydrostatic pressure (heartworm disease, other 
disorders of the right heart, pericardial disease including 
fibrosing/constrictive pericarditis induced by chylothorax 
itself) or both, are implicated. Evaluation of a patient with 
chylous effusion includes a careful search for an underlying 
cause, such as cardiac disease, cranial vena cava thrombus 
or mass (ch. 239), lung lobe torsion (ch. 217), heartworm 
disease (ch. 237), or neoplasia, notably cranial mediastinal 
masses (ch. 322); these are implicated in a minority of cases 
of chylothorax, but finding them offers the possibility of 
addressing the inciting cause. Postoperative chylothorax has 
been described.32 Idiopathic effusion is associated with dila-
tion of the lymphatics (lymphangiectasia), but the mecha-
nism of this remains elusive.
If a specific cause is found, therapy may be directed against 
that. In idiopathic effusion, medical treatment (e.g., low fat 
diet, rutin, octreotide) is seldom effective and surgical inter-
vention is often preferred. The various surgical techniques for 
palliating chylous effusion have been reviewed.33,34 No therapy 
is universally successful, and cure rates hover around 50-70%. 
Missed ducts during thoracic duct ligation, and the existence 
of collaterals that become patent after thoracic duct ligation 
are possible explanations for persistence of chylothorax post-
operatively.35 In a study of 15 cats with chylothorax, the median 
survival time after thoracic duct ligation plus subphrenic peri-
cardectomy was 774 days (range, 3-2844 days).36 In dogs, 50% 
of chylothorax patients that undergo thoracoscopic thoracic 
duct ligation and pericardectomy are alive at a median of 43 
months post-operatively.22 The best surgical outcome appears 
to be associated with a meticulous and experienced surgeon.22
Without surgery, palliation can be provided with periodic tho-
racocenteses, with the interval between centeses varying from 
one to many weeks depending on rate of reaccumulation of 
effusion and respiratory comfort.
Mesothelioma
Mesothelioma, a neoplasm arising directly from mesothelial cells, 
aects the pleura (79%), pericardium (64%), and peritoneum 
(7%) in dogs.37 It is rare in cats.38 e cause of mesothelioma is 
unknown; exposure to asbestos has been signicantly associated 
with intrathoracic mesothelioma in dogs.39,40 Transformation 
over time from idiopathic benign inammation to mesothelioma 
has been documented in dogs.41 Chronic body cavity eusions 
that accumulate slowly (oen, over periods of weeks to months 
initially) are common.37,41
Macroscopically, aected pleura shows varying degrees of 
thickening. Cytologic examination is rarely diagnostic, although 
a block preparation technique involving immunohistochemistry 
has been described.42 e diagnosis requires histologic analysis 
of a pleural biopsy sample,43 typically obtained via thoracotomy 
or thoracoscopy.
Treatment has been administered systemically and via intra-
cavitary (IC) infusion using an indwelling subcutaneous pleu-
ral port.37 Reported protocols in dogs include 5-fluorouracil 
150-200 mg/m2 IC q 2 weeks or weekly × 4 weeks then q 2 
weeks until either progressive disease occurs or effusion does 
not recur37 or carboplatin 250-300 mg/m2 IV or IC q 3 weeks 

CHAPTER 220
•
Pleural Space Diseases
1213
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
× 6 doses or until disease progression occurs.37 In a feline case 
report of suspected pleural mesothelioma, IC carboplatin (180 
mg/m2) administered twice, 6 weeks apart, reduced the fre-
quency of thoracocentesis and led to a survival of 4 months.44
e prognosis for dogs and cats with mesothelioma is guarded 
in the short term, and poor long-term. In 1 study of 34 dogs with 
mesothelioma, the median survival time was 195 days (95% CI 
53-324) and the 1-year survival rate was 22%.37
Idiopathic and Miscellaneous Effusions
In some dogs and cats, despite a concerted effort, no spe-
cific cause is identified for the pleural effusion. Pancreatitis, 
immune-mediated diseases, chronic diaphragmatic hernia, 
pulmonary thromboembolism and recent abdominal or tho-
racic surgeries have been associated with pleural effusion.45-
47 If none of these is present, analysis of effusion triglyceride 
concentration is indicated, to identify effusions that are bio-
chemically chylous without being visibly opaque. If this is 
negative, treatment is directed at ameliorating clinical signs, 
often through periodic thoracocentesis. Implantation of pleu-
ral ports has been successful in some dogs.48 49 A search for 
atypical infections is warranted before therapy for suspected 
immune-mediated disease with immunosuppressive agents 
(ch. 144).
CHRONIC EFFUSIONS
Chronic pleural eusions may occur secondary to a wide variety 
of diseases, but are most commonly seen with idiopathic eu-
sions, chylothorax, CHF, and mesothelioma. Survival times with 
chronic eusions depends on the underlying disease, as well 
as the patient and pet owner characteristics. Some dogs with 
chronic eusions may be managed for months to years with 
intermittent thoracocentesis, particularly if their quality of life 
is otherwise good, there is limited formation of adhesions, and 
the owner has emotional and nancial resources for chronic dis-
ease management. Importantly, animals with chronic eusions 
are much more likely to develop a pneumothorax following tho-
racocentesis and may develop infected uid, even with aseptic 
technique.
Pneumothorax is also a common iatrogenic complication of 
thoracocentesis in animals with chronic pleural eusion resulting 
in thickening of the pleura and possibly trapped lung. is may be 
a devastating complication as the pleura is unlikely to heal spon-
taneously. Pleural ports may be placed to permit thoracocentesis 
without the risk of inadvertent laceration of the pleura.48 In larger 
dogs, the size (20 g) of the Huber needle may result in long times 
required to drain the chest. Additionally, iatrogenic infections 
may occur, particularly if drained by lay individuals that have not 
been properly trained.
PNEUMOTHORAX
Pneumothorax is dened as free air in the pleural space.50 It can 
be characterized as traumatic, spontaneous, or iatrogenic, as well 
as open or closed. A tension pneumothorax is a pneumothorax 
severe enough to aect cardiac output and if not promptly evacu-
ated will result in the death of the patient. A tension pneumo-
thorax can result from any type of pneumothorax, although it is 
almost always closed.
TRAUMATIC
Traumatic pneumothorax results from injury to the thorax; it 
is divided into open where there is an open wound connecting 
the chest cavity and the outside air (Video 220.4), and closed
where air leak is from damaged lung parenchyma. Trauma is 
thought to be the most common cause of pneumothorax in 
small animals. Traumatic wounds can be blunt (e.g., hit by 
car) or penetrating (e.g., bite wounds). The type and extent of 
treatment of traumatic pneumothorax is selected based on the 
severity of the clinical signs.
As animals with pneumothorax often also have pulmonary 
contusions (ch. 217) or rib fractures (ch. 222), it is occasion-
ally hard to determine the contribution of pneumothorax to 
respiratory distress. Confirmation of traumatic pneumotho-
rax may be made through diagnostic thoracocentesis, thoracic 
radiographs, or ultrasonography. A negative diagnostic thora-
cocentesis may be truly negative, or may reflect an inadequate 
length of needle/catheter or pocketing of the air. Point of care 
ultrasound is popular as a diagnostic test for pneumothorax 
(ch. 73). Loss of the “glide sign” (Video 220.5) is a hallmark 
finding of pneumothorax, although generally on ultrasound, 
accurate determination of pneumothorax is more challeng-
ing than effusions.51 Treatment of traumatic pneumothorax 
depends on the severity of the pneumothorax and the mecha-
nism of the development of pneumothorax (blunt versus pen-
etrating trauma). Most blunt traumatic pneumothoraces will 
heal rapidly (1-4 days) with supportive care and rarely require 
surgery to control air leak. Traumatized lung lobes will rapidly 
heal if the underlying parenchyma and pleura are normal due 
to the high tissue thromboplastin content of lung tissue. The 
prognosis for a blunt traumatic pneumothorax is good with 
the majority of cases requiring only a short hospital stay. It is 
important to evaluate the patient fully for other wounds, as 
injuries such as vertebral fractures may be present and these 
can impact decision-making as much as, or more than, the 
pneumothorax.
Penetrating wounds often require surgery, as bite wounds 
may bring fur and debris into the chest cavity. Specifically, 
in bite wounds, the clinician should recall that the site of the 
skin puncture wound may be far removed (several centime-
ters) from the site of penetration into the thorax. Occasionally, 
dogs and cats with thoracic trauma have a flail chest, which 
is defined as the presence of two or more fractures in 3 or 
more adjacent ribs. A flail segment is physiologically impor-
tant because it moves paradoxically during ventilation and 
is invariably associated with a severe underlying pulmonary 
contusion. Historical references suggest that surgical stabili-
zation of the rib fractures is warranted, but more recent evi-
dence suggests that this is not necessary, and analgesia and 
time are sufficient. If the thorax of a patient with flail chest 
is being explored for treatment of other injuries anyway (e.g., 
bite wounds), rib fractures can be surgically stabilized. Flail 
chest should be distinguished from intercostal muscle tears 
(Video 220.6); both involve paradoxical inward movement of 
segments of thoracic wall on inspiration, but with intercostal 
tears, rib fractures are absent.
SPONTANEOUS PNEUMOTHORAX IS A 
PNEUMOTHORAX WITHOUT ASSOCIATED TRAUMA52
Spontaneous pneumothorax is termed primary if there is no 
underlying lung disease, and secondary if it is due to recognizable 
lung disease. Spontaneous pneumothorax is more common in 
dogs, where pneumothorax is due to the rupture of blebs or bulla, 
than it is in cats. Northern dog breeds such as Huskies are over-
represented, and more recently the overrepresentation of Golden 
Retrievers has been reported.52 Clinical signs include restlessness, 
respiratory distress, and tachypnea. It is important to distinguish 
