SECTION XV
•
Neurologic Disease
1610
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
segmental spinal reexes, and hypoventilation.20,22 Pelvic limb ataxia 
may also be a prominent clinical sign in some cases. Cranial nerve 
signs such as ptyalism, dysphagia, dysphonia, and facial paresis or 
paralysis are frequently observed.16,21 Urine discoloration due to 
hemoglobinuria or myoglobinuria (ch. 70) is seen in a substantial 
proportion of dogs and less frequently in cats.24 is is helpful in diag-
nosis, as it is not a feature of other diuse LMN diseases.22,24 Other 
clinical signs may include vomiting, depression, hypotension, hypo-
thermia, bleeding disorders, and ventricular arrhythmias.17,22,24,25 A 
complete blood count (CBC) may reveal anemia with spherocytosis 
and erythrocyte “burring.”26 e diagnosis of elapid snake envenom-
ation is typically presumptive based on clinical signs and history.
Treatment is mainly supportive. Placing a pressure bandage 
at the site of envenomation can reduce lymphatic circulation of 
venom.22 Fluid diuresis should be considered if pigmenturia is 
present. Administration of snake-specic antivenin may be bene-
cial in preventing or reducing the severity of clinical signs. Tiger 
snake and Mexican coral snake antivenins are cross-protective 
against North American coral snake venom.16,27,28 Most animals 
will recover in 1-2 weeks with adequate supportive care.24,26,29
POSTSYNAPTIC DISEASES OF THE 
NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION
TERMINOLOGY AND MYASTHENIA GRAVIS
Historically, veterinary texts have discussed acquired and con-
genital forms of myasthenia gravis (MG). However, the term 
congenital MG has been recently discarded in favor of congeni-
tal myasthenic syndrome (CMS), where MG is now reserved for 
conditions of autoimmunity against the NMJ.30 is shi closely 
follows the human classication of these diseases, where MG is 
also used only in the context of autoimmunity.
MYASTHENIA GRAVIS
Pathophysiology
MG is an yacquired autoimmune disorder characterized by autoanti-
bodies produced against nicotinic AChR on the postsynaptic muscle 
terminal.30-32 ese autoantibodies lead to destruction of the AChR, 
reduced numbers of functional receptors, and diminished ability of 
the muscle to respond to ACh, resulting in skeletal muscle weakness 
that is oen exacerbated by activity. ere is a bimodal age distribu-
tion for MG and dogs are usually aected at <4 years of age or >9 
years of age.34 Overrepresented dog breeds include the Akita, Ger-
man Shorthaired Pointer, Chihuahua, German Shepherd Dog, and 
Golden Retriever.32,35 Familial predispositions for MG have been 
identied in the Newfoundland and Great Dane breeds.36,37 In cats, 
Abyssinian and Somali breeds are overrepresented.38,39
Forms of Myasthenia Gravis
Generalized, focal and severe fulminant forms of the disease 
exist.40 e generalized form, characterized by diuse appendicu-
lar muscle weakness, is most common. Patients with generalized 
MG oen have a normal neurologic examination at rest. Dur-
ing a bout of activity-induced weakness, they will demonstrate a 
choppy, stilted gait that is rst noted in the pelvic limbs. If encour-
aged to continue activity, thoracic limb involvement becomes 
apparent. Some animals demonstrate a fatigable palpebral reex, 
although this is not a reliable nding. Segmental spinal reexes 
are typically normal. Signs of pharyngeal or laryngeal dysfunc-
tion such as ptyalism (due to diculty swallowing, ch. 46), and 
dysphonia are variably present. Megaesophagus is present in 84% 
of dogs with generalized MG and in 40% of cats with the condi-
tion.32,38 Ventroexion of the neck due to cervical muscle weak-
ness occurs in both species but is more common in cats.41
Clinical Presentation
Animals with fulminant MG present with a rapid onset of severe 
diuse weakness that does not improve with rest. ese patients 
progress quickly to nonambulatory tetraparesis and lateral 
recumbency.5 Spinal reexes (ch. 241) may be diminished.5 Fre-
quent regurgitation associated with megaesophagus (ch. 259) is 
typical, and the development of aspiration pneumonia (ch. 217) is 
common. Additional signs may include respiratory muscle weak-
ness, and urinary retention (ch. 310). e presence of thymoma 
has been associated with the development of this severe form of 
the disease in both dogs and cats.30,32,38,42
Focal MG presents as weakness of an isolated muscle group or 
groups, most commonly the ocular, facial, esophageal, pharyn-
geal, or laryngeal muscles. Generalized appendicular weakness is 
not observed. Presenting complaints are referable to the muscle 
groups involved and oen include regurgitation, dysphagia, dys-
phonia, or strabismus.30,32,40
Several comorbid conditions have been associated with the devel-
opment of MG in veterinary patients, including thymoma or other 
neoplastic processes (ch. 331), hypothyroidism (chs. 285 and 286), 
hypoadrenocorticism (ch. 296), polymyositis, and masticatory myo-
sitis (ch. 258).32 e prevalence of concurrent thymoma is 3.4% in 
dogs and as high as 52% in cats.32,39 In hyperthyroid cats (ch. 287), 
an association between MG and initiation of methimazole treatment 
has also been reported in a small cohort of animals, where the condi-
tion resolved once the medication was discontinued.38
Diagnosis
A CBC may be normal in animals with MG, or may show evi-
dence of inammation when concurrent aspiration pneumonia is 
present. A serum biochemistry prole is helpful to exclude meta-
bolic causes of neuromuscular weakness. oracic radiography or 
computed tomography is useful to evaluate for thymoma or other 
neoplasms, and to screen for aspiration pneumonia. Abdominal 
ultrasound can assist in ruling out paraneoplastic causes.
e gold standard for diagnosis of generalized MG in dogs 
and cats is demonstration of anti-AChR autoantibodies in serum: 
measurement of species-specic anti-AChR autoantibodies will 
detect approximately 98% of canine cases.43 Positive antibody 
titers are also reported in a smaller percentage of dogs with focal 
MG. Antibody levels are highly variable between patients and 
do not correlate with clinical severity; however, within patients, 
a decrease in antibodies correlates with improvement in clinical 
signs and can be followed to assess remission of disease. Anti-
body titers may be falsely negative early in disease or if cortico-
steroids are administered prior to measurement.30 Retesting in 
1-2 months is suggested when either scenario is suspected.30 A 
small number of patients may have true seronegative MG reec-
tive of autoantibodies directed against other NMJ proteins. In 
these cases, response to anticholinesterase therapy and electrodi-
agnostic repetitive nerve stimulation testing (ch. 111) can support 
a diagnosis.30
Administration of the short-acting anticholinesterase drug 
edrophonium has been used historically as a diagnostic tool to 
assess improvements in muscle strength, gait, or the ability to 
swallow.34 is drug is no longer available in some countries and 
neostigmine may be used in its place. Either drug inhibits acetyl-
cholinesterase (AChE), allowing ACh accumulation in the NMJ, 
thereby improving neuromuscular transmission. Animals with 
MG will oen show improvement shortly aer receiving these 
drugs. e eect lasts for several minutes (edrophonium) to sev-
eral hours (neostigmine), followed by a return of signs. Improve-
ment is not completely specic to MG, as some animals with other 
causes of neuromuscular weakness can show improvement and 
not all animals with MG will improve.5,40 Precipitation of a cho-
linergic crisis is possible by overstimulation of AChR, leading to 

1611
CHAPTER 253
•
Neuromuscular Junction Disorders
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
signs such as worsened weakness, salivation, tremors, vomiting, 
bradycardia, bronchoconstriction, and respiratory distress. In the 
author’s experience, these signs are more common with neostig-
mine than edrophonium.5 Animals should be monitored closely 
aer administration of either drug, and atropine and equipment 
to provide intubation and respiratory support should be available.
Treatment and Outcome
Long-term treatment for animals with MG consists of treatment 
via AChE inhibitors, as well as immunosuppressive therapy to 
reduce autoantibody production against the AChR. Anticholin-
esterase drugs such as pyridostigmine bromide (oral) or neostig-
mine (intramuscular) are the mainstays of supportive therapy and 
they work by inhibiting AChE so that ACh remains within the 
synaptic cle longer.5 ese medications must be carefully titrated 
to eect, and neostigmine is generally used only in hospitalized 
animals in acute crisis or with profound regurgitation. Both med-
ications have a narrow therapeutic window, and signicant side-
eects such as bradycardia, hypersalivation, vomiting, diarrhea, 
muscle cramping, and weakness can occur. Clinical signs associ-
ated with excessive anticholinergic drug administration may be 
dicult to distinguish from those of uncontrolled MG and careful 
monitoring is required at the time of therapy initiation.
Immunosuppressive agents such as cyclosporine, mycopheno-
late mofetil (MMF), and azathioprine (chs. 144 and 169) are fre-
quently used in the treatment of MG to reduce levels of circulating 
autoantibodies.44 45 Extrapolating from the human literature, MMF 
was once considered the drug of choice for canine MG; however, 
a recent study comparing dogs treated with MMF and pyridostig-
mine to those treated with pyridostigmine alone showed no dier-
ence in survival time or remission rate between groups.45
Corticosteroids can also be eective in the treatment of MG, 
but should be used with caution in animals with aspiration pneu-
monia (ch. 227).5 Corticosteroids may potentiate muscle weak-
ness and exacerbate clinical signs in some patients, and a gradual 
increase in corticosteroid dose is recommended to help avoid this 
complication. Other strategies for immunomodulation may also 
be employed in patients with MG, including therapeutic plasma 
exchange and intravenous administration of immune globulin 
(IVIG).46 47 Neither technique has been thoroughly evaluated 
for MG in a controlled veterinary study, although their utility 
is supported by small case series and ecacy in other immune-
mediated diseases. A long-term spontaneous remission rate as 
high as 88% has been reported for dogs with MG; spontaneous 
remission is not a characteristic of feline MG.32 39
CONGENITAL MYASTHENIC SYNDROME
CMS has been reported in a number of pure and mixed-breed dogs, 
and cats.30 A deciency of the AChR is assumed in most breeds and 
has been documented in Jack Russell Terriers, Springer Spaniels, and 
Miniature Dachshunds.30 48 49 Abnormalities in ACh synthesis or 
in AChE function have also been reported. CMS oen aects mul-
tiple animals in the same litter and clinical signs are usually apparent 
beginning around 6-9 weeks of age. Generalized limb and cervical 
muscle weakness that worsen with activity are common. Megaesoph-
agus is variably present. An autosomal recessive-mode of inheritance 
has been demonstrated in Smooth Fox Terriers, Jack Russell Terriers, 
and Gammel Dansk Honsehund (GDH) dogs.50 51
Measurement of AChR autoantibodies is not useful in diagnosis 
of CMS. A denitive diagnosis is made in some cases by quanti-
cation of AChR in a muscle biopsy. Treatment with pyridostigmine 
oen results in improvement; however, long-term response to anti-
cholinesterase therapy is variable and many reports describe death or 
euthanasia of aected animals due to diculty in controlling clinical 
signs. Exceptions to this are CMS in Miniature Dachshunds, where 
signs spontaneously resolved by 6 months of age, and GDHs, which 
tend to remain stable with mild clinical signs.48 51
OTHER
Although not a disease of the NMJ, exercise-induced collapse (EIC) 
of Labrador Retrievers causes fatigue and accid para- or tetraparesis 
during or aer strenuous activity. Examination ndings are normal 
at rest. Ataxia, pelvic limb weakness, and collapse develop in asso-
ciation with intense or prolonged eld training, hunting, or vigorous 
play (Video 253.1). Clinical signs may progress to involve the thoracic 
limbs. Recovery occurs with rest, and most dogs are clinically normal 
within 30 minutes; however, severe episodes can result in death.52-54
e condition is heritable in Labradors, associated with an 
autosomal recessively inherited mutation (Arg256Leu) in the gene 
encoding for the protein dynamin 1 (DNM1). DNM1 is expressed 
at synaptic terminal membranes within the CNS and is important 
in the recycling of synaptic vesicles during high frequency neuro-
logical stimulation.52 55 A collapse phenotype is also recognized 
in Labradors and other breeds in the absence of homozygosity for 
the DNM-1 mutation.55
Dogs with DNM1-associated EIC (d-EIC) typically experi-
ence their rst episode of collapse before 2 years of age.54 Loss 
of the patellar reex is common during an episode, and dogs 
maintain normal mental status.54 56 Hyperthermia and elevated 
plasma lactate oen develop during an episode, but are not dis-
tinct from what is observed in normal exercising dogs.56 Serum 
lactate/pyruvate ratios are normal in dogs with EIC both at rest 
and during exercise, and muscle biopsies are unremarkable.56 A 
genetic test for the Arg256Leu DNM1 mutation is now commer-
cially available to assist in diagnosis. While there is no cure for 
EIC, aected dogs have an excellent prognosis if they refrain from 
intense physical activity known to trigger episodes.56
REFERENCES
1. Malik R, Farrow BR. Tick paralysis in North America and Australia. Vet Clin 
North Am Small Anim Pract. 1991;21:157-171.
2. Padula AM, Leister EM, Webster RA. Tick paralysis in dogs and cats in 
Australia: treatment and prevention deliverables from 100 years of research. Aust 
Vet J. 2020;98:53-59.
3. Schull DN, Litster AL, Atwell RB. Tick toxicity in cats caused by Ixodes species 
in Australia: a review of published literature. J Feline Med Surg. 2007;9:487-493.
4. Kocan AA. Tick paralysis. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1988;192:1498-1500.
5. Añor S. Acute lower motor neuron tetraparesis. Vet Clin North Am Small 
Anim Pract. 2014;44:1201-1222.
6. Ilkiw JE, Turner DM, Howlett CR. Infestation in the dog by the paralysis tick 
Ixodes holocyclus. 1. clinical and histological ndings. Aust Vet J. 1987;64:137-139.
7. Atwell RB, Campbell FE, Evans EA. Prospective survey of tick paralysis in 
dogs. Aust Vet J. 2001;79:412-418.
8. Barsanti JA, Walser M, Hatheway CL, etal. Type C botulism in American 
Foxhounds. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1978;172:809-813.
9. Farrow BR, Murrell WG, Revington ML, etal. Type C botulism in young 
dogs. Aust Vet J. 1983;60:374-377.
10. van Nes JJ, van der Most van Spijk D. Electrophysiological evidence of 
peripheral nerve dysfunction in six dogs with botulism type C. Res Vet Sci
1986;40:372-376.
11. Bruchim Y, Steinman A, Markovitz M, etal. Toxicological, bacteriological 
and serological diagnosis of botulism in a dog. Vet Rec. 2006;158:768-769.
12. Elad D, Yas-Natan E, Aroch I, etal. Natural Clostridium botulinum type C 
toxicosis in a group of cats. J Clin Microbiol. 2004;42:5406-5408.
13. Humeau Y, Doussau F, Grant NJ, etal. How botulinum and tetanus neuro-
toxins block neurotransmitter release. Biochimie. 2000;82:427-446.
14. Nemath E, Sterczer A, Mathe A, etal. Clinical case of botulism in three 
dogs. Magy Allatorv Lapja. 2003;125:608-616.
15. Coleman ES. Clostridial neurotoxins: tetanus and botulism. Compend 
Contin Educ Pract Vet. 1998;20:1089.
16. Pérez ML, Fox K, Schaer M. A retrospective evaluation of coral snake 
envenomation in dogs and cats: 20 cases (1996-2011). J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San 
Antonio). 2012;22:682-689.
17. Ong HM, Witham A, Kelers K, etal. Presumed secondary immune-
mediated haemolytic anaemia following elapid snake envenomation and its 
treatment in four dogs. Aust Vet J. 2015;93:319-326.
18. Padula AM, Leister E. Eastern brown snake (Pseudonaja textilis) envenom-
ation in dogs and cats: clinical signs, coagulation changes, brown snake venom 
