CHAPTER 216
•
Small Airway Diseases
1173
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
149. Reinero CR, Decile KC, Byerly JR, etal. Eects of drug treatment on in-
ammation and hyperreactivity of airways and on immune variables in cats with 
experimentally induced asthma. Am J Vet Res. 2005;66:1121-1127.
150. Leemans J, Kirschvink N, Bernaerts F, etal. Salmeterol or doxycycline 
do not inhibit acute bronchospasm and airway inammation in cats with 
experimentally-induced asthma. Vet J. 2012;192:49-56.
151. Leemans J, Kirschvink N, Clercx C, etal. Eect of short-term oral and 
inhaled corticosteroids on airway inammation and responsiveness in a feline 
acute asthma model. Vet J. 2012;192:41-48.
152. Cohn LA, DeClue AE, Cohen RL, etal. Eects of uticasone propionate dos-
age in an experimental model of feline asthma. J Feline Med Surg. 2010;12:91-96.
153. Reinero CR, Delgado C, Spinka C, etal. Enantiomer-specic eects of 
albuterol on airway inammation in healthy and asthmatic cats. Int Arch Allergy 
Immunol. 2009;150:43-50.
154. García-Guasch L, Caro-Vadillo A, Manubens-Grau J, etal. Pulmonary 
function in obese vs non-obese cats. J Feline Med Surg. 2015;17:494-499.
155. Trzil JE, Masseau I, Webb TL, etal. Long-term evaluation of mesenchymal 
stem cell therapy in a feline model of chronic allergic asthma. Clin Exp Allergy
2014;44:1546-1557.
Small Airway Diseases
Carol Reinero
OVERVIEW
DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
S
mall airway diseases, also called bronchiolar disorders, repre-
sent specic diseases involving pathological changes of small 
airways <2 mm in diameter lacking cartilage. ese unique 
anatomic units are interposed between the upstream larger airways 
(conducting airways) and the downstream pulmonary acini (gas-
exchange units) and can serve as the primary targets for a variety of 
dierent insults. In cats and dogs, there are no pathognomonic clini-
cal signs or cytologic ndings (e.g., from lung ne-needle aspirates 
or airway lavage) for bronchiolar disorders. Due to their small size, 
small airways are not visible on thoracic radiographs or even com-
puted tomographic (CT) scans of healthy individuals. While diseased 
bronchioles can be appreciated on CT scans and while pathologists 
can microscopically visualize disease involvement of the small air-
ways, historically there has been a lack of crosstalk between veteri-
nary clinicians, radiologists and pathologists. Collectively, all these 
factors have contributed to a lack of recognition of small airway dis-
eases as distinct clinical entities.
Recently, a classication scheme was proposed for bronchiolar 
disorders in cats with the caveat that as understanding of small air-
way diseases improved that further renement of the scheme would 
be needed.1 e proposed classication split small airway disorders 
into three categories: (1) primary bronchiolar disorders, (2) second-
ary bronchiolar disorders from extension of large airway disease, and 
(3) secondary bronchiolar disorders as a component of interstitial 
lung diseases (ILDs).1 is classication was modeled aer a human 
scheme2 with the intent to group historical ndings, clinical features, 
CT ndings, and histopathologic ndings into discrete syndromes 
that may have similar etiologies, clinical courses, and treatments.
Unlike in cats, there has been no proposed classication for 
bronchiolar disorders in dogs, with only sporadic case reports 
and small case series suggesting that pet dogs also develop lesions 
associated with their small airways.3-7 Experimentally, bron-
chiolar disease could also be induced in dogs although the clini-
cal syndromes resulting from these exposures were classied as 
parenchymal disease (pneumonia and interstitial lung disease).8 9
ETIOLOGY
Inciting causes of bronchiolar disorders in people vary and include 
environmental exposures, infection, drugs, chronic aspiration, 
neoplasia, or immune-mediated disease. Dogs and cats share the 
environment with humans and are susceptible to many of the same 
triggers, including particulate matter in air pollution. Dogs in pol-
luted outdoor environments have been reported to sustain injury to 
their bronchioles.10 Mineral dust airway disease from inhaled inor-
ganic dusts has been described in a cat.1 Exposure to various envi-
ronmental chemicals, gases, smoke and other inhaled particulates 
as a cause for bronchiolar disorders still needs investigation in vet-
erinary medicine and underscores the need for a thorough history 
from owners about potential exposures. e role of some of the other 
aforementioned causes in inducing small airway disease in cats has 
been reviewed recently1 and many if not all of these are likely to aect 
canine small airways.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Bronchiolar disease can lead to an obstructive or a restrictive pheno-
type. ese disorders can be acute or chronic in nature. Inammatory 
(infectious or noninfectious), brotic and neoplastic processes can 
lead to small airway disorders when bronchioles <2 mm in diameter 
are aected. Fibrosis is considered a sequel to injury and inamma-
tion such that in the end stage of disease, the underlying inam-
matory response may be missed. If histologic evaluation is used for 
characterizing the microscopic features of the lesions, it is critical to 
examine multiple areas of the lung to assess for early lesions, patchy 
lesions, and subtle lesions. e extent of disease (i.e., number of small 
airways involved, severity of airway occlusion or luminal narrow-
ing, and involvement of upstream large airways or downstream gas 
exchange units) contributes to the type and severity of clinical signs.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
It is important to understand that there is/are no pathognomonic 
clinical sign(s) in dogs or cats with small airway disease. Bron-
chiolar disorders must thus remain on the dierential list for 
many respiratory signs. As we are still learning more about these 
syndromes, it will be critical to thoroughly investigate potential 
underlying exposures in the environment by taking a comprehen-
sive history and to combine that with ndings on physical exami-
nation, and ultimately a more sophisticated set of diagnostics.
HISTORY
Historical questions (ch. 2) should start with an understanding of the 
environment of the dog or cat. Does the cat live outdoors, indoors, 
or both? Is the setting rural, suburban, or urban and what is known 
CHAPTER 216
ACRONYM
CT computed tomography

SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1174
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
about environmental air quality in those regions? Is there exposure 
to smoke (cigarette, incense, replace, wood-burning stove, wildre 
smoke) or vapor (e.g., e-cigarettes, which may emit nicotine, form-
aldehyde, acetone, heavy metals, and volatile organic compounds)? 
Is there use of plug-in or canned air fresheners or other fragrances 
or essential oils? Is there a possibility the house might have radon 
or mold? Has there been recent construction or renovations in the 
home, including use of paint or solvents? Which cleaning products 
are used? Is there exposure to pesticides, herbicides, or heavy metals? 
For cats, what type of cat litter is used? It will take further study in 
large numbers of dogs and cats to determine if any of these are direct 
triggers of small airway inammation, brosis, or both. Knowledge 
of exposures also plays a role in treatment to promote a healthy respi-
ratory tract whether or not environmental substances directly or 
indirectly promote inammation and tissue injury.
Along with environmental exposures, it would be helpful to ques-
tion owners about any other systemic signs of illness that might point 
toward an underlying infectious, immune-mediated, or neoplastic 
disorder. Other respiratory clinical signs, including an association 
with drinking or eating (that could indicate the potential for repeti-
tive macro- or micro-aspiration; ch. 221) should be identied. Own-
ers should be asked about administration of any drugs (prescribed 
or over-the-counter), nutraceuticals, homeopathic remedies, and any 
other alternative medical therapies. Finally, owners should be ques-
tioned about the onset of signs (subacute, acute, or insidious) and if 
disease is static or progressive over time.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION (CH. 3)
In the author’s experience, dogs and cats with bronchiolar 
disease have been described to have a range of clinical signs 
including cough (ch. 34), wheeze, tachypnea, increased expira-
tory eort, mixed inspiratory/expiratory eort (ch. 37), exer-
cise intolerance, syncope (ch. 40), and cyanosis (ch. 27), and 
the presence of these should be recorded. ere should be an 
attempt to elicit cough with gentle tracheal pressure (Videos 
3.11, 34.5). Evidence of systemic signs of illness, such as poor 
body condition or documented unintentional weight loss (ch. 
18), and fever (ch. 16), should be noted, and a fundic examina-
tion should be performed (ch. 13). Careful attention should be 
paid to cardiopulmonary auscultation (ch. 3). Cardiac murmurs 
(ch. 38) or arrhythmias (ch. 230) may suggest comorbid car-
diac disease. Wheezes, crackles and increased bronchovesicular 
sounds may be heard (ch. 212).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
e most common disease mimics depend on whether the disease 
process is localized to the small airways alone, or if it involves 
the large airways, pulmonary acini, or all three anatomic regions. 
Many of the disorders isolated to the small airways (especially 
constrictive/obliterative bronchiolitis) present as an obstructive 
airway disorder, including patients having increased expiratory 
eort and air trapping noted on radiography. In cats, asthma 
would be the top dierential. If large and small airways are 
involved in tandem, cough frequently predominates as the main 
clinical sign (ch. 34) and any cause of cough (i.e., respiratory, car-
diac, aerodigestive) should be considered as a dierential until 
a more comprehensive diagnostic evaluation can be performed. 
If small airways and the parenchyma are aected, or if the large 
and small airways and the parenchyma are aected, the disease 
may present as a restrictive lung disease. Top dierentials would 
include infection, neoplasia and interstitial lung diseases. ese 
are only a few general guidelines for determining likely dieren-
tials, but it is important to remember that the small airway dis-
orders are very diverse, and our understanding of them is still in 
its infancy.
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
In general, the diagnostic evaluation of a dog or cat with respira-
tory signs should start with localizing disease to the likely anatomic 
regions of the respiratory tract (ch. 212). e clinical signs associ-
ated with small airway disease resemble those causing intrathoracic 
airway and parenchymal disease. While thoracic radiographs are 
oen the initial diagnostic test to be performed, they are incapable 
of detecting bronchiolar disease. is may be one reason why cats 
“diagnosed” with asthma or chronic bronchitis frequently have unre-
markable thoracic radiographs: these cats may instead have primary 
bronchiolar disease. oracic radiographic lung patterns may sug-
gest the predominant region of disease with a bronchial pattern 
reecting large airway disease and interstitial and alveolar patterns 
reecting pulmonary parenchymal disease. Regardless of lung pat-
tern, and even with unremarkable thoracic radiographs, small airway 
disease must always remain a dierential diagnosis.
Ancillary diagnostics including complete blood count, infec-
tious disease testing, pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas (as sole 
diagnostics or in tandem with a 6-minute walk test in dogs), lung 
ultrasound, respiratory uoroscopy, and videouoroscopic swal-
low study (Videos 221.1, 259.2, 259.3) can be considered prior to 
diagnostics requiring anesthesia (ch. 212). Additionally, screen-
ing other regions of the body for infectious disease involvement 
or a primary neoplasm can be performed.
e author strongly advocates anesthetized CT scans in lieu of 
awake or sedated CT scans as the latter are usually compromised by 
motion artifact, variable ination and poor detail of CT lung patterns 
required to better identify and characterize small airway disease. e 
most optimal thoracic CT study would employ ventilator-assisted 
paired inspiratory and expiratory breath-holds to help detect evi-
dence of dynamic changes.11 Patients with small airway disease can 
have direct and indirect CT signs. Direct CT signs of bronchiolar 
disease include tree-in-bud pattern (nodular opacities connected to 
branching linear opacities), bronchiolectasis (dilation; Figure 216.1) 
and peribronchiolar ground-glass opacity or consolidation.1 Indi-
rect CT signs of bronchiolar disease include mosaic attenuation sec-
ondary to air trapping (requiring paired inspiratory and expiratory 
breath-hold series) or, rarely, mosaic perfusion.1 Aside from provid-
ing evidence of small airway disease, thoracic CTs can demonstrate 
abnormalities associated with the upstream larger airways and the 
downstream pulmonary parenchyma. If other regions of the respira-
tory tract demonstrate abnormalities, it might indicate either a sec-
ondary bronchiolar disorder or the presence of unrelated comorbid 
disease.
oracic CT studies are one of two tests to denitively diagnose 
small airway disease, but additional diagnostics are required to deter-
mine the underlying cause. Cytologic evaluation of airway lavage (ch. 
93) or pulmonary ne-needle aspiration are most helpful when iden-
tifying the presence of infectious organisms or neoplastic cells; oth-
erwise, cytologic evidence of inammation is non-specic and can be 
appreciated with many types of large airway, small airway and paren-
chymal disease. e other diagnostic test to denitively diagnose 
small airway disease is histopathologic evaluation of a tissue sample. 
Lack of routine antemortem lung biopsies has hampered our recog-
nition and understanding of small airway disorders. Histopathologic 
evaluation has the potential to most fully characterize the type, extent 
and severity of lesions, but expertise in respiratory pathology is likely 
to be required until these are more commonly understood disorders.
TREATMENT
Currently, there is insucient knowledge of bronchiolar disorders 
to know how to best treat these diseases. In general, treatment can 
be divided into three categories: (1) strategies to promote respiratory 
health, (2) addressing comorbid respiratory and cardiovascular con-
ditions and (3) specic therapy to target the primary disease process.
