SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
2036
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
62. Syme HM, Scott-Moncrie JCR, Treadwell NG, etal. Hyperadrenocorticism 
associated with excessive sex hormone production by an adrenocortical tumor in 
two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2001;219:1725-1728.
63. Norman EJ, ompson H, Mooney CT. Dynamic adrenal function testing in 
eight dogs with hyperadrenocorticism associated with adrenocortical neoplasia. 
Vet Rec. 1999;144:551-554.
64. Frank LA, Mullins R, Rohrbach BW. Variability of estradiol concentration 
in normal dogs. Vet Dermatol. 2010;21:490-493.
65. Chapman PS, Mooney CT, Ede J, etal. Evaluation of the basal and post-
adrenocorticotrophic hormone serum concentrations of 17-hydroxyprogesterone 
for the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. Vet Rec. 2003;153:771-775.
66. Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ, Boozer AL, etal. Serum 17-alpha-
hydroxyprogesterone and corticosterone concentrations in dogs with non-adrenal 
neoplasia and dogs with suspected hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2005;227:1762-1767.
67. Monroe WE, Panciera DL, Zimmerman KL. Concentrations of noncortisol 
adrenal steroids in response to ACTH in dogs with adrenal-dependent hyperadre-
nocorticism, pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism, and nonadrenal illness. 
J Vet Intern Med. 2012;26:945-952.
68. Hill KE, Scott-Moncrie JCR, Koshko M, etal. Secretion of sex hormones in 
dogs with adrenal dysfunction. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2005;226:556-561.
Hypoadrenocorticism
Rebecka S. Hess
INTRODUCTION
I
n 1855, Dr. omas Addison published 
a case series of 11 individuals, each 
described as having a disease of the 
supra-renal capsule (adrenal cortex).1 Hypo-
adrenocorticism (HA) is, therefore, oen 
referred to as “Addison’s disease.” e adrenal 
cortex synthesizes and secretes glucocorti-
coids and mineralocorticoids that are essen-
tial for life. e cortex is divided into 3 layers: 
the outermost zona glomerulosa, the widest 
middle zona fasciculata, and the innermost 
zona reticularis. Hypofunction or dysfunc-
tion of the cortex, such as that seen in HA, 
can be life threatening. Since HA is common 
in dogs and rare in cats, the discussion that 
follows pertains to dogs and is followed by a 
short discussion of the condition in cats.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
AUTO-ANTIBODIES AGAINST 
STEROIDOGENIC ENZYME: 
21-HYDROXYLASE
Glucocorticoids are secreted from all 3 layers 
of the adrenal cortex. e mineralocorticoid 
aldosterone is synthesized and secreted from the zona glomeru-
losa, the only cortical layer which contains the enzyme aldoste-
rone synthase (adrenal physiology is discussed in ch. 293; see 
Figure 293.1). In humans, HA is a rare autoimmune disorder. Most 
people with HA have antibodies against the steroidogenic enzyme 
21-hydroxylase, present in all 3 cortical layers but its lowest con-
centrations are in the zona glomerulosa.2 Antibodies directed at the 
21-hydroxylase enzyme are believed to cause autoimmune destruc-
tion of the adrenal cortex.3 Although 21-hydroxylase antibodies 
have not been identied in dogs with HA, P450 enzyme antibod-
ies, more common in females than males, have been documented 
in 24% of dogs with HA vs 1% in non-HA dogs.4 A longitudinal 
study demonstrated these antibodies do not persist over time in 
most dogs with HA.5 Lymphoplasmacytic adrenalitis characterized 
by CD4+ T-cell inammation has also been documented in some 
dogs with HA, further supporting this being an immune-mediated 
disease in most aected dogs.6
GENETIC PREDISPOSITION TO POLYGENIC IMMUNE-
MEDIATED HYPOADRENOCORTICISM
e specic dog breeds at increased risk of developing HA pro-
vide strong evidence of the etiology having a genetic component. 
Familial HA has been reported in Leonberger and Pomeranian 
dogs while Great Danes, Standard Poodles, and Bearded Collies 
are also at increased risk.7-10 A genome-wide association study 
of HA in Bearded Collies revealed their mode of inheritance is 
polygenic, consisting of a single nucleotide polymorphism on 
canine chromosome 18 plus 3 other smaller eect loci.10 e 
mode of inheritance of HA in Standard Poodles is also likely to be 
polygenic.11 Several genetic studies have linked HA to immune 
function genes. e cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 
4, a T-cell regulator, has been associated with HA in 3 other 
predisposed breeds: Portuguese Water Dogs, Cocker Spaniels, 
and Springer Spaniels.12 13 Another important immune func-
tion gene, the major histocompatibility complex, is associated 
with HA in numerous breeds and is sex specific in Standard 
Poodles.13-18 However, the methodologies employed in some 
studies identifying an association between HA and the major 
histocompatibility complex have come under question and 
further studies are needed.19 Allelic variation in the immune 
function gene, PTPN22 is also linked to HA in Cocker Span-
iels.20 Neutered dogs appear to be at increased risk.21 Impor-
tantly, it is not clear if any genetic differences are functionally 
responsible for formation of anti-adrenal autoantibodies that 
destroy the adrenal cortex.
CHAPTER 296
ACRONYMS
ACTH adrenocorticotropic 
hormone
ACTHst ACTH stimulation 
test
BG blood glucose
CBC complete blood count
CRH corticotropin-releasing 
hormone
DOCP desoxycorticoste-
rone pivalate
ECG electrocardiogram
GI gastrointestinal
HA hypoadrenocorticism
hyperK hyperkalemia
hypoNa hyponatremia
IV intravenous(ly)
K potassium
[K] potassium concentra-
tion
Na sodium
[Na] sodium concentration
PE physical examination
PU polyuria
PU/PD polyuria/polydipsia
RAAS renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system
SQ subcutaneous(ly)
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic asset onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Client Information Sheet.

CHAPTER 296
•
Hypoadrenocorticism
2037
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
CLASSIFICATION
PRIMARY HYPOADRENOCORTICISM
Naturally occurring primary failure of the adrenal cortex is the 
most common form of HA, classically characterized by decreases 
in both glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids. “Atypical pri-
mary HA” describes a syndrome in which glucocorticoid secre-
tion is absent but serum sodium concentration ([Na]) and 
potassium concentration ([K]) are normal.22 23 Some dogs ini-
tially diagnosed as having atypical primary HA develop hypo-
natremia (hypoNa) and hyperkalemia (hyperK) with time.7 22-24
Others maintain normal electrolyte concentrations for years.22-24
Interestingly, some dogs with documented depletion of glucocor-
ticoids and normal [Na] and [K] have low aldosterone concen-
trations, suggesting that maintaining normal [Na] and [K] may 
not be completely dependent on aldosterone, that serum electro-
lyte concentrations may not be indicative of “active” hormone at 
receptors levels, or that the assays employed have limitations.24 If 
HA in dogs develops secondary to anti-21-hydroxylase antibod-
ies, it is possible that destruction of the zona glomerulosa, the 
layer in which aldosterone is produced, could lag behind because 
the concentration of 21-hydroxylase in this layer is lower than in 
the other 2 cortical layers.
Primary HA, whether typical or atypical, develops as a result 
of adrenal cortex atrophy or destruction (Figure 296.1). Rarely, 
primary HA results from a destructive inltrative disease, such 
as neoplasia, the most common cause of this rare presentation. 
Tuberculosis, fungal diseases, other granulomatous or infectious 
diseases, hemorrhage, and infarcts are possible causes of HA, but 
are not well documented in dogs.25-30 Transient ketoconazole- and 
phenobarbital-induced HA have been reported as has a rare HA 
dog with aldosterone depletion preceding glucocorticoid deple-
tion.31-34 Primary transient or permanent iatrogenic HA can be 
caused by administration of o,p′-DDD (mitotane) or trilostane 
(ch. 293). Isolated hypoaldosteronism (without glucocorticoid 
deciency) has been reported but is extremely rare.
SECONDARY HYPOADRENOCORTICISM
Secondary HA is rare and involves pituitary or hypothalamic failure 
secondary to neoplastic inltration, inammation, infection, infarct, 
or trauma, which can lead to impaired secretion of pituitary adre-
nocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) or hypothalamic corticotropin-
releasing hormone (CRH).35-38 Neurologic clinical signs and other 
hormonal decits in these dogs are inconsistent. Enigmatic idio-
pathic secondary HA has been reported in dogs without neuro-
logic signs, with long-term survival when given only glucocorticoid 
supplementation. Since the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system 
(RAAS) is independent of pituitary or hypothalamic control, these 
uncommon diseases involve only glucocorticoid deciency and nor-
mal [Na] and [K]. Unlike atypical primary HA with normal [Na] 
and [K], in secondary HA ACTH concentrations are low (Figure 
296.1). Iatrogenic secondary HA is expected aer hypophysectomy 
or abrupt withdrawal of long-term steroid administration and is not 
usually a diagnostic challenge.39 Exogenous steroids suppress ACTH 
secretion (Figure 296.1) and time is required for atrophied cells to 
regain function aer abrupt stoppage, explaining recommendations 
for always tapering glucocorticoid therapy.
SIGNALMENT, HISTORY, SIGNS, PHYSICAL 
EXAMINATION (PE)
AGE
HA is a disease of young to middle-aged dogs; median age at diag-
nosis is 3-4 years. But dogs as young as 2 months and as old as 12 
years have been diagnosed (Table 296.1). Females are at increased 
risk.7 40 41 HA can develop in any breed but specic genetic breed 
predispositions are recognized, as previously discussed.41 42 e 
overall incidence of HA is 2.3 cases per 10,000 dog years at risk.41
HISTORY AND CLINICAL SIGNS
Clinical signs can be mild, vague, wax and wane over time, or 
seem to develop in mere hours into a life-threatening crisis. 
Figure 296.1
e pituitary-adrenal axis in 
normal dogs (A); in dogs with loss of adreno-
cortical function and excess adrenocortico-
tropic hormone (ACTH) secretion due to a 
lack of negative feedback (the most common 
form of hypoadrenocorticism) (B); in dogs 
with failure to secrete ACTH and secondary 
atrophy of the adrenal cortex, specically the 
zona fasciculata and zona reticularis (C); and 
in dogs that are chronically overtreated with 
exogenous glucocorticoids, causing insucien-
cy in pituitary ACTH secretion and secondary 
atrophy of the adrenal cortex (D). A, Adrenal; 
CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone; P, pitu-
itary. Solid lines represent “normal” hormone 
concentrations; bold solid lines represent in-
creased concentrations; dashed lines represent 
decreased concentrations. (From Feldman EC, 
Nelson RW, Reusch CE, etal. Canine and Feline 
Endocrinology and Reproduction. 4th ed. Saun-
ders; 2015.)
Hypothalamus
CRH
P
A
A
ACTH
Cortisol
(negative
feedback)
Hypothalamus
CRH?
P
A
A
ACTH
increased
Cortisol
decreased
Hypothalamus
CRH?
P
A
A
ACTH
decreased
Cortisol
decreased
A
B
C
D
Hypothalamus
CRH?
P
A
A
ACTH
decreased
Chronic
iatrogenic
corticosteroids
suddenly
stopped
