265
SECTION III
Differential Diagnosis for 
Clinicopathologic Abnormalities
Anemia and Erythrocytosis
Tracy Stokol
A
nemia is dened as reduced red blood 
cell (RBC) mass and is recognized by 
a packed cell volume (PCV), hema-
tocrit (HCT), hemoglobin (HB) concentra-
tion, or RBC count below the lower limit of 
established reference intervals for that spe-
cies. Conversely, erythrocytosis is dened 
as increased RBC mass and is recognized by 
values that are higher than the upper refer-
ence limit for these tests. Although polycy-
themia and erythrocytosis have been used interchangeably, they 
are not identical. Polycythemia refers to increases in any cell in 
blood (RBCs, leukocytes, platelets), whereas polycythemia vera 
is a chronic myeloproliferative disease, specically chronic ery-
throid leukemia (ch. 173). Erythrocytosis specically means an 
absolute increase in RBCs (or a true increase in RBC mass) and 
will be used herein. In veterinary medicine, we typically use the 
PCV or HCT (the default applied herein) as the main indicator 
of RBC mass, whereas HB concentration is standard in human 
medicine. e reason for the discrepancy between disciplines is 
unclear; however, it may be related to the higher likelihood of 
postprandial lipemia in small animal patients, which can result 
in false increases in HB concentration. It should be noted that 
although PCV and HCT are used synonymously, they represent 
2 dierent measurements. e PCV is a directly measured value 
from a centrifuged microhematocrit tube whereas the HCT is a 
calculated result from a hematology analyzer that uses mean cell 
volume (MCV) and RBC count (HCT = MCV × RBC). us, the 
HCT will be inuenced by artifactual or real changes in the MCV, 
such as storage-associated RBC swelling,1 which are less likely 
to aect the PCV. Internal studies done at the author’s institu-
tion with the ADVIA 120 hematology analyzer showed that the 
PCV is generally lower than the HCT, with a median dierence 
(PCV− HCT) of −0.02 L/L (range, −0.06 to 0.03 L/L) and −0.03 
L/L (range, −0.06 to 0 L/L) in clinically healthy dogs (n = 64) and 
cats (n = 69), respectively.
e rst step in interpretation of HCT results is to decide 
whether the result is abnormal for that individual animal and 
due to a disease process versus an expected physiologic change, 
i.e., results should be interpreted in context of patient signalment 
(breed, age, sex, reproductive status). e use of reference inter-
vals can be misleading because they are usually established from 
presumably healthy adult animals of various breeds and will be 
insensitive to breed- and age-specic changes.2-6 For instance, 
a HCT of 0.45 L/L (45%) is within established reference inter-
vals for most laboratories, but would be compatible with anemia 
in Greyhounds, which typically have higher HCTs than other 
breeds.3 Reference intervals can be broad and may be insensitive 
to changes in an individual animal that are beyond analytic or 
biologic variation. us, the author considers it worthwhile to 
obtain baseline hemogram (complete blood count [CBC]) and 
clinical chemistry results when a dog or cat has reached adult-
hood (around 12 months of age in small or medium dog breeds 
and cats and 2 years of age in large dog breeds), so that individual-
specic abnormalities can be identied using a reference change 
value or critical dierence approach.7 Reference change values 
have been established for hematologic measurands in dogs and 
cats.8 9 However, these values are dependent on the cohort of ani-
mals (lower variation is expected with laboratory-bred animals), 
instrument, and analytical method used in the study. Ultimately, 
clinicians use their own judgment to determine if the degree of 
change from an established baseline is excessive for an individual 
animal. Once anemia or erythrocytosis has been conclusively 
identied, a systemic approach can be used to determine the 
pathophysiologic mechanism(s) and, hopefully, the underlying 
cause for the abnormalities.
CHAPTER 57
ACRONYMS
CBC complete blood count
HCT hematocrit
HB hemoglobin
IMHA immune-mediated 
hemolytic anemia
MCV mean cell volume
PCV packed cell volume
RBC red blood cell
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic asset onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Video.

SECTION III
•
Dierential Diagnosis for Clinicopathologic Abnormalities
266
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ANEMIA
Anemia is the most common hematologic abnormality encoun-
tered in veterinary clinical practice. It can be the cause of disease 
(e.g., immune-mediated hemolytic anemia [IMHA]) or a marker 
of underlying disease (e.g., cancer, chronic kidney disease). ere 
are three main pathophysiologic mechanisms for anemia: hemor-
rhage (loss), hemolysis (decreased lifespan), and decreased produc-
tion. Distinguishing between these mechanisms is important for 
identifying the underlying disease or cause of anemia (Box 57.1) 
and is best accomplished using a combination of signalment, his-
torical information, clinical signs, imaging ndings, and clinical 
pathologic results. Anemia can be multifactorial in origin, which 
can complicate discovery of the underlying cause. ere are always 
going to be those challenging and potentially frustrating cases, 
where the mechanism and cause of the anemia remain ambiguous.
MECHANISMS OF ANEMIA
If an anemia is “adequately” regenerative (see approach below), 
the underlying mechanism is hemorrhage or hemolysis. Dis-
tinguishing between these 2 mechanisms relies on identifying a 
source of hemorrhage or a cause for hemolysis on a blood smear 
examination (Figures 57.1 and 57.2; Box 57.1). In some cases, the 
anemia may be due to a combination of hemorrhage and hemoly-
sis, with one process being the main cause.
Hemorrhage
is can be internal (into a body cavity) or external (“lost” from 
the body, e.g., from gastrointestinal hemorrhage). A low total 
protein concentration (especially the combination of low albu-
min and globulins) would support the conclusion that an ane-
mia is due to hemorrhage, but it is not specic for hemorrhage. 
A normal total protein concentration also does not rule out 
hemorrhage, since peracute hemorrhage, internal bleeding, or 
chronic intermittent external blood loss may not decrease total 
protein concentrations. If external hemorrhage is chronic and 
occult, iron deciency can ensue once iron stores are depleted. 
Iron deciency should be suspected if hypochromic RBCs are 
seen on a blood smear (Figure 57.2) and a CBC shows micro-
cytic hypochromic RBC indices. Iron concentrations and per-
centage saturation of transferrin are usually quite low in serum 
or plasma with iron deciency anemia, but can also be decreased 
with inammatory disease.10 Newer diagnostic tests for HB 
content in reticulocytes (e.g., reticulocyte hemoglobin content 
[CHr]; ch. 172) can help support a diagnosis of iron deciency 
anemia in dogs but these results are not usually provided as part 
of a routine CBC and are not specic for iron deciency, being 
abnormal in dogs with inammatory disease, portosystemic 
shunts, or breed-associated microcytosis.10 11
Hemolysis (ch. )
A hemolytic anemia is due to premature phagocytosis of RBCs by 
macrophages in the spleen, liver, and bone marrow, called extra-
vascular hemolysis (because it is occurring “outside” vessels in tis-
sues). Extravascular hemolysis is occurring in all cases of hemolytic 
anemia. However, with certain causes, there may be a concurrent 
intravascular component, where the RBC membrane physically 
ruptures within the circulation, liberating free HB. It is important 
to identify which animals with a hemolytic anemia are suering 
from concurrent intravascular hemolysis, because this helps nar-
row down the dierential diagnosis (Box 57.1) and has negative 
prognostic implications. Intravascular hemolysis is characterized 
by hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria. Ghost RBCs and relevant 
RBC changes (e.g., Heinz bodies reecting oxidant injury; Figure 
57.2) or infectious organisms (e.g., Babesia canis) may be seen on 
blood smears, but should not be relied upon for distinguishing 
intravascular from extravascular hemolysis. Ghost RBCs are not 
specic for intravascular hemolysis, being more commonly seen 
with any cause of invitro or artifactual hemolysis (e.g., lysis of cells 
in stored blood) or as a consequence of blood smear preparation. 
A hemolytic anemia is usually secondary to RBC abnormalities, 
such as membrane-bound immunoglobulins or complement in 
IMHA, although abnormally activated or neoplastic macrophages 
in histiocytic disorders can inappropriately remove normal RBCs 
(ch. 328).12 Hemolytic anemia is typically associated with a normal 
or high total protein concentration and can result in bilirubinemia, 
especially due to unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin. However, cho-
lestasis with increases in conjugated (direct) bilirubin may occur 
and the latter may even dominate in dogs with IMHA and sick ano-
rectic cats (presumably due to bile sludging). Liver enzyme activi-
ties may be increased from hypoxic injury but can be normal. Iron 
concentrations and percentage saturation of transferrin are con-
sistently increased in the plasma or serum of dogs and cats with 
hemolytic anemia, and siderocytes (RBCs with faint iron inclu-
sions; Figure 57.2) may be seen on a blood smear. None of these 
results is specic for hemolytic anemia and should be considered 
as supportive, not conrmatory, results. e lack of these ndings 
does not rule out hemolysis either.
Decreased Production (ch. )
If the anemia is not acute and is non-regenerative or “inade-
quately” regenerative, this indicates a problem with RBC produc-
tion in the bone marrow, of which there are many causes (Box 
57.1). Clues as to the mechanism of a non-regenerative anemia 
can be gleaned from the severity of the anemia, RBC indices, and 
other hematologic ndings, particularly concurrent cytopenias 
(specically, neutropenia and thrombocytopenia) and abnormal 
(neoplastic) cells in blood smears (Figure 57.3). A mild to moder-
ate normocytic normochromic anemia is the most common form 
of non-regenerative anemia and is usually due to extramedul-
lary disease, particularly anemia of inammatory disease (used 
to be called anemia of chronic disease) and cancer-associated 
anemia (which is multifactorial, but does involve inammatory 
cytokines).13,14 Suppressed RBC production in the bone mar-
row from concurrent disease or inammation can dampen the 
regenerative response to a primarily hemorrhagic or hemolytic 
anemia so that it becomes less regenerative than expected or even 
“inadequately” regenerative. e most common causes of a severe 
non-regenerative anemia, without other cytopenias, are immune-
mediated conditions in dogs and immune-mediated conditions 
and feline leukemia virus infection in cats (ch. 199).13,14 Feline 
leukemia virus-associated hematologic disorders are infrequent 
since the advent of vaccination.
A MECHANISTIC APPROACH TO ANEMIA
A stepwise approach can be used for distinguishing between 
mechanisms of anemia and is based on asking these 4 questions 
(Box 57.2):
1. How acute is the anemia? is is important for assessing 
whether an anemia is regenerative or not (question 2, below). 
e bone marrow takes approximately 3-5 days to mount a 
regenerative response. An anemia of acute onset may appear 
“non-regenerative” if the bone marrow has had insucient 
time to respond (termed pre-regenerative). Clinical signs and 
history can help with determining duration of anemia, but 
anemia frequently manifests with vague clinical signs that 
may be missed by the owner. Unless there has been a known 
traumatic event, a regenerative response should be manifest by 
the time of presentation in most patients. e expected mar-
row response will also depend on the degree of anemia and 
