SECTION XXII
•
Cancer
2240
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
ALL acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia
AML acute myeloid 
leukemia
BM bone marrow
CBC complete blood count
CCNU lomustine
CHOP cyclophosphamide 
(C), doxorubicin 
(hydroxydaunorubicin 
[H]), vincristine (Oncovin 
[O]), and prednisone (P)
CLL chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia
CML chronic myeloid 
leukemia
CNS central nervous 
system
COP cyclophosphamide, 
vincristine, prednisone
CSF cerebrospinal fluid
CT computed tomography
DLBCL diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma
EATCL enteropathy 
associated T-cell 
lymphoma
FeLV feline leukemia virus
FIV feline 
immunodeficiency virus
GI gastrointestinal
Ig immunoglobulin
LSA lymphoma 
(lymphosarcoma)
MHC major 
histocompatibility 
complex
MI mitotic index
MM multiple myeloma
MRD myeloma-related 
disorders
MST median survival time
PARR PCR for antigen 
receptor rearrangement
PCR polymerase chain 
reaction
PE physical examination
PTCL peripheral T-cell 
lymphoma
PTHrP parathyroid 
hormone-related peptide
PU/PD polyuria/polydipsia
Hematopoietic Tumors
Dennis B. Bailey
DEFINITIONS
H
ematopoietic tumors include lym-
phoid tumors (lymphoma [LSA; his-
torically, lymphosarcoma], lymphoid 
leukemia, and myeloma-related disorders 
[MRD]) and myeloid leukemias. Lymphomas 
arise in lymphoid tissues outside of the bone 
marrow (BM). In dogs, lymph nodes, liver, 
and spleen are aected most commonly; in 
cats the gastrointestinal (GI) tract is aected 
most commonly. However, in both species, 
LSA can involve almost any organ system, 
including BM, peripheral blood, cranial 
mediastinum, skin, nasal cavity, kidneys, and 
central nervous system (CNS).
Leukemias arise in the BM and occasion-
ally the spleen. ey can be derived from 
lymphoid or myeloid cells. Myeloid leuke-
mias are usually neutrophilic or monocytic 
in origin, but can be derived from other gran-
ulocytes, erythrocytes, or megakaryocytes. 
e word “leukemia” sometimes is used to 
describe neoplastic hematopoietic cells cir-
culating in the blood, but this is imprecise 
and not recommended. Not all primary BM 
cancers result in tumor cells circulating in 
peripheral blood (so-called aleukemic leu-
kemias). Additionally, LSA can be associated 
with neoplastic cells found in circulation due 
to secondary inltration of the BM or occa-
sionally due to inltration of extramedullary 
hematopoietic organs such as the spleen. 
MRD includes multiple myeloma (MM) and 
several other clinical syndromes all derived 
from plasma cells or immunoglobulin (Ig)-
producing B-lymphocyte precursor cells.
LYMPHOMA
PREVALENCE
LSA is one of the most common cancers in 
dogs and cats.1 Cancer epidemiology studies 
in veterinary oncology are not as accurate and 
thorough as those in human oncology and 
many studies are outdated, particularly those 
in cats published before feline leukemia virus 
(FeLV) assays and vaccines became available 
(ch. 199).2 Reported prevalence rates range 
from 13-114 per 100,000 dogs at risk, and 
44-200 per 100,000 cats at risk.1 e num-
ber of dogs and cats diagnosed with LSA is 
increasing, but it is uncertain if this is a true increase or an increase 
in diagnostic capabilities and willingness of families to pursue diag-
nostic evaluation and therapy.1 2
ETIOLOGY (CHS. 198 AND 199)
In most dogs and cats diagnosed with LSA, an underlying cause 
is not identied. No infectious etiologies have been identied in 
aected dogs. In cats, FeLV is strongly associated with large-cell 
LSA (usually T-cell) as well as lymphoid and myeloid leukemias,3 4
caused primarily by insertional mutagenesis where integrated 
proviruses activate proto-oncogenes, such as c-myc 5 Cats with 
progressive FeLV infection are 60 times more likely to develop 
LSA compared to noninfected cats.3 Prior to FeLV testing and 
elimination programs and widespread vaccination, 70% of cats 
diagnosed with LSA were FeLV blood antigen positive. e most 
common FeLV-associated LSA is mediastinal, followed by multi-
centric and spinal, and occasionally renal or ocular. More current 
studies report progressive FeLV infection in cats with LSA with a 
prevalence of 0 to 21%.4 Regressive FeLV infections also can be 
associated with LSA. Cats from FeLV cluster households have a 
40-fold higher rate of developing FeLV-antigen negative LSA than 
cats in the general population.4 Additionally, proviral DNA has 
been detected in neoplastic T-lymphocytes and B-lymphocytes of 
FeLV antigen-negative cats.6 7
Cats infected with feline immunodeciency virus (FIV) are about 
5 times as likely to develop LSA or lymphoid leukemia compared 
with FIV-negative cats.3 FIV also has been linked to myeloprolifera-
tive disorders. Unlike FeLV, FIV is not directly oncogenic; immuno-
suppressive eects of the virus impede normal immunosurveillance 
and elimination of neoplastic cells.3 FIV-associated LSA is usually 
B-cell in origin and typically arises in extranodal sites. Other causes 
of chronic immunosuppression also have been linked to LSA: ∼10% 
of cats on immunosuppressive drugs aer renal transplantation 
(usually cyclosporine; ch. 301) develop mid- to high-grade diuse 
large B-cell LSA.8 Non-cutaneous LSA has been reported in dogs 
given oclacitinib (Apoquel, Zoetis), although the prevalence was not 
signicantly higher than the control population.9
Exposure to tobacco smoke increases the risk of LSA in dogs 
and cats.10 11 Herbicides, especially 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic 
acid (2,4-D), have been implicated in canine LSA in some, but not 
all studies.1 Other reported risk factors reported in dogs include 
living in an industrial area, exposure to paints or solvents, and 
exposure to strong magnetic elds.1
HISTOPATHOLOGIC CLASSIFICATIONS AND THEIR 
FREQUENCY
Definitions
ere are several dierent forms of LSA that vary in clinical 
presentation, response to therapy, and prognosis. Histopatho-
logic evaluations of tissues with immunophenotyping (deter-
mining whether the tumor is of B- or T-cell lineage) remains 
CHAPTER 322
Continued

CHAPTER 322
•
Hematopoietic Tumors
2241
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
the standard for diagnosing and subclassify-
ing LSA, although cytologic evaluation of 
smears with or without immunocytochemi-
cal staining, ow cytometry or polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) for antigen receptor 
rearrangement (PARR) can be used (see 
Diagnostic Evaluation below). Inappropriate 
use of terminology has confused classifying 
LSA. “Lymphoblast” is oen used indiscrimi-
nately to describe any large lymphoid cell, but 
should be reserved for precursor or stem cells. 
Lymphoblastic LSA and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) are 
relatively uncommon, and are most reliably identied by being 
CD34+ on ow cytometry.12 13
Dogs
e most common forms of LSA in dogs are diuse large B-cell 
lymphoma (DLBCL, ∼50% of cases) and peripheral T-cell lym-
phoma (PTCL, ∼15% of cases).12 14 While derived from mature 
(peripheral) lymphoid cells, both are characterized by large lym-
phoid cells eacing lymph nodes and/or other aected tissues. 
LSA grade is typically determined by mitotic index (MI), not cell 
size or LSA subtype.14 erefore, DLBCL and PTCL can be clas-
sied as low- (MI 0-5/400× eld), intermediate- (MI 6-10/400× 
eld), or high-grade (MI >10/400× eld). Other common forms 
of LSA in dogs include T-zone lymphoma (TZL, ∼10-15% of 
cases) and marginal zone lymphoma (5-15% of cases).
Cats
In cats, GI LSA is most common (ch. 262), with 3 distinct condi-
tions recognized.15 Mucosal T-cell LSA (enteropathy associated 
T-cell lymphoma [EATCL], type II) is characterized by small-
to intermediate-sized lymphocytes inltrating small intestinal 
lamina propria with or without epitheliotropism. Lesions can 
be patchy or diuse. Transmural T-cell LSA (EATCL, type I) is 
characterized by large lymphocytes, oen with eosinophilic gran-
ules typical of large granular lymphocytes (LGLs). Tumor cells 
eace the mucosal lamina propria, oen exhibiting epitheliotro-
pism, and heavily inltrate the submucosa. Lesions are focal or 
multifocal within the small intestine. DLBCL is characterized 
by transmural inltrates of large lymphocytes that rarely exhibit 
epitheliotropism. Lesions commonly involve the stomach (ch. 
261), jejunum (ch. 262), and ileocecocolic junction (chs. 262, 
263). DLCBL also accounts for most feline nasal LSA (ch. 213) 
and up to 33% of mediastinal LSA (ch. 222).12 About 10% of all 
feline LSAs are T-cell rich B-cell lymphoma (TCRBCL, formerly 
Hodgkin’s-like LSA).12 16 As the name implies, this form of LSA 
is characterized by small to intermediate-sized non-neoplastic 
T-cells admixed with neoplastic large B-cells. T-cells predominate 
initially, but B-cells gradually increase in proportion. Cats with 
TCRBCL usually have 1 or more enlarged mandibular or cervical 
lymph nodes.
CLINICAL SIGNS IN DOGS
Peripheral Lymph Node Lymphoma
Most dogs with DLCBL and PTCL have generalized lymphade-
nopathy (Figure 322.1). Severity of lymphadenopathy varies 
greatly and can be asymmetric. Concurrent liver and or/spleen 
involvement is common. Occasionally other anatomic sites will be 
aected as well, including but not limited to the BM or periph-
eral blood. LSA can aect any breed at any age. Many dogs have 
no clinical signs aside from peripheral lymphadenopathy with 
or without cranial abdominal organomegaly. As the cancer pro-
gresses, common clinical signs include inappetence, lethargy, 
vomiting, and diarrhea. Mandibular lymphadenopathy rarely 
causes dysphagia or dyspnea, but notably, if severe mandibular 
lymphadenopathy impairs lymphatic drainage, pitting edema and 
associated clinical signs result (ch. 239). Enlarged tonsils can cause 
respiratory stertor and/or dysphagia. Other clinical signs depend 
on the organ system(s) aected. Signicant liver inltration can 
lead to hepatic failure. BM myelophthisis can lead to anemia and 
weakness, thrombocytopenia and coagulopathy, and/or neutrope-
nia and sepsis (chs. 128, 176). Respiratory signs can result from 
tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy, pulmonary inltration, cra-
nial mediastinal mass, or pleural eusion. Almost any other organ 
system can become inltrated. Also, T-cell LSA can be associated 
with paraneoplastic hypercalcemia, which can cause polyuria/
polydipsia (PU/PD), renal failure, anorexia, vomiting, and occa-
sionally muscle twitching (chs. 69, 283, and 331).
About 75% of canine peripheral lymph node LSA are B-cell in 
origin (DLBCL being the most common subtype), and 25% are 
T-cell in origin (PTCL).14 ere are signicant breed dierences.17
e Basset Hound, Cocker Spaniel, Border Collie, and Doberman 
Pinscher have higher prevalences of B-cell LSA. In contrast, the 
Boxer, Shih Tzu, Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, and Airedale are 
among the breeds with the highest prevalences of T-cell LSA.
Indolent T-Zone Lymphoma (TZL)
Most dogs with TZL have mild peripheral lymphadenopathy that 
can be solitary, regional, or generalized,18-20 and is oen stable 
to slowly progressive over months. >50% of aected dogs have 
concurrent peripheral blood lymphocytosis and are clinically 
healthy, although concurrent demodicosis has been reported. 
Paraneoplastic hypercalcemia is rare. Golden Retrievers account 
for ∼40% of cases, and Shih Tzus about 8%. About 15% of dogs 
with TZL have peripheral blood lymphocytosis and no concur-
rent lymphadenopathy, indicating overlap between TZL and some 
chronic lymphocytic leukemias (CLLs).20 21 ∼30% of Golden 
Retrievers >10 years old with no evidence of lymphoproliferative 
disease have CD45 T-zone cells identied in their blood using 
ow cytometry, referred to as T-zone like cells of undetermined 
signicance.22
Figure 322.1
Generalized lymphadenopathy in a dog with large cell 
lymphoma. Calipers are measuring the right supercial cervical lymph 
node.
QoL quality of life
RT radiation therapy
TCR T-cell receptor
TCRBCL T-cell rich B-cell 
lymphoma
TZL T-zone lymphoma
UA urinalysis
US ultrasound
WHO World Health 
Organization
ACRONYMS—CONT’D
