SECTION XVI
•
Gastrointestinal Disease
1760
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Treatment
Smaller patients and minor hernias can sometimes be managed 
medically with stool soeners, enemas, and intermittent manual 
extraction of feces. If UBR or other organ entrapment exists, man-
ual decompression via emergency cystocentesis and immediate 
surgery are mandatory. e primary goal of surgical repair always 
involves reconstruction of the pelvic diaphragm. Traditional sur-
gery refers to a herniorrhaphy, oen with an internal obturator 
muscle transposition.55-57 Herniorrhaphy is usually sucient for 
most uncomplicated PHs, but further steps to strengthen the pel-
vic diaphragm might be necessary. Additional measures include 
polypropylene mesh reinforcement,58 semitendinosus muscle ap 
transposition,59 and/or biological membrane implantation.60 61
Repositioning or pexy of entrapped organs might be necessary 
prior to herniorrhaphy.53 Colopexy is not the recommended 
repair of choice unless RP is also present.15 52 For intact males, 
castration is recommended given that intact status is considered a 
risk factor (e.g., increased relaxin, enlarged prostate compressing 
pelvic wall).
Prognosis
e prognosis varies depending on whether underlying comor-
bidities and organ entrapment are present. While some studies 
have cited UBR to predict a worse prognosis (e.g., a 30% mortality 
rate in a large study of 100 dogs41), a case series of 41 dogs with 
PH found no increase in mortality between dogs with and with-
out UBR.52 e most common short-term postoperative compli-
cations include incisional infection, RP, and tenesmus, in order of 
occurrence.41 62 Postoperative tenesmus is a risk factor for recur-
rence with an internal obturator muscle transposition.55
PERIANAL FISTULA/CANINE ANAL FURUNCULOSIS
Perianal stulas (PAFs), which are synonymous with canine 
anal furunculosis, are characterized by ulceration, draining 
tracts, purulent discharge, and necrosis of perianal tissue (Figure 
264.7). e disease is most similar to stulizing Crohn’s disease in 
humans, although communication between draining tracts and 
the rectal lumen is rarely seen in dogs. Severe cases might develop 
rectoanal stenosis, structuring, or PH. GSDs are overrepresented, 
comprising up to 85% of some PAF populations.63 A genetic com-
ponent is suspected to be part of the underlying pathophysiologic 
mechanism in this breed.64-66 Other recognized breeds include 
the Australian Shepherd, Beagle, Border Collie, Bouvier des Flan-
dres, English Bulldog, Irish Setter, and Labrador Retriever.67-69
Pathogenesis
Factors that might play a role in the development of PAF in 
GSDs include canine major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
immune response genes, pro-inammatory cytokines, and cer-
tain matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs).64 70 71 A study looking 
at 107 GSDs with PAF in the United Kingdom versus healthy 
breed-matched controls found that dog leukocyte antigen (DLA)-
DRB1*00101 was positively associated with the presence of PAF.64
Homozygous dogs also tend to develop PAF at a younger age (< 8 
years).64 65 Further evidence for a genetic basis in GSDs is the pos-
itive association of ADAMTS16 and CTNND2 gene regions with 
the presence of PAF, determined from a large genome-wide asso-
ciation study.66 Importantly, the CTNND2 gene has been linked to 
Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis in people. mRNA expression 
of pro-inammatory cytokines (i.e., interleukins 1-beta, 2, 6, and 
Figure 264.6
Urinary bladder retroexion and entrapment pictured 
intraoperatively in a dog with a perineal hernia. (Courtesy Dr. Whitney 
DeGroot, Veterinary Emergency Clinic, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.)
A
B
Figure 264.7
Perianal stulae in 2 dierent German Shepherd Dogs. 
e tracts can form a trajectory that is either parallel (A) or perpen-
dicular (B) to the anal canal, as well as develop erythema (A) and/or 
purulent discharge (B). (Courtesy Dr. Alison Diesel, Texas A&M Uni-
versity, College Station, TX, and Dr. Linda Frank, University of Tennes-
see, Knoxville, TN.)

CHAPTER 264
•
Rectoanal Diseases
1761
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
8, and tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-alpha)70 and MMPs-9 and 
1371 is increased in the tissue of PAF dogs compared to healthy 
controls. e MMPs are produced by macrophages, and might 
signify type 1 helper T-cell dysfunction as an important contrib-
uting factor. While these ndings suggest that pro-inammatory 
cytokines contribute to PAF development, the anti-inammatory 
IL-10 has also been identied as increased,70 making it challeng-
ing to decipher whether the altered cytokines contribute to or are 
a result of PAF. It has been determined that TNF-alpha is likely 
elevated due to a linkage disequilibrium with an abnormal DLA-
DRB1*0010165 due to the close proximity of the 2 genes in the 
MHC. ese associations point towards a dysregulation in T-cell 
immunity, especially considering that biopsies from dogs with 
PAF have shown increased aggregates of CD3+ lymphocytes63
and type 1 T helper cell mRNA expression.70
Other conditions that might contribute to PAF development 
include a high moisture environment from low tail carriage, pre-
existing bacterial infection, an increased density of perianal apo-
crine glands,72 and potentially cutaneous adverse food reactions 
(CAFRs, ch. 166).73 74 A recent study investigating the intestinal 
microbiota of dogs with PAF identied some clinically aected 
dogs as dysbiotic (i.e., increased abundances of Bacteroides vulga-
tus and Escherichia coli and decreased abundances of Megamonas
sp. and Prevotella copri), while others had a normal microbiota.75
Diagnosis
Middle-aged, adult dogs (mean age: 4-7 years)76 most commonly 
develop PAF. Presenting clinical signs oen include excessive 
grooming, tenesmus (ch. 51), hematochezia (ch. 50), purulent 
discharge from beneath the tail (Figure 264.7, B) and in some 
cases, fecal incontinence. Because there is an established associa-
tion between PAF and colitis,77 dogs might also present with signs 
indicative of LI disease (ch. 263). Dierential diagnoses should 
include ulcerated perianal tumors (e.g., adenomas, adenocarci-
nomas), abscesses, FBs or, less commonly, mucocutaneous lupus 
erythematous (MCLE; ch. 178).78 PAFs and MCLE can usually be 
dierentiated based on dierences in lesion distribution. With 
MCLE, lesions usually appear slightly merged together rather 
than divided into distinct “tracts” as seen with PAF.78
Visual inspection of the perianal region is oen sucient to 
denitively diagnose PAF, especially in predisposed breeds. Care-
ful assessment of the anal sacs, digital rectal examination, and 
expression of the anal sacs should be performed. Sedation is oen 
necessary to accomplish these tasks due to extreme discomfort of 
that region. Further imaging such as stulograms might be neces-
sary for select cases in order to assess for rectocutaneous stulas 
(i.e., communication with the rectal lumen). Biopsies are oen 
unnecessary, but can be performed if concurrent colonic disease 
is suspected or if PE alone does not dierentiate PAF from MCLE.
Treatment
PAFs pose a therapeutic challenge, as remission cannot be achieved 
in all cases. e goals of treatment, which should be emphasized to 
owners, are to slow disease progression and ideally induce clinical 
remission. Medical management is standard, and surgery should 
only be pursued if comorbidities (e.g., abscessation) exist at the 
time of diagnosis or if 6 weeks of medical therapy fails to induce 
remission.67 e cornerstone of medical management is immuno-
suppression, including calcineurin inhibitors (i.e., cyclosporine A 
[CsA], tacrolimus), steroids, and nonsteroidal immunosuppressive 
agents (e.g., azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil [ch. 144]). Cal-
cineurin inhibitors are preferred as they specically inhibit T-cell-
mediated immunity. A randomized, controlled trial comparing 
single agent CsA with placebo in 20 GSDs found that all dogs in the 
CsA group (n=10) showed improvement in lesions aer 4 weeks of 
therapy, with 85% achieving remission by 16 weeks.69 None of the 
control group dogs achieved remission. e dosage and formu-
lation of CsA are also important to consider. While various dos-
ages and dosing frequencies (i.e., once79,80 or twice81 daily) have 
successfully induced remission,69,79,81 higher dosages are associ-
ated with an improved chance of success.80 Ketoconazole (KZ) is 
commonly used in conjunction with CsA to reduce the dosage of 
CsA (chs. 139, 141). is helps reduce the cost of treatment as well 
as potential side-eects associated with CsA. Controlled studies 
assessing the ecacy of combination CsA-KZ have documented 
65-100% of dogs achieving remission 3-16 weeks into therapy.82-84
All dogs have maintained remission throughout the duration of 
the trial. A dosage range of 2-4 mg/kg/day CsA combined with 
5-10 mg/kg/day KZ is a currently acceptable starting regime,67
with recommendations to escalate the dosage if no improvement 
is seen in the rst 4-5 weeks.80 Once there has been substantial 
clinical improvement, the dosage of CsA should be slowly tapered 
(e.g., ∼25% reduction every 4-8 weeks), if appropriate based on 
clinical status. Microemulsied or modied formulations are pre-
ferred due to increased bioavailability (ch. 169). e CsA should 
be administered on an empty stomach (i.e., ≥2 hours before and 
aer a meal) to maximize absorption. Controlled studies evaluat-
ing topical tacrolimus are lacking. In one published study, 50% of 
dogs treated with tacrolimus twice daily achieved clinical remis-
sion.85 Topical tacrolimus is reportedly irritating to tissues,67 and 
therefore might be more suitable for smaller lesions.
While prednisone is preferable to no therapy, the remission 
rates are not as favorable as with CsA (only ∼33% in 1 study77
using prednisone in conjunction with a novel protein diet), and 
long-term side eects can aect quality of life, especially consid-
ering many aected dogs are large-breed dogs. Remission rates 
with azathioprine treatment of PAF are variable,86,87 and one 
report investigating MMF showed no response.88
A new therapy, which has been successful for people with s-
tulizing Crohn’s disease, is local mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) 
therapy. One veterinary study documented improvement in a 
small group (n=6) of dogs with PAF given local human embry-
onic MSC into their stula sites.89 ese dogs had failed at least 
6 months of standard CsA therapy, and all showed resolution 
of their draining tracts 3 months post-injection. e dogs were 
followed for 6 months, and 2/6 dogs had recurrence of PAF by 
the end of the monitoring period. us, while MSC treatment 
appears promising, further studies are necessary before it can be 
recommended for routine management of PAF.
Given the concern that cutaneous adverse food reaction might 
be a factor in development of PAF, many clinicians recommend a 
strict novel or hydrolyzed protein diet as part of medical manage-
ment (chs. 160, 166).67 It is unknown how many dogs might be 
well-controlled with long-term dietary therapy alone, given the 
lack of controlled studies. Additional therapies such as stool so-
eners and analgesics might be necessary in some dogs. Decisions 
regarding starting these should be made on a case-by-case basis.
Prognosis
e prognosis is variable based on whether or not remission 
can be achieved. Dogs with concurrent PHs or draining tracts 
communicating with the anal canal have been shown to have a 
worse prognosis in regards to both recurrence and postoperative 
complications.90
DISEASES OF THE ANAL SACS
ANAL SAC IMPACTION, SACCULITIS, AND 
ABSCESSATION
Non-neoplastic anal sac disease (ASD) refers to impaction, inam-
mation, or infection of the anal sacs. e incidence and prevalence 
