SECTION XXI
•
Lower Urinary Tract Disease
2144
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Lower Urinary Tract Infections
Michael Wood
CHAPTER 307
ACRONYMS
ASB asymptomatic 
bacteriuria
GAG glycosaminoglycan
MUC mean urinary 
concentration
NSAIDs non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs
PAC proanthocyanidin
SCB subclinical bacteriuria
UTI urinary tract infection
INTRODUCTION
U
rinary tract infection (UTI) develop-
ment is multifactorial, dependent on 
the interplay between the virulence 
of an organism and alterations in anatomic, 
environmental, and immunological compe-
tency of the host. Urinary bladders with nor-
mal urinary defenses are inherently resistant 
to colonization and cystitis.1 It is those blad-
ders with compromised defenses that are at 
increased risk for UTI development. Please refer to the 8th edition 
of this textbook ch. 330 “Lower Urinary Tract Infections” for a 
review of “Natural and Acquired Host Defenses” in Box 330-1.
e most common microbes invading the urinary tract are 
bacteria. Other organisms like fungi account for only ∼1% of dog 
and cat bladder infections. Infecting bacteria typically originate 
from the enteric ora and ascend through the distal urogeni-
tal tract into the proximal urethra and urinary bladder.2 When 
urinary tract colonization results in lower urinary tract (LUT) 
inammation and clinical signs including caudal abdominal pain, 
pollakiuria, stranguria, or dysuria, the term UTI or bacterial cys-
titis is appropriate.3
Spayed female dogs have twice the risk of UTI when compared 
to male dogs.4 Gram negative bacteria comprise >60% of posi-
tive cultures, with Escherichia coli being isolated from 45-55% of 
bacteriuric dogs. Other Gram negative organisms including Pro-
teus spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Klebsiella spp. and Gram 
positive bacteria that include Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus
spp., and Enterococcus spp. are each cultured between 2-14% of 
the time.5
In cats, E. coli is also the most common cause of bacteriuria 
(37.3%); however, Gram negative and Gram positive infections 
each occur roughly half the time with Gram positive Enterococcus 
faecalis present in 27% of culture-positive urine samples.6 Overall, 
the incidence of bacteriuria is much lower in cats than in dogs and 
a sex predilection is variably reported.5 6
BACTERIURIA: CONTAMINATION, SUBCLINICAL 
BACTERIURIA, AND INFECTION
Quantitative aerobic culture is the gold standard for identifying 
bacteriuria. However, the lower urinary tract is not a sterile envi-
ronment, and the microbiological documentation of bacteriuria 
is not equivalent to diagnosing a UTI. Potentially benign expla-
nations for detecting bacteriuria include technical errors, sample 
contamination, and subclinical bacteriuria (ch. 70).
Bacteriuria secondary to urine specimen contamination 
occurs when the urine contacts non-sterile surfaces prior to 
analysis or culture. Aseptic cystocentesis-collected urine is rec-
ommended to obtain the most reliable sample for identifying true 
bacteriuria; however, voided and catheter-collected urine samples 
are acceptable when quantitative bacterial colony counts are pro-
vided. Using >100,000 colony-forming units/mL as a diagnostic 
cut-o, voided urine samples have a 94% sensitivity and specic-
ity for non-contaminant bacteriuria (chs. 98, 184).7
Another form of benign bacteriuria is asymptomatic bacteri-
uria (ASB). In human medicine, this term is used for describing 
persistent bacterial urinary tract colonization that is not produc-
ing symptoms or clinical signs. In veterinary patients, dierentiat-
ing non-clinical colonization from UTI is dicult because subtle 
clinical signs are dicult to detect; hence, the term subclinical 
bacteriuria (SCB) may be more appropriate.3
In people, the treatment of ASB is not recommended in many 
circumstances. Eradication of ASB does not prevent future uri-
nary bladder re-colonization8 and the presence of ASB strains 
is hypothesized to convey a degree of protection against urinary 
tract colonization with more virulent bacteria.9 In veterinary 
medicine, a similar approach has been recommended for the 
management of SCB despite a lack of evidence demonstrating a 
protective benet.
e decision of whether to treat a patient that has SCB is com-
plex and it requires the veterinarian to assess patient and bacterial 
characteristics. For example, caution must be aorded when man-
aging dogs and cats with co-morbidities that may mask clinical 
signs. Polyuric patients or immunosuppressed patients that are 
unable to mount an appropriate inammatory response require 
special consideration as they may appear subclinical despite a 
uropathogenic infection.
When deciding whether to treat bacteriuria, it is as important 
to consider bacterial characteristics as to assess co-morbidities. 
Bacteria contain genomic islands encoding tness factors, which 
promote commensalism and/or virulence factors that injure 
host tissues. ese tness and virulence genes have tremendous 
plasticity, which allows an organism to alter gene expression to 
adapt to a changing environment.10 is means that clinically 
nonpathogenic strains may contain unexpressed virulence genes 
and the current bacterial phenotype is not necessarily predictive 
of future pathogenicity as the urinary environment changes.11
At this time bacterial genome sequencing to detect virulence 
genes is not a widely available clinical diagnostic in veterinary 
medicine. Instead, patients with untreated SCB are managed via 
vigilant observation of the patient, and monitoring for subtle 
changes in clinical signs and urine composition, including 
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Video and 1 Client Information Sheet.

CHAPTER 307
•
Lower Urinary Tract Infections
2145
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
increases in urine concentrations of blood, protein, and inam-
matory cells.
URINARY TRACT INFECTION: DIAGNOSIS
A denitive diagnosis of UTI requires concurrent evidence of 
bacteriuria and cystitis. Aerobic urine culture alone will not dis-
tinguish between SCB and UTI. Interpreting urinalysis, urine 
sediment examination (ch. 70), clinical signs, and urine culture 
results (ch. 184) together is essential, paying particular attention 
to external factors that may alter results.
When interpreting aerobic urine culture results, the inuence of 
urine collection and storage methods must be considered (ch. 98). 
Time to processing, storage temperature, and storage media all 
may alter bacterial detection. At room temperature, bacteria may 
begin to proliferate or die within 1 hour.12 Urine samples pro-
cessed 2-24 hours aer collection should be refrigerated at 4°C 
in a sterile preservative-free tube. If urine culture submission is 
contingent on pending diagnostic test results, storing urine in a 
preservative, reducing media vial, or Amies transport media can 
extend the time that bacteria will be viable for up to 72 hours.13
e growth of most uropathogens on culture media is appar-
ent within 18-24 hours of incubation, with 24-72 hours required 
to obtain results. Some organisms such as Corynebacterium spp. 
and Mycoplasma spp. can take 4 to 7 days. To improve the e-
ciency of diagnosing UTI, in recent years, several point-of-care 
bacteriuria screening tools have become available, with additional 
molecular-based diagnostic tests imminent. Two of these diag-
nostics tests include a point of care rapid immunoassay (RapidBac 
Vet, Silver Lake Research Corp, Monrovia, CA) and a catalase-
based point-of-care urine test (Accutest Uriscreen, Jant Phar-
maceuticals Co, Encino, CA). e immunoassay has a reported 
sensitivity and specicity of 97.4% and 98.8%, respectively, when 
screening cystocentesis-collected samples14; a sensitivity of 89% 
is reported with voided samples.15 e catalase-based test is lim-
ited in its ability to detect catalase-negative bacteria and also cross 
reacts with white blood cells and epithelial cells, reducing its sen-
sitivity and specicity on samples obtained by cystocentesis to 
89% and 71%, respectively.16
URINARY TRACT INFECTION: TREATMENT
e standard therapy for UTIs is antimicrobials. erapeutic 
plans vary depending on previous UTI history, concurrent dis-
eases, neutering status, sex, and species. Broadly, treatment strate-
gies for UTI fall into 2 categories, depending on whether bacterial 
cystitis is sporadic or recurrent.
SPORADIC BACTERIAL CYSTITIS
Sporadic bacterial cystitis is dened as a clinical bladder infec-
tion occurring <3 times in a 12-month period, regardless of the 
patient’s species, sex, neuter status or co-morbidities. e recently 
adopted term sporadic bacterial cystitis focuses on the inam-
mation caused by the bacteria and the infrequent nature of the 
episodes rather than the presence or absence of a complicating 
risk factor for infection or treatment.3 e treatment recommen-
dations for sporadic cystitis can be applied to all dogs (male and 
female) and cats provided that bacteriuria is detected in the cat 
and a normal prostate is present in the male dog. If these condi-
tions are not met, then additional diagnostic tests and treatment 
plans may be necessary. Please refer to ch. 311 “Feline Idiopathic/
Interstitial Cystitis” and ch. 314 “Prostatic Diseases” for more 
information.
Sporadic bacterial cystitis is associated with lower urinary 
tract signs including dysuria, pollakiuria, and stranguria (ch. 54). 
In dogs with limited previous antibiotic therapy, empiric antibi-
otic prescriptions are justied; however, urine culture and sen-
sitivity is recommended, especially in cats. When choosing an 
antibiotic for an infection of unknown bacterial susceptibility, 
selection should be made with consideration of local community 
resistance patterns, attainable urine antibiotic concentrations, 
risk of adverse events, and cost. Veterinarians are encouraged 
to monitor antimicrobial resistance patterns within their clinic 
to help further with selecting an antibiotic with a spectrum and 
ecacy against the suspected agent (chs. 7, 186). First-line anti-
biotics should have a local resistance rate for sporadic bacterial 
cystitis cases of ∼10%. Suggested rst-line antibiotics to consider 
include amoxicillin, cephalexin, or trimethoprim-sulfonamide.3
In some cases, the colonizing bacteria are found to be resis-
tant to the chosen antibiotic when antimicrobial susceptibility 
results become available but clinically the patient has improved. 
In such instances, the antibiotic course should be completed as 
prescribed, with a follow-up urinalysis and culture performed 
3-5 days aer the conclusion of therapy to ensure eradication of 
infection. Alternatively, if the colonizing bacteria are resistant to 
the chosen antibiotic and clinical signs remain, then the original 
antibiotic should be discontinued and an appropriate antibiotic 
begun.
e current recommended treatment duration for sporadic 
bacterial cystitis in veterinary medicine is 3-5 days.3 is recom-
mendation stems from studies demonstrating that trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole or high-dose enrooxacin for 3 days yielded 
similar cure rates when compared to 10 days of cephalexin or 
14 days of amoxicillin-clavulanic acid.17,18 Advantages of short 
duration therapy include reduced patient side-eects, improved 
adherence/compliance, reduced cost, and decreased antibiotic 
resistance while maintaining clinical ecacy.17,19 Despite these 
studies, the use of second line antibiotics such as uoroquino-
lones and cefovecin is not recommended for sporadic bacterial 
cystitis treatment when rst line antibiotics are options. When the 
treatment course of sporadic bacterial cystitis is complete, addi-
tional monitoring, diagnostic testing, or preventative therapies 
are usually not required.
In recent years there have been some proponents of using 
nonsteroidal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for managing 
sporadic cystitis.3 e basis behind NSAID therapy is that the 
drugs may limit lower urinary tract signs while the body’s innate 
defenses and immune system clear the infection, thus limiting 
antibiotic use. In people, NSAID therapy is not currently the stan-
dard of care, with recent studies suggesting that NSAID therapy is 
inferior to antibiotics and may be associated with increased occur-
rence of pyelonephritis.20,21 In veterinary medicine, there are no 
studies that assess NSAID therapy to manage UTI and given the 
challenges veterinarians have identifying patients with pyelone-
phritis,22 UTI treatment with NSAIDs as a sole therapy is not rec-
ommended by this author. However, in an otherwise healthy dog 
with recurrent infections, NSAIDs may be benecial to reduce 
clinical signs while awaiting culture and sensitivity results.3
RECURRENT BACTERIAL CYSTITIS
Recurrent bacterial cystitis or recurrent UTI is said to be present 
when a dog or cat has 3 or more documented clinical infections 
within 12 months. Recurrent infections indicate that an under-
lying anatomic, functional, or metabolic abnormality or comor-
bidity is present, either preventing the clearance of an infection 
(persistence and relapse) or allowing for reinfection.
Persistence
Persistent infections occur when appropriate antimicrobial 
therapy fails to sterilize the urine. Provided that the prescribed 
