SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
1990
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
BG blood glucose
CGM continuous glucose 
monitoring
CKD chronic kidney dis-
ease
DKA diabetic ketoacidosis
DM diabetes mellitus
DM-HS diabetes mellitus 
secondary to hyperso-
matotropism
ER extended-release
GIP glucose-dependent 
insulinotropic polypep-
tide
GLP-1 glucagon-like pep-
tide-1
GLP-1RA glucagon-like pep-
tide-1 receptor agonist
HS hypersomatotropism
IGc interstitial glucose con-
centration
IGF-1 insulin-like growth 
factor 1
MC4R melanocortin-4 
receptor
NPH neutral protamine 
Hagedorn
PD polydipsia
PU polyuria
PZI protamine zinc insulin
SC subcutaneous
SGLT-2 sodium-glucose 
cotransporter-2
UTI urinary tract infection
DEFINITION AND DIAGNOSIS
D
iabetes mellitus (DM) is a syndrome 
characterized 
by 
hyperglycemia 
due to defects in insulin secretion, 
insulin sensitivity, or both.1 2 Regardless of 
the pathogenic cause, relative or absolute 
deciency in insulin action on target tissues 
leads to myriad abnormalities in carbohy-
drate, fat, and protein metabolism. e crite-
ria for the diagnosis of DM in cats developed 
by an international consensus committee are 
provided in Box 292.1 3
Prediabetes is a state of abnormally 
increased blood glucose (BG) concentra-
tions (either fasting or aer a glucose load) 
that do not yet meet the criteria of DM. Pre-
diabetes is a risk factor for development of 
DM.4 Multiple studies have described cats 
with abnormal BGs in various clinical and 
experimental contexts5 6; however, no study 
has shown that a dened state of abnormal 
glucose in cats confers a risk for developing 
DM.1 erefore, criteria for diagnosis of pre-
diabetes in cats have not been established.
ETIOLOGY AND CLASSIFICATION
Multiple etiologies can lead to DM.1 Feline 
DM is mostly considered analogous to type 2 
DM in people, characterized by beta cell dys-
function of unknown etiology, usually with 
concurrent insulin resistance. is leads to 
either permanent or temporary states of 
exogenous insulin requirement.
Recent studies suggest that up to 25% of diabetic cats suer 
from DM secondary to hypersomatotropism (DM-HS; ch. 280).7
However, most studies on etiology, pathophysiology, and epide-
miology of feline DM were published before HS was commonly 
recognized. us, most cats with DM-HS were probably misdiag-
nosed as having uncomplicated type 2 DM.
Other types of diabetes resulting from processes that cause 
beta cell dysfunction or loss occur in a minority of aected cats. 
Pancreatitis can destroy beta cells (chs. 276, 278). Histopatho-
logic evidence of beta cell deciency associated with lymphocytic 
inltration (consistent with type 1 DM) has been described rarely. 
With the exception of the serum insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-
1) assay for identication of DM-HS, there is no ante mortem test 
to classify the other etiologic types of feline DM. From a clini-
cal perspective, virtually all cats with DM are handled similarly. 
Importantly, many cats that survive an episode of diabetic keto-
acidosis (DKA, ch. 280) can later achieve diabetic remission.8
EPIDEMIOLOGY
e prevalence of DM in cats ranges from 0.5-2% depending on the 
population studied.9-11 Numbers are steadily increasing due to the 
increasing frequency of predisposing factors, e.g., obesity and phys-
ical inactivity.12-14 is is similar to human type 2 DM. Importantly, 
DM in cats is generally diagnosed later in the disease process than 
in people, in whom diagnosis of DM is based on fasting hypergly-
cemia >126 mg/dL (>7 mmol/L).10 In contrast, the diagnosis in cats 
Diabetes Mellitus in Cats
Chen Gilor | Linda Fleeman
CHAPTER 292
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic asset onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Video.
ALIVE* Criteria for Diagnosis of Diabetes Mellitus in 
Cats
The potential for stress hyperglycemia warrants caution in interpre-
tation of hyperglycemia of any magnitude in cats. Diabetes mellitus 
in cats is diagnosed:
1. In a patient with a random (fasted or unfasted) blood glucose 
concentration ≥270 mg/dL (≥15 mmol/L) with classic clinical 
signs of hyperglycemia (with no other plausible cause) or 
hyperglycemic crisis AND at least one of the following criteria:

•increased glycated proteins

•glucosuria on more than one occasion on a naturally voided
sample acquired in a home environment at least  days after 
any stressful events.
In some cases clinical signs may not have been reported by the 
owner.
2. In a patient with random (fasted or unfasted) blood glucose 
concentration >125 mg/dL to ≤270 mg/dL (>7 mmol/L to ≤15 
mmol/L) and at least two of the following:

•classic clinical signs of hyperglycemia (with no other plausi
ble cause) or hyperglycemic crisis

•increased glycated proteins

•glucosuria on more than one occasion on a naturally voided
sample acquired in a home environment at least  days after 
any stressful events.
Applying the above ALIVE criteria permits the possible existence 
of a subpopulation of cats where diabetes mellitus or stress hyper-
glycemia cannot be confidently confirmed or excluded; if concerns 
over presence of diabetes mellitus persist, periodic re-evaluation is 
warranted.
BOX 292.1
*Project ALIVE (Agreeing Language In Veterinary Endocrinology) was founded by 
the European Society of Veterinary Endocrinology in  and endorsed by the 
Society for Comparative Endocrinology in . It focuses on creating agreement 
over the definition of common terminology in veterinary endocrinology.
From Project ALIVE. European Society of Veterinary Endocrinology. Accessed 
February , . https://www.esve.org/alive/search.aspx

CHAPTER 292
•
Diabetes Mellitus in Cats
1991
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
is oen delayed until BGs exceed the renal threshold (>270 mg/dL, 
>15 mmol/L)15 16 and clinical signs (polyuria/polydipsia/polyphagia 
[PU/PD/PP], weight loss) are evident.17 18 is delay in diagnosis 
may explain why most cats are insulin-dependent at diagnosis and 
why diet changes and oral hypoglycemic drugs are not typically suf-
cient to control DM early aer diagnosis.18
DM is most common in Domestic Long- and Shorthair cats. 
Most pure-breed cats are underrepresented.12 19 However, in the 
UK, Australia, and New Zealand, Burmese cats are over-represe
nted.11 19-21 DM appears to be an autosomal, partially penetrant, 
dominant trait in Burmese cats with about 4 times higher fre-
quency than other breeds.20 21 Genome-wide association studies 
have identied polymorphisms in genes related to beta cell func-
tion and lipid metabolism.22 23 Other susceptible breeds include 
Tonkinese and Norwegian Forest in the UK, and Maine Coon, 
Russian Blue, and Siamese in the USA.19 20 24
Increasing age is a risk factor; most cats are diagnosed at 
>8 years of age with peak incidence at 10-13 years.9 10 12 Neu-
tered male cats are at greater risk than neutered females, even 
when controlled for body weight.9 12 Other risk factors include 
indoor connement and little physical activity.25 Obesity (ch. 
150), increasingly prevalent in pet cats, causes insulin resistance, 
interferes with glycemic control, and confers a high risk of DM 
in cats.9 12-14 26-29 In the USA, it has been estimated that 25-35% 
of pet cats are overweight or obese.13 27 30 Environmental factors 
(e.g., living indoors, diet) predispose cats to obesity.27 30 e risk 
of obesity is highest among middle-aged, neutered male cats, the 
same group that is at increased risk of DM.27 30
FEATURES OF TYPE 2 DM IN CATS
Type 2 DM is a diagnosis of exclusion in cats—one to be consid-
ered only aer ruling out HS. e etiology of feline type 2 DM 
is unknown but likely similar to type 2 DM in people.1 Similari-
ties include risk factors, clinical presentation, epidemiology, and 
association with amyloid deposition in the islets of Langerhans.1
Periods when exogenous insulin is not required are common 
and genetic predisposition has been demonstrated in both cats 
and people.31 Type 2 DM is a progressive disease that can have 
a prolonged preclinical period. It is characterized by the com-
bination of impaired insulin secretion and insulin resistance. 
Impaired secretion results in insulin deciency, which is usually 
relative (rather than absolute) to the overall increased insulin 
requirement resulting from insulin resistance. Although obesity 
itself causes some degree of insulin resistance, it is not the cause 
of type 2 DM. Instead, obesity leads to a compensatory increase 
in insulin secretion. Obese diabetic individuals have impaired 
beta cell function whereas obese non-diabetics do not (ch. 150).
e melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R), expressed in the hypo-
thalamus, mediates satiety when there is positive energy bal-
ance.31 It is also expressed in intestinal L cells and mediates the 
secretion of the incretin hormone glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-
1).32 In human obesity and DM, MC4R is a major susceptibility 
gene. Polymorphism in the MC4R gene was demonstrated in 
obese diabetic cats but not in obese non-diabetic cats.31 us, 
cats with this gene polymorphism may be predisposed to reduced 
incretin eect when obese, and so be more likely to develop DM.
FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH DM REMISSION
REMISSION IS NOT A “CURE”
ere is no known cure for type 2 DM and remission of DM in 
cats is dened as a state of euglycemia with no insulin therapy 
for at least 4 weeks when insulin was previously administered.33
Achieving remission does not imply that the underlying disease 
has been cured but that endogenous insulin secretion is meeting 
or exceeding requirements. Cats in remission usually continue to 
display impaired glucose tolerance.34 Remission is a temporary 
state (although it might last for years) and, therefore, eorts to 
maintain it and treat any underlying disease should be consid-
ered. One possible exception is DM remission in cats treated for 
HS. In these cats, surgical removal of the growth-hormone secret-
ing tumor might be curative. Because it is by denition tempo-
rary, some question whether remission should be a treatment goal 
in all cats with DM. at also raises the question of which cats are 
more likely to achieve remission. Answers to these questions are 
not available, but remission is associated with longer survival in 
some studies.35 Here we discuss the available evidence and patho-
physiologic background.
PHYSIOLOGY OF REMISSION
Overview
For a cat with type 2 DM to achieve remission, beta cell capac-
ity to synthesize and secrete insulin must meet or exceed insu-
lin requirements. Insulin requirements decrease with decreased 
insulin resistance and decreased carbohydrate load. Insulin resis-
tance can be reduced with weight loss, resolution of inammatory 
conditions, pharmacological intervention (insulin sensitizers, 
discontinuing glucocorticoids and any drug that causes insulin 
resistance), and resolution of stress. Carbohydrate load can be 
decreased by reducing dietary carbohydrates or reducing carbo-
hydrate digestion (e.g., with acarbose), by suppressing hepatic 
glucose output with pharmacological interventions (e.g., metfor-
min, glucagon receptor antagonists), or by enhancing glucosuria, 
e.g., sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors.
While the cause of underlying beta cell dysfunctions that 
lead to type 2 DM is unknown, some metabolic derangements 
that cause further beta cell dysfunction are somewhat reversible. 
Reversing metabolic derangements such as glucotoxicity, lipotox-
icity, and impaired incretin eect can lead to substantial improve-
ment in beta cell function that could make the dierence between 
whether or not remission is achieved.
Glucotoxicity and Lipotoxicity of Beta Cells
Longstanding hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia are both toxic 
to beta cells, causing dysfunction and eventually beta cell death. 
Glucotoxicity causing beta cell dysfunction occurred within 48 
hours of IV glucose infusion in healthy cats.36 Aer 10 days of 
hyperglycemia, beta cell dysfunction and markedly reduced cell 
numbers persisted for some time aer discontinuation of glucose 
infusion. Hyperlipidemia does not have as dramatic an eect 
although it did seem to aect the cats’ ability to regulate BG.36 e 
eect of lipotoxicity on feline beta cells may have been underesti-
mated since mostly unsaturated fatty acids were infused. In other 
species, saturated fatty acids are more injurious than unsaturated 
fatty acids.37
Glucolipotoxicity and the Incretin Effect
Glucolipotoxicity can cause beta cell dysfunction by interrupting 
the incretin eect.38 Incretin hormones (glucose-dependent insu-
linotropic polypeptide [GIP]; GLP-1) are secreted from the intes-
tine in response to glucose and other nutrients in the gut lumen 
(but not in the blood).39 In a glucose-dependent manner, incre-
tins stimulate synthesis and secretion of insulin and inhibit gluca-
gon secretion. Incretin hormones also prevent beta cell apoptosis 
in response to injurious toxins (such as glucocorticoid drugs) and 
enhance beta cell dierentiation and proliferation.40,41 Incretin 
hormones are responsible for about 75% of postprandial insulin 
secretion in healthy people and abnormalities in incretin hor-
mone secretion or action lead to substantial beta cell dysfunction.
In people with type 2 DM, GIP secretion is normal or increased 
but beta cells become resistant to its eects. is resistance can be 
