CHAPTER 283
•
Primary Hyperparathyroidism
1901
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
[Ca] calcium concentration
CaCrCR calcium to creati-
nine clearance ratio
CaSR calcium sensing 
receptor
CBC complete blood count
CKD chronic kidney disease
ELISA enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay
FHH familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcemia
FIH feline idiopathic hyper-
calcemia
GI gastrointestinal
HHM humoral hypercalce-
mia of malignancy
HRPT2 hyperparathyroid-
ism 2 with jaw tumors
iCa ionized calcium
[iCa] ionized calcium con-
centration
IV intravenous
MEN multiple endocrine 
neoplasia
PD polydipsia
PHPT primary hyperpara-
thyroidism
PO4 phosphate
PTH parathyroid hormone
PTHrP parathyroid hor-
mone–related protein
PU polyuria
SQ subcutaneous
TCa total serum calcium
[TCa] total serum calcium 
concentration
US ultrasonography
CALCIUM HOMEOSTASIS IN DOGS 
AND CATS
CALCIUM FUNCTIONS
C
alcium (Ca), the most abundant ele-
ment in the body due to its presence in 
skeletal bone, is necessary for diverse 
processes, such as transmitting many sig-
nals received on cell surfaces to intracellular 
locations, nerve conduction, neuromuscu-
lar transmission, muscle contraction, blood 
coagulation, hormone secretion and hepatic 
glycogen metabolism. Adverse eects on 
organ systems are noted when Ca homeosta-
sis is disrupted. e skeleton acts as a Ca res-
ervoir, used for correcting decreases in serum 
Ca concentrations ([Ca]). Ca can be excreted 
or absorbed in the kidneys and the small 
intestine. e Ca sensing receptor (CaSR), 
responsible for ensuring that circulating 
[Ca] is maintained within a limited “normal” 
range, is a G-protein present in parathyroid 
glands, kidneys, cartilage and bone.1 Inter-
actions between the CaSR and parathyroid 
hormone (PTH), synthesized and secreted by 
the parathyroid glands, can lead to direct or 
indirect eects on skeletal bone, the gastroin-
testinal (GI) tract, and kidneys.2
CALCIUM MEASUREMENT AND ITS 
SERUM REGULATION
Ca, in common with other important elec-
trolytes, is regulated to maintain narrow ref-
erence intervals. Total serum [Ca] ([TCa]) is 
usually about 2.3-2.8 mmol/L (9.2-11.2 mg/
dL) in dogs and 2.1-2.5 mmol/L (8.4-10.0 mg/dL) in cats. Refer-
ence intervals vary between laboratories. When concerned about 
Ca, it is recommended that both TCa and ionized Ca concentra-
tions ([iCa]), the biologically active form of the electrolyte, be 
assessed (ch. 69). About 50% of the [TCa] is iCa, about 40% is 
protein-bound (albumin plus a small amount of globulin), and 
<10% is complexed with anions, such as bicarbonate or citrate. 
Spectrophotometric methods are used to measure TCa in serum 
or heparinized plasma. Blood anticoagulated with EDTA or 
oxalate cannot be used because they chelate Ca. Hemolysis and 
lipemia can falsely increase measured [TCa]. Hypoproteinemia 
lowers measured [TCa] but does not aect measured [iCa]. Clini-
cally, the [iCa], measured with an ion-specic electrode, is most 
important. However, the proportion of iCa in a sample can be 
altered by sample handling. When samples are stored, red cell 
metabolism increases lactic acid concentrations, pH decreases, 
and the iCa fraction increases. Conversely, when samples are 
exposed to air, CO2 is lost, the pH rises, and the iCa fraction 
decreases.
CONTROL OF SERUM CALCIUM CONCENTRATION [Ca]
Overview
Circulating [Ca] is under control of 4 important hormones: 
PTH, PTH-related protein (PTHrP), vitamin D (calcitriol, 
1,25-[OH]2-cholecalciferol), and calcitonin. e CaSR senses 
extracellular [Ca]. Hypercalcemia activates the CaSR, reducing 
PTH synthesis and secretion. Hypocalcemia inactivates CaSR, 
increases PTH secretion, enhances PTH gene expression, and 
promotes parathyroid gland cellular proliferation. Ca homeosta-
sis is disrupted when CaSR activity is abnormal or when patho-
logical processes interfere.
Parathyroid Hormone (PTH): Description, Function, 
Assays
PTH is an 84 amino acid polypeptide hormone synthesized and 
secreted by the parathyroid glands. Dogs and cats have 4 para-
thyroid glands (2 pairs). One pair is either embedded within or 
closely associated with each thyroid lobe (Figure 283.1). Cranial, 
“external,” glands are usually situated outside the thyroid capsule 
and caudal, “internal,” glands are usually located within thy-
roid tissue. Parathyroid glands consist of cords or nests of cells 
around capillaries (Figure 283.2). Parathyroid chief cells continu-
ously synthesize PTH, which increases both TCa and iCa and 
decreases serum phosphate (PO4) concentrations either directly 
or indirectly via activity in 3 major target organs: bone, kidney, 
or GI tract (Figure 283.3). PTH is metabolized quickly. Secretory 
granules within chief cells contain intact active hormone, includ-
ing the 34-amino-acid, biologically active N-terminus and the 
carboxy-terminus portions required for PTH activity.2-4 When 
the serum [Ca] is low, the secretory granule rate of degradation is 
reduced. Conversely, when serum [Ca] is increased, the degrada-
tion rate is enhanced. ere is an inverse sigmoidal relationship 
between Ca and PTH; the set-point of Ca homeostasis is the [Ca] 
that suppresses PTH secretion 50%. PTH cannot be suppressed 
completely and low level production is continuous, so the set-
point is midway between this low-level production and maximum 
PTH production. An altered Ca set-point characterizes many 
hypercalcemic conditions, resulting in a drive to generate a higher 
[Ca] through the synthesis and release of PTH. Increased concen-
trations of vitamin D slow PTH gene transcription and reduce the 
rate of synthesis of the hormone. High PO4 concentrations slow 
PTH breakdown and increase hormone secretion.
Primary Hyperparathyroidism
Barbara Justine Skelly
CHAPTER 283
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic asset onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Video.

SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
1902
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
PTH and its fragments cleaved from the prohormone circulate. 
Biologically active intact PTH (amino acids 1-84) must be measured 
for reliable assessment of parathyroid function.5 6 Assays developed 
for PTH are sensitive and specic. Older PTH assays used anti-
bodies directed at both the C-terminal (amino acids 39-84) and 
N-terminal (amino acids 12-24, or 26-32). However, such assays also 
measured some of the fragments cleaved between amino acids 1-12. 
Current (usually enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]) 
assays use antibody combinations that only measure intact hor-
mone.7 A canine-specic ELISA, which has also been validated for 
cats, is available. Some laboratories have validated human-specic 
PTH testing kits for use in the dog and cat.8 9 Since assay availabil-
ity changes, new methods should be validated for the species being 
tested. EDTA plasma samples are preferred for assaying PTH. Since 
PTH is labile, samples should be immediately separated and frozen 
until assayed. e laboratory should provide handling information, 
and many also provide freezer packs for sample submission. e 
reference interval for PTH is approximately 20-65 pg/mL (2.1-6.9 
pmol/L) in the dog and <25 pg/mL (<2.7 pmol/L) in the cat but may 
dier depending on the laboratory and assay system used.
Parathyroid Hormone–Related Protein (PTHrP): 
Description, Function, Assays
PTHrP is integral to Ca homeostasis in the fetus but aer birth, 
it becomes virtually undetectable in healthy animals. Increases 
in PTHrP are the cause of humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy 
(HHM).10 PTHrP has the same physiologic eects as PTH, increas-
ing TCa and iCa while decreasing PO4. Measuring PTHrP is 
important when evaluating hypercalcemic dogs and cats, since a 
neoplasia-related cause is always a possibility (ch. 69). Normal or 
low PTHrP concentrations do not denitively exclude the possibility 
of a neoplastic process, whereas increases are usually associated with 
a malignant cancer (ch. 331). PTHrP can be reliably measured using 
2-site immunoradiometric assay (IRMA) or N-terminal radioim-
munoassays (RIAs). Several circulating forms of PTHrP, in addition 
to the intact 1-141 amino acid hormone, have biological activity. 
ese include an N-terminal 1-36 amino acid fragment and a 1-86 
amino acid N-terminal-and-midregion fragment. Roles of these 
dierent forms are not completely understood. Like most proteins, 
PTHrP is not stable, is measured preferentially in EDTA plasma, 
and samples should be handled as described for PTH. e reference 
interval for PTHrP is generally <0.5 pmol/L in both dogs and cats.
Vitamin D (Calcitriol, ,-[OH]-Cholecalciferol)
Dietary cholecalciferol, hydroxylated once in an unregulated pro-
cess by the liver to produce 25-OH-cholecalciferol (25-OH vitamin 
D, calcidiol), produces a reservoir pool of inactive vitamin D ready 
for activation to 1,25-(OH)2-vitamin D, calcitriol. is step, which 
occurs in the kidneys, is regulated: its synthesis is stimulated by 
PTH via alpha-1-hydroxylase and suppressed by increases in PO4. 
25-OH-cholecalciferol can also be catabolized by 24-hydroxylation, 
then excreted. Vitamin D (25 and 1,25-[OH]2 D) can be measured 
in cats and dogs by veterinary specialist laboratories.
Calcitonin
Calcitonin, a peptide synthesized by thyroid gland C cells, reduces 
serum [Ca] and aids in limiting postprandial hypercalcemia. ough 
calcitonin can counteract the eects of PTH, its role is relatively 
minor. Following total thyroid and parathyroidectomy, the clini-
cal consequence is hypocalcemia due to hypoparathyroidism, not 
hypercalcemia due to calcitonin deciency. Similarly, when there is 
neoplasia of the C cells (medullary thyroid carcinoma) and excessive 
production of calcitonin, Ca homeostasis is not disrupted. In people, 
release of calcitonin by Ca-stimulated CaSR activity is unlikely to 
contribute to Ca homeostasis. Calcitonin is not usually assessed in 
patients with Ca disorders, and no assays are commercially available.
How Do These Hormones Act Together to Maintain 
Calcium Homeostasis?
PTH is the primary regulator of Ca homeostasis, increasing 
serum [Ca] by increasing the number of osteoclasts on bone 
Larynx
Trachea
Left external
parathyroid gland
Left internal
parathyroid gland
Right lobe
of thyroid
Common
carotid artery
Vagosympathetic
trunk
Isthmus of thyroid
(not always present)
B
A
Figure 283.1
A, Schematic representation of the anatomical posi-
tion of the parathyroid glands. B, Macroscopic pathological specimen 
showing dissection of the ventral cervical region from a cat with an en-
larged parathyroid gland (solid arrow). e contralateral thyroid gland 
is normal, showing no visible parathyroid gland (broken arrow). (Photo 
courtesy Fernando Constantino-Casas.)
Figure 283.2
Histological appearance of the parathyroid glands from 
a healthy dog showing cords or nests of cells around capillaries. He-
matoxylin and eosin, bar = 50 micrometers. (Photo courtesy Fernando 
Constantino-Casas.)
