CHAPTER 301
•
Chronic Kidney Disease
2089
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
ACEi angiotensin 
converting enzyme 
inhibitor
ADH antidiuretic hormone
ARB angiotensin receptor 
blocker
BP blood pressure
BUN blood urea nitrogen
Ca calcium
CI confidence interval
CKD chronic kidney disease
CKD-MBD chronic kidney 
disease-mineral bone 
disorders
EPO erythropoietin
ESA erythrocyte-
stimulating agent
FGF23 fibroblast growth 
factor 23
FIV feline immunodeficien-
cy virus
GFR glomerular filtration 
rate
GI gastrointestinal
HIF hypoxia-inducible factor
hyperCa hypercalcemia
hyperK hyperkalemia
hypoCa hypocalcemia
hypoK hypokalemia
iCa ionized calcium
ICGN immune-complex 
mediated glomerular 
nephritis
IRIS International Renal 
Interest Society
K potassium
KCl potassium chloride
Mg magnesium
PCV packed cell volume
PO4 phosphate
PRCA pure red cell aplasia
PTH parathyroid hormone
RAAS renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system
RBC red blood cell
RSHP renal secondary 
hyperparathyroidism
tCa total calcium
TOD target organ damage
UPCR urine protein-to-
creatinine ratio
US ultrasound
USG urine specific gravity
UTI urinary tract infection
Chronic Kidney Disease
Jessica M. Quimby
OVERVIEW OF CHRONIC KIDNEY 
DISEASE (CKD)
DEFINITIONS AND CO-EXISTING 
CONDITIONS
C
hronic kidney disease (CKD) is 
defined as structural and/or func-
tional abnormalities of one or 
both kidneys that have been continuously 
present for ≥3 months. CKD is usually 
irreversible and progressive, even with 
treatment. It is common for prerenal or 
postrenal azotemia, or for active kidney 
diseases, e.g., “acute-on-chronic kidney 
disease,” to co-exist with CKD. In con-
trast to CKD, many complications are 
reversible (e.g., pyelonephritis, ureteral 
obstruction, dehydration, etc.). There-
fore, appropriate diagnostic workup and 
assessment of all contributing factors 
is important (ch. 299). After correcting 
reversible primary diseases and/or pre-
renal or postrenal conditions, further 
improvement in kidney function may 
not occur because compensatory and 
adaptive mechanisms designed to sus-
tain kidney function have largely already 
occurred, promoting progressive loss of 
remaining nephrons and kidney function.
PREVALENCE AND AFFECTED 
POPULATIONS
Recent prevalence estimates of CKD in pri-
mary care practice range from 0.5-3.74% in 
dogs and 1.2-3.6% in cats.1-3 Age strongly 
inuences prevalence; CKD is oen consid-
ered a disease of older animals, particularly 
in cats. It was estimated that 15-30% of cats 
>15 years old had evidence of CKD,4 but a 
more recent study suggested a prevalence of 
80%.5 In that study, the prevalence was sig-
nicantly higher than previously reported 
even in younger cats (37.5% 0-4.9 years; 
40.9% 5-9.9 years; 42.1% 10-14.9 years). 
In another study of cats >9 years of age, 
30.5% of cats developed azotemia within 12 
months.6 A “renal disorder” was the most 
common cause of death in cats >5 years old 
and the most common cause of death in 
Swedish insured cats dying before the age 
of 12; incidences increase with age.7 8 Dogs 
from the United Kingdom ≥12 years of age had 5.5 times greater 
risk of having CKD than dogs 7 to 12 years old.3
CAUSES OF CKD
A DIAGNOSIS USUALLY MADE LATE IN THE DISEASE 
PROCESS
CKD in dogs and cats is usually diagnosed late in the disease 
course, not until azotemia is present. Typically, these kidneys are 
small because lost nephrons are replaced by brosis and chronic 
inammation. Surviving nephrons have undergone compensa-
tory modications, and progression due to maladaptive processes 
may have occurred. As these lesions are non-specic, they fail to 
provide much insight into the etiologic origin of injury. us, the 
initial inciting cause of CKD is not usually determined, and likely 
may be attributable to a series of renal insults over the life of the 
pet as opposed to one specic cause.
DOGS
Canine CKD may begin due to any of a variety of familial, con-
genital, or acquired conditions. Juvenile nephropathy (renal 
dysplasia) is most likely in young animals (ch. 305). Tubuloint-
erstitial nephritis tends to be found in older dogs, similar to cats 
(ch. 303). Glomerular disease appears to be signicantly more 
common in dogs than cats, likely accounting for the majority of 
CKD (ch. 302). e proportion of dogs with CKD attributable to 
glomerular disease is not known since renal biopsy is necessary 
for diagnosis and there is inherent bias in dogs selected for biopsy. 
In a retrospective study of 501 dogs with proteinuria, immune-
complex mediated glomerular nephritis (ICGN) accounted for 
48.1% of dogs biopsied and amyloidosis for 15.2%. e remaining 
dogs had non-ICGN conditions: 20.6% had focal segmental glo-
merulosclerosis (FSGS), 9% had non-ICGN glomerulopathy, 4.8% 
had non-ICGN nephropathy, and 2.4% had tubulointerstitial dis-
ease.9 Glomerular diseases may result from infectious diseases, e.g., 
borreliosis (ch. 187), ehrlichiosis (ch. 193), anaplasmosis (ch. 193), 
babesiosis (ch. 197), and leishmaniasis (ch. 197).10
CATS
Features seen histologically in cats with CKD most commonly 
include tubulointerstitial inammation, tubular atrophy, and bro-
sis, with secondary glomerulosclerosis. ese features are oen 
described as the nal common pathway aer any one of many 
possible renal insults. Specic renal diagnoses were made in only 
∼16% of postmortem tissues from cats with CKD at rst opinion 
clinics.11 Various etiologies for tubulointerstitial nephritis have 
been proposed, e.g., age, viral infection (feline immunodeciency 
virus [FIV] [ch. 198], feline morbillivirus [ch. 206]), extrarenal dis-
ease (hyperthyroidism [ch. 287], dental disease [ch. 258], systemic 
hypertension [ch. 236], heart disease [ch. 234]), environmental 
CHAPTER 301

SECTION XX
•
Renal Disease
2090
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
factors (stress, vaccines [ch. 185], diet [chs. 148, 149, 158]), ischemia, 
hypoxemia, and others.12 13 e majority of cats with CKD never 
have a denitive cause identied. eir disease likely results from a 
combination of factors that varies among individuals.12
e role that tubular lipid may have in causing disease appears 
to be unique to cats.14 15 Once tubular damage and cell death 
occurs, lipid released into the interstitium may serve as a nidus 
of inammation and subsequent brosis. Since the incidence of 
feline CKD substantially increases with age, this process merits 
special consideration. Not only does this substantiate the theory 
that multiple small injuries to the kidney over the lifetime of the 
cat culminate in clinical disease, but the aged kidney has increased 
susceptibility to injury; changes within the kidney such as senes-
cence and loss of telomere length, which have been documented 
in feline CKD, mean that recovery and repair aer injury are less 
eective.16 17
STAGING CKD
OVERVIEW
Once the diagnosis of CKD has been conrmed and the dog 
or cat is stable, International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) stag-
ing should be performed. is four-tier system in cats and dogs 
is based on renal function (Table 301.1). e system further 
subclassies pets according to the magnitude of their proteinuria 
and/or arterial blood pressure (BP), facilitating application of 
appropriate guidelines for developing management strategies and 
establishing prognosis.3 18 19
ASSIGNING IRIS CKD STAGE
Staging CKD is based on serum creatinine concentrations 
(Table 301.1), the most commonly used estimate of glomeru-
lar ltration rate (GFR) in dogs, cats, and humans. Since cre-
atinine has limited specicity and sensitivity, staging should be 
based on a minimum of 2 results obtained several weeks apart 
when the dog or cat is fasted and well hydrated. Clinical status 
should be considered when interpreting creatinine, other labo-
ratory tests, and when planning treatment strategies. Variability 
in results from dierent laboratories, patient-specic charac-
teristics (e.g., breed, age, sex, body condition and lean body 
mass), and transient prerenal or postrenal events can inuence 
the creatinine. Reduced muscle mass, a common manifestation 
of advanced CKD (muscle condition score charts are found 
inside the covers; ch. 151), may substantially reduce creatinine 
concentrations relative to true GFR, particularly in cats. IRIS 
therefore suggests that symmetric dimethylarginine values may 
be used to modify IRIS CKD staging in dogs and cats where 
body muscle mass is markedly reduced (www.iris-kidney.com).
TABLE 301.1
IRIS CKD Staging in Dogs and Cats
A. IRIS CKD Stage
STAGE
DOGS
CATS
Stage I
Creatinine
<1.4 mg/dL (<125 mcmol/L)
<1.6 mg/dL (<140 mcmol/L)
SDMA
<18 ng/dL
<18 ng/dL
Stage II
Creatinine
1.4-2.8 mg/dL (125-250 mcmol/L)
1.6-2.8 mg/dL (140-250 mcmol/L)
SDMA
18-35 ng/dL
18-25 ng/dL
Stage III
Creatinine
2.9-5.0 mg/dL (251-440 mcmol/L)
2.9-5.0 mg/dL (251-440 mcmol/L)
SDMA
36-54 ng/dL
26-38 ng/dL
Stage IV
Creatinine
>5.0 mg/dL (>440 mcmol/L)
>5.0 mg/dL (>440 mcmol/L)
SDMA
>54 ng/dL
>38 ng/dL
B. Substaging by Proteinuria
URINE PROTEIN-TO-CREATININE RATIO
SUBSTAGE
DOGS
CATS
Proteinuric (P)
>0.5
>0.4
Borderline proteinuric (BP)
0.2-0.5
0.2-0.4
Nonproteinuric (NP)
<0.2
<0.2
C. Substaging by Blood Pressure
BLOOD PRESSURE SUBSTAGE
SYSTOLIC BLOOD PRESSURE (mm Hg)
RISK OF TARGET ORGAN DAMAGE
Normotensive
<140
Minimal
Prehypertensive
140 to 159
Low
Hypertensive
160 to 179
Moderate
Severe hypertensive
≥180
High
CKD, Chronic kidney disease; IRIS, International Renal Interest Society; SDMA, symmetric dimethylarginine.
Data from http://www.iris-kidney.com/pdf/_IRIS_Staging_of_CKD_.pdf. © Copyright  International Renal Interest Society.
