SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1162
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Surgical management may be necessary for more substantial 
injury or for tumors, with anastomosis repair if necessary. 
The prognosis can still be good even with substantial tracheal 
injuries.24
INFECTIOUS TRACHEITIS/TRACHEOBRONCHITIS
Canine infectious respiratory disease complex (CIRDC), formerly 
known as “kennel cough,” is commonly seen in young dogs, espe-
cially in boarding kennels or aer time spent in animal shelters. 
is contagious disease is described in detail in ch. 203.
BRONCHIAL DISEASES
BRONCHIAL DISEASES—PRIMARY
Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs
Definition, Overview Chronic bronchitis (CB) is an incur-
able disease of insidious onset, characterized by chronic and per-
sistent cough, and related to chronic inflammation of the airways 
unassociated with any identified specific primary cause. It is a 
syndrome more than a true diagnosis.27 Therefore, in dogs, it is 
also called nonspecific/aspecific chronic bronchitis.
CB in dogs is dened when 3 diagnostic criteria are fullled: 
(1) ≥2 months of coughing; (2) evidence of mucus hypersecretion 
and (3) exclusion of other chronic cardiopulmonary diseases (e.g., 
congestive heart failure, chronic infectious bronchopneumonia, 
pulmonary neoplasia, eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy [EBP]) 
as the sole cause of cough. Such cardiorespiratory diseases (e.g., 
congestive heart failure, airway collapse) may coexist and compli-
cate the diagnosis and treatment of CB. In humans, the functional 
sequela of CB is chronic airway obstruction, referred to as chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and subsequent emphy-
sema. is mechanism appears to be less frequently observed in 
dogs, although the diagnosis of COPD relies on documentation 
of airow obstruction by pulmonary function tests that are not 
widely available in veterinary medicine. Dogs with severe and 
longstanding CB can exhibit either bronchiectasis (dilation and 
destruction of the walls of the bronchi) or bronchomalacia (air-
way collapse during expiration and cough) or both combined.
Etiology, Epidemiology, and Risk Factors By definition, 
primary causes of CB are poorly understood. The major difficulty 
is that the disease is detectable only in its advanced stages, since 
it has an insidious onset and protracted pathogenesis. Therefore, 
the diagnostic work up is based on exclusion of possible spe-
cific causes, which can be frustrating for both the clinician and 
the owner. Clinicopathological findings are variable and incon-
clusive. Nonspecific CB is mostly diagnosed in middle-aged to 
old smaller breeds of dogs, but it can also occur in larger breeds. 
Many dogs with CB are overweight and have periodontitis and 
dental tartar, which could be potential risk factors.
In humans, the most important risk factors include smoke 
exposure, atmospheric pollution, and infection. e same fac-
tors could impact development of CB in dogs. Moreover, in 
dogs, chronic/previous infection with CIRDC pathogens (e.g., 
Bordetella bronchiseptica) or canine distemper virus, with para-
sites leading to eosinophilic CB, or presence of other diseases 
like tracheal collapse or chronic cardiac disease, are all potential 
causes leading to development of CB. Exposure to environmental 
tobacco has not been conrmed as a risk factor.28
In people, gastroesophageal reux disease (GERD) is generally 
considered among the most common etiologies of chronic cough. 
Indeed, cough management guidelines published by numerous 
respiratory societies worldwide recommend evaluation and treat-
ment of GERD as an integral component of the diagnostic/thera-
peutic algorithm for the management of chronic cough. Silent 
aspiration occurs in over half of healthy humans during sleep 
without clinical consequence29 so it is reasonable to suspect that 
healthy dogs could have silent aspiration without clinical respira-
tory disease (ch. 221).30 31 Indeed, GERD has been shown to be 
common in healthy dogs in a study using nuclear scintigraphy 
to document reux32 while GERD and microaspiration of gastric 
juice reux aspiration have been documented in specic breeds 
(such as healthy West Highland White Terriers) using detection 
of bile acids in bronchoalveolar lavage uid (BALF).31 Aerodiges-
tive disorders causing cough in dogs are probably underdiagnosed 
due to poor clinical recognition and diagnostic limitations.33
Figure 215.5
Tracheal rupture following endotracheal intubations in 
a cat, endoscopic view. e rupture has been repaired with suture.
Figure 215.6
Foreign body obstructing a cat’s trachea, endoscopic 
view. e stone was dislodged and withdrawn using an endoscopic for-
ceps.

CHAPTER 215
•
Large Airway Diseases
1163
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Videouoroscopic swallow studies (VFSS) and detection of 
bile acids in the BALF have been used for conrming the contri-
bution of GERD and microaspiration/occult aerodigestive disor-
ders in dogs presenting for cough without gastrointestinal (GI) 
signs,33,34 including cases of CB.35 Another nding supporting 
the occurrence of repetitive microaspiration is the heterogeneity 
and alterations of the lung microbiota in dogs with CB, believed 
to result from increased colonization of the lower airways during 
compromised airway function.35
Pathophysiology CB results in inflammatory changes within 
the bronchial mucosa, including increased mucus production. 
Bronchial wall thickening and possible progressive bronchomala-
cia contribute to airflow obstruction and further worsen inflam-
mation, which induces cough; the cough, in turn, triggers further 
inflammation.
Clinical Presentation Middle-aged to older dogs of smaller 
breeds are more often affected. The disease is more common in 
obese and overweight animals (ch. 150) and the presence of den-
tal tartar is frequently recognized. A persistent, sonorous cough 
often followed by a terminal retch, and without any identified 
cause, is generally the chief (and often only) client concern.
Diagnosis Chronic cough related to specific causes should 
be ruled out, specifically including tracheal collapse, lung fibrosis 
(ch. 217), EBP, parasitic lung diseases (ch. 217), airway or lung 
tumors (ch. 217), and mitral valve disease (ch. 232). Diagnostic 
tests are performed to rule out other causes of chronic cough. 
Results of a complete blood count are usually normal. If detected, 
peripheral eosinophilia points instead towards pulmonary eosin-
ophilia or parasite infection. Other laboratory testing that should 
be considered includes heartworm antigen testing (ch. 237), fecal 
analysis for both eggs and lungworm larva (ch. 80), and evalua-
tion of N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) 
as a biomarker for left atrial enlargement/congestive heart failure 
(ch. 229) or PH (ch. 218). Elevated NT-proBNP concentrations 
should prompt further evaluation by echocardiography (chs. 
73, 97).36 Thoracic radiographs show bronchial wall thickening 
or a generalized increase in airway-oriented interstitial opacity 
or both. Thoracic radiographs are also useful to exclude other 
conditions that cause cough, such as congestive heart failure, 
lung masses, or interstitial lung disease. Fluoroscopy is useful for 
evaluating the airways for collapse (ch. 212). Ultrasound is not 
particularly useful in bronchitis.37
Computed tomography (CT), which is widely used in people 
with airway diseases, is growing in popularity for identication of 
canine bronchial disease. CT scanning usually requires brief gen-
eral anesthesia, so is commonly combined with evaluation of laryn-
geal function (ch. 214), bronchoscopy (ch. 93), and collection of 
airway cytologic samples in dogs suspected of having CB.38,39
Bronchoscopic ndings are variable but can include irregular 
mucosal surfaces with a loss of the normally glistening appear-
ance, a granular and roughened aspect, and sometimes signs of 
partial bronchial collapse. However, similar signicant ndings 
have been reported in aging healthy dogs, together with some 
degree of bronchiectasis,40 and therefore such ndings must be 
interpretated with caution. e presence of excessive thickened 
and sticky mucus in the airways is also consistent with CB.
Cytologic evaluation of BALF typically reveals excessive 
mucus with possible hyperplasia of epithelial cells, and increased 
numbers of neutrophils, goblet cells, and macrophages.41 Anal-
ysis of bronchial brushings might be a more sensitive indica-
tor of airway inammation than cytologic examination of BAL, 
showing greater percentages of leukocytes and neutrophils.41 As 
with peripheral eosinophilia, airway eosinophilic inammation 
suggests EBP or parasitic infection (e.g., heartworm disease, Angi-
ostrongylus or Crenosoma infection).42-45
Echocardiography (ch. 97) helps to diagnose mitral valve dis-
ease that might be concurrent with CB or might be an alternative 
explanation for cough. It can also detect evidence of PH, which 
can occur secondary to chronic tracheobronchial disease.
As mentioned, VFSS allows identication of dogs with occult 
aerodigestive disorders.34
Management and Monitoring The bronchial alterations 
are not readily reversible, if at all. Therefore, treatment won’t cure 
the disease but ideally will prevent or slow disease progression. 
Therapy is based on an assessment of the nature and severity of 
the individual animal’s problems, and relies on client education. 
Treatment goals for dogs with CB include avoiding exacerbating 
factors, reducing inflammation, limiting cough, and improving 
stamina.
Any environmental pollutants should be eliminated. Owners 
should be advised not to smoke indoors and to limit exposure of 
dogs to airborne irritants, including perfumes.
Control of body weight is very important. Obesity (ch. 150) 
should be treated comprehensively because it markedly worsens 
cough and limits activity. Furthermore, obesity impairs lung func-
tion and increases airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR).46,47 Weight 
loss induces a signicant improvement of cardiopulmonary func-
tion.47 In fact, weight loss alone can cause major improvement in 
clinical signs without any additional drug. A harness should be 
used in place of a collar, and episodes of excessive barking should 
be curtailed with appropriate behavioral modication.
Control of infection and dental hygiene are advocated (ch. 
258) since bacteria from dental tartar may be inhaled into the 
lower airways, especially during panting.
Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of treatment of CB because 
they reduce mucus hypersecretion and mucosal bronchial wall 
thickening as well as reducing airway inammation, which 
reduces cough. Glucocorticoids can be administered orally or via 
inhalation. Prednisone is the most commonly used glucocorti-
coid and is administered at 0.5-1 mg/kg PO q24h initially and 
then tapered to the lowest eective dosage that controls clinical 
signs. Alternate-day therapy is preferred to allow normalization of 
the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and to limit clinical signs associ-
ated with use of exogenous glucocorticoids.
Inhaled glucocorticoids have been used widely in people and 
are used with growing frequency in dogs with CB, since avoidance 
of systemic steroid eects can improve quality of life. One study 
demonstrated the benets of therapy with uticasone, delivered 
via a spacer chamber and face mask designed especially for dogs 
(e.g., AeroDawg; ch. 90).48 Bronchodilators (beta-2 agonists, the-
ophylline) are frequently used, although their eectiveness in the 
treatment of CB has not been well-investigated.
Antibiotics are warranted in dogs with an acute exacerbation 
of CB and a reasonable suspicion of infection. Doxycycline and 
macrolides (azithromycin) are good choices for dogs with CB 
because these drugs have anti-inammatory properties as well as 
antimicrobial eects.27 Fluoroquinolones also have good tissue 
penetration but concurrent administration of uoroquinolones 
with theophylline can result in theophylline toxicosis.49
When coughing is exhausting to dog and owner despite 
anti-inammatory therapy, cough suppressants can be helpful. 
Over-the-counter cough suppressants are rarely eective in dogs, 
whereas narcotic cough suppressants are most eective. In some 
countries, oral preparations containing opioids have become less 
and less easily available. In countries where no oral preparation 
of butorphanol can be prescribed, a couple of drops of injectable 
solution deposited on the tongue can be eective but neither the 
necessary dosage, nor the dosage-eect relationship, have been 
