SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
2022
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
INTRODUCTION
F
eline hyperadrenocorticism (fHAC; 
Cushing’s syndrome; hypercortisolism) 
is less common, has more worrisome 
consequences, and poses greater challenges to 
diagnose and treat than canine hyperadreno-
corticism (cHAC). fHAC has a worse progno-
sis than the condition in dogs. Unlike in dogs, 
fHAC is commonly associated with diabetes 
mellitus (DM), a skin hyperfragility syn-
drome, and other conditions that can compli-
cate management. Basic pathophysiology and 
other aspects of fHAC are similar to cHAC 
(ch. 293). is chapter focuses on the clinical 
condition in cats caused by chronic exposure 
to excess cortisol or other steroid hormones 
with cortisol-like action. For example, cats 
with progesterone-secreting adrenocortical 
tumors, with or without aldosterone secre-
tion, may have clinical signs similar to fHAC 
(ch. 295).1-3 Importantly, insulin-resistant 
DM in cats is more commonly associated 
with hypersomatotropism (HS; feline acro-
megaly) than with fHAC (ch. 280).
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Naturally occurring fHAC is a multi-systemic disorder resulting 
from excessive production of cortisol by the adrenal cortices. 
ere are single case reports and several case series of cats with 
fHAC that together total only about 100 cases.4-25 Pituitary-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH) aects about 85% of 
cats with fHAC, most commonly caused by an autonomous 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-secreting adenoma. 
Adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (ADH) aects about 
15% of cats with fHAC, usually caused by an autonomously 
functioning adrenocortical adenoma or carcinoma.5 A small 
number of cats have a pituitary tumor that secretes more than 1 
hormone.19 26-29 Iatrogenic fHAC has been described aer glu-
cocorticoid or progestogen administration,30-32 either of which 
can severely suppress endogenous cortisol and cause adrenocor-
tical atrophy.33
CLINICAL SIGNS
OVERVIEW
Early reports of cats with fHAC described obvious clinical signs, 
oen present for months before diagnosis. As subtleties and 
variations in signs and associated biochemical disorders are bet-
ter appreciated, fHAC is being diagnosed in cats with fewer clini-
cal signs (Table 294.1).6 Early diagnosis and treatment may avoid 
development of severe clinical signs or DM.34
AGE, BREED, SEX
fHAC is most common in middle-aged to older cats (median age 
in the various studies was 9.5 to 13 years; range from 3 to 15 years) 
with no apparent sex or breed predilection.
PHYSICAL CHANGES
Skin
Cutaneous manifestations of fHAC include truncal and abdominal 
alopecia, but far less frequently than in cHAC. An unkempt hair coat 
and cornication defects/seborrhea are common. eir thin skin is 
prone to tears, bruising, and secondary infection (Figure 294.1). e 
hyperfragile skin is particularly distressing to owners and unwary cli-
nicians. Cats with fHAC should always be handled with great care. 
Calcinosis cutis has not been reported in naturally occurring nor iat-
rogenic fHAC. Recurrent sebaceous cysts have also been seen.
Other Physical Examination Findings
Cats with fHAC oen have a pendulous abdomen, muscle wast-
ing, hepatomegaly, and weight gain. A minority lose weight. Some 
have soened tongue barbs or tongue ulcers.
METABOLIC ALTERATIONS
Diabetes Mellitus (DM)
Polyuria, polydipsia (PU/PD) and polyphagia (PP) are the most 
common metabolic signs of fHAC but are almost always second-
ary to DM with its consequent glycosuria and osmotic diuresis 
(ch. 292) or to chronic kidney disease (CKD) with its consequent 
Feline Hyperadrenocorticism
Ian K. Ramsey | Michael E. Herrtage
CHAPTER 294
ACRONYMS
ACTH adrenocorticotropic 
hormone
ACTHst ACTH stimulation 
test
ADH adrenal-dependent 
hyperadrenocorticism
ALP alkaline phosphatase
BUN blood urea nitrogen
cHAC canine hyperadreno-
corticism
CKD chronic kidney disease
CT computed tomography
DM diabetes mellitus
DST dexamethasone 
screening test
fHAC feline hyperadreno-
corticism
HAC hyperadrenocorticism
MRI magnetic resonance 
imaging
PDH pituitary-dependent 
hyperadrenocorticism
PU/PD polyuria, polydipsia
UCCR urine 
corticoid:creatinine
US ultrasonography
USG urine specific gravity
TABLE 294.1
Approximate Frequency of Clinical Findings in 
Feline Hyperadrenocorticism
FINDING
FREQUENCY
Concurrent diabetes mellitus
79%
Polyuria/polydipsia
79%
Polyphagia
60%
Abdominal distension
54%
Alopecia/failure to regrow hair
43%
Skin hyperfragility/spontaneous tearing
40%
Weight loss/muscle atrophy
31%
Weakness/lethargy
29%
Weight gain/obesity
23%
Poor coat (dry, seborrhea, etc.)
15%
From data provided in  published series of cases with a combined total of  
cats.-,- Note that  of these series (a total of  cases) were selected by treat-
ment modality; however, there was no apparent difference in the presenting 
signs. See e-Table . for further information.

CHAPTER 294
•
Feline Hyperadrenocorticism
2023
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
inability to concentrate urine (ch. 301). Most cats with fHAC 
have insulin resistant DM; in 1 case series, 27 of 30.11 Several 
other series have indicated that a majority, but not all, cats with 
hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) have concurrent DM.7 10 Insulin 
resistance is reected in large daily insulin doses oen required 
(∼2 units/kg) to control their hyperglycemia and glycosuria.4 7
However, clinicians should not exclude the possibility of HAC in 
a well-controlled diabetic on a typical dose of insulin. PU/PD is 
not common in fHAC in the absence of DM or CKD.
Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD, ch. )
PU/PD in fHAC can also be associated with CKD, a rare con-
comitant condition in cHAC. ere is no evidence of a direct 
correlation between the two nor that presence of one makes the 
other more dicult to manage.11 Most cats with fHAC and a urine 
specic gravity (USG) <1.020 have CKD.
Infection
Many cats with HAC develop infections, sometimes with unusual 
organisms, that are frequently dicult to resolve.4 9 11 17 is appar-
ent predisposition to infection suggests that cats with fHAC are 
either quite immunosuppressed or their fragile skin, DM, and other 
concurrent conditions increase susceptibility to severe infection.
Pancreatitis (ch. )
Cats with fHAC have been described as having pancreatitis, but 
fHAC is a severe anti-inammatory condition, making this an 
unlikely pairing of conditions. Feline pancreatic lipase immuno-
reactivity (fPLI) may not be reliable in cats with fHAC.11 35
Systemic Hypertension (ch. ), Blindness (ch. )
About 20% of cats with fHAC are hypertensive, a lower prevalence 
than in cHAC.11 36 Acute blindness due to bilateral retinal detach-
ment was reported in a hypertensive cat with HAC.23
GENERAL LABORATORY TESTING AND 
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
SERUM BIOCHEMISTRY PROFILE, COMPLETE BLOOD 
COUNT (CBC), URINALYSIS (UA)
Hyperglycemia, seen in about 80% of cats with fHAC, is com-
mon. Most but not all of these cats have overt DM (Table 
294.2; Figure 294.2). About 50% of cats with fHAC have hyper-
cholesterolemia, probably related to poorly controlled DM 
and increased lipolysis (ch. 63). In 1 review, >50% of cats with 
fHAC had increases in blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and >25% 
had increases in both BUN and creatinine concentrations, 
consistent with CKD (ch. 62).37 Cats lack a steroid-induced 
isoenzyme of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and only ∼30% of 
cats with fHAC have even mild increases in ALP and/or ala-
nine aminotransferase (ALT) activity, likely secondary to DM 
(ch. 65). e “stress leukogram” (lymphopenia, eosinopenia and 
neutrophilia) is not common in cats with fHAC (ch. 58). Cats with 
fHAC that do not have DM or CKD usually have USG >1.020. In 
comparison to dogs with HAC, cats tend to have more dramatic 
physical changes and less dramatic clinicopathological changes.
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
Overview
Diagnostic imaging allows identication of pituitary and adrenal 
size (large or small) and can provide evidence of masses, local 
vessel or organ invasion, or metastases, aiding in choosing indi-
vidualized treatment strategies. Seeing a mass does not indicate 
function. Images should be interpreted in the context of clinical 
signs and endocrine test results.
Radiography
Radiographic examination of the thorax and abdomen is advisable 
in all cats suspected or proven to have fHAC. Survey radiographs 
of the thorax and abdomen uncommonly reveal an adrenal mass 
(Figure 294.3, A), but also may identify concurrent abnormalities 
A
B
Figure 294.1
A and B, A 9-year-old neutered female Domestic Short-
hair cat with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism causing fragile 
skin that can easily tear.
TABLE 294.2
Approximate Frequency of Clinicopathological 
Findings in Feline Hyperadrenocorticism
FINDING
FREQUENCY
Biochemical
Hyperglycemia
>43 of 47 (>91%)
Hypercholesterolemia
>16 of 31 (>51%)
Increased ALT
16 of 45 (35%)
Increased ALP
11 of 46 (24%)
Urinalysis
Glucosuria
>41 of 47 (>87%)
USG less than 1.030
10 of 28 (36%)
Proteinuria
23 of 29 (79%)
Hematological
Anemia
16 of 44 (36%)
Neutrophilia
21 of 39 (54%)
Lymphopenia
26 of 45 (58%)
Undetectable eosinophils
7 of 11 (63%)
From data provided in  published series of unselected cases with a combined 
total of  cases.,,,
ALP, Alkaline phosphatase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; USG, urine specific gravity.
