SECTION XI
•
Infectious Disease
1050
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
68. Hofmann-Lehmann R, Levy LS, Willett BJ. Comparing the ecacy of FeLV 
vaccines: comment on: Stuke, K. etal. Ecacy of an inactivated FeLV vaccine 
compared to a recombinant FeLV vaccine in minimum age cats following virulent 
FeLV challenge. Vaccine. 2014;32(22):2599-2603.
69. Poulet H, ibault JC, Masias A. Immunosuppression in a comparative study 
of feline leukemia virus vaccines. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2015;22:1294-1295.
70. Day MJ, Schoon HA, Magnol JP, etal. A kinetic study of histopathologi-
cal changes in the subcutis of cats injected with non-adjuvanted and adjuvanted 
multi-component vaccines. Vaccine. 2007;25:4073-4084.
71. Srivastav A, Kass PH, McGill LD, etal. Comparative vaccine-specic and 
other injectable-specic risks of injection-site sarcomas in cats. J Am Vet Med 
Assoc. 2012;241:595-602.
72. Hofmann-Lehmann R, Cattori V, Tandon R, etal. Vaccination against the 
feline leukaemia virus: outcome and response categories and long-term follow-
up. Vaccine. 2007;25:5531-5539.
73. Jirjis FF, Davis T, Lane J, etal. Protection against feline leukemia virus 
challenge for at least 2 years aer vaccination with an inactivated feline leukemia 
virus vaccine. Vet er. 2010;11:E1-E6.
74. Wilson S, Greenslade J, Saunders G, etal. Diculties in demonstrating long 
term immunity in FeLV vaccinated cats due to increasing age-related resistance to 
infection. BMC Vet Res. 2012;8:125.
75. Bergmann M, Schwertler S, Speck S, etal. Antibody response to feline 
panleukopenia virus vaccination in cats with asymptomatic retrovirus infections: 
a pilot study. J Feline Med Surg. 2019;21:1094-1101.
76. Hartmann K. Ecacy of antiviral chemotherapy for retrovirus-infected 
cats: What does the current literature tell us? J Feline Med Surg. 2015;17:925-939.
77. Hartmann K. How I treat feline retrovirus infections. NAVC Clinician’s Brief
2012;5:79-84.
78. Hartmann K. Management of feline retrovirus-infected cats. In: Bonagura JD, 
Twedt DC, eds. Kirk’s Current Veterinary erapy XVI. Elsevier; 2015:1275-1283.
ACRONYMS
ACE2 angiotensin converting 
enzyme 2
ADE antibody-dependent 
enhancement
CCoV canine enteric coronavirus
CD cluster of differentiation
CIRD canine infectious respirato-
ry disease complex
CPV canine parvovirus
CRCoV canine respiratory coro-
navirus
CSF cerebrospinal fluid
GI gastrointestinal
FCoV feline coronavirus
FDA U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration
FECV feline enteric coronavirus
FIP feline infectious peritonitis
FIPV feline infectious peritonitis 
virus
FNA fine-needle aspirate
IFN interferon
IHC immunohistochemistry
IL interleukin
ORF open reading frame
PCR polymerase chain reaction
RT-PCR reverse transcriptase 
polymerase chain reaction
S spike
SARS-CoV-2 severe acute respi-
ratory syndrome coronavirus 2
SNP single nucleotide polymor-
phism
TGEV transmissible gastroenteri-
tis virus
Th T helper (cell)
Coronavirus Infection
Beth N. Licitra | Gary R. Whittaker
FELINE CORONAVIRUS
FELINE ENTERIC CORONAVIRUS 
(FECV) VERSUS FELINE INFEC-
TIOUS PERITONITIS VIRUS (FIPV)
The Dichotomy of Diseases 
Caused by Feline Coronavirus 
(FCoV)
FCoV is a pathogen of wild and domes-
tic cats and is endemic in multi-cat envi-
ronments, e.g., catteries and shelters.1
Most cats exposed to FCoV develop 
mild or subclinical enteritis; however, a 
small subset experiences progression to 
a systemic and usually lethal immune-
mediated disease known as feline infec-
tious peritonitis (FIP). is dichotomy in 
disease severity has resulted in classify-
ing FCoV infections into one of two bio-
types: FECV and FIPV. e term biotype
refers to a virus infection associated with 
a distinct clinical outcome: FECV is pro-
posed to cause mild self-limiting enteritis 
while FIPV causes systemic inamma-
tion and death. e preponderance of 
evidence suggests that FIPVs arise from 
FECVs by mutations that occur sponta-
neously within each aected cat and a 
mix of host and viral factors that dictate 
whether FIPVs will arise and what form 
the disease will take.
e emergence of FIP in cats was 
documented in necropsy records from 
Angell Memorial Animal Hospital 
(Boston, MA, USA) from the late 1950s and was rst described in 
1963.2 It appears to have emerged in the United States and spread 
worldwide by the mid-1970s.3 e origins of FCoV are less clear, 
but coronaviruses are well known for their ability to cross species 
boundaries and FIPV emerged in approximately the same time 
frame as its closest relatives: transmissible gastroenteritis virus 
(TGEV) of swine (in the 1940s) and canine enteric coronavirus 
(CCoV) of dogs (in the 1970s) (Figure 200.1).
Serotypes of FCoV
Two distinct serotypes of FCoV have been identied, separated by 
the antigenic and genetic properties of their viral spike (S) protein 
(Figure 200.2).4 5 S is a crucial mediator of infection responsible 
for both receptor binding and membrane fusion. Feline coronavi-
rus serotype 1 (FCoV-1) and feline coronavirus serotype 2 (FCoV-
2) have evolutionarily distinct S proteins that, in many ways, make 
them behave like dierent viruses.6 FCoV-1 is more prevalent 
clinically, grows poorly in cell culture, and is less studied. FCoV-2 
is easily propagated in cell culture but accounts for a smaller pro-
portion of natural infections. Aminopeptidase N (APN) has been 
identied as the receptor for FCoV-2 while FCoV-1 uses a dier-
ent, unidentied receptor.7 FCoV-1 S contains a notable insertion 
of a proteolytic cleavage site (S1/S2) that plays an important role 
in infection. FCoV-2 viruses lack this insertion.8 Despite dier-
ences, the clinical outcome of infection appears to be the same: 
both FCoV-1 and FCoV-2 can result in FECV or FIPV in an 
infected cat. Superinfection, or simultaneous infection with more 
than one serotype, is possible but poorly documented.
PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL SIGNS OF FECV
FECV replicates within the intestinal epithelium. Most cats are 
subclinically infected, but some have signs of fever, anorexia, and 
mild diarrhea.9 10 FECV is ubiquitous among cats in multi-cat 
environments such as catteries and shelters. Within 24 hours of 
CHAPTER 200
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic asset onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Video.

CHAPTER 200
•
Coronavirus Infection
1051
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
infection, FCoV can be detected in the tonsils and small intes-
tine.11 It then spreads systemically.12 Monocyte-associated viremia 
is common,13-15 with virus shed in the feces and transmitted by the 
oronasal route. Primary infection can last several months. Some 
cats clear the virus, but many continue to shed at low levels for 
up to 2 years.4 16 Colonic columnar epithelial cells appear to serve 
as a reservoir for persistent infection and shedding.12 Immunity 
is not long-lasting and reinfection may occur.17 Despite the term 
“enteric,” FECV can be detected in all major organs, including the 
central nervous system, for up to 80 days post-infection with no 
clinical signs.12 It is suspected that mesenteric lymph nodes and 
tissue macrophages also serve as virus reservoirs. Like other coro-
naviruses, FCoV can survive 1 to 2 days on surfaces. Anecdotally, 
it has been reported to remain viable as long as 7 weeks in dried 
feces. is nding is reported in previous reviews and textbooks 
and is based on data collected in a laboratory setting; however, the 
longevity of FCoV in natural environments is likely to be much 
shorter. Like other enveloped viruses, FCoV is highly susceptible 
to destruction by detergents, disinfectants, prolonged exposure to 
UV light, or desiccation (ch. 186).
PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL SIGNS OF FIPV
Pathogenesis
In approximately 5% of FCoV infections, the virus gains an abil-
ity to replicate robustly within blood monocytes and tissue macro-
phages, resulting in FIP—an immune-mediated disease associated 
with activation of monocytes, macrophages, and endothelial cells. 
Naturally occurring FIPVs are thought to arise independently and 
to be largely non-transmissible; however, cats can be experimen-
tally infected through oronasal exposure and, while transmission 
data are limited, have been shown to shed virus in nasal secre-
tions.18 FIP has a predilection for kittens and young cats, but ani-
mals of any age can succumb. It may strike more than one animal in 
a household and has been known to devastate shelters and catteries.
Early Clinical Characteristics
Early clinical signs are nonspecic (Video 6.4): fever, lethargy, 
anorexia, and weight loss. Laboratory test results oen reveal 
a nonregenerative anemia, neutrophilia with a le shi, and 
lymphopenia due to cytokine mediated depletion of cluster of 
CCoV-2
CCoV-2 (pantropic)
FCoV-2 “FECV”
FCoV--2 “FIPV”
TGEV
FRECV
FRSCV
FCoV-1 “FECV”
CCoV-1
FCoV-1 “FIPV”
Porcine deltaCoV
Asian leopard cat CoV
IBV
SARS-CoV
SARS-CoV-2
ECoV
CRCoV
BCoV
α
δ
γ
β
Figure 200.1
Cartoon representation of a phylogenetic tree for selected coronavirus spike genes. Feline and canine coronaviruses referred to in this 
chapter are shown in blue, with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in purple, along with other representative coronavi-
ruses. One additional feline coronavirus from a wild Asian leopard cat is also shown. e coronavirus genus (alpha, beta, gamma, or delta) to which the 
viruses belong is indicated. BCoV, Bovine coronavirus; CCoV-1, canine enteric coronavirus 1; CCoV-2, canine enteric coronavirus 2; CRCoV, canine 
respiratory coronavirus; ECoV, equine coronavirus; FECV, feline enteric coronavirus; FIPV, feline infectious peritonitis virus; FRECV, ferret enteric 
coronavirus; FRSCV, ferret systemic coronavirus; IBV, infectious bronchitis virus; TGEV, transmissible gastroenteritis virus.
