CHAPTER 286
•
Feline Hypothyroidism
1935
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
188. Daniel GB, Neelis DA. yroid scintigraphy in veterinary medicine. Semin 
Nucl Med. 2014;44:24-34.
189. Taeymans O, Peremans K, Saunders JH. yroid imaging in the dog: cur-
rent status and future directions. J Vet Intern Med. 2007;21:673-684.
190. Taeymans O, Daminet S, Duchateau L, etal. Pre- and post-treatment 
ultrasonography in hypothyroid dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2007;48:262-269.
191. Reese S, Breyer U, Deeg C, etal. yroid sonography as an eective tool 
to discriminate between euthyroid sick and hypothyroid dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2005;19:491-498.
192. Bromel C, Pollard RE, Kass PH, etal. Comparison of ultrasonographic 
characteristics of the thyroid gland in healthy small-, medium-, and large-breed 
dogs. Am J Vet Res. 2006;67:70-77.
193. Taeymans O, Dennis R, Saunders JH. Magnetic resonance imaging of the 
normal canine thyroid gland. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2008;49:238-242.
194. Taeymans O, Schwarz T, Duchateau L, etal. Computed tomographic fea-
tures of the normal canine thyroid gland. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2008;49:13-19.
195. Diaz Espineira MM, Mol JA, Peeters ME, etal. Assessment of thyroid 
function in dogs with low plasma thyroxine concentration. J Vet Intern Med
2007;21:25-32.
196. Shiel RE, Pinilla M, McAllister H, etal. Assessment of the value of quanti-
tative thyroid scintigraphy for determination of thyroid function in dogs. J Small 
Anim Pract. 2012;53:278-285.
197. Pinilla M, Shiel RE, Brennan SF, etal. Quantitative thyroid scintigraphy 
in greyhounds suspected of primary hypothyroidism. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
2009;50:224-229.
198. Seavers A, Vickery K, Page SW, etal. Dynamic thyroid testing, thyroid 
histology and thyroxine replacement therapy in Basenji dogs. Aust Vet Pract
2015;45:9.
199. Cecere J, Purswell B, Panciera D. Levothyroxine supplementation in hypo-
thyroid bitches during pregnancy. eriogenology. 2020;142:48-53.
200. Lewis VA, Morrow CMK, Jacobsen JA, etal. A pivotal eld study to sup-
port the registration of levothyroxine sodium tablets for canine hypothyroidism. J 
Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2018;54:201-208.
201. Bergmann M, Freisl M, Hartmann K, etal. Antibody response to canine 
parvovirus vaccination in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism treated with trilo-
stane. Vaccines (Basel). 2020;8:547.
202. Dixon RM, Reid SW, Mooney CT. Treatment and therapeutic monitoring 
of canine hypothyroidism. J Small Anim Pract. 2002;43:334-340.
203. Tvarijonaviciute A, Jaillardon L, Ceron JJ, etal. Eects of thyroxin therapy 
on dierent analytes related to obesity and inammation in dogs with hypothy-
roidism. Vet J. 2013;196:71-75.
204. Hare JE, Morrow CMK, Caldwell J, etal. Safety of orally administered, 
USP-compliant levothyroxine sodium tablets in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol er
2018;41:254-265.
205. O’Neill SH, Frank LA, Reynolds LM. Eect of an anti-inammatory dose 
of prednisone on thyroid hormone monitoring in hypothyroid dogs. Vet Derma-
tol. 2011;22:202-205.
206. Lavergne SN, Fosset FT, Kennedy P, etal. Potential cutaneous hypersensi-
tivity reaction to an inactive ingredient of thyroid hormone supplements in a dog. 
Vet Dermatol. 2016;27:53-e16.
ACRONYMS
CKD chronic kidney disease
fT4 free T4
LT4Na levothyroxine sodi-
um
NTIS non-thyroidal illness 
syndrome
TSH thyrotropin (thyroid-
stimulating hormone)
TT4 total thyroxine
T3 triiodothyronine
Feline Hypothyroidism
J. Catharine Scott-Moncrieff
N
aturally 
occurring 
hypothyroid-
ism in cats is a rare clinical entity. 
A small number of cats with con-
genital or adult onset hypothyroidism have 
been reported in the veterinary literature.1-9
In contrast, iatrogenic hypothyroidism fol-
lowing treatment for hyperthyroidism is 
common.11-15 e most common cause of a 
low serum total thyroxine (TT4) concentra-
tion in cats is non-thyroidal illness syndrome 
(NTIS).
ETIOLOGY
ADULT-ONSET HYPOTHYROIDISM
While only 4 case reports and one case series of 7 cats with 
primary adult-onset hypothyroidism have been published, the 
disorder is likely more common. Reported causes included 
lymphocytic thyroiditis, diuse follicular hyperplasia, and 
idiopathic.6-10 Diuse follicular hyperplasia causing goiter was 
documented in 2 cats and suspected in a further 5 based on scin-
tigraphic ndings.10 e underlying cause of follicular hyper-
plasia in cats with adult onset hypothyroidism is unknown. 
Exposure to goitrogens or imbalances in dietary iodine have 
not been documented. Adult cats with a mild form of congenital 
hypothyroidism (dyshormonogenesis) is a more likely explana-
tion, but is not proven. Secondary hypothyroidism was reported 
in an 18-month-old cat with stunted growth and a history of 
head trauma at 8 weeks of age.3
CONGENITAL HYPOTHYROIDISM
Overview
Congenital primary hypothyroidism is recognized more fre-
quently than the adult-onset condition in cats. Cats with congeni-
tal hypothyroidism are likely under-recognized because screening 
for hypothyroidism is not routine in kittens and some likely die 
without a diagnosis. Causes of congenital hypothyroidism include 
thyroid dyshormonogenesis, thyroid hypoplasia or aplasia, thy-
rotropin (TSH [thyroid-stimulation hormone]) resistance, and 
thyroiditis.1 2 4 16 17
Dyshormonogenesis
Dyshormonogenesis is the most common form of congenital 
hypothyroidism in cats and is a condition caused by inborn errors 
that interfere with synthesis of thyroid hormone, e.g., thyroid 
peroxidase deciency and iodide transport defects. Severity of 
clinical signs varies and their onset may be delayed because some 
defects are incomplete. Dyshormonogenesis is usually associated 
with the development of goiter (enlarged thyroid) secondary to 
sustained TSH stimulation. Both functional transduction of sig-
nal via the TSH receptor and a block in the synthesis of thyroid 
hormones must be present. A specic mutation was not identi-
ed in the reported cats. Two kittens with congenital hypothy-
roidism due to defective organication of iodide were diagnosed 
CHAPTER 286
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Video and 1 Client Information Sheet.

SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
1936
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
based on in vivo discharge of accumulated labeled iodide by per-
chlorate.1 e defect was complete in 1 cat and partial in another. 
No membrane-bound peroxidase activity could be demonstrated 
in the cat with the partial deciency and it was suspected that 
“loose enzyme anchoring” decreased peroxidase availability and 
decreased capacity for organic binding of trapped iodide. An 
inherited autosomal recessive defect in iodine organication was 
suspected in a family of Abyssinian cats with congenital hypo-
thyroidism and goiter.2 Congenital hypothyroidism with goiter 
due to thyroid peroxidase deciency was reported in a family of 
Domestic Shorthair cats, also thought to have an inherited auto-
somal recessive trait.18 yroid dyshormongenesis was suspected 
in a series of 6 cats with congenital goitrous hypothyroidism from 
a single veterinary hospital in Chile.5
Thyroid Gland Agenesis or Hypoplasia
Defects in development causing thyroid gland agenesis or hypo-
plasia (dysmorphogenesis) have been described. e molecular 
genetic defect has not been established. In other species, defects 
in genes encoding thyroid transcription factors 1 and 2, the TSH 
receptor, and signal transduction pathways downstream of the 
TSH receptor have been described.4
TSH Resistance
TSH resistance was the proposed cause of inherited primary 
hypothyroidism in a colony of Japanese cats, none of which had a 
goiter.16 e defect was inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.
Thyroiditis
A colony of cats had severe signs of hypothyroidism and thyroid-
itis that developed at 40 to 60 days of age.17 e severity of thy-
roiditis was decreased by early treatment with thyroid hormone.
Iodine Deficiency
Rarely, iodine deciency has been reported to cause hypothyroid-
ism in kittens fed a strict all-meat diet.
IATROGENIC HYPOTHYROIDISM
Iatrogenic hypothyroidism is most oen the result of treating 
hyperthyroidism and is the most common cause of the condi-
tion in cats (ch. 287). Iatrogenic hypothyroidism has also been 
reported following stereotactic radiation therapy for acromeg-
aly.19 Iatrogenic hypothyroidism may follow radioactive iodine 
treatment, bilateral thyroidectomy, or administration of anti-
thyroid drugs (ch. 287). Depending on the mode of treatment, 
plasma TT4 may decline to subnormal concentrations within 
hours (surgery), days (anti-thyroid drugs), or weeks-to-months 
(radioactive iodine). e prevalence of iatrogenic hypothyroid-
ism following radioactive iodine treatment ranges from 3 to 79%, 
a wide range that likely reects dierences in criteria used for 
diagnosing iatrogenic hypothyroidism and use of dierent radio-
active iodine dose protocols.20 21
Diagnosis of iatrogenic hypothyroidism relies on clinical signs 
(see below) in conjunction with low total TT4 (overt hypothyroid-
ism). It is now recognized that some cats with iatrogenic hypothy-
roidism do not have overt clinical signs and may have serum TT4
concentrations within the low end of the reference range (sub-
clinical hypothyroidism).13 15 e clinical consequences of sub-
clinical hypothyroidism are unclear but azotemia in some cats 
resolves with thyroid hormone supplementation.
In two recent studies of cats treated with 2 to 6 mCi of radioac-
tive iodine, the reported prevalence of overt hypothyroidism aer 6 
months ranged from 1 to 40% and prevalence of subclinical hypo-
thyroidism ranged from 13 to 46%.13 14 e prevalence of overt and 
subclinical hypothyroidism was lower in cats treated with lower 
dosages of radioactive iodine. Iatrogenic hypothyroidism may also 
occur in cats treated with anti-thyroid drugs. In a study of 80 non-
azotemic hyperthyroid cats treated with methimazole for 6 months, 
35% became hypothyroid, as dened by a TT4 below the reference 
range and a serum TSH concentration above the reference range.12
Cats that became hypothyroid following therapy for hyperthy-
roidism were more likely to become azotemic than those that 
became euthyroid. Cats that became both hypothyroid and azo-
temic had shorter survival times than the euthyroid azotemic cats. 
Azotemia was presumed to be due to a decrease in glomerular l-
tration rate in cats with underlying chronic kidney disease (CKD, 
ch. 301) and concurrent hypothyroidism. Prolonged iatrogenic 
hypothyroidism should be avoided, especially in cats with known 
concurrent CKD. In 125 methimazole-treated hyperthyroid cats, 
about 20% had decreased free T4 (fT4) and/or TT4 and increased 
TSH concentrations, consistent with iatrogenic hypothyroid-
ism.22 Hypothyroidism is not expected aer unilateral thyroidec-
tomy, but approximately 50% of cats become hypothyroid aer 
bilateral thyroidectomy.23
CLINICAL SIGNS
ADULT-ONSET HYPOTHYROIDISM
Clinical signs of adult onset feline hypothyroidism vary in sever-
ity and include lethargy, inappetence, mental dullness, derma-
tologic abnormalities, obesity, polyuria, and polydipsia (Figure 
286.1; Video 286.1). In a report of 7 adult cats with spontaneous 
hypothyroidism, only 2 were evaluated for hair loss, lethargy or 
obesity, 3 had no signs but had abnormal results on annual thy-
roid testing, and 2 had a palpable goiter. e goiters ranged in 
size from 2.5 to 8 times the upper reference of thyroid volume.10
Dermatologic signs are quite variable (ch. 12). Aected cats may 
develop a dull, dry, unkempt hair coat with matting, increased 
shedding, dandru, and seborrhea. Easily epilated and poor hair 
regrowth may lead to alopecia aecting the pinnae, pressure 
points, and the dorsal and lateral tail base region.6 7 Asymmetric 
or bilaterally symmetric alopecia involving the lateral neck, tho-
rax, and abdomen also occur. Myxedema of the face, causing a 
“puy” appearance, was reported in 1 cat with naturally acquired 
adult-onset hypothyroidism.6 Bradycardia and mild hypothermia 
may be additional ndings on physical examination.
CONGENITAL HYPOTHYROIDISM
Kittens with congenital hypothyroidism typically appear normal 
at birth but their slow growth usually becomes evident by 6 to 
8 weeks of age. Disproportionate dwarsm develops over the 
ensuing months, with aected kittens developing large heads, 
short wide necks, short body and short thick limbs. Facial dys-
morphism results in a broad head and at face (Figure 286.2). 
Additional ndings include palpable bilateral goiter, obesity, 
lethargy, mental dullness, constipation, hypothermia, brady-
cardia, retention of deciduous teeth and/or delayed eruption 
of adult teeth.1 2 4 eir hair coats consist mainly of the under-
coat with primary guard hairs scattered thinly. Two littermate 
kittens with hypothyroidism had concurrent seizure disorders 
but whether the seizures were related to hypothyroidism was 
unclear.4 Radiographic abnormalities include delayed epiphy-
seal ossication, epiphyseal dysgenesis, shortened vertebral 
bodies, and constipation. An adult cat with suspected con-
genital primary hypothyroidism had bilateral femoral capital 
physeal fractures.24 In a case series of 6 cats with congenital goi-
trous hypothyroidism, the age at diagnosis ranged from 4 to 19 
