SECTION XVI
•
Gastrointestinal Disease
1746
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
should be performed and repeat treatment with ronidazole at 
30 mg/kg PO q12h should be considered. If untreated, cats usu-
ally recover within 5 months to 2 years. e time to obtain com-
plete treatment response is longer in cats in multi-cat households 
and in cats that had previously received various antibiotics. It is 
important to note that the absence of clinical signs is not equiva-
lent to the absence of the pathogen. In dogs, T. foetus plays no role 
as a colonic infectious agent.54-61 153 194 200 201
Giardiasis Dogs and cats with giardiasis may present with 
mixed diarrhea but Giardia spp. are regarded as small intestine 
parasites (ch. 262). The diagnosis and other aspects are discussed 
in ch. 196. Importantly, infection should be treated only when 
clinical signs are present, in which case fenbendazole and strict 
environmental hygiene is the therapy of choice. In order not to 
cause long-term, severe dysbiosis, metronidazole should not be 
used initially, especially in young animals with giardiasis. Inter-
estingly, case reports have shown eradication of Giardia in dogs 
by fecal transplantation (ch. 106).202
Balantidiasis Balantidium coli is primarily a parasite of pigs. 
Dogs can become infected accidentally, leading to UC, when they 
are in contact with pigs. Therapy with tetracyclines and metroni-
dazole is used successfully in humans. Coinfection with T. vulpis
is common and some animals respond well upon eradication of 
T. vulpis.203
Amoebiasis Entamoeba histolytica primarily infects humans 
and leads to amoebic dysentery. Animals usually become infected 
from diseased humans. Although E. histolytica is present in the 
intestinal tract of healthy dogs and cats, there are case reports of 
this organism causing severe colitis. The diagnosis can be made 
by fecal smear. Metronidazole (30 mg/kg PO q12h for 3 weeks) is 
the drug of choice for treatment. However, neurotoxicosis is well-
documented at this high dosage (ch. 248).204-208
Viruses
Feline Infectious Peritonitis Feline infectious peritonitis 
(FIP) is caused by a mutated form of the enteric feline corona-
virus and is usually a disease that affects multiple organ systems 
(ch. 200). When manifesting in the intestinal tract, the colon may 
also be affected. Affected animals show ultrasonographic bowel 
wall thickening either diffusely or as focal nodules/masses. Asso-
ciated lymph nodes may also be enlarged. The diagnosis is made 
by IHC detection of the FIP virus in biopsy specimens. Recent 
experimental studies showed remission of clinical, laboratory, 
and ultrasonographical signs after administration of a nucleoside 
analogue, GS-441524 (ch. 200).209-212
NEOPLASIA
Etiology
Colonic neoplasms are uncommon in dogs and cats, but in dogs 
the colon is the most common site for GI neoplasia. Aected dogs 
typically are 7-11 years old, while cats have a median age of 12.5 
years at presentation. Adenocarcinoma (Video 263.7) is the most 
common (43% and 46% in dogs and cats, respectively) and lym-
phoma is second (41% and 19% in dogs and cats, respectively; ch. 
322).70 78 Less frequent are mast cell tumor (ch. 327), leiomyo-
sarcoma or other stromal tumors (GI stromal tumor [GIST]; ch. 
324) and plasmacytoma (ch. 322).213-216 Most tumors originate in 
the descending colon or rectum, but leiomyosarcomas commonly 
arise in the cecum.217 German Shepherds, West Highland White 
Terriers, and Collies are overrepresented with adenocarcinomas. 
Neoplasia with benign behavior (i.e., polyps [Video 263.8], ade-
nomas [Video 263.5], leiomyomas) also do occur (Figure 263.9). 
e Miniature Dachshund appears to be predisposed to adeno-
matous colonic polyps. As in humans, adenomas and polyps can 
rarely transform into adenocarcinomas in dogs.70 78 218
In the cat, lymphoma occurs as the second most common 
tumor type of the large intestinal tract (alimentary lymphoma; chs. 
262, 322). Dependent on the type of therapy, response and median 
survival time (MST) dier. Small cell lymphoma has the most 
prolonged survival (MST, 18-30 months) and large granular lym-
phoma the shortest (MST, 21 days).219-223 Alimentary lymphomas 
are usually T-cell lymphomas and, unlike mediastinal lymphoma, 
are not associated with feline leukemia virus infection. Rare case 
reports of brosarcoma, ganglioneuroma, hemangiosarcoma, and 
neurobrosarcoma, or indolent follicular lymphoma do occur.213
Physical Examination
Clinical signs of all these tumors include hematochezia, tenes-
mus, possible bowel obstruction, and occasionally perforation. 
Local neoplastic changes can lead to increased intestinal wall 
permeability, translocation of intestinal bacteria, bacteremia, and 
possibly sepsis. e dierential diagnoses always include other 
structural changes such as intussusception, FIP in cats, granu-
lomas, strictures, foreign bodies, hematomas, or fungal granulo-
mas. A comprehensive workup should always be done early in the 
disease course in older animals with fresh blood in their feces. 
As leiomyosarcoma and leiomyoma do not inltrate the mucosa, 
hematochezia is less common.214 215 224
Paraneoplastic disorders include hypoglycemia due to 
insulin-like substance secretion from GIST tumors (especially 
leiomyoma, ch. 324) and hyperglobulinemia in patients with 
plasmacytoma, due to monoclonal antibody production leading 
to hyperviscosity syndrome (ch. 331). In patients with diuse ali-
mentary lymphoma, there may be anorexia and vomiting. Leth-
argy, signs of abdominal pain, and weight loss may also occur. If a 
tumor ruptures spontaneously, acute onset of lethargy, fever, signs 
of abdominal pain, vomiting, and even collapse may occur.
Diagnosis
Rectal masses can be palpated in about 70% of cases with colonic 
neoplasia.225 In cats, a mass is identiable during abdominal pal-
pation in about 50% of cases.226 Larger masses and associated 
lymph node enlargement might be detected radiographically 
(Figure 263.4). However, ultrasound is the most helpful tool for 
Figure 263.9
Endoscopic view of a papillary adenoma of the colon in 
an 8-year-old Sheltie presented for evaluation of hematochezia. (Cour-
tesy Peter Kook, Clinic for Small Animal Internal Medicine, Vetsuisse 
Faculty, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.)

CHAPTER 263
•
Diseases of the Large Intestine
1747
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
visualizing neoplasia of the colon, oen revealing focal thickening 
of the intestinal wall with complete loss of normal wall layering. In 
cats, ultrasound is diagnostic in 85% of cases of malignant colonic 
neoplasia.226 Fluid accumulation cranial to the obstruction may be 
visible in large tumors. Regional lymphadenomegaly may be due to 
metastatic inltration or translocation of intestinal bacteria through 
the permeable intestinal wall (Video 263.3).70 In cats, care must be 
taken when interpreting intestinal thickening ultrasonographically, 
since chronic enteropathies may cause thickening of the cecal wall 
and thus mimic neoplasia. In one study, benign typhlitis associated 
with intestinal wall thickening was described histopathologically in 
13/18 animals.227 In dogs, focal large intestinal wall thickening or a 
mass eect is frequently seen with leiomyosarcomas.224
Ultrasound-guided ne-needle aspiration of focal masses may 
be helpful, but histopathologic evaluation of an endoscopic biopsy 
is usually required for a denitive diagnosis (Videos 263.5, 263.7, 
263.8). Focal changes, with a mass eect, mucosal bleeding, increased 
mucosal friability, erosions, and ulcers can be present. Samples from 
the tumor itself can sometimes reveal only tumor necrosis. It is cru-
cial to collect multiple deep biopsy samples not only from altered 
tissue, but also from adjacent healthy tissue, and the transition zone 
between the two. Colonic perforation during colonoscopy is a rare 
complication.80 Cross-sectional imaging (CT and MRI) can be valu-
able in assessing lesion dimensions and detecting metastatic lesions.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the tumor type, the presence of metasta-
ses, and tumor size. Tumor staging should include thoracic radio-
graphs or CT and ne-needle aspiration of regional lymph nodes. 
Obstructive tumors (e.g., adenocarcinoma, leiomyosarcoma) 
must be completely excised with an endorectal pull-through exci-
sion for distally located tumors or pelvic osteotomy for colorectal 
adenocarcinomas. In cats with adenocarcinomas, local metasta-
ses are oen widespread and subtotal colectomy is recommended 
instead of local excision. Better survival rates are described when 
surgery is combined with carboplatin chemotherapy. In patients 
with large cell lymphoma, initial excision is controversial, but 1 
study showed better survival rates with chemotherapy with prior 
removal of the primary intestinal tumor. Various chemotherapeu-
tic protocols have been described for lymphoma (ch. 322).223
In some dogs with large intestinal neoplasia, upregulation 
of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) has been described and COX-2 
inhibitors (piroxicam, meloxicam) have also been used in non-
lymphoma colonic tumors.228-230 In patients with plasmacytoma, 
excision with adjuvant chemotherapy (prednisolone, melphalan) 
has been described (ch. 322).216 When removing polyps via colo-
noscopy, recurrence should be expected if the stalk remains. An 
attempt should be made to gently loosen the mucosa surrounding 
the polyp with Allis forceps to be able to also remove the stalk. 
Additional argon plasma coagulation can be applied.
Prognosis
e prognosis aer excision for polyps and leiomyomas is excel-
lent but for most malignant colonic tumors it is guarded to poor. 
Aer excision, dogs survive a median of 22 months and cats a 
median of 15 months without adjuvant chemotherapy. For 
patients with adenocarcinoma, the MST in dogs is 1.6 months and 
cats that received subtotal colectomy survived longer than those 
with only mass removal (138 versus 66 days).226 231 232
CONSTIPATION
Etiology and Pathophysiology
Constipation is dened as the diculty with defecation leading 
to 3 or fewer bowel movements per week. It is usually associated 
with an increased mass of stool in the rectum and colon. Acute 
constipation does not necessarily progress to chronic disease if 
treated adequately and promptly because transient dilation of the 
large intestine does not necessarily cause permanent loss of func-
tion. Chronic constipation is dened as infrequent defecation for 
at least 3 consecutive weeks. Obstipation is a more severe form of 
constipation associated with permanent loss of colonic function 
and it is not reversible even with medical treatment.
Many dierent risk factors and secondary causes of consti-
pation have been described and should be considered. First, an 
obstruction (i.e., extramural, intramural, or intraluminal) should 
be distinguished from nonobstructive causes (i.e., inammation or 
neurogenic, metabolic, pharmacologic, environmental, or behav-
ioral factors) (Table 263.6). In hospitalized animals, constipation 
may occur as a multifactorial problem (e.g., decreased physical 
activity plus colonic hypomotility due to the underlying disease 
[e.g., pancreatitis] or treatment with opioids). Such secondary risk 
factors should be addressed early to avoid long-term complications.
In a retrospective study of cats with chronic constipation, 62% 
had idiopathic disease. Extraluminal obstruction (e.g., pelvic canal 
stenosis) was the second most common cause (23%). Neurologic 
(6%) and specic breed-related changes (e.g., spinal cord lesion of the 
Manx cat, 5%) were described less frequently. Few cases were caused 
by neoplasia or were iatrogenic (e.g., colopexy). Hypo-/aganglionosis 
was suspected in 2% of cats. In one young cat with feline megacolon, 
aganglionosis was diagnosed histologically. e dierential diagnoses 
for chronic feline constipation are listed in Table 263.6
Megacolon is the end stage of colonic dysfunction and it pri-
marily occurs in cats. ere are 2 pathogenic mechanisms at play: 
dilation and hypertrophy. Dilation most frequently occurs as the 
end stage of an idiopathic colonic motility disorder with permanent 
loss of microscopic colonic structure and function. Drug treatment 
may be attempted, but most cats require subtotal colectomy. Ani-
mals with a hypertrophic megacolon secondary to obstruction may 
respond to early intervention (e.g., osteotomy for obstructive bony 
lesions). Hypertrophic megacolon will evolve into a dilated, irre-
versible form if intervention is not undertaken promptly. Nonob-
structive idiopathic feline megacolon may begin in the descending 
TABLE 263.6
Causes of Constipation/Obstipation
TYPE
CAUSE
Obstructive
Intraluminal
Bone/hair/foreign body ingestion, neo-
plasia, diverticulum, stricture, saccula-
tion associated with perineal hernia
Intramural
Neoplasia, pythiosis/lagenidiosis, histo-
plasmosis
Extraluminal
Pelvic fractures, neoplasia, prostatomegaly
Non-obstructive
Inflammation
Colitis, proctitis, perianal fistula, anal sac 
disease, perineal wounds
Neuromuscular dysfunc-
tion
Lumbosacral disease, cauda equina syn-
drome, sacral spinal cord deformities 
(Manx cat), autonomous nerve disor-
der (feline dysautonomia)
Metabolic disorder
Hypercalcemia, hypokalemia, dehydra-
tion, hypothyroidism, obesity
Pharmacological interfer-
ence
Opioids, anticholinergics, diuretics, bari-
um sulfate, phenothiazines, sucralfate, 
beta-agonists
Environmental, behavior 
problems
Soiled/absent litterbox, inactivity, hospi-
talization, weakness
Modified from Washabau RJ. Dysmotility. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ.Canine and 
Feline Gastroenterology. Elsevier Health Sciences; 2012: 551.
