SECTION XVI
•
Gastrointestinal Disease
1638
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
end of the procedure. e tongue can also be wrapped with a gauze 
sponge soaked with a hypertonic solution prior to extubation.
HYPO- AND HYPERTHERMIA
Prevention of patient hypothermia is of particular importance when 
water is used for cooling dental power instruments or for rinsing 
debris from the mouth.4 Conversely, hyperthermia also is a con-
cern, especially in cats when opiates like hydromorphone, with or 
without gas anesthesia, ketamine, or a combination of these drugs 
is/are being used.5 Cats with postoperative hyperthermia oen 
respond favorably to intravenous uid administration, removal of 
blankets in the cage, mechanical cooling methods such as a fan or 
ice packs, and application of rubbing alcohol to the footpads.
ORAL BLEEDING AND HEMOSTASIS
Severe oral bleeding may be due to injury of larger blood vessels, 
bleeding dyscrasias (e.g., von Willebrand disease [ch. 175]), lin-
gual or palatal injury, oral inammation, so-tissue trauma, oral 
neoplasia, and jaw fracture. Intravascular volume replacement is 
accomplished with crystalloids, colloids, and/or blood products 
(ch. 120).6 Diuse bleeding from the nasal mucosa (e.g., aer 
maxillectomy or palate surgery) can be stopped by irrigation with 
0.05-0.1 mL/kg (cats) or 0.1-0.2 mL/kg (dogs) of a mixture of 0.25 
mL 1% phenylephrine and 50 mL 2% lidocaine,7 vessel ligation, 
bone wax, brin sealants, and many others.
ORAL INFLAMMATION
PERIODONTAL DISEASE
Gingivitis is inammation of the gingiva. Periodontitis is inam-
mation of the gingiva, periodontal ligament, alveolar bone, and 
cementum (Figure 258.1). Dental plaque causes periodontal dis-
ease, but the host’s reaction to plaque bacteria and their toxins 
also plays a role in tissue destruction (gingival recession, attach-
ment loss, periodontal pocketing, alveolar bone resorption, tooth 
mobility, and tooth loss). Aected teeth need to be scaled and 
polished under anesthesia. In addition, various periodontal ther-
apy and surgery options (including extraction) exist. Use of anti-
biotics for treatment of periodontal disease is not recommended.8
CONTACT ULCERS AND OSTEOMYELITIS/
OSTEONECROSIS
Contact ulcers tend to be located in oral mucosa facing plaque-laden 
tooth surfaces. Young adult to middle-aged Cocker Spaniels, Lab-
rador Retrievers, Standard Poodles, Scottish Terriers, Maltese, and 
Dachshunds sometimes present with severe osteomyelitis/osteo-
necrosis and adjacent cellulitis (exposed infected, inamed, and 
necrotic bone and tooth roots surrounded by ulceronecrotic oral 
mucosa). is can be associated with systemic signs, such as lethargy, 
fever, and unwillingness to eat or drink due to oral pain. Some of 
these patients also have concurrent otitis externa, lip fold dermatitis, 
and pododermatitis. Treatment involves partial or full-mouth tooth 
extraction; tissue debridement; pain control; anti-inammatory, 
antiseptic, and antibiotic therapy; and nutritional support9 (ch. 81).
GINGIVAL HYPERPLASIA
Juvenile hyperplastic gingivitis can be found in immature, adoles-
cent, and young adult cats that present with enlarged and inamed 
gingiva (other oral mucosae are not aected) mostly around their 
maxillary and mandibular cheek teeth. Certain medications (e.g., 
calcium channel blockers, cyclosporine, phenobarbital) can also 
cause gingival hyperplasia. Careful gingivectomy and gingivo-
plasty should be performed (including histological examination 
of suspicious lesions), followed by professional dental cleaning. 
e owners are encouraged to perform daily tooth brushing with 
an azithromycin-containing dentifrice (8.5%). Azithromycin can 
reduce the occurrence of gingival hyperplasia in dogs.10
PYOGENIC GRANULOMA
Pyogenic granuloma is a benign ulceroproliferative lesion in cats, 
resulting from the maxillary fourth premolar tooth traumatizing 
the gingiva, alveolar and buccal mucosa adjacent to a present or 
missing mandibular rst molar tooth. Surgical excision of the 
mass plus blunting or extraction of the involved tooth or teeth is 
the treatment of choice.11
STOMATITIS
Stomatitis in adult cats usually manifests as inammation of the 
mucosal linings of the caudal oral cavity lateral to the palatoglos-
sal folds, extending rostrally into gingiva, alveolar mucosa, buccal 
and labial mucosa, sublingual mucosa, and occasionally also the 
ventral and dorsal tongue surface. Feline calicivirus (FCV) and 
feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) have been implicated (ch. 205), and 
recent data suggest that fungi might play a role in the etiology 
and pathogenesis of feline stomatitis.12 13 Aected cats show inap-
petence; weight loss; oral, nasal, and/or ocular discharge; regional 
lymphadenopathy; and signs of oral pain. In severe cases, the 
inamed oral tissues become proliferative and ulcerated, and can 
bleed spontaneously. An increase in serum total protein usually is 
due to elevated gamma globulin concentrations. A biopsy speci-
men should be obtained to rule out neoplasia or other causes of 
oral inammation. Pain management is imperative (ch. 6). Plaque 
control is achieved with dental cleaning, topical and systemic anti-
microbial therapy, and partial or full-mouth tooth extraction.14
Glucocorticoids oen are required to decrease inammation, 
reduce pain, and stimulate appetite. Some cats may benet from 
periodic injections of methylprednisolone acetate (Depo-Medrol) 
(4 mg/kg SC or IM). Others do well with prednisolone ointment 
*
*
*
B
A
D
C
Figure 258.1
Dog with gingivitis and periodontitis, also showing 
mucosal ulcerations (asterisks) in the labial and buccal mucosa that 
contacts the plaque-laden teeth of the le upper jaw (A). Dog with idi-
opathic osteomyelitis and osteonecrosis of the le mandible surround-
ed by ulceronecrotic oral mucosa (arrows) (B). Adolescent cat with 
juvenile hyperplastic gingivitis (C). Adult cat with stomatitis; note that 
the teeth of the right maxillary quadrant had previously been extracted, 
resulting in reduction of oral inammation on that side of the mouth 
(D). (Copyright Alexander M. Reiter.)

CHAPTER 258
•
Oral Cavity and Salivary Gland Disorders
1639
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
(1 mg/kg per 0.1 mL q12-24h) that is applied to the pinna of the 
ears. Cyclosporine (e.g., Neoral) may be useful (start at 2.5 mg/kg 
PO q12h for 6 weeks before judging eectiveness; monitor kid-
ney values periodically; whole-blood cyclosporine concentrations 
>300 ng/mL have been associated with signicant improvement 
of oral inammation).15 Clinical improvement of stomatitis also 
was reported with bovine lactoferrin (250 mg PO q24h). Low-
dose doxycycline (1 mg/kg PO q24h) and interferon omega (5 
MU are diluted and divided as necessary to submucosally inject 
all inamed areas; the remaining 5 MU are injected into a 100 
mL bag of sodium chloride and frozen in 10 mL aliquots; the 
client gives 1 mL PO q24h for 100 days; the 10 mL fraction in 
use is refrigerated and the other aliquots are kept frozen until 
needed) have also been suggested as medical treatment options 
for cats with stomatitis.16 Intravenous injection of fresh, autolo-
gous, adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells resulted in com-
plete clinical and histological resolution or reduction in clinical 
disease severity and immune modulation in most cats with severe 
refractory stomatitis.17 Laser surgery (to remove proliferative tis-
sue and ablate inamed mucosa) may be used as an adjunct in 
patients with refractory stomatitis not responding to extractions 
and medical therapy.18
EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA COMPLEX
Eosinophilic granuloma complex includes several conditions 
of the oral mucosa (dogs and cats) and lips and skin (cats), 
characterized by an eosinophilic inltrate on histopathological 
examination.19 Lesions are more common in young adult female 
cats and male dogs. Suggested causes include ectoparasites and 
other insects, environmental allergens, or dietary hypersensi-
tivity. Clinical signs depend on the location of the lesion and 
include dysphagia, ptyalism, and inappetence. In cats, the con-
dition manifests either as nodules (speckled with small, dense 
white or yellowish areas) at the dorsal and lateral tongue surfaces, 
hard and so palate, palatoglossal folds, and chin, or as well-
demarcated ulcers (raised edges surrounding an ulcerated sur-
face) on the upper lip and philtrum (occasionally also the lower 
lip). In dogs, single or multiple (oen conuent) ulcerated lesions 
may be present on the so palate and lateral pharyngeal mucosa 
(typically in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels), or raised, irregu-
lar, ulcerated lesions with well-demarcated edges are located on 
the lateral or ventral tongue (primarily in Siberian Huskies and 
Alaskan Malamutes).20 Biopsy with histopathologic evaluation is 
warranted to rule out dierential diagnoses, such as squamous 
cell carcinoma, lymphoma, and other skin diseases. In addition 
to eliminating the underlying cause, the treatment of choice is 
prednisone or prednisolone (1-2 mg/kg PO q12h initially, then 
tapered to the lowest eective dosage) or periodic methylpred-
nisolone injections (4 mg/kg SC or IM). Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
(14 mg/kg PO q12h) also may be attempted. Surgical excision 
of aected areas is rarely recommended. Untreated lesions can 
result in major so tissue loss (upper lip) and oronasal commu-
nication (hard palate).19
AUTOIMMUNE ORAL CONDITIONS
Autoimmune diseases causing skin lesions in dogs and cats 
(ch. 178) also can aect the mucocutaneous junction areas sur-
rounding the mouth and the oral mucosa inside the mouth (e.g., 
lupus erythematosus with autoantibody production against tis-
sue and nuclear proteins). Occasionally, the lesions are wholly 
contained within the oral cavity, as with pemphigus vulgaris and 
bullous pemphigoid with autoantibody production against spe-
cic squamous epithelial structures, or mucous membrane pem-
phigoid with autoantibody production against tissue proteins. 
Contrary to stomatitis in cats and contact ulceration in dogs, 
the hard palate mucosa can be aected. Biopsy of the leading 
edge of a lesion, when an intact blister is not found, could be suf-
cient. Storing the samples in Michel’s solution is recommended 
by some pathologists to preserve tissue antigenicity at ambient 
temperatures.21
Bullae undergo dierent stages, from bleb (vesicle) formation, 
to erosion, to ulceration. Vesicles are characteristic, but they may 
no longer be present at the time of diagnosis and are replaced by 
scales, crusts, erosions and ulcers. e causative lesion in pemphi-
gus vulgaris is suprabasilar (intercellular cleing) with formation 
of acanthocytes. e causative lesion in bullous pemphigoid is 
subepidermal without formation of acanthocytes. Laminin 5 and 
6, collagen XVII, and integrin alpha-6/beta-4 have been impli-
cated as autoantigens in mucous membrane pemphigoid in dogs, 
but only laminin 5 has been recognized in the cat. e treatment 
of choice is prednisone or prednisolone (1-2 mg/kg PO q12h 
initially, then tapered to the lowest eective dosage) or periodic 
methylprednisolone injections (4 mg/kg SC or IM).22
HYPERSENSITIVITY AND METABOLIC ORAL 
CONDITIONS
ERYTHEMA MULTIFORME AND TOXIC EPIDERMAL 
NECROLYSIS (CH. 178)
Erythema multiforme is possibly mediated by deposition of 
immune complexes in the supercial capillaries of the skin and 
less oen the oral mucosa as a result of an infection or drug 
exposure.23,24 Toxic epidermal necrolysis is characterized by full-
thickness coagulative necrosis with minimal dermal inamma-
tion25; it is an extreme form of drug reaction, with the animal 
being depressed, febrile, and inappetent. e underlying cause 
must preferably be eliminated (e.g., cessation of use of a particular 
drug). Anti-inammatory, immunosuppressive, or immunomod-
ulating therapy is instituted (ch. 169) together with nursing care.
UREMIA
Uremia results from retention of uremic waste products aer a 
rapid decline in renal function26 (ch. 301). A sharp odor of ammo-
nia in the breath may be noticeable, and oral ulcerations can occur, 
especially at the labial and buccal mucosa, lateral margins of the 
tongue, lateral lip frenula, and lip commissures. Uremic vasculitis 
and thrombosis can lead to necrosis and sloughing of the mucosa. 
In severe cases, this may lead to sloughing of the tip of the tongue. 
e lesions are oen painful, contributing to anorexia in pets with 
kidney disease. Any underlying condition (e.g., leptospirosis, dia-
betes mellitus, etc.; ch. 171) that can produce a hypercoagulable 
state may lead to thrombi formation and subsequent sloughing of 
the aected areas.27 Treatment is supportive and nonspecic, until 
the inciting cause can be removed or resolved, and includes pain 
management (such as buprenorphine 0.01 mg/kg q8-12h, IV), 
bypassing the mouth with supplemental enteral (ch. 81) or par-
enteral (ch. 164) nutrition, and use of gastric protectants (sucral-
fate 0.5-1 g PO q4-6h). Topical mouthwashes, such as a mixture 
of diphenhydramine, sucralfate or aluminum and magnesium 
hydroxide (Maalox, Novartis), and lidocaine may provide some 
local pain control. Diluted (0.12%) chlorhexidine rinse prevents 
secondary infection of necrotic areas.26
ORAL FOREIGN BODY
Penetrating foreign bodies can create deep and contaminated 
wounds in the sublingual area, palatoglossal fold, so palate, pal-
atine tonsil, oor of the orbit, or pharyngeal wall.28 ey also can 
