
--- ettinger PDF 324 ---
265
SECTION III
Differential Diagnosis for 
Clinicopathologic Abnormalities
Anemia and Erythrocytosis
Tracy Stokol
A
nemia is dened as reduced red blood 
cell (RBC) mass and is recognized by 
a packed cell volume (PCV), hema-
tocrit (HCT), hemoglobin (HB) concentra-
tion, or RBC count below the lower limit of 
established reference intervals for that spe-
cies. Conversely, erythrocytosis is dened 
as increased RBC mass and is recognized by 
values that are higher than the upper refer-
ence limit for these tests. Although polycy-
themia and erythrocytosis have been used interchangeably, they 
are not identical. Polycythemia refers to increases in any cell in 
blood (RBCs, leukocytes, platelets), whereas polycythemia vera 
is a chronic myeloproliferative disease, specically chronic ery-
throid leukemia (ch. 173). Erythrocytosis specically means an 
absolute increase in RBCs (or a true increase in RBC mass) and 
will be used herein. In veterinary medicine, we typically use the 
PCV or HCT (the default applied herein) as the main indicator 
of RBC mass, whereas HB concentration is standard in human 
medicine. e reason for the discrepancy between disciplines is 
unclear; however, it may be related to the higher likelihood of 
postprandial lipemia in small animal patients, which can result 
in false increases in HB concentration. It should be noted that 
although PCV and HCT are used synonymously, they represent 
2 dierent measurements. e PCV is a directly measured value 
from a centrifuged microhematocrit tube whereas the HCT is a 
calculated result from a hematology analyzer that uses mean cell 
volume (MCV) and RBC count (HCT = MCV × RBC). us, the 
HCT will be inuenced by artifactual or real changes in the MCV, 
such as storage-associated RBC swelling,1 which are less likely 
to aect the PCV. Internal studies done at the author’s institu-
tion with the ADVIA 120 hematology analyzer showed that the 
PCV is generally lower than the HCT, with a median dierence 
(PCV− HCT) of −0.02 L/L (range, −0.06 to 0.03 L/L) and −0.03 
L/L (range, −0.06 to 0 L/L) in clinic

--- ettinger PDF 338 ---
CHAPTER 59
•
rombocytopenia, rombocytosis
279
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Thrombocytopenia, Thrombocytosis
Marjory B. Brooks
Q
uantitative defects of platelet number 
are detected as increased or decreased 
platelet count in the hemogram and 
blood smear. A consistent diagnostic strategy 
helps streamline dierentiation among the 
many primary and secondary disease pro-
cesses that inuence platelet number.
PLATELET LIFE CYCLE
Platelets are small anucleate cell fragments produced from bone 
marrow megakaryocytes. Platelets circulate for approximately 
5 to 9 days in dogs and cats. The cytokine thrombopoietin 
(TPO) is the major regulator of megakaryocyte maturation; 
however, additional growth factors act synergistically with 
TPO.1 2 The liver is the primary site of TPO synthesis, which 
upon release binds to a ligand (c-Mpl) expressed on mega-
karyocytes and platelets. As platelet count falls, free TPO levels 
increase to stimulate thrombopoiesis. Conversely, as platelet 
count rises, free TPO falls and thrombopoiesis slows. Platelet 
mass is further regulated through clearance of senescent plate-
lets lacking sialic acid residues by engagement with hepato-
cyte Ashwell-Morell receptors and subsequent increased TPO 
production.3
Platelets in circulation undergo transient splenic seques-
tration. Approximately one third of total platelet mass is 
compartmentalized within the spleen in healthy individu-
als.2 Prothrombotic and inammatory stimuli induce platelet 
activation and incorporation into a hemostatic plug or egress 
into tissues from the microvasculature. Non-activated platelets 
undergo gradual apoptotic death and subsequent clearance by 
hepatic and splenic macrophages.4
Disease processes that upset the balance of platelet produc-
tion, activation, and clearance result in an increase or decrease 
in platelet count. rombocytopenia is among the most common 
acquired bleeding disorders in small animal practice, whereas 
thrombocytosis is typically identied as a laboratory abnormality 
without specic clinical signs.
DIAGNOSIS OF THROMBOCYTOPENIA
CLINICA

--- ettinger PDF 726 ---
CHAPTER 128
•
Sepsis and the Systemic Inammatory Response Syndrome
667
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Sepsis and the Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome
Amy E. DeClue
DEFINITIONS
S
epsis is derived from the Greek word 
meaning “to make rotten” or “to 
putrefy.” It is an infection-induced 
innate antimicrobial response disorder 
dened as bacteremia or as a concurrent 
infection with evidence that the infection is 
causing the systemic inammatory response 
syndrome (i.e., SIRS). Immune system dys-
regulation is the key pathologic process, not 
just a pro-inammatory response and/or 
widespread infection (ch. 227). Infection-
induced innate antimicrobial response 
disorders encompass a wide range of syn-
dromes including SIRS, the compensatory 
anti-inammatory 
response 
syndrome 
(CARS), mixed antagonist response syn-
drome (i.e., concurrent SIRS and CARS) 
(MARS), the persistent inammation and 
immune suppression catabolism syndrome 
(PICS), and the multiple organ dysfunc-
tion syndrome (MODS) (Table 128.1, Box 
128.1).
PATHOGENESIS
TRIGGERS OF SEPSIS AND THE INNATE IMMUNE 
SYSTEM (IIS)
Triggers
Sepsis is a complex, variable, prolonged host response triggered 
by infection (ch. 183). Manifestations of sepsis vary by pathogen 
(type, load, virulence, site of inoculation) and host (genetics, site 
of infection, comorbidities). In dogs and cats, Gram-negative bac-
terial infections are the most common cause of sepsis, with E. coli
being the most common isolate (Figure 128.1).1-10 However, any 
pathogen (e.g., fungus, parasite, virus, protozoan) could cause 
sepsis. In dogs, sepsis most commonly originates from abdominal 
and respiratory tract infections.1 2 In cats, abdominal and pleural 
space infections are most common.6-11
Innate Immune System (IIS)
e IIS is predominately responsible for the initial manifestations of 
sepsis, activated by danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), 
e.g., pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs; endotoxin 
from Gram-negative bacteria; exotoxins, peptidoglycans and supe-
rantigens from Gram-positive bacteria; and funga

--- ettinger PDF 925 ---
SECTION X
•
Hematologic and Immunologic Disease
866
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
vitamin K is essential for carboxylation of the glutamic acid 
residues of these coagulation factors. Anticoagulant rodenti-
cides antagonize vitamin K epoxide reductase, causing rapid 
depletion of the vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors 
(Figure 171.3).36 Factors II, VII, IX, and X have relatively short 
half-lives (4, 6., 13.9, and 16.5 hours, respectively) and grad-
ually decline over 36-7 hours following intoxication. Clinical 
signs of bleeding are typically observed 3-5 days after inges-
tion of anticoagulant rodenticide. Because factor VII has the 
shortest half-life, PT will be prolonged within 36 to 7 hours 
of ingestion, followed by prolongation of aPTT and ACT.37
Proteins induced by vitamin K absence/antagonism (PIVKA) 
levels will increase 1-4 hours after ingestion; these are not 
specific for anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication.
Vitamin K antagonism is treated with vitamin K1 supplemen-
tation and supportive care (chs. 14, 138). PT typically normal-
izes 14-36 hours aer starting vitamin K1 therapy. PT should be 
rechecked 36-48 hours aer discontinuing vitamin K1 therapy to 
ensure normalization of coagulation tests and sucient treatment 
duration.37
HEPATIC DISEASE
The liver has a central role in hemostasis, being responsible for 
synthesizing and clearing most pro- and anticoagulant factors 
and regulators of fibrinolysis. Liver disease can alter coagula-
tion factors, cause endothelial activation, and lead to vitamin 
K deficiency. Most patients with liver insufficiency have a par-
allel decline in pro- and anticoagulant proteins, resulting in a 
relatively balanced hemostatic system invivo in initial disease 
stages. Prolonged PT and aPTT, and decreased fibrinogen lev-
els, are commonly detected in patients with liver disease, but 
clinical bleeding is usually associated with only fulminant or 
end-stage liver failure38 39; an exception is that gastrointestinal 
(GI) ulceration can be observed in dogs with hepatic disease 
and lead to GI blood loss in

--- ettinger PDF 942 ---
CHAPTER 174
•
Immune-Mediated Hemolytic Anemia and Other Regenerative Anemias
883
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
53. Côté E, Ettinger SJ. Long-term clinical management of right-to-le (“re-
versed”) patent ductus arteriosus in 3 dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2001;15(1):39-42.
54. Meyer HP, Slappendel RJ, Greydanus-van der Putten SW. Polycythaemia 
vera in a dog treated by repeated phlebotomies. Vet Q. 1993;15(3):108-111.
55. Nett CS, Arnold P, Glaus TM. Leeching as initial treatment in a cat with 
polycythaemia vera. J Small Anim Pract. 2001;42(11):554-556.
56. Buote NJ. e use of medical leeches for venous congestion. A review and 
case report. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol. 2014;27(3):173-178.
57. Yarbro JW. Mechanism of action of hydroxyurea. Semin Oncol. 1992;19(3 
Suppl 9):1-10.
58. Morton D, Reed L, Huang W, etal. Toxicity of hydroxyurea in rats and dogs. 
Toxicol Pathol. 2015;43(4):498-512.
59. Gonzales AJ, Bowman JW, Fici GJ, etal. Oclacitinib (APOQUEL((R))) is a 
novel Janus kinase inhibitor with activity against cytokines involved in allergy. J 
Vet Pharmacol er. 2014;37(4):317-324.
60. Vasilatis DM, McGill JE, Gilor C. A novel bone marrow-sparing treatment 
for primary erythrocytosis in a cat: onion powder. J Vet Intern Med. 2021.
61. Turner E. Pentoxifylline as adjunct therapy to long-term clinical manage-
ment of a right-to-le patent ductus arteriosus. Can Vet J. 2016;57(6):655-656.
Immune-Mediated Hemolytic Anemia and 
Other Regenerative Anemias
Christiane Weingart | Barbara Kohn
ANEMIAS DUE TO HEMOLYSIS
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
H
emolytic anemias are caused by 
an accelerated erythrocyte (red 
blood cell [RBC]) destruction 
and decrease of the normal RBC life span 
(dog: 100-10 days, cat: 70-75 days) due 
to an intrinsic (e.g., erythroenzymopa-
thy) or extrinsic (e.g., antibody formation 
against the RBC membrane) defect. Hemo-
lytic anemias are usually regenerative, 
and extramedullary hematopoiesis in the 
spleen and liver may occur. Hemolysis can 
be extravascular or intravascular. Extra-
vascular hemolysis is the predominant 
form and refers to phagocytosis of RB

--- ettinger PDF 964 ---
CHAPTER 176
•
Nonneoplastic White Blood Cell Disorders and Pancytopenia
905
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
to various underlying bone marrow disorders, including IMHA, 
sepsis (ch. 18), hemic neoplasia infiltrating bone marrow 
(ch. 3), and drugs/medications.
MYELODYSPLASIA
Primary Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS)
True primary MDS are clonal (neoplastic) disorders arising from 
mutations in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Testing for 
clonality to conrm primary MDS is not available for dogs and 
cats, and the dierentiation between primary MDS and second-
ary dysmyelopoiesis therefore can be dicult.6 A combination 
of consistent history, clinical signs and accurate categorization 
of hematopathologic abnormalities is needed for diagnosis.7
Nonregenerative anemia is a necessary feature in primary MDS 
of both dogs and cats (ch. 17). Feline retroviruses, particularly 
FeLV, can cause MDS and dysmyelopoiesis (ch. 199); a clonal 
origin to FeLV-associated myelodysplasia and acute myeloid 
leukemia is proven.8 Primary MDS is rare in dogs and a clonal 
origin has not been proven.9 Morphologic changes in blood or 
bone marrow that suggest primary MDS instead of secondary 
dysmyelopoiesis include higher numbers of immature precur-
sors, dysplastic cells, and/or megaloblastic erythroid precursors 
(Figure 176.1, G-J). Additionally, a history of drug/toxin expo-
sure or concurrent disease may support secondary dysmyelopoi-
esis instead of primary MDS. Primary MDS is similar to chronic 
myeloid leukemia: both feature anemia or multiple cytopenias 
and normal/hypercellular bone marrow. Marrow blast cells com-
prise less than 0% of nucleated cells (a few veterinary references 
cite a cuto of 30%30) in both disorders. A key dierence is the 
lack of increased myeloid cells (predominantly mature) in circu-
lation of patients with primary MDS.
Modied versions of the French-American-British (FAB) 
working group scheme for classication of MDS in human medi-
cine are oen used in small animal medicine.7 e following is 
one modied-FAB scheme for classication of 

--- ettinger PDF 1062 ---
1003
ACRONYMS
ALP alkaline phosphatase
ALT alanine aminotransfer-
ase
CBC complete blood count
CME canine monocytic 
ehrlichiosis
CNS central nervous sys-
tem
ELISA enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay
IFA indirect fluorescent 
antibody
IV intravenous
PCR polymerase chain 
reaction
POC point-of-care
PU/PD polyuria/polydipsia
RMSF Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever
SFG spotted fever group
SPD salmon poisoning 
disease
CHAPTER 193
•
Ehrlichiosis, Anaplasmosis, Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
74. Gloor CI, Schweighauser A, Francey T, etal. Diagnostic value of two com-
mercial chromatographic “patient-side” tests in the diagnosis of acute canine 
leptospirosis. J Small Anim Pract. 2017;58:154-161.
75. Branger C, Blanchard B, Fillonneau C, etal. Polymerase chain reaction 
assay specic for pathogenic Leptospira based on the gene hap1 encoding the 
hemolysis-associated protein-1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2005;243:437-445.
76. Stoddard RA, Gee JE, Wilkins PP, etal. Detection of pathogenic Leptospira
spp. through TaqMan polymerase chain reaction targeting the LipL32 gene. Diagn 
Microbiol Infect Dis. 2009;64:247-255.
77. Harkin KR, Roshto YM, Sullivan JT. Clinical application of a polymerase 
chain reaction assay for diagnosis of leptospirosis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
2003;222:1224-1229.
78. Weiss S, Menezes A, Woods K, etal. An extended multilocus sequence 
typing (MLST) scheme for rapid direct typing of Leptospira from clinical samples. 
2016; https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.
0004996
79. Salaün L, Mérien F, Gurianova S, etal. Application of multilocus variable-
number tandem-repeat analysis for molecular typing of the agent of leptospirosis. 
J Clin Microbiol. 2006;44:3954-3962.
80. Bourhy P, Bremont S, Zinini F, etal. Comparison of real-time PCR assays 
for detection of pathogenic Leptospira spp. in blood and identication of varia-
tions in target sequences. J Clin Microbiol. 2011;49:2154-2160.
81. Bolin CA. Finds fault with implications of PCR assay conclusions. J Am Vet 
Med Assoc. 2003;223:178-179.
82. Miden

--- ettinger PDF 1071 ---
SECTION XI
•
Infectious Disease
1012
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
and dogs sampled in these studies have varied enormously, from 
healthy to anemic patients or retrovirus-infected cats, and from 
client-owned indoor only cats to outdoor feral cats or ghting 
dogs. ese factors contribute to the variation in reported preva-
lence as well as the dierent risk factors identied for infection. 
Additionally, geographic variation in prevalence exists. Dier-
ent polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods, with likely dif-
fering sensitivities and specicities, also likely contribute to the 
variation.
FELINE HEMOPLASMAS
Ca. M. haemominutum’ is the most common species (Table 194.1); 
with infection prevalences ranging from 4.4-46.7% (median 15.5%) 
of cats. Reported prevalences for M. haemofelis range from 0.4-
27.0% (median 5.1%) and for ‘Ca. M. turicensis’ from 0-26.0% 
(median 1.9%). Variable numbers of cats infected with more than 
one hemoplasma species were also reported in dierent studies. 
Ca. M. turicensis’ infected cats are oen co-infected with another 
hemoplasma species, particularly ‘Ca. M. haemominutum.’
In many studies, feline hemoplasma (especially ‘Ca. M. hae-
mominutum’) infections were more common in male, older, 
non-pedigree cats with outdoor access. Some studies have shown 
associations between hemoplasma infection and positive retrovi-
ral status (particularly feline immunodeciency virus [FIV]) and 
between hemoplasma infection and anemia or being unhealthy.
CANINE HEMOPLASMAS
Reported hemoplasma prevalences in dogs also vary widely in 
dierent studies (Table 194.1); generally M. haemocanis is more 
prevalent, ranging from 0-48.6% (median 6.9%) but occasionally 
Ca. M. haematoparvum’ is more common, with 0-33.3% of dogs 
infected (median 1.5%). Geographic variation is marked, possi-
bly due to the presence of the proposed canine hemoplasma tick 
vector Rhipicephalus sanguineus.18 19 Ticks are oen identied as 
risk factors for canine hemoplasma infection. In contrast to cats, 
age and sex are less commonly associated with infection. Fighting 
do

--- ettinger PDF 1089 ---
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
SECTION XI
•
Infectious Disease
1030
ACRONYMS
ALP alkaline phosphatase
CBC complete blood count
CNS central nervous 
system
CSF cerebrospinal fluid
DIC disseminated intravas-
cular coagulation
ELISA enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay
GI gastrointestinal
IFA indirect fluorescent 
antibody
PCR polymerase chain 
reaction
PE physical examination
Systemic Protozoal Diseases
Jonathan David Dear
P
rotozoal pathogens that disseminate 
widely in the bodies of cats and dogs 
belong to the family Apicomplexa. 
ese protozoa are intracellular parasites of 
vertebrate hosts with cellular tropism vary-
ing from blood cells (including erythrocytes 
and leukocytes) as well as epithelial and con-
nective tissues.
BABESIA
PATHOGENESIS
e genus Babesia encompasses a group of 
intracellular pathogens capable of infect-
ing human, dog, cat, horse, and wild mam-
malian erythrocytes. Like other apicomplexan parasites, Babesia
spp. undergo a complex lifecycle with both sexual and asexual 
reproductive phases. Sexual reproduction occurs in the denitive 
host (generally Ixodidae ticks) and asexual reproduction occurs 
in mammalian hosts. Inoculation of the parasite occurs primar-
ily via tick bite: the parasite is injected by the tick into the host 
interstitium. e parasite then migrates into the vascular space 
where it invades erythrocytes and undergoes schizogony or 
binary ssion to form clones. Babesia can also be transmitted via 
blood transfusion and direct inoculation during ghting between 
infected animals. Intravascular and extravascular hemolysis can 
occur due to parasitemia. Clinical signs depend on the species 
infecting the animal, the host immune response, and co-existing 
diseases. Dogs infected but subclinical are common and may be a 
reservoir of infection.
LARGE BABESIA SPECIES
Prior to availability of molecular methods, Babesia organisms in 
dogs were classied by size and morphology, resulting in broad 
categories of “large” and “small” Babesia species. e most com-
mon large (2.4 × 5 micrometers) Babesia species belong to the 
Babesia c

--- ettinger PDF 1091 ---
SECTION XI
•
Infectious Disease
1032
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT
Diagnosis requires either organism identication using cytologic 
examination or PCR. Serologic testing to detect antibodies is not 
typically helpful due to its short incubation period.26 Approxi-
mately 60% of cats treated with combination therapy of atovaquone 
and azithromycin survived, compared to 26% of cats treated with 
imidocarb dipropionate.27 Cats with cytauxzoonosis are oen criti-
cally ill and require intensive care (IV uids [ch. 120], nutritional 
support [ch. 164]) as well as antiprotozoal medications.
LEISHMANIA
DESCRIPTION
More than 30 species of Leishmania cause disease in humans and 
dogs across the Americas, Europe, Asia, and Africa. Leishmani-
osis is an important disease of public health concern, particularly 
in geographic areas where poor sanitation and inadequate vector 
control result in pets serving as a reservoir for human infection.28
Leishmaniosis is a reportable disease in the US. Treatment is 
controversial as it is rarely curative and might be associated with 
selection for antiprotozoal drug resistance.29 30
PATHOGENESIS
Most dogs diagnosed with visceral leishmaniosis in North 
America were infected on another continent. Infected dogs are 
introduced every year from endemic regions in Europe and Latin 
America (ch. 9). Visceral disease has been described in US dogs 
with no history of travel.31 ough there are competent sandy 
vectors in North America, the prevalence of this disease is consid-
erably lower in the US than in endemic regions.28 Transmission 
by blood transfusion has been described.32
Visceral and focal cutaneous leishmaniosis have been described 
in dogs. In the Old World, Phlebotomus sand ies act as the vector; 
in the New World, Lutzomyia sand ies act as primary vectors.29
e regional distribution of disease depends on the regional dis-
tribution of the specic vectors involved. Leishmania transitions 
between two forms: the promastigote and the amastigote. Pro-
mastigotes are infectious to dogs and humans while amastigot

--- ettinger PDF 1097 ---
CHAPTER 198
•
Feline Immunodeciency Virus Infection
1037
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus Infection
Julia Beatty | Paweł M. Bęczkowski
OVERVIEW
F
eline immunodeciency virus (FIV) 
infection is common among domestic 
cats worldwide. Transmission occurs 
primarily 
during 
aggressive 
territorial 
encounters. Infection with FIV is lifelong. 
Although the immunological consequences 
of FIV infection in cats mirror many of those 
seen in human immunodeciency virus 
(HIV)-infected humans, the clinical mani-
festations of most FIV infections are mild 
or absent. Cats that die from FIV-associated 
diseases have no pathognomonic signs, 
which makes assigning clinical relevance 
to FIV infection in an individual cat chal-
lenging. Diagnostic investigation of ill, FIV-
infected cats with clinical signs frequently 
reveals treatable problems. Screening diag-
nostic tests detect circulating antibodies to 
the virus. Depending on the circumstances, additional serologic 
or molecular testing can assist in determining a cat’s true infec-
tion status. Connement of uninfected cats is the most eective 
way to prevent transmission. FIV presents no known zoonotic 
risk.
ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Feline immunodeciency virus (FIV), family Retroviridae, sub-
family Orthoretrovirinae, genus Lentivirus, describes a large group 
of closely related viruses that are endemic in domestic and wild 
cats, as well as spotted hyenas.1 FIV of the domestic cat is classi-
ed into distinct subtypes or clades (currently designated A to E) 
based on sequence diversity (up to 26%) of the variable region of 
the env gene. e true genetic diversity of FIV at the population 
level is likely higher due to the frequent occurrence of recombina-
tion.2 3 Virus diversity has implications for the design and inter-
pretation of molecular diagnostic tests as well as the ecacy of 
FIV vaccines (ch. 185).
Antibodies to FIV are found in domestic cat populations 
across the globe. Seroprevalence varies from <2.5% to >14%,4
depending on the region and the population tested. Risk fac-
tors

--- ettinger PDF 1102 ---
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
SECTION XI
•
Infectious Disease
1042
Feline Leukemia Virus Infection
Katrin Hartmann | Regina Hofmann-Lehmann
DEFINITIONS AND PREVALENCE
F
eline leukemia virus (FeLV) is a ret-
rovirus that aects domestic cats 
worldwide. FeLV infection is associ-
ated with a variety of illnesses, including 
neoplasia, bone marrow suppression, and 
immunodeciency. FeLV prevalence (usu-
ally determined by FeLV antigenemia) 
is reported between 2.3% to 3.3% in the 
United States, 0% to 15.6% in Europe, 3.0% 
to 28.4% in South America, and 0% to 24.5% in Asia and Austra-
lia/New Zealand.1 e prevalence of FeLV infection is higher in 
cats with specic risk factors (Table 199.1) and in sick cats, e.g., 
up to 15% of certain diseases are associated with FeLV,2 includ-
ing lymphoma,3 cutaneous abscesses, bite wounds,4 and chronic 
gingivostomatitis.5 In a pan-European prevalence study using 
FeLV RNA to assess cats for FeLV antigenemia in >6000 saliva 
samples from 32 countries, the FeLV prevalence was 2.3%. ere 
was a high variability among countries, with a very low preva-
lence (0-1%) in the northern European countries Denmark, 
Finland, Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. In west-
ern European countries (e Netherlands, Germany, Austria, 
France, Belgium, and Luxemburg) the prevalence was 0-1.3%. 
A higher prevalence of 4.5-8.8% was identied in southern 
European countries that included Croatia, Italy, and Portugal.6
Generally, prevalence has decreased for decades subsequent to 
widespread test and removal or separation programs and com-
mon use of FeLV vaccines;2 7 8 however, in many regions preva-
lence is still high or has not decreased any further,9-11 thereby 
demanding continuous awareness and vaccination of at-risk cats 
(ch. 185).
PATHOGENESIS
VIRUS REPLICATION
e genomic RNA of the retrovirus FeLV is reverse transcribed 
into DNA within infected cells. e DNA copies are then inserted 
into the host genome (provirus). us, division of infected cells 
will result in daughter cells that also contain the provirus. e 
viral genome encodes for

--- ettinger PDF 1110 ---
SECTION XI
•
Infectious Disease
1050
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
68. Hofmann-Lehmann R, Levy LS, Willett BJ. Comparing the ecacy of FeLV 
vaccines: comment on: Stuke, K. etal. Ecacy of an inactivated FeLV vaccine 
compared to a recombinant FeLV vaccine in minimum age cats following virulent 
FeLV challenge. Vaccine. 2014;32(22):2599-2603.
69. Poulet H, ibault JC, Masias A. Immunosuppression in a comparative study 
of feline leukemia virus vaccines. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2015;22:1294-1295.
70. Day MJ, Schoon HA, Magnol JP, etal. A kinetic study of histopathologi-
cal changes in the subcutis of cats injected with non-adjuvanted and adjuvanted 
multi-component vaccines. Vaccine. 2007;25:4073-4084.
71. Srivastav A, Kass PH, McGill LD, etal. Comparative vaccine-specic and 
other injectable-specic risks of injection-site sarcomas in cats. J Am Vet Med 
Assoc. 2012;241:595-602.
72. Hofmann-Lehmann R, Cattori V, Tandon R, etal. Vaccination against the 
feline leukaemia virus: outcome and response categories and long-term follow-
up. Vaccine. 2007;25:5531-5539.
73. Jirjis FF, Davis T, Lane J, etal. Protection against feline leukemia virus 
challenge for at least 2 years aer vaccination with an inactivated feline leukemia 
virus vaccine. Vet er. 2010;11:E1-E6.
74. Wilson S, Greenslade J, Saunders G, etal. Diculties in demonstrating long 
term immunity in FeLV vaccinated cats due to increasing age-related resistance to 
infection. BMC Vet Res. 2012;8:125.
75. Bergmann M, Schwertler S, Speck S, etal. Antibody response to feline 
panleukopenia virus vaccination in cats with asymptomatic retrovirus infections: 
a pilot study. J Feline Med Surg. 2019;21:1094-1101.
76. Hartmann K. Ecacy of antiviral chemotherapy for retrovirus-infected 
cats: What does the current literature tell us? J Feline Med Surg. 2015;17:925-939.
77. Hartmann K. How I treat feline retrovirus infections. NAVC Clinician’s Brief
2012;5:79-84.
78. Hartmann K. Management of feline retrovirus-infected cats. In: Bonagura JD, 
Twedt DC, eds. Kirk’s Current Veterinary erapy XVI. Elsevier; 2015:1275-

--- ettinger PDF 1310 ---
SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1158
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Large Airway Diseases
Cecile Clercx
CHAPTER 215
TRACHEAL DISEASES
M
ost tracheal disorders can involve 
both intra- and extrathoracic seg-
ments of the trachea. Noninfec-
tious tracheal diseases are common and 
include dorsal tracheal membrane accidity, 
tracheal collapse, tracheal injury/laceration, 
posttraumatic stenosis, foreign body, intra-
tracheal tumor, and tracheal avulsion (cat).
Tracheitis refers to an inammation of 
the epithelial lining of the trachea, which can 
be infectious or noninfectious. When dogs 
develop tracheitis, it is oen a part of the 
canine infectious respiratory disease com-
plex (CIRDC; ch. 203). Tracheitis can also be 
secondary to prolonged barking, or disease 
of the oropharynx, esophagus, or even the 
stomach (aerodigestive disorders; ch. 221) 
(see Figure 215.4). In cats, tracheitis is most 
oen associated with infectious feline respi-
ratory disease (ch. 205). Tracheitis in cats 
does not always induce a signicant cough, 
as it does in dogs.
Tracheal compromise can also result from 
extratracheal diseases, such as extreme car-
diac enlargement, mediastinal enlargement 
(hematopoietic neoplasia [ch. 322], or mega-
esophagus [ch. 259]), or space-occupying 
masses, which can cause deviation of the tra-
chea and possibly aect the shape or lumen 
of the trachea (Figures 215.1, 215.2).
TRACHEAL COLLAPSE (DOGS)
Tracheal collapse, also referred to as collapsing trachea and canine 
tracheal collapse syndrome, is a very common disorder encoun-
tered in middle-aged to older toy or miniature breeds. e “goose 
honk” sound of the cough is characteristic (Video 215.1).
Etiology and Pathophysiology
e cause of primary tracheal collapse syndrome is complex and 
is best regarded as multifactorial.1 e traditionally considered 
form of dynamic mechanical collapse can be caused by a combi-
nation of progressive malacia of the tracheal cartilages and lax-
ity of the trachealis muscle, resulting primarily in dorsoventral 
collapse, possibly associated with malacic airways (or 

--- ettinger PDF 1314 ---
SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1162
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Surgical management may be necessary for more substantial 
injury or for tumors, with anastomosis repair if necessary. 
The prognosis can still be good even with substantial tracheal 
injuries.24
INFECTIOUS TRACHEITIS/TRACHEOBRONCHITIS
Canine infectious respiratory disease complex (CIRDC), formerly 
known as “kennel cough,” is commonly seen in young dogs, espe-
cially in boarding kennels or aer time spent in animal shelters. 
is contagious disease is described in detail in ch. 203.
BRONCHIAL DISEASES
BRONCHIAL DISEASES—PRIMARY
Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs
Definition, Overview Chronic bronchitis (CB) is an incur-
able disease of insidious onset, characterized by chronic and per-
sistent cough, and related to chronic inflammation of the airways 
unassociated with any identified specific primary cause. It is a 
syndrome more than a true diagnosis.27 Therefore, in dogs, it is 
also called nonspecific/aspecific chronic bronchitis.
CB in dogs is dened when 3 diagnostic criteria are fullled: 
(1) ≥2 months of coughing; (2) evidence of mucus hypersecretion 
and (3) exclusion of other chronic cardiopulmonary diseases (e.g., 
congestive heart failure, chronic infectious bronchopneumonia, 
pulmonary neoplasia, eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy [EBP]) 
as the sole cause of cough. Such cardiorespiratory diseases (e.g., 
congestive heart failure, airway collapse) may coexist and compli-
cate the diagnosis and treatment of CB. In humans, the functional 
sequela of CB is chronic airway obstruction, referred to as chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and subsequent emphy-
sema. is mechanism appears to be less frequently observed in 
dogs, although the diagnosis of COPD relies on documentation 
of airow obstruction by pulmonary function tests that are not 
widely available in veterinary medicine. Dogs with severe and 
longstanding CB can exhibit either bronchiectasis (dilation and 
destruction of the walls of the bronchi) or bronchomalacia (air-
way collapse during expiration and cough) or both combined.

--- ettinger PDF 1325 ---
CHAPTER 216
•
Small Airway Diseases
1173
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
149. Reinero CR, Decile KC, Byerly JR, etal. Eects of drug treatment on in-
ammation and hyperreactivity of airways and on immune variables in cats with 
experimentally induced asthma. Am J Vet Res. 2005;66:1121-1127.
150. Leemans J, Kirschvink N, Bernaerts F, etal. Salmeterol or doxycycline 
do not inhibit acute bronchospasm and airway inammation in cats with 
experimentally-induced asthma. Vet J. 2012;192:49-56.
151. Leemans J, Kirschvink N, Clercx C, etal. Eect of short-term oral and 
inhaled corticosteroids on airway inammation and responsiveness in a feline 
acute asthma model. Vet J. 2012;192:41-48.
152. Cohn LA, DeClue AE, Cohen RL, etal. Eects of uticasone propionate dos-
age in an experimental model of feline asthma. J Feline Med Surg. 2010;12:91-96.
153. Reinero CR, Delgado C, Spinka C, etal. Enantiomer-specic eects of 
albuterol on airway inammation in healthy and asthmatic cats. Int Arch Allergy 
Immunol. 2009;150:43-50.
154. García-Guasch L, Caro-Vadillo A, Manubens-Grau J, etal. Pulmonary 
function in obese vs non-obese cats. J Feline Med Surg. 2015;17:494-499.
155. Trzil JE, Masseau I, Webb TL, etal. Long-term evaluation of mesenchymal 
stem cell therapy in a feline model of chronic allergic asthma. Clin Exp Allergy
2014;44:1546-1557.
Small Airway Diseases
Carol Reinero
OVERVIEW
DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
S
mall airway diseases, also called bronchiolar disorders, repre-
sent specic diseases involving pathological changes of small 
airways <2 mm in diameter lacking cartilage. ese unique 
anatomic units are interposed between the upstream larger airways 
(conducting airways) and the downstream pulmonary acini (gas-
exchange units) and can serve as the primary targets for a variety of 
dierent insults. In cats and dogs, there are no pathognomonic clini-
cal signs or cytologic ndings (e.g., from lung ne-needle aspirates 
or airway lavage) for bronchiolar disorders. Due to their small size, 
small airways are not visible on thoracic radiographs or even com-
puted

--- ettinger PDF 1363 ---
CHAPTER 220
•
Pleural Space Diseases
1211
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
lymphoma), small lymphocytes, neutrophils, bacteria or fungi, 
red blood cells, macrophages and/or mesothelial cells.6 In 
longstanding eusions, mesothelial cells may assume bizarre 
cytological appearances, which may make distinction from neo-
plastic cells dicult.13
Biochemical assessment of pleural effusion is useful in some 
cases. In human medicine, Light’s criteria are widely applied 
to pleural effusion, and have been described in cats.14 Light’s 
criteria evaluate the ratio of effusion protein to serum protein, 
as well as lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) concentrations. Exu-
dates have higher ratios (>0.5) and higher concentrations of 
LDH.7 In people, biochemical analysis of pleural effusion is 
more commonly pursued than in dogs and cats. Biochemical 
properties of pleural effusion include glucose, amylase, pH, 
creatinine, cholesterol, triglycerides and variety of other sub-
stances.15 16 In people, pleural fluid amylase has been used to 
confirm esophageal perforation, but dogs and cats do not pro-
duce salivary amylase.10 Biochemical analysis of pleural effu-
sion in dogs and cats has been limited although recently there 
has been increased interest.15 16 Glucose levels do not routinely 
identify sepsis as they do in abdominal effusion. NT pro-BNP
concentration in pleural effusion is high in cats with CHF.18
High effusion triglyceride concentration can be used for iden-
tifying an effusion as chylous. It may be that further studies 
of biochemical properties of pleural effusion will add useful 
information to individual case evaluation.
Identification of Organisms
Bacterial culture and sensitivity testing is warranted in cases with 
suspected infection or with evidence of neutrophilic inamma-
tion. Recurrent thoracocentesis could predispose a patient to iat-
rogenic infections. Bacterial culture is most frequently used for 
evaluating for aerobic organisms, although pyothorax is oen due 
to mixed infections that include anaerobic organisms. Anaerobic 
bacterial cultures may be hard t

--- ettinger PDF 1364 ---
SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1212
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
are frequently responsible. Occasionally, pleural effusions are 
identified secondarily to bacterial pneumonias (i.e., parap-
neumonic effusions), but these are rare in contrast to people 
and horses. Other less common infectious causes of effusion 
include Bartonella (ch. 191), Mycobacterium (ch. 188), Toxo-
plasma (ch. 197), and viral infections (ch. 205). PCR testing is 
particularly useful in atypical infections.
Therapy for pyothorax involves drainage (usually via chest 
tube) and antibiotics based on culture and sensitivity, with 
coverage for presumed anaerobic pathogens even if anaerobic 
culture was not performed (ch. 140). Some animals, particu-
larly dogs, may require surgical intervention for resection and 
drainage of affected tissues.25,26 The prognosis for pyothorax 
is frequently good if the pet does not present in a moribund 
condition and comprehensive treatment can be provided. Pyo-
thorax is one of the few effusions that can be cured.
Hemothorax
Hemothorax can result from bleeding disorders such as antico-
agulant rodenticide intoxication (e.g., brodifacoum; ch. 138), 
trauma, lung lobe torsion, or neoplasia.28 In hemothorax, the 
packed cell volume of the effusion is >20%, or more than 50% 
of the patient’s peripheral hematocrit. Clinical signs of hemo-
thorax more commonly reflect hypovolemia than the presence 
of pleural effusion. In dogs with anemia and pleural effusion, 
it is prudent to check coagulation status prior to thoracocen-
tesis in order to exclude coagulopathy although in recent years 
the frequency of anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication has 
decreased. Therapy of hemothorax depends on the underly-
ing cause and may include blood transfusion (type depends 
on presence of coagulopathy (plasma) and anemia (packed 
red blood cells, whole blood)), vitamin K therapy, surgery or 
rest (ch. 124). Autotransfusion may be considered except in 
cases of malignancy. Rib tumors may result in hemothorax, 
with resection required to control hemorrhage. Small-volume 
traumati

--- ettinger PDF 1400 ---
SECTION XIII
•
Comorbidities
1248
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
80. Dandrieux JR, Timm K, Roosje PJ, etal. Unusual systemic signs in a dog 
with sterile neutrophilic-macrophagic lymphadenitis and nodular panniculitis. J 
Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2011;47:117-121.
81. Tipold A, Schatzberg SJ. An update on steroid responsive meningitis-
arteritis. J Small Anim Pract. 2010;51:150-154.
82. Nafe LA, Leach SB. Treatment of feline asthma with ciclosporin in a 
cat with diabetes mellitus and congestive heart failure. J Feline Med Surg
2014;12:1073-1076.
83. Windsor RC, Johnson LR. Canine chronic inammatory rhinitis. Clin Tech 
Small Anim Pract. 2006;21:76-81.
84. Segev G, Cowgill LD, Heiene R, etal. Consensus recommendations for im-
munosuppressive treatment of dogs with glomerular disease based on established 
pathology. J Vet Intern Med. 2013;27(Suppl 1):S44-S54.
85. Leal RO, Gil S, Brito MT, etal. e use of oral recombinant feline interferon 
omega in two cats with type II diabetes mellitus and concurrent feline chronic 
gingivostomatitis syndrome. Irish Vet J. 2013;66:19.
86. Higginbotham ML, McCaw DL, Roush JK, etal. Intermittent single-agent 
doxorubicin for the treatment of canine B-cell lymphoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2013;49:357-362.
87. Musser ML, Quinn HT, Chretin JD. Low apparent risk of CCNU 
(lomustine)-associated clinical hepatotoxicity in cats. J Feline Med Surg
2012;14:871-875.
Feline Triaditis
Jonathan Andrew Lidbury
INTRODUCTION
F
eline triaditis is the term used for 
describing concurrent inammation of 
the small intestine, pancreas, and liver.1-
3 is syndrome is somewhat ill-dened but 
it encompasses a range of intestinal, pancre-
atic, and hepatobiliary diseases, including inammatory bowel 
disease (IBD), pancreatitis, and cholangitis (Box 225.1). e clini-
cal signs and laboratory ndings for the diseases comprising tria-
ditis overlap and biopsy of all 3 organs is needed for a denitive 
diagnosis. Some cats have involvement of 2 of these organs but not 
the third (e.g., IBD with concurrent pancreatitis). Cats may also 
present with disease of 1 or

--- ettinger PDF 1440 ---
SECTION XIV
•
Cardiovascular Disease
1288
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
GENERATION OF THE NORMAL 
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
K
nowledge of the generation of the 
normal electrocardiogram (ECG) is 
essential before being able to com-
prehend arrhythmogenesis. Coordinated 
electrical activation of the heart depends 
upon the interplay of a complex apparatus 
of impulse formation, conduction, and dis-
tribution to the contractile myocardium. 
Impulse generation normally begins in the 
sinoatrial node (SAN), the dominant cardiac 
pacemaker, and propagates through the atria 
to the atrioventricular node (AVN). Aer 
more slowly conducting through the AVN, 
the impulse rapidly propagates through the 
His-Purkinje system (HPS) to the ventricu-
lar myocardium, triggering coordinated 
ventricular contraction.1 e various car-
diac regions are distinguished electrically by 
specic action potential (APo) morphology 
and duration as a result of regionally distinct 
collections of ionic currents. APos in vari-
ous cardiomyocytes and the currents under-
lying various phases of the APo in dierent 
cardiac cells are shown in Figure 230.1
As the primary pacemaker of the heart, 
the SAN is no longer considered compact and 
discrete, but is now known to be a more dif-
fuse, elaborate, anatomically and electrophysi-
ologically heterogenous cellular collection. It 
is a crescent-shaped, subepicardial structure 
located along the crista terminalis (CT) in the 
right atrium (RA) with an extensive paranodal 
area.2 SAN APos are distinctly dierent from 
those of working atrial myocytes, exhibiting 
diastolic (phase 4) depolarization, a relatively 
depolarized diastolic membrane potential, and 
a slow upstroke driven primarily by L-type cal-
cium (Ca2+) current (ICa-L), rather than the fast 
sodium (Na+) current (INa) responsible for the 
upstroke in atrial and ventricular myocytes.3
ere are two main hypotheses for the mecha-
nism underlying SAN diastolic depolariza-
tion, and it is likely the tight integration of the 
two that forms the overall pacemaker clock.4 5
e rst mechanism is the membra

--- ettinger PDF 1500 ---
SECTION XIV
•
Cardiovascular Disease
1348
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
MYXOMATOUS MITRAL VALVE 
DISEASE
M
yxomatous mitral valve disease 
(MMVD) is a common adult-onset 
valvular heart disease in dogs. e 
disease is characterized by progressive degen-
eration of the mitral valve, eventually leading to 
mitral valve leakage, mitral regurgitation (MR), 
and later to chronic dilatation of the le atrium 
(LA) and le ventricle (LV). Aected dogs have 
a variable progression and outcome: in some 
dogs, the disease progresses to the point that 
they develop signs of congestive heart failure 
(CHF) and other complications, whereas oth-
ers can compensate for the MR for years and 
thereby remain clinically healthy.
OCCURRENCE
Approximately 10% of the total dog popu-
lation develops cardiac disease,1 of which 
MMVD accounts for more than 75% of the 
cases. is makes the disease one of the most 
common causes for morbidity and mortality 
in dogs.2 e disease occurs in other species, 
including humans, cats, horses, monkeys, 
and pigs,3 but the prevalence of MMVD in 
cats is low. e disease has been reported to 
account for the vast majority of the cases of 
CHF in dogs,4 a proportion even consider-
ably higher in predisposed dog breeds.2 5 6
MMVD is encountered in all dog breeds, but the preva-
lence is highest in small to medium-sized dogs, such as Cavalier 
King Charles Spaniel (CKCS), Dachshunds, Miniature Poodles, 
and Yorkshire Terriers.2 5 7 8 e prevalence of MMVD in dogs 
increases with age and is, at a given age, higher in males.2 4 5 9
e disease has an unusually early onset in the CKCS breed and 
closely related breeds: approximately 50% of CKCS dogs aged 6-7 
years and nearly 100% of CKCS dogs aged >10 years have been 
reported to be aected.5 10
UNDERLYING CAUSES AND MECHANISMS
Valve remodeling in MMVD has been well described, but the 
underlying causes for its development and its progression remain 
poorly understood. A combination of a sire and a dam that both 
have an early onset of MMVD has previously been shown to pro-
duce ospring that have, on average,

--- ettinger PDF 1519 ---
CHAPTER 233
•
Myocardial Diseases of Dogs
1367
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
M
yocardial diseases are those that 
aect the heart muscle (cardiomy-
ocytes and interstitium), distinct 
from those primarily aecting the valves 
(chs. 231 and 232), endocardium (ch. 231), 
or pericardium (ch. 235). e most common 
myocardial diseases in dogs are in the group 
of cardiomyopathies, including dilated car-
diomyopathy and arrhythmogenic right 
ventricular cardiomyopathy. Hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, while very common in cats 
(ch. 234), is rare in dogs. Other canine myo-
cardial diseases include myocarditis, myo-
cardial infarction, muscular dystrophies, 
and neoplasia (chs. 235 and 325).
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is the sec-
ond most common acquired heart disease in 
dogs aer degenerative mitral valve disease. 
DCM is classically characterized by le ven-
tricular (LV) or biventricular systolic dys-
function and dilatation (Figure 233.1) that 
is not attributable to underlying disorders 
that cause abnormal cardiac loading condi-
tions such as volume overload states, shunts 
or other congenital cardiac disease, valve dis-
ease, primary tachyarrhythmias, or systemic 
hypertension.1 e importance of the latter 
is recognition that ventricular dilatation and 
systolic dysfunction can represent a morpho-
logic and functional response common to a 
variety of potential insults, and the identi-
cation of these features (phenotype) alone 
does not automatically indicate a diagnosis of 
DCM. Furthermore, while the classic pheno-
type is a dilated and hypokinetic heart, DCM 
can manifest as a spectrum of functional 
and electrical abnormalities, which oen dier by breed, including 
arrhythmic and intermediate phenotypes.1 2
PREVALENCE, BREED AND AGE DISTRIBUTION
e prevalence of DCM among the general canine population is 
unknown. e reported prevalence in historical canine referral 
populations has been 0.5-1% (1-2 cases per 200 patients exam-
ined),3 but this may be inuenced by geographic dierences in 
breeds and ages examined, degree of prospective 

--- ettinger PDF 1532 ---
SECTION XIV
•
Cardiovascular Disease
1380
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
actually a congenital myocardial disease resulting from an arrest 
in embryogenesis.7 8 11 It is characterized by prominent myo-
cardial trabeculae and deep inter-trabecular recesses, occurring 
as an isolated nding or in association with various congeni-
tal heart diseases.7 8 11 Biventricular noncompaction has been 
reported as an extremely rare pathological condition in the 
cat.31 32
CLINICAL AND MORPHOLOGIC CHARACTERISTICS
HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
HCM is characterized phenotypically by increased cardiac mass 
due to a hypertrophied non-dilated LV in the absence of an 
obvious cause of le ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), the most 
common of which are systemic arterial hypertension and hyper-
thyroidism (Table 234.1).1 3 33
Left Ventricular Hypertrophic Patterns, Macroscopic/
Microscopic Features
As in people, feline HCM is characterized by marked phenotypic 
variability, including mild to severe, diuse or segmental, con-
centric LVH (Figures 234.3 and 234.4).33-36 In up to two-thirds 
of cats with HCM, LVH is diuse, involving portions or all of 
both the IVS and the LVFW, with hypertrophy of the le pap-
illary muscles and a consequently reduced LV cavity (Video 
234.3).33 36 Diuse LVH can be symmetric or asymmetric with 
predominant thickening of the IVS or LVFW. In about one-third 
of cases, LVH is conned to only one segment, e.g., usually the 
basal IVS and less commonly the apex.33 36 In some cases, the 
thickened basal IVS protrudes into the LVOT, resulting in mild 
to severe LVOTO, thus dening OHCM forms (Video 234.4). 
Marked combined LVH and papillary muscle hypertrophy can 
result in systolic mid-ventricular cavity obstruction, associated 
with the presence of endocardial contact plaques.2 37 Although 
IVS
Ao
LA
3
2
c
c
c
A
IVS
LV
B
IVS
1
2
C
A
A
A
A
E
E
E
E
D
IVS
Ao
LA
2
3
E
Figure 234.2
Echocardiographic appearance of le ventricular false tendons. A-B, False tendons usually appear as thin echogenic linear structures 
(arrows), more taut in diastole and more lax in systole

--- ettinger PDF 1539 ---
CHAPTER 234
•
Feline Myocardial Diseases
1387
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
RESTRICTIVE CARDIOMYOPATHY
Definition—Pathological Lesions
Human RCM Human RCM is an uncommon heart muscle 
disease primarily characterized by impaired ventricular filling due 
to increased myocardial stiffness or reduced compliance of either or 
both ventricles (mainly LV), with normal or near-normal systolic 
function and wall thicknesses.7 91-94 The reduced ventricular com-
pliance restricts ventricular filling (hence the term “restrictive”), 
with secondary increased end-diastolic ventricular filling pressure. 
This results in marked LA or biatrial enlargement. In the early stages, 
global systolic function is normal, and then altered systolic function 
is usually observed as the disease progresses.11 94 Human RCM rep-
resents a heterogeneous group of heart disorders subdivided into 
primary and secondary RCM.11 93 94 Causes of secondary RCM 
include infiltrative diseases (e.g., amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, Gaucher 
and Hurler diseases) and storage diseases (e.g., hemochromatosis, 
glycogen storage disorders, and Fabry disease). Secondary RCM, 
especially endomyocardial fibrosis, is also reported in the hypereo-
sinophilic syndrome and as an iatrogenic complication (radiation, 
drugs).91 94 Primary human RCM is characterized by patchy to 
diffuse interstitial myocardial fibrosis with possible fibrosis of the 
sinoatrial and AV nodes, resulting in AV blocks.91 Endomyocardial 
fibrosis is a specific form of primary RCM, characterized by marked 
endocardial fibrosis in addition to myocardial fibrosis.95 96 Similarly 
to HCM, familial forms of primary RCM are reported, with most 
identified genes encoding for sarcomere or Z-disk proteins, e.g., 
cardiac troponin genes and MYH7 97-99 Interestingly, in addition 
to these genetic similarities, “overlap” or “crossover” phenotypes of 
RCM and HCM have been observed in families with mutations in 
sarcomeric genes, suggesting that some RCM cases may be consid-
ered as “minimally hypertrophic” HCM phenotypes.94
Feline RCM Similar to human forms of prima

--- ettinger PDF 1574 ---
SECTION XIV
•
Cardiovascular Disease
1422
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF 
SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION
S
ystemic hypertension (SH) is dened 
as a pathologic elevation in systemic 
arterial blood pressure (BP) usually 
recognized with sustained elevations in 
systolic blood pressure (SBP). e complex 
neurohormonal interactions between the 
kidneys, nervous system, vasculature, and 
heart may lead to altered BP control (Figure 
236.1).1 2 Guidelines for identication and 
evaluation of SH have been devised based 
on the probability of developing target-
organ damage (TOD), and both monitor-
ing and therapeutic guidelines have been 
established.1-3 Feline studies have docu-
mented a normal SBP range of 111-162 mm 
Hg depending on measurement method.3
Canine studies suggest a narrower range of 
131-154 mm Hg.2 Methods for measuring 
BP are described in ch. 91
e prevalence of SH has been reported 
as 19.5% for cats, and in dogs 0.5-13%.2 4
Cats aged >9 years have signicantly higher 
BP than cats aged 3-9 years, and risk of SH 
also increases with age,5 whereas a slight 
increase in BP (13 mm Hg/year) has been 
reported in dogs.6 e association between 
SH and age is likely multifactorial and unclear at this time. No 
relationship exists between breed and BP in cats;5 however, certain 
breed variations likely exist in dogs.
TYPES OF HYPERTENSION
SH can be divided into three broad categories: secondary hyper-
tension, idiopathic hypertension and situational hypertension. 
Secondary hypertension is induced by clinical disease or medi-
cations and is most common. Idiopathic hypertension occurs in 
absence of a readily identiable cause. Situational hypertension is 
most oen caused by the “white coat” eect.
Secondary Hypertension
Obesity (ch. 150) There is either a small or no correlation 
between obesity and SH in dogs. Furthermore, SH in obese dogs 
is more likely related to endocrinopathies, renal disease or cardiac 
disease. In cats, no studies correlate sex, breed, and body weight 
with increased SH risk.2 3
Renal Disease (ch. 301) The most common cause 

--- ettinger PDF 1728 ---
SECTION XV
•
Neurologic Disease
1576
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
eventually dysphonia and dysphagia. Hypoventilation as a result 
of respiratory muscle dysfunction results in hypoxemia in later/
terminal stages of the disease.112
DIAGNOSIS
Several large breeds of dogs can be aected with DM but Ger-
man Shepherd Dogs and Boxers are the most commonly aected 
breeds; mixed-breed dogs have also been described with this 
disease.113 Age of onset of neurologic signs is usually 5 years or 
older with a mean age of 9 years in large dog breeds. e mean age 
of aected Pembroke Welsh Corgis was 11.2 years in 1 study.104
ere appears to be a female predominance (1.6:1) for the disease 
in Corgis but not in other breeds.99
The diagnosis is based primarily on the exclusion of other 
myelopathies. Spinal imaging (myelogram, MRI, CT [ch. 112]) 
is typically normal, but some dogs may have concurrent mild 
disc protrusions. The clinician must then consider the dura-
tion of clinical signs as well as the findings of the neurologi-
cal examination to determine the significance of these lesions. 
MRI is the imaging modality of choice to ensure that all other dif-
ferentials are ruled out, including intramedullary lesions such as 
neoplasms.114 Recent work has shown that dogs with DM under-
going MRI diusion tensor imaging had signicant decreases in 
fractional anisotropy (FA) within the regions of the spinal cord 
that had high expected lesion load.115 Decreases in FA were most 
signicant in dogs with severe forms of the disease and correlated 
with neurological grade.
Patients with DM typically have normal CSF results, or 
increased protein levels with a normal cell count (ch. 109).104
Phosphorylated neurolament heavy (pNF-H) concentration in 
CSF is elevated in all stages of DM compared to old control dogs 
and is now proposed as a promising sensitive biomarker for the 
diagnosis of DM.116
A DNA test based on the SOD1 mutation is commercially 
available. Dogs that are homozygous for the mutation are at risk 
for developing DM and will contribute one chromosome with the 
mutan

--- ettinger PDF 1762 ---
SECTION XV
•
Neurologic Disease
1610
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
segmental spinal reexes, and hypoventilation.20,22 Pelvic limb ataxia 
may also be a prominent clinical sign in some cases. Cranial nerve 
signs such as ptyalism, dysphagia, dysphonia, and facial paresis or 
paralysis are frequently observed.16,21 Urine discoloration due to 
hemoglobinuria or myoglobinuria (ch. 70) is seen in a substantial 
proportion of dogs and less frequently in cats.24 is is helpful in diag-
nosis, as it is not a feature of other diuse LMN diseases.22,24 Other 
clinical signs may include vomiting, depression, hypotension, hypo-
thermia, bleeding disorders, and ventricular arrhythmias.17,22,24,25 A 
complete blood count (CBC) may reveal anemia with spherocytosis 
and erythrocyte “burring.”26 e diagnosis of elapid snake envenom-
ation is typically presumptive based on clinical signs and history.
Treatment is mainly supportive. Placing a pressure bandage 
at the site of envenomation can reduce lymphatic circulation of 
venom.22 Fluid diuresis should be considered if pigmenturia is 
present. Administration of snake-specic antivenin may be bene-
cial in preventing or reducing the severity of clinical signs. Tiger 
snake and Mexican coral snake antivenins are cross-protective 
against North American coral snake venom.16,27,28 Most animals 
will recover in 1-2 weeks with adequate supportive care.24,26,29
POSTSYNAPTIC DISEASES OF THE 
NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION
TERMINOLOGY AND MYASTHENIA GRAVIS
Historically, veterinary texts have discussed acquired and con-
genital forms of myasthenia gravis (MG). However, the term 
congenital MG has been recently discarded in favor of congeni-
tal myasthenic syndrome (CMS), where MG is now reserved for 
conditions of autoimmunity against the NMJ.30 is shi closely 
follows the human classication of these diseases, where MG is 
also used only in the context of autoimmunity.
MYASTHENIA GRAVIS
Pathophysiology
MG is an yacquired autoimmune disorder characterized by autoanti-
bodies produced against nicotinic AChR on the postsynaptic muscle 
terminal.30-

--- ettinger PDF 1763 ---
1611
CHAPTER 253
•
Neuromuscular Junction Disorders
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
signs such as worsened weakness, salivation, tremors, vomiting, 
bradycardia, bronchoconstriction, and respiratory distress. In the 
author’s experience, these signs are more common with neostig-
mine than edrophonium.5 Animals should be monitored closely 
aer administration of either drug, and atropine and equipment 
to provide intubation and respiratory support should be available.
Treatment and Outcome
Long-term treatment for animals with MG consists of treatment 
via AChE inhibitors, as well as immunosuppressive therapy to 
reduce autoantibody production against the AChR. Anticholin-
esterase drugs such as pyridostigmine bromide (oral) or neostig-
mine (intramuscular) are the mainstays of supportive therapy and 
they work by inhibiting AChE so that ACh remains within the 
synaptic cle longer.5 ese medications must be carefully titrated 
to eect, and neostigmine is generally used only in hospitalized 
animals in acute crisis or with profound regurgitation. Both med-
ications have a narrow therapeutic window, and signicant side-
eects such as bradycardia, hypersalivation, vomiting, diarrhea, 
muscle cramping, and weakness can occur. Clinical signs associ-
ated with excessive anticholinergic drug administration may be 
dicult to distinguish from those of uncontrolled MG and careful 
monitoring is required at the time of therapy initiation.
Immunosuppressive agents such as cyclosporine, mycopheno-
late mofetil (MMF), and azathioprine (chs. 144 and 169) are fre-
quently used in the treatment of MG to reduce levels of circulating 
autoantibodies.44 45 Extrapolating from the human literature, MMF 
was once considered the drug of choice for canine MG; however, 
a recent study comparing dogs treated with MMF and pyridostig-
mine to those treated with pyridostigmine alone showed no dier-
ence in survival time or remission rate between groups.45
Corticosteroids can also be eective in the treatment of MG, 
but should be used with caution in animals with aspiration pneu-
monia (ch. 227)

--- ettinger PDF 1790 ---
SECTION XVI
•
Gastrointestinal Disease
1638
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
end of the procedure. e tongue can also be wrapped with a gauze 
sponge soaked with a hypertonic solution prior to extubation.
HYPO- AND HYPERTHERMIA
Prevention of patient hypothermia is of particular importance when 
water is used for cooling dental power instruments or for rinsing 
debris from the mouth.4 Conversely, hyperthermia also is a con-
cern, especially in cats when opiates like hydromorphone, with or 
without gas anesthesia, ketamine, or a combination of these drugs 
is/are being used.5 Cats with postoperative hyperthermia oen 
respond favorably to intravenous uid administration, removal of 
blankets in the cage, mechanical cooling methods such as a fan or 
ice packs, and application of rubbing alcohol to the footpads.
ORAL BLEEDING AND HEMOSTASIS
Severe oral bleeding may be due to injury of larger blood vessels, 
bleeding dyscrasias (e.g., von Willebrand disease [ch. 175]), lin-
gual or palatal injury, oral inammation, so-tissue trauma, oral 
neoplasia, and jaw fracture. Intravascular volume replacement is 
accomplished with crystalloids, colloids, and/or blood products 
(ch. 120).6 Diuse bleeding from the nasal mucosa (e.g., aer 
maxillectomy or palate surgery) can be stopped by irrigation with 
0.05-0.1 mL/kg (cats) or 0.1-0.2 mL/kg (dogs) of a mixture of 0.25 
mL 1% phenylephrine and 50 mL 2% lidocaine,7 vessel ligation, 
bone wax, brin sealants, and many others.
ORAL INFLAMMATION
PERIODONTAL DISEASE
Gingivitis is inammation of the gingiva. Periodontitis is inam-
mation of the gingiva, periodontal ligament, alveolar bone, and 
cementum (Figure 258.1). Dental plaque causes periodontal dis-
ease, but the host’s reaction to plaque bacteria and their toxins 
also plays a role in tissue destruction (gingival recession, attach-
ment loss, periodontal pocketing, alveolar bone resorption, tooth 
mobility, and tooth loss). Aected teeth need to be scaled and 
polished under anesthesia. In addition, various periodontal ther-
apy and surgery options (including extraction) exist. 

--- ettinger PDF 1898 ---
SECTION XVI
•
Gastrointestinal Disease
1746
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
should be performed and repeat treatment with ronidazole at 
30 mg/kg PO q12h should be considered. If untreated, cats usu-
ally recover within 5 months to 2 years. e time to obtain com-
plete treatment response is longer in cats in multi-cat households 
and in cats that had previously received various antibiotics. It is 
important to note that the absence of clinical signs is not equiva-
lent to the absence of the pathogen. In dogs, T. foetus plays no role 
as a colonic infectious agent.54-61 153 194 200 201
Giardiasis Dogs and cats with giardiasis may present with 
mixed diarrhea but Giardia spp. are regarded as small intestine 
parasites (ch. 262). The diagnosis and other aspects are discussed 
in ch. 196. Importantly, infection should be treated only when 
clinical signs are present, in which case fenbendazole and strict 
environmental hygiene is the therapy of choice. In order not to 
cause long-term, severe dysbiosis, metronidazole should not be 
used initially, especially in young animals with giardiasis. Inter-
estingly, case reports have shown eradication of Giardia in dogs 
by fecal transplantation (ch. 106).202
Balantidiasis Balantidium coli is primarily a parasite of pigs. 
Dogs can become infected accidentally, leading to UC, when they 
are in contact with pigs. Therapy with tetracyclines and metroni-
dazole is used successfully in humans. Coinfection with T. vulpis
is common and some animals respond well upon eradication of 
T. vulpis.203
Amoebiasis Entamoeba histolytica primarily infects humans 
and leads to amoebic dysentery. Animals usually become infected 
from diseased humans. Although E. histolytica is present in the 
intestinal tract of healthy dogs and cats, there are case reports of 
this organism causing severe colitis. The diagnosis can be made 
by fecal smear. Metronidazole (30 mg/kg PO q12h for 3 weeks) is 
the drug of choice for treatment. However, neurotoxicosis is well-
documented at this high dosage (ch. 248).204-208
Viruses
Feline Infectious Peritonitis Feline 

--- ettinger PDF 1901 ---
CHAPTER 263
•
Diseases of the Large Intestine
1749
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Oral Laxatives The mode of action of laxatives is based on 
stimulating fluid accumulation in the colon, thereby increasing 
motility.
Bulk-Forming Laxatives Fiber preparations usually con-
sist of polysaccharides and psyllium that are poorly absorbed 
(ch. 165). ey can either be a dietary ingredient or a supplement 
(e.g., psyllium 1-4 teaspoons [5-20 mL] per meal or pumpkin 1-4 
tablespoons [15-60 mL] per meal). ese are only eective if the 
animal is well-hydrated and eating. In patients where megacolon 
has already developed, ber supplements should be avoided, and 
a low-residue diet should be fed instead to reduce the amount of 
fecal material produced.
Hyperosmotic Laxatives ese include indigestible poly-
saccharides (e.g., lactose, lactulose), magnesium salts (e.g., mag-
nesium citrate, magnesium hydroxide, magnesium sulfate), and 
polyethylene glycols. Lactulose (0.5-2 mL/kg PO q8-12h) is the 
most potent and frequently used laxative in this group.
Stimulant Laxatives ese are characterized by their ability to 
induce propulsive motility (e.g., bisacodyl, phenolphthalein, castor 
A
B
Figure 263.10
Lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) abdominal radiograph of a cat with megacolon due to pelvic stenosis secondary to a healed fracture 
aer a road accident. Panel A shows extreme distension of the colon with feces. Panel B more clearly shows the asymmetry of the healed pelvic fracture 
and the narrowed pelvic canal.
TABLE 263.7
Treatment of Dogs and Cats With Constipation Depending on Severity of Clinical Signs
SEVERITY
TYPICAL FEATURES
TREATMENT
Mild constipation
•First episode of constipation
•Absence of defecation for >2 days, but <4 days
•Straining with defecation
•Passing hard feces
•Hardened feces in colon
•Normal colonic size
Dietary modification (fiber-rich diets or supple-
mentation [e.g., psyllium 1-4 tsp/meal]) com-
bined with 1 dose of dodecyl (sulfoacetate) 
suppositories or microenemas (Microlax 5 
mL tubes)
Moderate or recurrent 
constipation
•Recurrent ep

--- ettinger PDF 1912 ---
SECTION XVI
•
Gastrointestinal Disease
1760
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Treatment
Smaller patients and minor hernias can sometimes be managed 
medically with stool soeners, enemas, and intermittent manual 
extraction of feces. If UBR or other organ entrapment exists, man-
ual decompression via emergency cystocentesis and immediate 
surgery are mandatory. e primary goal of surgical repair always 
involves reconstruction of the pelvic diaphragm. Traditional sur-
gery refers to a herniorrhaphy, oen with an internal obturator 
muscle transposition.55-57 Herniorrhaphy is usually sucient for 
most uncomplicated PHs, but further steps to strengthen the pel-
vic diaphragm might be necessary. Additional measures include 
polypropylene mesh reinforcement,58 semitendinosus muscle ap 
transposition,59 and/or biological membrane implantation.60 61
Repositioning or pexy of entrapped organs might be necessary 
prior to herniorrhaphy.53 Colopexy is not the recommended 
repair of choice unless RP is also present.15 52 For intact males, 
castration is recommended given that intact status is considered a 
risk factor (e.g., increased relaxin, enlarged prostate compressing 
pelvic wall).
Prognosis
e prognosis varies depending on whether underlying comor-
bidities and organ entrapment are present. While some studies 
have cited UBR to predict a worse prognosis (e.g., a 30% mortality 
rate in a large study of 100 dogs41), a case series of 41 dogs with 
PH found no increase in mortality between dogs with and with-
out UBR.52 e most common short-term postoperative compli-
cations include incisional infection, RP, and tenesmus, in order of 
occurrence.41 62 Postoperative tenesmus is a risk factor for recur-
rence with an internal obturator muscle transposition.55
PERIANAL FISTULA/CANINE ANAL FURUNCULOSIS
Perianal stulas (PAFs), which are synonymous with canine 
anal furunculosis, are characterized by ulceration, draining 
tracts, purulent discharge, and necrosis of perianal tissue (Figure 
264.7). e disease is most similar to stulizing Crohn’s disease in 
humans, although commun

--- ettinger PDF 2027 ---
1875
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com CHAPTER 279
•
Exocrine Pancreatic Insuciency and Rare Conditions of the Exocrine Pancreas
EXOCRINE PANCREATIC 
INSUFFICIENCY
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
E
xocrine pancreatic insuciency (EPI) 
describes a syndrome that is charac-
terized by the insucient synthesis 
and secretion of digestive enzymes by the 
exocrine pancreas. e most common cause 
of EPI is an absolute lack of pancreatic acinar 
cells that is due to destruction of acinar cells 
secondary to chronic pancreatitis (both dogs 
and cats) or depletion of acinar cells due to 
pancreatic acinar atrophy (PAA; likely only 
in dogs). In either case, pancreatic digestive 
enzymes are lacking in patients with EPI. In rare cases, a single 
enzyme may be lacking, but lack of a single enzyme, even if com-
plete, may not lead to any clinical signs as digestion of most mac-
ronutrients is characterized by redundancy and a great functional 
reserve. However, isolated pancreatic lipase deciency has been 
reported as a cause of clinical signs of EPI in humans and in 1 
dog and was highly suspected in a few other dogs.1-3 Another 
infrequent cause of EPI is an obstruction of the pancreatic duct by 
either a tumor, surgical damage, or trauma, which can lead to lack 
of digestive enzymes in the small intestinal lumen, despite nor-
mal acinar production. Exocrine pancreatic aplasia or hypoplasia 
could also lead to clinical signs of EPI. is could be suspected in 
patients diagnosed with EPI at a very young age, but to date no 
case has been described in the literature and the author of this 
chapter has only encountered a single case in a kitten to date.
PHYSIOLOGY
e process of digestion of macronutrients is characterized 
by redundancy and a large functional reserve. Redundancy is 
achieved by each macronutrient being able to be digested by at 
least two and sometimes even more independent processes. For 
example, dietary fat can be broken down by pancreatic lipase 
or pre-duodenal lipase, which in dogs and cats is gastric lipase. 
While in healthy humans and dogs it has been estimat

--- ettinger PDF 2053 ---
CHAPTER 283
•
Primary Hyperparathyroidism
1901
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
[Ca] calcium concentration
CaCrCR calcium to creati-
nine clearance ratio
CaSR calcium sensing 
receptor
CBC complete blood count
CKD chronic kidney disease
ELISA enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay
FHH familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcemia
FIH feline idiopathic hyper-
calcemia
GI gastrointestinal
HHM humoral hypercalce-
mia of malignancy
HRPT2 hyperparathyroid-
ism 2 with jaw tumors
iCa ionized calcium
[iCa] ionized calcium con-
centration
IV intravenous
MEN multiple endocrine 
neoplasia
PD polydipsia
PHPT primary hyperpara-
thyroidism
PO4 phosphate
PTH parathyroid hormone
PTHrP parathyroid hor-
mone–related protein
PU polyuria
SQ subcutaneous
TCa total serum calcium
[TCa] total serum calcium 
concentration
US ultrasonography
CALCIUM HOMEOSTASIS IN DOGS 
AND CATS
CALCIUM FUNCTIONS
C
alcium (Ca), the most abundant ele-
ment in the body due to its presence in 
skeletal bone, is necessary for diverse 
processes, such as transmitting many sig-
nals received on cell surfaces to intracellular 
locations, nerve conduction, neuromuscu-
lar transmission, muscle contraction, blood 
coagulation, hormone secretion and hepatic 
glycogen metabolism. Adverse eects on 
organ systems are noted when Ca homeosta-
sis is disrupted. e skeleton acts as a Ca res-
ervoir, used for correcting decreases in serum 
Ca concentrations ([Ca]). Ca can be excreted 
or absorbed in the kidneys and the small 
intestine. e Ca sensing receptor (CaSR), 
responsible for ensuring that circulating 
[Ca] is maintained within a limited “normal” 
range, is a G-protein present in parathyroid 
glands, kidneys, cartilage and bone.1 Inter-
actions between the CaSR and parathyroid 
hormone (PTH), synthesized and secreted by 
the parathyroid glands, can lead to direct or 
indirect eects on skeletal bone, the gastroin-
testinal (GI) tract, and kidneys.2
CALCIUM MEASUREMENT AND ITS 
SERUM REGULATION
Ca, in common with other important elec-
trolytes, is regulated to maintain narrow ref-
erence intervals. Total serum [Ca] ([TCa]) is

--- ettinger PDF 2072 ---
SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
1920
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
CNS central nervous system
cTSH canine-specific thy-
roid stimulating hormone
DLA dog leukocyte antigen
DM diabetes mellitus
ED equilibrium dialysis
fT4 free thyroxine (T4)
GFR glomerular filtration rate
GH growth hormone
GI gastrointestinal
IGF-1 insulin-like growth 
factor type 1
IV intravenous
LC-MS/MS liquid 
chromatography-tandem 
mass spectrometry
NTI non-thyroidal illness
PU/PD polyuria/polydipsia
rhTSH human recombinant 
thyroid stimulating hor-
mone
RIA radioimmunoassay
SDMA symmetric dimethyl-
arginine
T3 triiodothyronine
T3AA T3 autoantibodies
T4 thyroxine
T4AA T4 autoantibodies
TCTU technetium thyroid 
gland uptake
TgAA thyroglobulin auto-
antibody
THRT thyroid hormone 
replacement therapy
TPO thyroid peroxidase
TRH thyrotropin releasing 
hormone
TSH thyroid stimulating 
hormone
TT3 total triiodothyronine 
(T3)
TT4 total thyroxine (T4)
US ultrasonography
vWf:Ag von Willebrand 
factor antigen
Hypothyroidism in Dogs
Carmel T. Mooney
INTRODUCTION AND ANATOMY
H
ypothyroidism is the most com-
mon thyroid disease and one of 
the most common endocrine dis-
orders in dogs. Its prevalence has been esti-
mated between 0.2 and 0.8%.1-3 A survey on 
insured dogs from Sweden, however, sug-
gested a lower prevalence (0.07%) despite 
including a large number of pedigree dogs 
more likely to have hypothyroidism.4 5 Breed 
predisposition can be signicant. A preva-
lence as high as 15% has been recognised in 
Swedish Giant Schnauzers and Hovawarts.6
e thyroid gland of dogs has two sepa-
rate lobes, one on either side of the trachea 
(ch. 283, Figure 283.1). Each lobe is com-
posed of microscopic follicles lined by a sin-
gle layer of thyroid epithelium. e lumen of 
each follicle contains “colloid,” a thyroglobu-
lin storage material secreted by follicular 
cells. yroglobulin is a large glycoprotein 
containing iodotyrosines, precursors of thy-
roid hormones.
PHYSIOLOGY
THYROID HORMONES
e thyroid gland synthesizes and secretes 
the hormones 3,5,3′,5′-L-tetraiodothyronine 
(thyroxine [T4]) and 

--- ettinger PDF 2087 ---
CHAPTER 286
•
Feline Hypothyroidism
1935
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
188. Daniel GB, Neelis DA. yroid scintigraphy in veterinary medicine. Semin 
Nucl Med. 2014;44:24-34.
189. Taeymans O, Peremans K, Saunders JH. yroid imaging in the dog: cur-
rent status and future directions. J Vet Intern Med. 2007;21:673-684.
190. Taeymans O, Daminet S, Duchateau L, etal. Pre- and post-treatment 
ultrasonography in hypothyroid dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2007;48:262-269.
191. Reese S, Breyer U, Deeg C, etal. yroid sonography as an eective tool 
to discriminate between euthyroid sick and hypothyroid dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2005;19:491-498.
192. Bromel C, Pollard RE, Kass PH, etal. Comparison of ultrasonographic 
characteristics of the thyroid gland in healthy small-, medium-, and large-breed 
dogs. Am J Vet Res. 2006;67:70-77.
193. Taeymans O, Dennis R, Saunders JH. Magnetic resonance imaging of the 
normal canine thyroid gland. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2008;49:238-242.
194. Taeymans O, Schwarz T, Duchateau L, etal. Computed tomographic fea-
tures of the normal canine thyroid gland. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2008;49:13-19.
195. Diaz Espineira MM, Mol JA, Peeters ME, etal. Assessment of thyroid 
function in dogs with low plasma thyroxine concentration. J Vet Intern Med
2007;21:25-32.
196. Shiel RE, Pinilla M, McAllister H, etal. Assessment of the value of quanti-
tative thyroid scintigraphy for determination of thyroid function in dogs. J Small 
Anim Pract. 2012;53:278-285.
197. Pinilla M, Shiel RE, Brennan SF, etal. Quantitative thyroid scintigraphy 
in greyhounds suspected of primary hypothyroidism. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
2009;50:224-229.
198. Seavers A, Vickery K, Page SW, etal. Dynamic thyroid testing, thyroid 
histology and thyroxine replacement therapy in Basenji dogs. Aust Vet Pract
2015;45:9.
199. Cecere J, Purswell B, Panciera D. Levothyroxine supplementation in hypo-
thyroid bitches during pregnancy. eriogenology. 2020;142:48-53.
200. Lewis VA, Morrow CMK, Jacobsen JA, etal. A pivotal eld study to sup-
port the registration of levothyroxine sodium tablets for ca

--- ettinger PDF 2092 ---
SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
1940
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
ACE-i angiotensin convert-
ing enzyme inhibitors
ARBs angiotensin receptor 
blockers
BCS body condition score
BP blood pressure
CBC complete blood count
CKD chronic kidney dis-
ease
fT4 free thyroxine
GI gastrointestinal
GNAS Gαs subunit
131I radioactive iodine
IRIS International Renal 
Interest Society
MCS muscle condition 
score
PE physical examination
PP polyphagia
SHIM-RAD severe hyper-
thyroidism, huge thyroid 
masses, intrathoracic in 
location, multifocal with 
resistance to anti-thyroid 
drugs
T3 triiodothyronine
T4 thyroxine
TSH thyroid stimulating 
hormone or thyrotropin
TT4 total thyroxine
UA urinalysis
Hyperthyroidism in Cats
Sylvie Daminet
INTRODUCTION
H
yperthyroidism is the most com-
mon 
feline 
endocrine 
disease, 
aecting about 10% of senior 
cats, and one of the most common geriat-
ric diseases of cats.1 Hyperthyroidism is a 
progressive disease with disastrous conse-
quences if untreated. Early diagnosis has 
been facilitated by the inclusion of serum 
total thyroxine concentrations (TT4) in rou-
tine screening panels for older cats. Aected 
thyroid nodules contain single or multiple 
hyperplastic and/or adenomatous tumor 
nodules resembling toxic nodular goiter seen 
in humans (i.e., Plummer’s disease).2 Patho-
logic changes are bilateral in about 70% of 
aected cats and unilateral in about 25%.3
Ectopic disease is the least common form, 
occurring in around 4%. Although most cats 
have an adenoma, carcinomas are diagnosed 
in about 1-2%. Some benign thyroid tumors 
may transform into malignant carcinomas if 
untreated or aer chronic oral anti-thyroid 
drugs.4 Histologic evaluation of feline thy-
roid tumors is rarely available, and carcino-
mas are indistinguishable from adenomas on 
thyroid scintigraphy. A classication scheme 
was developed for more aggressive tumors 
that require a dierent therapeutic approach. 
Some thyroid tumors cause severe hyperthy-
roidism, may become huge thyroid masses, 
some are intrathoracic in location or multifocal with resistance to

--- ettinger PDF 2111 ---
CHAPTER 289
•
Insulin-Secreting Tumors
1959
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
ATP adenosine triphos-
phate
CRI continuous rate infu-
sion
CT computed tomography
CTA computed tomogra-
phy angiography
GH growth hormone
IV intravenous
US ultrasonography
Insulin-Secreting Tumors
Johan P. Schoeman
INTRODUCTION
I
nsulinoma” is a neoplasm of pancreatic 
beta cells that synthesizes and secretes 
excessive quantities of insulin, oen 
causing clinical signs of hypoglycemia. It is 
an uncommon condition in dogs and rare 
in cats. Insulinoma was rst described in the 
dog in 1935 and in the cat in 1974.1 2 Subse-
quently, approximately 360 canine cases have 
been described as compared with merely 
10 well-documented feline cases. Consequently, this chapter will 
focus on canine insulinoma and conclude with a short section on 
the comparative aspects of feline insulinoma.
PATHOLOGY
THE PRIMARY TUMOR
Insulin-secreting pancreatic beta cells comprise approximately 
70% of the cells of the islets of Langerhans which, in turn, com-
prise only 1-2% of pancreatic volume. Most canine insulinomas 
are malignant. In one report utilizing immunocytochemical stain-
ing, 17 of 18 were carcinomas, 1 was an adenoma.3 About 80% 
of insulinomas are solitary, located in either limb rather than the 
body of the pancreas (Figure 289.1).4-6 Occasionally no discrete 
nodule is seen or palpated during gross pancreatic examination 
because some of these tumors are microscopic in size. In these, 
histologic examination is required to locate the tumor within a 
section of surgically removed pancreatic tissue or at necropsy.
METASTASES
e rate of detected metastatic lesions in dogs with insulinoma 
ranges from 45-64%, higher in necropsy-based studies than those 
using surgically-obtained samples.6-8 Clinical staging of pancre-
atic tumors denes stage I as T1N0M0 (presence of a primary 
Tumor and absence of regional lymph Node or distant Metas-
tases), stage II as T1N1M0, and stage III as T1N1M1 or T1N0M1
(ch. 316). A majority of dogs with an insulinoma have stage II 
or III disease at diagnosis. e m

--- ettinger PDF 2118 ---
SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
1966
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
AcAc acetoacetate
AKI acute kidney injury
ALIVE Agreeing Language 
in Veterinary 
Endocrinology
BG blood glucose
CHF congestive heart fail-
ure
CKD chronic kidney dis-
ease
CRI constant rate infusion
DKA diabetic ketoacidosis
DM diabetes mellitus
ECF extracellular fluid
FFA free fatty acid
FGMS flash glucose moni-
toring system
HHS hyperosmolar hyper-
glycemic state
IM intramuscular(ly)
IV intravascular
KB ketone body
PE physical examination
PU/PD polyuria/polydipsia
SQ subcutaneous(ly)
UTI urinary tract infection
D
iabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and 
the “hyperosmolar hyperglycemic 
state” (HHS) are two acute, severe, 
potentially life-threatening complications of 
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus (DM). eir 
clinical signs overlap. Morbidity and mortal-
ity are usually a consequence of the under-
lying precipitating cause or the result of 
complications derived from lack of therapy 
or improper therapy and monitoring rather 
than a result of hyperglycemia. Prompt diag-
nosis, use of standardized treatment proto-
cols respecting the unpredictable nature of 
these conditions and responses to treatment, 
and the ability to resolve or manage the 
underlying cause, aect outcome.
DEFINITIONS
DKA is dened by the triad of hypergly-
cemia (or previous diagnosis of DM), 
metabolic acidosis, and ketonemia. e 
term HHS has been recommended by the 
American Diabetes Association for the syn-
drome characterized by severe hyperglyce-
mia, hyperosmolality, and dehydration in 
the absence of signicant ketosis. Compared to previously used 
nomenclatures (hyperosmolar coma, hyperosmolar non-ketotic 
syndrome), this new title emphasizes that not all patients are 
comatose and that mild degrees of ketosis and acidemia may 
be present.1 2 Although there are important dierences in their 
pathogenesis, both DKA and HHS result from a decrease in 
the net eective action of circulating insulin, due to an abso-
lute or relative insulin deciency complicated by increases in 
circulating concentrations of counterregula

--- ettinger PDF 2126 ---
SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
1974
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
BG blood glucose
BGC blood glucose curve
CBC complete blood count
CGMS continuous glucose 
monitoring system
CoA coenzyme A
cPLI canine pancreatic 
lipase immunoreactivity
DKA diabetic ketoacidosis
DM diabetes mellitus
FFAs free fatty acids
FGMS flash glucose moni-
toring system
GAD65 glutamic acid 
decarboxylase 65
GH growth hormone
HbA1c glycated hemoglo-
bin
IA-2 insulinoma antigen 2
IG interstitial glucose
MHC major histocompati-
bility complex
NIDDM non-insulin-
dependent diabetes mel-
litus
NPH neutral protamine 
Hagedorn
PBGM portable blood glu-
cose meter
PD polydipsia
PE physical examination
Pg progesterone
PP polyphagia
PU polyuria
PZI protamine zinc insulin
RBC red blood cell
SQ subcutaneous(ly)
UA urinalysis
US ultrasound
INTRODUCTION
D
iabetes mellitus (DM) is a hetero-
geneous group of diseases with 
multiple etiologies characterized by 
hyperglycemia resulting from inadequate 
insulin secretion, inadequate insulin action, 
or both.1 e prevalence of DM in dogs has 
been estimated from about 0.3% in rst opin-
ion practices to about 1% in referral institu-
tion practices.2-5 e reported incidence 
of DM in a population of 182,087 Swedish 
insured dogs was about 13 cases per 10,000 
(0.13%) dog-years at risk.6
CLASSIFICATION AND ETIOLOGY
“TYPES” OF DIABETES MELLITUS
ere are two predominant forms of DM in 
people, one involving a permanent and abso-
lute loss of insulin and the other involving 
insulin resistance that may not be permanent. 
ese 2 conditions were referred to as “juvenile-
onset” and “adult-onset” DM, respectively, then 
updated to “insulin-dependent DM” (IDDM) 
and “non-insulin-dependent DM” (NIDDM). 
e terms type 1 and type 2 DM are now 
employed, with about 10% of diabetic people 
worldwide having type 1 disease and about 
90% with type 2, a condition almost identical 
to the previous NIDDM.7 Several classication 
systems for canine DM have been proposed 
based on the underlying cause of their beta-cell 
dysfunction.8 9 More recently, the European 
Society o

--- ettinger PDF 2142 ---
SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
1990
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
BG blood glucose
CGM continuous glucose 
monitoring
CKD chronic kidney dis-
ease
DKA diabetic ketoacidosis
DM diabetes mellitus
DM-HS diabetes mellitus 
secondary to hyperso-
matotropism
ER extended-release
GIP glucose-dependent 
insulinotropic polypep-
tide
GLP-1 glucagon-like pep-
tide-1
GLP-1RA glucagon-like pep-
tide-1 receptor agonist
HS hypersomatotropism
IGc interstitial glucose con-
centration
IGF-1 insulin-like growth 
factor 1
MC4R melanocortin-4 
receptor
NPH neutral protamine 
Hagedorn
PD polydipsia
PU polyuria
PZI protamine zinc insulin
SC subcutaneous
SGLT-2 sodium-glucose 
cotransporter-2
UTI urinary tract infection
DEFINITION AND DIAGNOSIS
D
iabetes mellitus (DM) is a syndrome 
characterized 
by 
hyperglycemia 
due to defects in insulin secretion, 
insulin sensitivity, or both.1 2 Regardless of 
the pathogenic cause, relative or absolute 
deciency in insulin action on target tissues 
leads to myriad abnormalities in carbohy-
drate, fat, and protein metabolism. e crite-
ria for the diagnosis of DM in cats developed 
by an international consensus committee are 
provided in Box 292.1 3
Prediabetes is a state of abnormally 
increased blood glucose (BG) concentra-
tions (either fasting or aer a glucose load) 
that do not yet meet the criteria of DM. Pre-
diabetes is a risk factor for development of 
DM.4 Multiple studies have described cats 
with abnormal BGs in various clinical and 
experimental contexts5 6; however, no study 
has shown that a dened state of abnormal 
glucose in cats confers a risk for developing 
DM.1 erefore, criteria for diagnosis of pre-
diabetes in cats have not been established.
ETIOLOGY AND CLASSIFICATION
Multiple etiologies can lead to DM.1 Feline 
DM is mostly considered analogous to type 2 
DM in people, characterized by beta cell dys-
function of unknown etiology, usually with 
concurrent insulin resistance. is leads to 
either permanent or temporary states of 
exogenous insulin requirement.
Recent studies suggest that up to 25% of diabetic cats 

--- ettinger PDF 2156 ---
SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
2004
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
THE HISTORY OF 
HYPERADRENOCORTICISM AND 
DEFINITIONS
T
he most common manifestation of 
hyperadrenocorticism (hypersecre-
tion of adrenocortical hormones) 
in dogs is hypercortisolism (HC). Chroni-
cally increased circulating glucocorticoids 
can be caused by long-term glucocorticoid 
administration (iatrogenic) or it can be 
naturally occurring, caused by excessive 
endogenous cortisol production.1 e clini-
cal condition associated with chronic corti-
sol excess is oen referred to as Cushing’s 
syndrome, aer the eminent neurosurgeon 
Harvey Cushing. Cushing’s clinical descrip-
tion of his patient Minnie G., published in 
his monograph in 1912, incorporated all the 
features that are now considered classic for 
HC. He speculated that the disorder may be 
related to the adrenal gland (hyperadrenal-
ism). In his later survey, published in 1932, 
he associated the condition with a basophil 
adenoma of the pituitary gland. e descrip-
tion of this fascinating discovery makes 
Harvey Cushing one of the greatest gures 
in endocrinology.2 In veterinary medicine 
the rst mention of HC appeared in 1939, 
when Verstraete and oonen reported the 
rst 2 dogs with “pituitary disorders.”3
Naturally occurring HC is usually 
the result of inappropriate excess secre-
tion of pituitary adrenocorticotropic hor-
mone (ACTH) or due to autonomous 
adrenal glucocorticoid secretion. ese 
are classied as ACTH-dependent HC 
and 
ACTH-independent 
HC, 
respec-
tively. 
ACTH-dependent 
HC 
includes 
pituitary-dependent HC (PDH; Cush-
ing’s disease) and the ectopic ACTH syn-
drome. ACTH-independent HC includes 
functional adrenocortical tumors (ATs) 
and primary ACTH-independent adreno-
cortical hyperplasia, such as food-induced 
HC. While PDH and functional ATs are 
well-recognized, reports of primary ACTH-
independent adrenocortical hyperplasia 
and ectopic ACTH syndrome are limited to 
individual case reports.4
PHYSIOLOGY: HYPOTHALAMUS-PITUITARY-
ADRENOCORTICAL AXIS (HPAA)
HYPOTHALAMUS AND PITUITARY GLAND
e hypothal

--- ettinger PDF 2174 ---
SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
2022
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
INTRODUCTION
F
eline hyperadrenocorticism (fHAC; 
Cushing’s syndrome; hypercortisolism) 
is less common, has more worrisome 
consequences, and poses greater challenges to 
diagnose and treat than canine hyperadreno-
corticism (cHAC). fHAC has a worse progno-
sis than the condition in dogs. Unlike in dogs, 
fHAC is commonly associated with diabetes 
mellitus (DM), a skin hyperfragility syn-
drome, and other conditions that can compli-
cate management. Basic pathophysiology and 
other aspects of fHAC are similar to cHAC 
(ch. 293). is chapter focuses on the clinical 
condition in cats caused by chronic exposure 
to excess cortisol or other steroid hormones 
with cortisol-like action. For example, cats 
with progesterone-secreting adrenocortical 
tumors, with or without aldosterone secre-
tion, may have clinical signs similar to fHAC 
(ch. 295).1-3 Importantly, insulin-resistant 
DM in cats is more commonly associated 
with hypersomatotropism (HS; feline acro-
megaly) than with fHAC (ch. 280).
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Naturally occurring fHAC is a multi-systemic disorder resulting 
from excessive production of cortisol by the adrenal cortices. 
ere are single case reports and several case series of cats with 
fHAC that together total only about 100 cases.4-25 Pituitary-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH) aects about 85% of 
cats with fHAC, most commonly caused by an autonomous 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-secreting adenoma. 
Adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (ADH) aects about 
15% of cats with fHAC, usually caused by an autonomously 
functioning adrenocortical adenoma or carcinoma.5 A small 
number of cats have a pituitary tumor that secretes more than 1 
hormone.19 26-29 Iatrogenic fHAC has been described aer glu-
cocorticoid or progestogen administration,30-32 either of which 
can severely suppress endogenous cortisol and cause adrenocor-
tical atrophy.33
CLINICAL SIGNS
OVERVIEW
Early reports of cats with fHAC described obvious clinical signs, 
oen present for months before diagnosis. As su

--- ettinger PDF 2188 ---
SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
2036
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
62. Syme HM, Scott-Moncrie JCR, Treadwell NG, etal. Hyperadrenocorticism 
associated with excessive sex hormone production by an adrenocortical tumor in 
two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2001;219:1725-1728.
63. Norman EJ, ompson H, Mooney CT. Dynamic adrenal function testing in 
eight dogs with hyperadrenocorticism associated with adrenocortical neoplasia. 
Vet Rec. 1999;144:551-554.
64. Frank LA, Mullins R, Rohrbach BW. Variability of estradiol concentration 
in normal dogs. Vet Dermatol. 2010;21:490-493.
65. Chapman PS, Mooney CT, Ede J, etal. Evaluation of the basal and post-
adrenocorticotrophic hormone serum concentrations of 17-hydroxyprogesterone 
for the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. Vet Rec. 2003;153:771-775.
66. Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ, Boozer AL, etal. Serum 17-alpha-
hydroxyprogesterone and corticosterone concentrations in dogs with non-adrenal 
neoplasia and dogs with suspected hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2005;227:1762-1767.
67. Monroe WE, Panciera DL, Zimmerman KL. Concentrations of noncortisol 
adrenal steroids in response to ACTH in dogs with adrenal-dependent hyperadre-
nocorticism, pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism, and nonadrenal illness. 
J Vet Intern Med. 2012;26:945-952.
68. Hill KE, Scott-Moncrie JCR, Koshko M, etal. Secretion of sex hormones in 
dogs with adrenal dysfunction. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2005;226:556-561.
Hypoadrenocorticism
Rebecka S. Hess
INTRODUCTION
I
n 1855, Dr. omas Addison published 
a case series of 11 individuals, each 
described as having a disease of the 
supra-renal capsule (adrenal cortex).1 Hypo-
adrenocorticism (HA) is, therefore, oen 
referred to as “Addison’s disease.” e adrenal 
cortex synthesizes and secretes glucocorti-
coids and mineralocorticoids that are essen-
tial for life. e cortex is divided into 3 layers: 
the outermost zona glomerulosa, the widest 
middle zona fasciculata, and the innermost 
zona reticularis. Hypofunction or dysfunc-
tion of the cortex, such as that seen in HA, 
can be life threate

--- ettinger PDF 2225 ---
CHAPTER 300
•
Acute Kidney Injury
2073
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
154. Ochoa VB, DiBartola SP, Chew DJ, etal. Perinephric pseudocysts in 
the cat: a retrospective study and review of the literature. J Vet Intern Med
1999;13(1):47-55.
155. Valdes-Martinez A, Cianciolo R, Mai W. Association between renal 
hypoechoic subcapsular thickening and lymphosarcoma in cats. Vet Radiol 
Ultrasound. 2007;48(4):357-360.
156. Mantis P, Lamb CR. Most dogs with medullary rim sign on ultrasonography 
have no demonstrable renal dysfunction. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2000;41(2):
164-166.
157. Hart DV, Winter MD, Conway J, etal. Ultrasound appearance of the 
outer medulla in dogs without renal dysfunction. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
2013;54(6):652-658.
158. Jakovljevic S, Rivers WJ, Chun R, etal. Results of renal ultrasonography 
performed before and during administration of saline (0.9% NaCl) solution 
to induce diuresis in dogs without evidence of renal disease. Am J Vet Res
1999;60(4):405-409.
159. Neuwirth L, Mahaey M, Crowell W, etal. Comparison of excretory 
urography and ultrasonography for detection of experimentally induced 
pyelonephritis in dogs. Am J Vet Res. 1993;54(5):660-669.
160. Adin CA, Herrgesell EJ, Nyland TG, etal. Antegrade pyelography for 
suspected ureteral obstruction in cats: 11 cases (1995-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2003;222(11):1576-1581.
161. Etedali NM, Reetz JA, Foster JD. Complications and clinical utility of 
ultrasonographically guided pyelocentesis and antegrade pyelography in cats and 
dogs: 49 cases (2007-2015). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2019;254(7):826-834.
162. Lemieux C, Vachon C, Beauchamp G, etal. Minimal renal pelvis dilation in 
cats diagnosed with benign ureteral obstruction by antegrade pyelography: a 
retrospective study of 82 cases (2012–2018). J Feline Med Surg. 2021;23(10):892-899.
163. Novellas R, Ruiz de Gopegui R, Espada Y. Assessment of renal vascular 
resistance and blood pressure in dogs and cats with renal disease. Vet Rec
2010;166(20):618-623.
ACRONYMS
4-MP 4-methylpyrazole
ACE-I angiotensin converting 
enzyme inhibitor
ADH antidiureti

--- ettinger PDF 2241 ---
CHAPTER 301
•
Chronic Kidney Disease
2089
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
ACEi angiotensin 
converting enzyme 
inhibitor
ADH antidiuretic hormone
ARB angiotensin receptor 
blocker
BP blood pressure
BUN blood urea nitrogen
Ca calcium
CI confidence interval
CKD chronic kidney disease
CKD-MBD chronic kidney 
disease-mineral bone 
disorders
EPO erythropoietin
ESA erythrocyte-
stimulating agent
FGF23 fibroblast growth 
factor 23
FIV feline immunodeficien-
cy virus
GFR glomerular filtration 
rate
GI gastrointestinal
HIF hypoxia-inducible factor
hyperCa hypercalcemia
hyperK hyperkalemia
hypoCa hypocalcemia
hypoK hypokalemia
iCa ionized calcium
ICGN immune-complex 
mediated glomerular 
nephritis
IRIS International Renal 
Interest Society
K potassium
KCl potassium chloride
Mg magnesium
PCV packed cell volume
PO4 phosphate
PRCA pure red cell aplasia
PTH parathyroid hormone
RAAS renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system
RBC red blood cell
RSHP renal secondary 
hyperparathyroidism
tCa total calcium
TOD target organ damage
UPCR urine protein-to-
creatinine ratio
US ultrasound
USG urine specific gravity
UTI urinary tract infection
Chronic Kidney Disease
Jessica M. Quimby
OVERVIEW OF CHRONIC KIDNEY 
DISEASE (CKD)
DEFINITIONS AND CO-EXISTING 
CONDITIONS
C
hronic kidney disease (CKD) is 
defined as structural and/or func-
tional abnormalities of one or 
both kidneys that have been continuously 
present for ≥3 months. CKD is usually 
irreversible and progressive, even with 
treatment. It is common for prerenal or 
postrenal azotemia, or for active kidney 
diseases, e.g., “acute-on-chronic kidney 
disease,” to co-exist with CKD. In con-
trast to CKD, many complications are 
reversible (e.g., pyelonephritis, ureteral 
obstruction, dehydration, etc.). There-
fore, appropriate diagnostic workup and 
assessment of all contributing factors 
is important (ch. 299). After correcting 
reversible primary diseases and/or pre-
renal or postrenal conditions, further 
improvement in kidney function may 
not occur because compensatory and 
adaptive mechanisms designed to sus-
tain kidney function

--- ettinger PDF 2296 ---
SECTION XXI
•
Lower Urinary Tract Disease
2144
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Lower Urinary Tract Infections
Michael Wood
CHAPTER 307
ACRONYMS
ASB asymptomatic 
bacteriuria
GAG glycosaminoglycan
MUC mean urinary 
concentration
NSAIDs non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs
PAC proanthocyanidin
SCB subclinical bacteriuria
UTI urinary tract infection
INTRODUCTION
U
rinary tract infection (UTI) develop-
ment is multifactorial, dependent on 
the interplay between the virulence 
of an organism and alterations in anatomic, 
environmental, and immunological compe-
tency of the host. Urinary bladders with nor-
mal urinary defenses are inherently resistant 
to colonization and cystitis.1 It is those blad-
ders with compromised defenses that are at 
increased risk for UTI development. Please refer to the 8th edition 
of this textbook ch. 330 “Lower Urinary Tract Infections” for a 
review of “Natural and Acquired Host Defenses” in Box 330-1.
e most common microbes invading the urinary tract are 
bacteria. Other organisms like fungi account for only ∼1% of dog 
and cat bladder infections. Infecting bacteria typically originate 
from the enteric ora and ascend through the distal urogeni-
tal tract into the proximal urethra and urinary bladder.2 When 
urinary tract colonization results in lower urinary tract (LUT) 
inammation and clinical signs including caudal abdominal pain, 
pollakiuria, stranguria, or dysuria, the term UTI or bacterial cys-
titis is appropriate.3
Spayed female dogs have twice the risk of UTI when compared 
to male dogs.4 Gram negative bacteria comprise >60% of posi-
tive cultures, with Escherichia coli being isolated from 45-55% of 
bacteriuric dogs. Other Gram negative organisms including Pro-
teus spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Klebsiella spp. and Gram 
positive bacteria that include Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus
spp., and Enterococcus spp. are each cultured between 2-14% of 
the time.5
In cats, E. coli is also the most common cause of bacteriuria 
(37.3%); however, Gram negative and Gram positive infections 
each occur roughly half the time with G

--- ettinger PDF 2316 ---
SECTION XXI
•
Lower Urinary Tract Disease
2164
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
25. Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP, etal. Association between dietary 
factors and calcium oxalate and magnesium ammonium phosphate urolithiasis in 
cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2001;219(9):1228-1237.
26. Zuckerman JM, Assimos DG. Hypocitraturia: pathophysiology and medical 
management. Rev Urol. 2009;11(3):134-144.
27. Cao LC, Boevé ER, De Bruijn WC, etal. Glycosaminoglycans and 
semisynthetic sulfated polysaccharides: an overview of their potential application 
in treatment of patients with urolithiasis. Urology. 1997;50(2):173-183.
28. Bungton CAT, Blaisdell JL, Binns SP, etal. Decreased urine 
glycosaminoglycan excretion in cats with interstitial cystitis. J Urol
1996;155(5):1801-1804.
29. Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Lekcharoensuk C, etal. Eects of diet on urine 
composition of cats with calcium oxalate urolithiasis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
2004;40(3):185-191.
30. Palm CA, Westropp JL. Cats and calcium oxalate. Strategies for managing 
lower and upper tract stone disease. J Feline Med Surg. 2011;13(9):651-660.
31. Quéau Y, Bijsmans ES, Feugier A, etal. Increasing dietary sodium chloride 
promotes urine dilution and decreases struvite and calcium oxalate relative 
supersaturation in healthy dogs and cats. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl)
2020;104(5):1524-1530.
32. Nolan BG, Labato MA. Calcium oxalate urolithiasis. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt 
DC, eds. Kirk’s Current Veterinary erapy XV. 15th ed. Elsevier; 2014:897-901.
33. Luckschander N, Iben C, Hosgood G, etal. Dietary NaCl does not aect 
blood pressure in healthy cats. J Vet Intern Med. 2004;18(4):463-467.
34. Passlack N, Kohn B, Doherr MG, etal. Inuence of protein concentration 
and quality in a canned diet on urine composition, apparent nutrient digestibility 
and energy supply in adult cats. BMC Vet Res. 2018;14(1):225.
35. Capuano P, Radanovic T, Wagner CA, etal. Intestinal and renal adaptation 
to a low-Pi diet of type II NaPi cotransporters in vitamin D receptor- and 
1αOHase-decient mice. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2005;2

--- ettinger PDF 2323 ---
CHAPTER 311
•
Feline Idiopathic/Interstitial Cystitis
2171
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
AAFP American 
Association of Feline 
Practitioners
CBD cannabidiol
cLUTS chronic lower 
urinary tract signs
CNS central nervous 
system
CTRS central threat 
response system
FIC feline idiopathic/
interstitial cystitis
IC interstitial cystitis
LUTS lower urinary tract 
signs
MEMO multimodal 
environmental 
modification
UTI urinary tract infection
WAS water-avoidance 
stress
Feline Idiopathic/Interstitial Cystitis
Tony Buffington | Mikel M. Delgado
INTRODUCTION
F
eline 
idiopathic/interstitial 
cysti-
tis (FIC) is the most common cause 
of chronic lower urinary tract signs 
(cLUTS), which includes variable combina-
tions of straining, hematuria, pollakiuria, 
and periuria, in domestic cats.1 Cats show-
ing these signs have been referred to as hav-
ing “feline idiopathic/interstitial cystitis” 
only because of their similarities to humans 
with interstitial cystitis (IC; now sometimes 
referred to as bladder pain syndrome/inter-
stitial cystitis). IC is characterized clinically 
by dicult, painful, and frequent urinations 
without a diagnosable cause, and oen a 
variety of comorbid health problems.2
FIC was once classied as a “feline lower 
urinary tract disorder” (FLUTD)3 because 
cats present with cLUTS. FIC does not seem 
to originate in the bladder, however. Just 
as jaundice can present as a dermatologic 
or ophthalmic sign, it is neither a dermatologic nor ophthal-
mic disorder. Research has identied genetic factors, epigenetic 
eects, and environmental inuences associated with risk for 
(F)IC, documented that comorbid disorders oen occur before 
the onset of the lower urinary tract signs (LUTS), and demon-
strated how much systemic involvement can be present in these 
patients.1 One of us (CATB) has proposed the term “Pandora syn-
drome” to describe the multiple health problems present in some 
of these cats (as in people with chronic overlapping pain condi-
tions), because it does not identify any specic cause or organ, 
and tries to capture the dismay and 

--- ettinger PDF 2345 ---
CHAPTER 314
•
Prostatic Diseases
2193
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
to neoplasia. Aseptic prostatitis is rare. Septic prostatitis, the most 
common inammatory disease, can be acute or chronic, and may 
be associated with prostatic abscesses (Figure 314.6).44 Multiple 
organisms are usually demonstrated in dogs with septic pros-
tatitis; infection by a single bacterium is uncommon.45 Aerobic 
organisms are most common, e.g., Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus
sp., Streptococcus sp., Proteus sp., Pseudomonas spp., Brucella canis, 
Klebsiella sp. Infections are oen traced to bacteria ascending the 
urethra. Local dissemination from urogenital organs or hematog-
enous spread is possible.36 Conditions that reduce normal defence 
mechanisms or that alter prostatic architecture (BPH, cysts, meta-
plasia, neoplasia) can predispose to prostatic infection.1 5
Quantitative cultures of prostatic uid may help in understand-
ing a positive prostatic uid culture (ch. 104). Denitive diagno-
sis of infection is made by growth >10,000 bacteria/mL.46 It has 
been suggested that a 2-log dierence between prostatic and urine 
colony-forming unit counts is consistent with bacterial prostati-
tis.47 When semen collection or prostate massage is not possible, 
US-guided FNA (ch. 85) of parenchyma, cysts, or abscesses usu-
ally provides adequate material for cytologic analysis, culture, and 
sensitivity (Figure 314.6). Value of a FNA must be weighed against 
risk. One can drain a cystic or abscess cavity completely to reduce 
risk of leakage into the abdomen. Cysts, especially those with urine, 
can become infected secondary to prostatitis.
ACUTE PROSTATITIS (AP)
Common Signs, Physical Examination
A presumptive diagnosis of AP should be based on the history, 
signs (Box 314.2), PE, laboratory ndings, urine culture results, 
and prostatic imaging. AP may be conrmed with prostatic cyto-
logic examination of slides from aspirates, and bacterial culture 
(ch. 104).45 Common clinical signs include fever, anorexia, leth-
argy, vomiting, caudal abdominal pain, diculty rising, painful 
sti gai

--- ettinger PDF 2392 ---
SECTION XXII
•
Cancer
2240
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
ALL acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia
AML acute myeloid 
leukemia
BM bone marrow
CBC complete blood count
CCNU lomustine
CHOP cyclophosphamide 
(C), doxorubicin 
(hydroxydaunorubicin 
[H]), vincristine (Oncovin 
[O]), and prednisone (P)
CLL chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia
CML chronic myeloid 
leukemia
CNS central nervous 
system
COP cyclophosphamide, 
vincristine, prednisone
CSF cerebrospinal fluid
CT computed tomography
DLBCL diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma
EATCL enteropathy 
associated T-cell 
lymphoma
FeLV feline leukemia virus
FIV feline 
immunodeficiency virus
GI gastrointestinal
Ig immunoglobulin
LSA lymphoma 
(lymphosarcoma)
MHC major 
histocompatibility 
complex
MI mitotic index
MM multiple myeloma
MRD myeloma-related 
disorders
MST median survival time
PARR PCR for antigen 
receptor rearrangement
PCR polymerase chain 
reaction
PE physical examination
PTCL peripheral T-cell 
lymphoma
PTHrP parathyroid 
hormone-related peptide
PU/PD polyuria/polydipsia
Hematopoietic Tumors
Dennis B. Bailey
DEFINITIONS
H
ematopoietic tumors include lym-
phoid tumors (lymphoma [LSA; his-
torically, lymphosarcoma], lymphoid 
leukemia, and myeloma-related disorders 
[MRD]) and myeloid leukemias. Lymphomas 
arise in lymphoid tissues outside of the bone 
marrow (BM). In dogs, lymph nodes, liver, 
and spleen are aected most commonly; in 
cats the gastrointestinal (GI) tract is aected 
most commonly. However, in both species, 
LSA can involve almost any organ system, 
including BM, peripheral blood, cranial 
mediastinum, skin, nasal cavity, kidneys, and 
central nervous system (CNS).
Leukemias arise in the BM and occasion-
ally the spleen. ey can be derived from 
lymphoid or myeloid cells. Myeloid leuke-
mias are usually neutrophilic or monocytic 
in origin, but can be derived from other gran-
ulocytes, erythrocytes, or megakaryocytes. 
e word “leukemia” sometimes is used to 
describe neoplastic hematopoietic cells cir-
culating in the blood, but this is imprecise 
and not recommended. Not all primary BM 
cancers result i

--- ettinger PDF 2402 ---
SECTION XXII
•
Cancer
2250
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
the importance of molecular diagnostics, e.g., ow cytometry and 
cytochemistry on blood and/or BM when evaluating a pet with 
acute leukemia.
A diagnosis of acute leukemia is based on >20% blasts in 
either the peripheral blood or BM; some older studies used >30% 
blasts.106-109 Classically, acute leukemias can be distinguished 
from LSA by being CD34+, but it is estimated that up to 25% of 
canine acute leukemias are CD34
21 101 106 Commercially avail-
able ow cytometry tests have specic antibodies for lymphocytes 
and for granulocytes/monocytes. However, about 20-25% of acute 
leukemias cannot be denitively classied despite use of these 
markers (so-called acute undierentiated leukemias).21 107 Addi-
tional cytochemical or immunocytochemical stains are available 
through some universities. PARR is not helpful because not all 
lymphoid cancers test positive for a clonal rearrangement, and 
>60% of dogs with AML test positive for clonal or biclonal rear-
rangements.110 When lineage can be determined, about 50-55% of 
acute leukemias in dogs are ALL, and 45-50% are AML.100 106-108
In dogs with ALL, there is not a consistent predominance of B- or 
T-cell.106-108 Both B- and T-cell ALL have been reported in cats, 
but there are too few to make meaningful comparisons.111
Clinical Signs
Most dogs and cats with acute leukemia are clinically ill at time of 
initial presentation. Anorexia and lethargy are common108 109 111; 
other clinical signs include vomiting, diarrhea, weakness, and neu-
rologic abnormalities. Mild lymphadenopathy is reported in over 
half of dogs, but it is not reported in cats. Other PE ndings include 
cranial abdominal organomegaly, fever, pallor, petechia, and epi-
staxis. T-cell ALL can cause paraneoplastic hypercalcemia, causing 
PU/PD. FeLV (ch. 199) is associated with acute leukemias in cats.3
Diagnostics
Greater than 90% of dogs and cats with acute leukemia have neo-
plastic cells seen on peripheral blood smears (ch. 58). In some, 
the number of neoplastic cells is small or they ar

--- ettinger PDF 2453 ---
CHAPTER 329
•
Mammary Gland Tumors
2301
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
bMGT benign mammary 
gland tumor
CBC complete blood count
DFI disease-free interval
IMGC inflammatory 
mammary gland 
carcinoma
MGT mammary gland 
tumor
mMGT malignant 
mammary gland tumor
OHE ovariohysterectomy
OS overall survival
PE physical examination
SLN sentinel lymph node
UA urinalysis
US ultrasound
Mammary Gland Tumors
Juan Borrego
PREVALENCE AND RISK FACTORS
M
ammary gland tumors (MGTs) 
are the most common tumor in 
intact female dogs and the sec-
ond to third most common tumor overall 
in cats.1-3 e incidence varies geographi-
cally, mostly due to dierent attitudes about 
neutering. A common risk factor for both 
species is advancing age. Dogs with malig-
nant mammary gland tumors (mMGTs) 
are older. mMGTs are rare in dogs <5 years 
of age.4 In cats, the mean age at diagno-
sis is 10-12 years. One recent study noted 
a trend in higher rates of mMGTs versus 
benign mammary gland tumors (bMGTs) 
in dogs, similar to epidemiologic trends in 
women.2
Exposure to ovarian hormones during the rst 2 years of life is 
a recognized risk factor for the development of MGTs, and ovar-
iohysterectomy (OHE) greatly decreases risk of MGT in both spe-
cies.5 6 Dogs spayed before their rst estrus have a risk of 0.5%; 
aer the rst estrus, the risk increases to 8%; and aer a second 
estrus, risk increases to 26%. Aer the third estrus cycle and/or 
approximately 4 years of age, OHE provides only modest protec-
tion. Some studies, however, show a decreased risk of developing 
new tumors if OHE is performed at MGT removal. Addition-
ally, histologic progression with increasing tumor size has been 
reported in dogs with multiple tumors, suggesting a continuous 
eect of hormones throughout the dog’s lifespan.7 Studies suggest 
MGTs progress not only from benign to malignant, but also from 
low to highly malignant.8 Neutering before the rst estrus in cats 
provides 91% risk reduction; before the second estrus, an 86% risk 
reduction; and before the third estrus, an 11% risk reduction. Aer 
the 