SECTION X
•
Hematologic and Immunologic Disease
866
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
vitamin K is essential for carboxylation of the glutamic acid 
residues of these coagulation factors. Anticoagulant rodenti-
cides antagonize vitamin K epoxide reductase, causing rapid 
depletion of the vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors 
(Figure 171.3).36 Factors II, VII, IX, and X have relatively short 
half-lives (4, 6., 13.9, and 16.5 hours, respectively) and grad-
ually decline over 36-7 hours following intoxication. Clinical 
signs of bleeding are typically observed 3-5 days after inges-
tion of anticoagulant rodenticide. Because factor VII has the 
shortest half-life, PT will be prolonged within 36 to 7 hours 
of ingestion, followed by prolongation of aPTT and ACT.37
Proteins induced by vitamin K absence/antagonism (PIVKA) 
levels will increase 1-4 hours after ingestion; these are not 
specific for anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication.
Vitamin K antagonism is treated with vitamin K1 supplemen-
tation and supportive care (chs. 14, 138). PT typically normal-
izes 14-36 hours aer starting vitamin K1 therapy. PT should be 
rechecked 36-48 hours aer discontinuing vitamin K1 therapy to 
ensure normalization of coagulation tests and sucient treatment 
duration.37
HEPATIC DISEASE
The liver has a central role in hemostasis, being responsible for 
synthesizing and clearing most pro- and anticoagulant factors 
and regulators of fibrinolysis. Liver disease can alter coagula-
tion factors, cause endothelial activation, and lead to vitamin 
K deficiency. Most patients with liver insufficiency have a par-
allel decline in pro- and anticoagulant proteins, resulting in a 
relatively balanced hemostatic system invivo in initial disease 
stages. Prolonged PT and aPTT, and decreased fibrinogen lev-
els, are commonly detected in patients with liver disease, but 
clinical bleeding is usually associated with only fulminant or 
end-stage liver failure38 39; an exception is that gastrointestinal 
(GI) ulceration can be observed in dogs with hepatic disease 
and lead to GI blood loss in the absence of coagulopathy. Rou-
tine coagulation profiles are likely inadequate in characteriz-
ing hemostatic abnormalities in liver disease.
Given the complex and multiple effects that liver dis-
ease has on hemostasis, thrombosis and/or bleeding can be 
consequences. Hepatic diseases are common underlying 
conditions in dogs and cats diagnosed with portal vein throm-
bosis, although other risk factors for thrombosis including 
glucocorticoid therapy are present in many of these patients. 
Dogs with hepatopathies have variable findings on visco-
elastic testing (ch. 170). Dogs with chronic hepatopathies, 
portosystemic shunts, and extrahepatic biliary duct obstruc-
tion are generally normo- to hypercoagulable based on vis-
coelastic testing. Advanced chronic hepatopathies can cause 
hypocoagulability.40-4 Viscoelastic testing shows that most 
dogs with acute hepatopathy are normo- or hypocoagulable.43
Vitamin-K replete cats with cholestatic disease are typically 
hyper- or normocoagulable, although hypocoagulability and 
hyperfibrinolysis can be observed in cats with synthetic fail-
ure.44 Changes in primary hemostasis are not well described 
in liver disease, although thrombocytopenia and thrombocy-
topathia have been reported in some liver diseases.
DISSEMINATED INTRAVASCULAR COAGULATION
DIC is a systemic activation of coagulation and impairment 
of anticoagulants and endogenous fibrinolysis, leading to non-
localized intravascular fibrin deposition, thrombosis, and 
organ dysfunction. DIC is a consumptive coagulopathy that 
can result from many systemic diseases including widespread 
inflammation, sepsis, and neoplasia. Tissue factor is a primary 
mediator of DIC. Proinflammatory cytokines and endotoxins 
induce tissue factor expression and release. High concentra-
tions of tissue factor can be found on circulating monocytes, 
endothelial cells, neoplastic cells, microparticles, and other 
sources.45 Once in circulation, tissue factor forms a complex 
with activated factor VII, a potent stimulus for thrombin for-
mation. Excess circulating thrombin cleaves fibrinogen, leav-
ing behind multiple fibrin clots and leading to microvascular 
and macrovascular thrombosis. Coagulation inhibitors are 
consumed in DIC, further promoting coagulation. As clots 
form, platelets become entrapped, resulting in thrombocytope-
nia. Simultaneously, excess circulating thrombin results in the 
conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, leading to fibrinolysis. 
Fibrinolysis results in excess amounts of fibrinogen degrada-
tion products, which have anticoagulant properties, possibly 
contributing to hemorrhage. Excess plasmin also activates the 
complement and kinin systems, leading to clinical signs such 
as shock, hypotension, and increased vascular permeability.46
Patients with DIC can display consequences of widespread 
thrombosis of the microvasculature as well as increased bleed-
ing tendencies, either sequentially or concurrently. During the 
initial (non-overt, or compensated) stages of DIC, patients 
are in a hypercoagulable phase. However, procoagulant fac-
tors progressively become consumed, leading to a hypocoagu-
lable (overt, or uncompensated) phase. Prolonged coagulation 
times accompanied by clinical signs of bleeding might be 
apparent in the hypocoagulable phase. Patients in acute ful-
minant DIC present with bleeding; however, in more chronic 
forms, patients may only show signs related to the underlying 
disorder.
Typical laboratory findings of DIC patients include throm-
bocytopenia, prolongation of PT and aPTT, elevation of fibri-
nolysis markers (D-dimers), hypofibrinogenemia, decreased 
antithrombin, and signs of red blood cell fragmentation on the 
blood smear (ch. 57). No single diagnostic test has high sensi-
tivity or specificity for diagnosis of DIC. Diagnostic algorithms 
combining multiple hemostatic parameters have been devel-
oped in people and likely have utility in veterinary patients.47
Viscoelastic testing can be used for distinguishing between the 
various stages of DIC in dogs.
e prognosis for DIC varies depending on the underlying 
disorder but is considered poor regardless. Mortality appears to 
O2
H2O
γ-glutamyl
carboxylase
Clotting factor
precursors
Reduced vitamin K
Warfarin 
Vitamin K–epoxide
reductase
Vitamin K epoxide
Carboxylated
clotting factors
CO2
Figure 171.3
Vitamin K epoxidase cycle illustrating the carboxylation 
of clotting factors and the site of warfarin inhibition.

CHAPTER 171
•
Hyper- and Hypocoagulable States
867
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
be higher in dogs with hypocoagulability and multiple hemostatic 
laboratory abnormalities.47 48
ACQUIRED ANTICOAGULANTS
Coagulation inhibitors are antibodies (usually IgG) that bind 
to and inhibit activity of coagulation factor or cause increased 
coagulation factor clearance. Acquired anticoagulants are rare 
in veterinary patients and can develop secondary to immune-
mediated disease, multiple blood transfusions, stem cell trans-
plantation, and neoplasia. Anti-phospholipid protein antibody 
(i.e., lupus anticoagulant) inhibits the interaction between 
coagulation proteins and cell membranes, causing prolonga-
tion of coagulation times such as aPTT. Paradoxically, the 
presence of anti-phospholipid protein antibodies is clinically 
associated with thrombosis. Clinical signs related to acquired 
anticoagulants may be absent or can include signs of hemor-
rhage. Coagulation times (PT, aPTT) are abnormal depending 
on which factor(s) is/are affected. A plasma mixing test can 
be used to support a diagnosis of acquired anticoagulant, and 
confirmatory testing with specific assays can be performed 
(e.g., Bethesda assay for quantification of factor inhibitor).49
GENERAL TREATMENT OF ACQUIRED 
HYPOCOAGULABILITY
Therapy to address the underlying disorder for hypocoagula-
bility is recommended when possible. Vitamin K1 therapy is 
recommended in anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication cases 
(ch. 138), and in liver dysfunction causing coagulopathy. An 
initial dose of .5 to 5 mg/kg SC or PO, followed 6-1 hours 
later with maintenance therapy (.5 to 5 mg/kg PO, split into 
-3 doses per day) can be given and long-term duration is 
guided by PT rechecks. Cats with liver disease can be given 
doses of 0.5 to 1.5 mg/kg SC every 1 hours. Intravenous vita-
min K1 administration has been associated with anaphylaxis. 
Vitamin K3 therapy is not recommended due to slower onset 
of action and possible Heinz body formation.
Plasma transfusions can temporarily replenish coagulation 
factors (ch. 14). Coagulation times are not sensitive predic-
tors for risk of hemorrhage, and viscoelastic testing might be 
useful in determining if a patient would benefit from plasma 
transfusion and at what dosage. Plasma is usually administered 
as an initial dose of 10-0 mL/kg IV in dogs.50 Lower dos-
ages (e.g., 6 mL/kg) are recommended in cats.51 Fresh frozen 
plasma contains all coagulation factors and plasma proteins, 
including the labile coagulation factors (V and VIII). Cryopre-
cipitate primarily contains factors VIII, XIII, von Willebrand 
factor, fibrinogen, and fibronectin, at approximately 50-80% 
of the levels as fresh frozen plasma but in a smaller volume. 
Cryoprecipitate-poor plasma has sufficient quantities of most 
coagulation factors except for those contained in cryoprecipi-
tate.5 Coagulation factor stability generally declines in plasma 
products over prolonged storage. Factors V and VIII signifi-
cantly diminish after 1 year of storage in human plasma prod-
ucts, although stability in dogs likely exceeds this timeframe.53
Either fresh frozen or stored plasma is suitable for replacement 
of vitamin K-dependent factors, as well as for treatment of 
most other factor deficiencies.
erapeutic recommendations to address consequences of 
DIC are controversial. Heparin therapy is commonly used in the 
hypercoagulable phase of DIC, but optimal dosing protocols are 
not known.54 Heparin is an indirect anticoagulant, exerting most 
of its eect through potentiation of AT activity, which can be 
diminished in states of DIC. Heparin therapy should be avoided 
in veterinary patients with DIC and evidence of bleeding. Pro-
phylactic plasma transfusion does not show a consistent benet 
in humans with DIC, and thus plasma transfusions are usually 
recommended only in veterinary DIC patients with clinical signs 
of bleeding.55
HEREDITARY HYPOCOAGULABLE STATES
SCOTT SYNDROME
While Scott syndrome is a defect of procoagulant activity on the 
platelet surface, this disorder manifests as a coagulopathy because 
the platelet surface cannot support plasma coagulation protein 
activity.56 Further details can be found in ch. 175.
HYPERFIBRINOLYSIS
The fibrinolytic system regulates hemostasis and is acti-
vated alongside coagulation. Hyperfibrinolysis prematurely 
degrades fibrin clots, leading to hemorrhage. Hyperfibrinoly-
sis can occur secondary to other disorders including trauma, 
DIC, and liver disease. Delayed hemorrhage has been observed 
in Greyhounds following trauma or surgery. While the dis-
order is not fully characterized, it is suspected to be due to 
hyperfibrinolysis.57
The diagnosis of hyperfibrinolysis is challenging. Increased 
levels of fibrin degradation products and D-dimers are sug-
gestive of, but not specific for, hyperfibrinolysis. Increased 
fibrinolysis can be detected by viscoelastic testing, but the 
test appears to lack specificity and sensitivity. Peri-operative 
treatment of Greyhounds with anti-fibrinolytic drugs (e.g., 
aminocaproic acid 500 mg per 30 kg dog PO q8h, begin-
ning postoperatively the evening of surgery) mitigates post-
operative hemorrhage.58
HEREDITARY FACTOR DEFICIENCIES
Single or combined factor deficiencies produce variable clini-
cal signs ranging from subclinical to severe bleeding tenden-
cies. Depending on the factor(s) deficient, prolongation of PT 
and/or aPTT is observed. Measurement of individual coagu-
lation factor activity is required for a definitive diagnosis. 
Genetic testing is also available for some inherited coagulation 
disorders.
Hemophilia A and B
Hemophilia A and B are deficiencies in factors VIII and IX, 
respectively. Hemophilia A is more common than hemo-
philia B and both forms have been documented in dogs and 
cats. Maine Coon cats are suspected to have an inherited defi-
ciency in factor I and IX.59 Hemophilia A and B are autosomal 
X-linked recessive traits; therefore, males are most commonly 
affected. Various genetic mutations are responsible for hemo-
philia A or B. In some cases, hemophilia within a pedigree can 
be traced to the original index animal while other cases are 
suspected to arise from de novo mutations.60 Lack of factor 
VIII or IX inhibits formation of the tenase complex, hindering 
downstream thrombin generation and blood clot formation. 
Accordingly, hemorrhage is the principal clinical sign associ-
ated with hemophilia A and B and it can manifest as prolonged 
bleeding after trauma or surgery, subcutaneous or intramuscu-
lar hematomas, mucosal bleeding (ch. 9), and lameness due to 
hemarthrosis.
Hemophilia A or B is suspected in patients with a bleed-
ing diathesis (i.e., tendency to bleed) and prolonged aPTT 
