SECTION XIX
•
Endocrine Disease
1966
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ACRONYMS
AcAc acetoacetate
AKI acute kidney injury
ALIVE Agreeing Language 
in Veterinary 
Endocrinology
BG blood glucose
CHF congestive heart fail-
ure
CKD chronic kidney dis-
ease
CRI constant rate infusion
DKA diabetic ketoacidosis
DM diabetes mellitus
ECF extracellular fluid
FFA free fatty acid
FGMS flash glucose moni-
toring system
HHS hyperosmolar hyper-
glycemic state
IM intramuscular(ly)
IV intravascular
KB ketone body
PE physical examination
PU/PD polyuria/polydipsia
SQ subcutaneous(ly)
UTI urinary tract infection
D
iabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and 
the “hyperosmolar hyperglycemic 
state” (HHS) are two acute, severe, 
potentially life-threatening complications of 
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus (DM). eir 
clinical signs overlap. Morbidity and mortal-
ity are usually a consequence of the under-
lying precipitating cause or the result of 
complications derived from lack of therapy 
or improper therapy and monitoring rather 
than a result of hyperglycemia. Prompt diag-
nosis, use of standardized treatment proto-
cols respecting the unpredictable nature of 
these conditions and responses to treatment, 
and the ability to resolve or manage the 
underlying cause, aect outcome.
DEFINITIONS
DKA is dened by the triad of hypergly-
cemia (or previous diagnosis of DM), 
metabolic acidosis, and ketonemia. e 
term HHS has been recommended by the 
American Diabetes Association for the syn-
drome characterized by severe hyperglyce-
mia, hyperosmolality, and dehydration in 
the absence of signicant ketosis. Compared to previously used 
nomenclatures (hyperosmolar coma, hyperosmolar non-ketotic 
syndrome), this new title emphasizes that not all patients are 
comatose and that mild degrees of ketosis and acidemia may 
be present.1 2 Although there are important dierences in their 
pathogenesis, both DKA and HHS result from a decrease in 
the net eective action of circulating insulin, due to an abso-
lute or relative insulin deciency complicated by increases in 
circulating concentrations of counterregulatory stress hor-
mones: glucagon, catecholamines, cortisol, and growth hormone 
(Figure 290.1).3-5
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF DIABETIC KETOACIDOSIS
A STATE OF STARVATION
Insulin, a peptide hormone produced by beta cells within the pan-
creatic islets, allows blood glucose (BG) to be transported from the 
blood into cells throughout the body, fueling metabolic processes. 
Insulin deciency dramatically reduces glucose availability for cells 
and creates a physiologic state of “starvation.” Without glucose, 
the body must utilize its alternative energy source: ketone bodies 
(KBs). ese include beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHB), acetoacetate 
(AcAc), and acetone. KBs are molecules deriving from oxidation 
of nonesteried or free fatty acids (FFAs) by hepatic mitochondria. 
eir synthesis is regulated by the amount of FFAs mobilized from 
adipose tissue and the shi in hepatic metabolism from fat syn-
thesis to fat oxidation and ketogenesis.6 7 Since insulin is a potent 
inhibitor of lipolysis and FFA oxidation,8 its deciency “permits” 
increased activity of hormone sensitive lipase in adipocytes that 
increases the availability of FFAs for ketogenesis (Figure 290.1).
CONSEQUENCES OF KETONE EXCESSES
In short-term starvation, KBs provide an energy source for cells 
that can be lifesaving until food becomes available. In DM, hyper-
ketonemia (and hyperglycemia) becomes deleterious, leading to 
acidemia, water loss, electrolyte depletion, and hypotension; a 
self-sustaining vicious circle responsible for the clinical manifesta-
tions of DKA. During hepatic ketogenesis, the number of hydro-
gen ions equivalent to the number of KBs synthesized are released 
into the bloodstream. When the concentration of hydrogen ions 
overwhelms the body’s buering system, metabolic acidosis devel-
ops, causing nausea, vomiting, inappetence. When plasma BG and 
KB concentrations exceed the renal tubular threshold for complete 
reabsorption, they spill into urine and induce an osmotic diuresis. 
erefore, the anionic charge on the KBs obligates the excretion 
of positively charged ions (e.g., sodium [Na], potassium [K], cal-
cium [Ca], and magnesium [Mg]) to maintain electrical neutrality 
(chs. 67-69). Chloride (Cl) and phosphorus (PO4) are also lost. 
is process invariably predisposes to electrolyte and water deple-
tion, exacerbated by vomiting, diarrhea, and the inability to drink 
and retain water as the metabolic acidosis worsens.
COUNTER-REGULATORY HORMONE EXCESS
Insulin deciency is not the sole physiologic cause for develop-
ment of DKA. Some pets with DKA are insulin-treated diabet-
ics with serum insulin concentrations within reference ranges 
when DKA develops, although inappropriately low for the sever-
ity of hyperglycemia.9 Some pets newly diagnosed with DM and 
DKA have “some” endogenous insulin. ese pets have a “rela-
tive” insulin deciency. ey are likely to have a small number 
of functioning beta cells. Insulin resistance (impaired sensitivity 
to insulin) is caused and worsened by increases in circulating 
glucose-counterregulatory hormones: glucagon, catecholamines, 
cortisol, and growth hormone.10 11 ese hormones are produced 
as a defense mechanism in a wide variety of diseases or stress-
ful conditions (e.g., starvation, pancreatitis, infection). However, 
their activity as insulin antagonists has the eect of worsening 
the hyperglycemia and ketonemia in DM (ch. 224). Concur-
rent diseases can trigger or coexist with DKA and can contribute 
clinical issues that alter both prognosis and treatment strate-
gies; therefore, their recognition and treatment is essential for 
Diabetic Ketoacidosis and the Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State
Eleonora Malerba
CHAPTER 290
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic asset onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Client Information Sheet.

CHAPTER 290
•
Diabetic Ketoacidosis and the Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State
1967
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
achieving therapeutic success. Absolute or relative insulin de-
ciency together with excess glucose counter-regulatory hormones 
also stimulate hepatic glycogenolysis and protein catabolism 
providing substrate for gluconeogenesis.12 Increased glucose and 
KB production together with their reduced peripheral utilization 
lead to accumulations of both in the blood. Most of the glucose 
in severely hyperglycemic pets with DM is derived from the liver, 
not from diet.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF HYPEROSMOLAR 
HYPERGLYCEMIC STATE
e pathogenesis of HHS and DKA are similar. e lack of keto-
sis is usually explained by these patients having a small amount of 
insulin to inhibit lipolysis but not enough insulin to prevent hyper-
glycemia.13 Hyperglycemia is due to increased gluconeogenesis, 
accelerated glycogenolysis, and inadequate use of BG by peripheral 
tissues (Figure 290.1). Hyperglycemia together with hypernatremia 
can severely increase plasma osmolality, resulting in an osmotic 
gradient that draws water out of cerebral cells and contributes to 
progressive alterations in consciousness. Rapid correction of dehy-
dration can cause water to ow into cerebral cells leading to cere-
bral edema. Glomerular ltration is initially increased in HHS, and 
the resulting glucosuria and osmotic diuresis prevent development 
of severe hyperglycemia. As plasma volume contracts, glomerular 
ltration is impaired, limiting renal glucose excretion and contrib-
uting to worsening hyperglycemia. e higher circulating ratio of 
insulin/glucagon in patients with HHS, compared to patients with 
DKA, is consistent with little to no KB synthesis.14 Reduced renal 
function, impaired renal glucose excretion, and low or undetectable 
concentrations of KBs slow development of overt clinical signs. is 
prolongs the course of the disease and may explain why hypergly-
cemia is generally more severe in HHS than in DKA. Concomitant 
diseases, especially those that most compromise the ability to main-
tain adequate water intake (e.g., kidney failure, congestive heart 
failure [CHF], pancreatitis, pulmonary disease, infection), contrib-
ute to progressive deterioration and negatively aect prognosis.
SIGNALMENT, HISTORY AND PHYSICAL 
EXAMINATION
DKA and HHS occur most frequently in dogs and cats with undi-
agnosed DM, but either condition can occur in insulin-treated 
DM pets. e latter group may have issues related to the insulin 
treatment regimen (inadequate dosage, errors in the administra-
tion or storage procedure) and/or development of another dis-
order causing insulin resistance (e.g., infectious, inammatory, 
hormonal, cancers). e signalment of pets with DKA and HHS is 
similar to that of pets with uncomplicated DM: middle-aged and 
older dogs and cats without breed predisposition, most common 
in female dogs and male cats. e history for pets with DKA can 
range from the classic polyuria/polydipsia (PU/PD), polyphagia 
and weight loss (sometimes unnoticed or considered insignicant 
by the owner), to the more worrisome systemic signs of severe 
lethargy, anorexia, and vomiting. Severity of signs correlate with 
degree of metabolic acidosis, hyperosmolality, dehydration, and 
the concurrent disorder. Physical examination (PE; ch. 3) is used 
to assess mental status, strength, hydration, cardiac function, and 
respiratory status. Sometimes slow deep breathing (i.e., Kussmaul 
respiration) with a strong odor of acetone on the breath is noted.
Counterregulatory hormones
Absolute insulin deficiency
+
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Hormone sensitive lipase
 (uninhibited release)
Gluconeogenic enzymes
Gluconeogenesis
Glycogenolysis
Glucose utilization
Osmotic diuresis
Electrolyte abnormalities
Dehydration
Hyperglycemia
Ketogenesis
Acidosis
FFA to liver
Counterregulatory hormones
Relative insulin deficiency
+
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state
Gluconeogenic enzymes
Hormone sensitive lipase
 (inhibited release)
Gluconeogenesis
Glycogenolysis
Glucose utilization
Osmotic diuresis
Electrolyte abnormalities
Dehydration
Absent or minimal
ketogenesis
Hyperglycemia
 (extreme)
Hyperosmolarity
Figure 290.1
Pathogenesis of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS). Both DKA and HHS result from an insulin 
deciency together with an increase in glucose counterregulatory hormones (i.e., glucagon, catecholamines, cortisol, and growth hormone). In HHS, 
the presence of a small amount of insulin is able to inhibit the activity of hormone sensitive lipase in adipocytes, thus decreasing the availability of 
free fatty acids (FFAs) for ketogenesis and preventing metabolic acidosis and systemic clinical manifestations. Hyperglycemia and hyperosmolarity 
progressively worsen as a result of increased gluconeogenesis, accelerated glycogenolysis, and inadequate utilization of blood glucose by peripheral 
tissues. On the contrary, in DKA, the absolute insulin deciency does not allow the inhibition of hormone sensitive lipase and FFAs are mobilized 
by the adipocytes, reach the liver and are used for ketogenesis. e synthesis of ketone bodies is associated with the release of hydrogen ions in the 
bloodstream, resulting in metabolic acidosis and associated systemic clinical signs. (Adapted from French EK, Donihi AC, Korytkowski MT. Diabetic 
ketoacidosis and hyperosmolar hyperglycemic syndrome: review of acute decompensated diabetes in adult patients. BMJ. 2019;365:1114.)
