eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
SECTION XI
•
Infectious Disease
1042
Feline Leukemia Virus Infection
Katrin Hartmann | Regina Hofmann-Lehmann
DEFINITIONS AND PREVALENCE
F
eline leukemia virus (FeLV) is a ret-
rovirus that aects domestic cats 
worldwide. FeLV infection is associ-
ated with a variety of illnesses, including 
neoplasia, bone marrow suppression, and 
immunodeciency. FeLV prevalence (usu-
ally determined by FeLV antigenemia) 
is reported between 2.3% to 3.3% in the 
United States, 0% to 15.6% in Europe, 3.0% 
to 28.4% in South America, and 0% to 24.5% in Asia and Austra-
lia/New Zealand.1 e prevalence of FeLV infection is higher in 
cats with specic risk factors (Table 199.1) and in sick cats, e.g., 
up to 15% of certain diseases are associated with FeLV,2 includ-
ing lymphoma,3 cutaneous abscesses, bite wounds,4 and chronic 
gingivostomatitis.5 In a pan-European prevalence study using 
FeLV RNA to assess cats for FeLV antigenemia in >6000 saliva 
samples from 32 countries, the FeLV prevalence was 2.3%. ere 
was a high variability among countries, with a very low preva-
lence (0-1%) in the northern European countries Denmark, 
Finland, Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. In west-
ern European countries (e Netherlands, Germany, Austria, 
France, Belgium, and Luxemburg) the prevalence was 0-1.3%. 
A higher prevalence of 4.5-8.8% was identied in southern 
European countries that included Croatia, Italy, and Portugal.6
Generally, prevalence has decreased for decades subsequent to 
widespread test and removal or separation programs and com-
mon use of FeLV vaccines;2 7 8 however, in many regions preva-
lence is still high or has not decreased any further,9-11 thereby 
demanding continuous awareness and vaccination of at-risk cats 
(ch. 185).
PATHOGENESIS
VIRUS REPLICATION
e genomic RNA of the retrovirus FeLV is reverse transcribed 
into DNA within infected cells. e DNA copies are then inserted 
into the host genome (provirus). us, division of infected cells 
will result in daughter cells that also contain the provirus. e 
viral genome encodes for the major proteins: group-specic anti-
gens (gag), reverse transcriptase (pol), and envelope (env). One 
of the gag proteins, p27, is abundant in the plasma of persistently 
infected cats and is the basis for diagnostic point-of-care tests 
(PoCTs) (ch. 184). e env protein denes the virus subgroup 
with dierent pathogenicity (i.e., FeLV-A, -B, -C) and is impor-
tant for inducing immunity.1
OUTCOMES OF INFECTION
“Balance of Power”
ere are 4 potential outcomes of FeLV infection that depend on 
the balance of power between the virus and the cat’s immune sys-
tem: progressive (least favorable for the cat), regressive, abortive 
(most favorable for the cat), and the probably rarely occurring 
focal (atypical) infection (Box 199.1).12-16 Outcomes are deter-
mined by certain risk factors (Table 199.1). Although the majority 
of cats follows one of the 4 outcomes within a few months of infec-
tion, varying and discrepant FeLV test results can be observed 
during this early phase of infection. is is a time during which 
the interplay between the cat’s immune system and the virus is at 
its peak and the host-virus balance has not yet been denitively 
set.14 16
Even later aer infection, the host-virus balance is not xed 
(Box 199.1) and the advantage can swing to either cat or virus 
and, in turn, change the course of FeLV infection. Examples are 
cats that have been positive for soluble p27 antigen for a long 
period of time (which would be classied as progressive infec-
tion) and then suddenly become antigen-negative.17 On the other 
hand, in some regressively infected cats, FeLV infection might be 
reactivated any time aer infection, although this occurs more 
frequently during early infection.18 ese observations demon-
strate that FeLV infection outcome is not xed, and the course 
of infection is determined by balance of power between immune 
system and virus, not only during initial infection, but life-long in 
some cats (Box 199.1).
Early Infection
Aer mucosal or cutaneous exposure to FeLV, the virus replicates 
in local lymphoid tissues. From there, infected cells carry the virus 
to other target tissues, such as thymus, spleen, and lymph nodes. 
About 3 weeks aer infection, bone marrow cells can become 
infected (mainly in progressively infected cats that lack sucient 
immunity against FeLV), producing infected neutrophils and 
platelets that circulate in the blood and carry the virus to salivary 
glands and mucosal glandular epithelium, the sites that will even-
tually secrete most of FeLV responsible for horizontal transmis-
sion. FeLV genetic material is usually detectable within 1 week 
(viral RNA) to 2 weeks (proviral DNA) of infection. In most cats, 
antigenemia (presence of viral proteins in the blood) correlates 
with viremia (presence of infectious virus that can be cultured 
from the blood), although some cats have discordant ndings.19 20
Four Potential Outcomes
Infected cats can either remain viremic and antigenemic (pro-
gressive infection) or remain in or revert to an aviremic state 
CHAPTER 199
ACRONYMS
FeLV feline leukemia virus
FIV feline immunodeficien-
cy virus
PCR polymerase chain 
reaction
PoCT point-of-care test
RT-PCR reverse transcrip-
tase polymerase chain 
reaction
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic asset onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Client Information Sheet.

CHAPTER 199
•
Feline Leukemia Virus Infection
1043
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
(regressive infection with or without transient viremia) in which 
neither antigen nor culturable virus is detected but in which FeLV 
proviral DNA can still be identied.12 21 Regressive and progres-
sive infections can thus be distinguished by repeated testing for 
soluble p27 antigen in peripheral blood (Figure 199.1).22 ey 
also can be distinguished by their provirus load later (a few weeks 
to months) in the course of infection.12 18 21 However, during early 
infection, cats undergoing progressive or regressive infections 
have similar proviral and viral RNA loads.23 Moreover, soluble 
p27 antigen loads can indicate likelihood of infection outcome a 
few weeks aer infection.21 24 Antigen loads were also suggested 
as a prognostic marker. Among progressively infected cats, appar-
ently healthy cats had lower soluble p27 antigen loads than did 
cats with FeLV-associated diseases18 and in shelter cats tested at 
intake, high antigen as well as high provirus loads were associated 
with shorter survival.25 Cats with abortive infection are negative 
in all direct virus detection methods (such as tests for soluble p27 
antigen and proviral DNA) and anti-FeLV antibodies are the only 
sign of abortive infection.12 13
Progressive Infection e percentage of cats that will develop 
progressive FeLV infection varies, and it is most oen determined 
by risk factors (Table 199.1) and infection pressure. ere is about 
a 3% chance of progressive infection aer a single contact with a 
FeLV-shedding cat and a 30% chance when a cat lives with a shed-
ding cat for several weeks.26 e virus has the upper hand in cats 
with progressive infection (Box 199.1). ese cats continuously shed 
virus, frequently succumb to FeLV-associated diseases within a few 
years, and have a decreased life expectancy.8 27-29 In a long-term 
follow-up study on experimentally FeLV-infected cats, progressively 
infected cats lived an average (median) of 3.1 years (range from 0.6 
to 6.5 years).18 Cats with progressive infection have ineective FeLV-
specic immunity, allowing extensive virus replication in the bone 
marrow, spread to many tissues, and shedding of the virus.18 21 30
Regressive Infection In regressive infection, an eective 
immune response can keep the virus in check so that no, or only 
very limited, viral replication takes place prior to or at the time of 
bone marrow infection (Box 199.1). Between 1% and 11% of cats 
were found to be regressively infected. In these cats, soluble p27 
antigen is sometimes detectable in peripheral blood within 2 to 3 
weeks aer virus exposure but the antigen becomes undetectable 2 
to 8 weeks later or, in rare cases, even aer many months.14 21 31 32
Cats with regressive infection have persistent integration of FeLV 
DNA in their genome. Complete clearance of FeLV provirus has 
not been detected in cats with regressive infection, even up to 12 
years aer exposure.18 However, FeLV provirus levels can fall under 
the detection limit of molecular assays. Regressively infected cats 
only rarely develop FeLV-associated diseases such as lymphoma 
or bone marrow disorders.33-36 In these cats, the provirus itself can 
disturb cellular mechanisms (leading to bone marrow suppression) 
or act as an oncogenic substance causing tumor development with-
out necessity of replicating virus. Even though viral shedding does 
not occur, it is possible for cats with regressive infection to trans-
mit FeLV following blood and tissue donation since proviral DNA 
can be infectious.37 e regressive state can convert to a progressive 
state, called “reactivation” (Box 199.1). is is more likely to occur 
soon aer exposure to FeLV, but also has been described in cats that 
were antigen-negative for many years.38
Abortive Infection Abortively infected cats have ecient 
immunity against FeLV and neither provirus integration nor viral 
replication occurs (Box 199.1). It is unclear how common abor-
tive infection occurs naturally, but its frequency might be under 
estimated.14 31
Focal Infection In cats with focal (i.e., atypical) infection, 
the immune system keeps FeLV in check and virus replication is 
sequestered in tissues e.g., spleen, lymph nodes, small intestine, 
mammary glands (Box 199.1). Soluble p27 antigen can be released 
at times into the peripheral blood, but no infected cells are detect-
able. is can result in discordant or alternating test results and 
diagnostic diculties. Cats with focal FeLV infection are probably 
rare and not a major epidemiological concern, but this infection 
outcome can lead to confusing FeLV test results.14 16 39
TABLE 199.1
Risk Factors Influencing Prevalence of Progressive 
Feline Leukemia Virus (FeLV) Infection and Courses 
of FeLV Infection
A) Risk Factors Influencing Prevalence of FeLV Infection
Signalment
•Sex: male cats
•Reproductive status: intact cats
•Age: adult cats
Health status
•Presence of clinical signs (e.g., bite
wounds, abscesses, secondary infections, 
lymphoma, anemia, neuropathies, 
reproductive disorders, fading kitten 
syndrome)
Behavior
•Aggressive (e.g., cat fights, bites) or social
behavior (e.g., grooming, sharing food 
bowls)
Vaccination status
•Lack of FeLV vaccination
Lifestyle
•Outdoor access
•Direct cat contact
Housing conditions
•Multi-cat household
Background
•Cats in households with FeLV infection
•Stray cats (especially cats from regions
without trap-neuter-return program)
•Cats from shelters (especially from shel-
ters with inadequate testing programs 
and hygiene strategies)
•Cats from animal hoarders
•Cats with inadequate nutrition, sanitation,
medical care
Origin
•Cats from countries with higher prevalence
•Cats from areas of a low purchasing
power parity per capita and income
B) Risk Factors Influencing Courses of FeLV Infection
Signalment
•Young age at time of infection
Immune system
•Insufficient virus-specific humoral and
cell-mediated immunity
•Absence of anti-FeLV antibodies
•Lack of FeLV vaccination
Infectious pressure
•High FeLV viral load in the environment
•Long-term contact with FeLV-shedding
cats (multi-cat households with FeLV)
Virus virulence
•Emergence of FeLV subgroups within the
cat (e.g., FeLV-B, FeLV-C)
•Mutations in the FeLV genome or integra-
tion of the FeLV genome near proto-
oncogenes, both leading to activation of 
proto-oncogenes
Modified from Hartmann K, Hofmann-Lehmann R. What’s new in feline leukemia 
virus infection. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. ;:-.
