1875
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com CHAPTER 279
•
Exocrine Pancreatic Insuciency and Rare Conditions of the Exocrine Pancreas
EXOCRINE PANCREATIC 
INSUFFICIENCY
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
E
xocrine pancreatic insuciency (EPI) 
describes a syndrome that is charac-
terized by the insucient synthesis 
and secretion of digestive enzymes by the 
exocrine pancreas. e most common cause 
of EPI is an absolute lack of pancreatic acinar 
cells that is due to destruction of acinar cells 
secondary to chronic pancreatitis (both dogs 
and cats) or depletion of acinar cells due to 
pancreatic acinar atrophy (PAA; likely only 
in dogs). In either case, pancreatic digestive 
enzymes are lacking in patients with EPI. In rare cases, a single 
enzyme may be lacking, but lack of a single enzyme, even if com-
plete, may not lead to any clinical signs as digestion of most mac-
ronutrients is characterized by redundancy and a great functional 
reserve. However, isolated pancreatic lipase deciency has been 
reported as a cause of clinical signs of EPI in humans and in 1 
dog and was highly suspected in a few other dogs.1-3 Another 
infrequent cause of EPI is an obstruction of the pancreatic duct by 
either a tumor, surgical damage, or trauma, which can lead to lack 
of digestive enzymes in the small intestinal lumen, despite nor-
mal acinar production. Exocrine pancreatic aplasia or hypoplasia 
could also lead to clinical signs of EPI. is could be suspected in 
patients diagnosed with EPI at a very young age, but to date no 
case has been described in the literature and the author of this 
chapter has only encountered a single case in a kitten to date.
PHYSIOLOGY
e process of digestion of macronutrients is characterized 
by redundancy and a large functional reserve. Redundancy is 
achieved by each macronutrient being able to be digested by at 
least two and sometimes even more independent processes. For 
example, dietary fat can be broken down by pancreatic lipase 
or pre-duodenal lipase, which in dogs and cats is gastric lipase. 
While in healthy humans and dogs it has been estimated that 
approximately one-third of all dietary fat is digested by gastric 
lipase, this value can vary among individuals.4 is degree of 
redundancy translates into some animals not showing any clinical 
signs of maldigestion even if one digestive pathway is insucient. 
Also, digestion is characterized by a large functional reserve and 
it has been estimated in humans that >90% of exocrine pancreatic 
function has to be lost before clinical signs of maldigestion will 
ensue.5 ese numbers are based on averages and there may be a 
wide interindividual variability, but they do demonstrate the large 
functional reserve of exocrine pancreatic function.
e exocrine pancreas plays a central role in the digestion of 
all macronutrients (Video 279.1). While acinar cells synthesize 
and secrete some enzymes in their active forms, such as amylase, 
lipase, RNase, and DNase, others are synthesized as an inactive 
preform or zymogen, such as trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, 
proelastase, prophospholipase, procarboxypeptidase, and others. 
While trypsinogen is activated to trypsin in the small intestine by 
enteropeptidase, the other zymogens are in turn being activated 
by trypsin. However, the impact of pancreatic secretions on diges-
tion reaches far beyond secretion of enzymes and zymogens. Aci-
nar cells also synthesize and secrete colipase, which is necessary 
to overcome the lipase-inhibiting properties of bile salts. Also, the 
pancreatic duct system secretes large amounts of pancreatic juice, 
which has buering capacity and thus is a crucial source of buf-
fer for gastric acid; without it, the gastric acid would irreversibly 
inhibit many of the digestive enzymes and destroy the intestinal 
mucosa and microbiome.
ETIOLOGY
e most common cause of EPI in both dogs and cats is chronic 
pancreatitis, which is suspected to be the cause of EPI in nearly 
100% of cats and in approximately slightly more than 50% of dogs 
with EPI. In dogs, the majority of the remainder of EPI cases are 
caused by PAA, which is almost exclusively seen in German Shep-
herd Dogs, Rough-Coated Collies, and Eurasians.6 7 In addition, 
an increased risk for EPI has been described for Cavalier King 
Charles Spaniels, Shar Peis, and West Highland White Terriers.8
Interestingly, the age of onset is young adult for German Shepherd 
Dogs, Rough-Coated Collies, and Shar Peis, while the age of onset 
in other dog breeds is usually later in life. is suggests that Shar 
Peis also may have PAA, but this has not been studied further as 
of yet.8 9
Several studies have suggested that PAA is inherited as an auto-
somal recessive trait in German Shepherd Dogs and Eurasians.10-12
However, the search for a denitive genetic marker for this dis-
ease has been largely unsuccessful, even though scans of the entire 
canine genome using a set of microsatellite markers and single 
nucleotide polymorphisms revealed several regions that appear 
to be associated with this condition.13 Interestingly, a test breed 
of an aected male and an aected female German Shepherd Dog 
only resulted in 2 of 6 of the ospring being aected through their 
entire life, strongly suggesting against inheritance as a simple 
autosomal recessive trait.14 us, this condition is likely polygenic 
with the major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 12 
Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency and Rare Conditions of the 
Exocrine Pancreas
Jörg M. Steiner
CHAPTER 279
ACRONYMS
CCK cholecystokinin
CT computed tomography
DM diabetes mellitus
EPI exocrine pancreatic 
insufficiency
GI gastrointestinal
MMA methylmalonic acid
PAA pancreatic acinar atro-
phy
PAC pancreatic adenocarci-
noma
PERT pancreatic enzyme 
replacement therapy
TLI trypsin-like immunore-
activity
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Video and 1 Client Information Sheet.

SECTION XVIII
•
Pancreatic Disease
1876
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
being of special interest.15 Another study has identied a DLA-
DQB1 duplication as a risk allele.16
Other, less common causes of EPI in dogs and cats are 
obstruction of the pancreatic duct due to neoplasia, parasites, 
or trauma, pancreatic hypoplasia, or isolated lipase deciency, 
but all of these causes are exceptionally rare. Severe acute pan-
creatitis with pancreatic necrosis has been described as causing 
EPI in humans. e hypothesis that has been proposed is that 
pancreatic necrosis leads to irreversible damage of acinar tissue, 
but this has not yet been described in either dogs or cats.17 18
Other proposed causes of EPI in people are type I or type II dia-
betes mellitus (DM), inammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, 
pediatric intestinal transplantation, human immunodeciency 
virus infection, total gastrectomy, Sjögren’s syndrome, aging, 
tobacco usage, critical illness, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, or 
somatostatin analog therapy, but the possible pathogenesis as 
well as a true cause-and-eect relationship for most of these 
proposed causes is unclear.19-21 Also, with the exception of DM 
and inammatory bowel disease, none of these has been sus-
pected as a cause of EPI in small animals. More importantly, 
many, if not most, of these proposed causes may be a reection 
of the poor positive predictive value of elastase 1, commonly 
used as a diagnostic test for EPI in humans, rather than a true 
association of EPI with these conditions.22 Finally, an associa-
tion of these conditions and EPI does not equal causality. For 
example, both EPI and DM could be a result of chronic pancre-
atitis without one causing the other.
PATHOGENESIS
As mentioned above, digestive enzymes and zymogens 
secreted by pancreatic acinar cells are crucial for the digestion 
of all macronutrients. When pancreatic acinar cells are lack-
ing, regardless of the cause, maldigestion ensues. Maldigestion 
leads to undigested food components in the intestinal lumen, 
which can lead to loose stools or diarrhea, and weight loss. 
Maldigestion also leads to secondary intestinal dysbiosis (ch. 
260), characterized by a decrease in diversity and changes in 
abundances of various bacterial species.23 Interestingly, these 
changes, while improving, did not completely normalize with 
enzyme replacement therapy.23 Thus, modulation of the intes-
tinal microbiome may be a therapeutic option for patients that 
do not respond to pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy 
(PERT) and cobalamin supplementation alone. Also, rare cases 
of EPI have been described with dogs and cats showing neu-
rologic signs. One cat was diagnosed with D-lactic acidosis, 
which was hypothesized to be due to small intestinal dysbiosis 
and which improved with PERT.24 Other patients have been 
hypothesized to have neurological signs secondary to cobala-
min deficiency.25
However, it has been suspected that clinical signs are not only 
due to maldigestion, but that EPI also leads to malabsorption. 
is has been hypothesized to be due to a lack of trophic factors 
normally secreted by the exocrine pancreas that help maintain a 
normal gastrointestinal (GI) mucosa.
e exocrine pancreas is the major source of intrinsic factor 
in both dogs and cats (ch. 257).3 26 is is in sharp contrast to 
humans, where intrinsic factor is mainly secreted by the gastric 
mucosa. Since intrinsic factor is required for ileal cobalamin 
absorption, EPI is frequently associated with cobalamin malab-
sorption and hypocobalaminemia in dogs and cats. Indeed, in one 
study, 82% of dogs with EPI had a decreased serum cobalamin 
concentration, with 36% having marked hypocobalaminemia.27
Similarly, a retrospective study of 119 cats with EPI documented 
hypocobalaminemia in 77% of them.28
As mentioned above the majority of both cats and dogs with 
EPI are believed to develop the disease due to chronic pancreatic 
inammation (chs. 277, 278). Since pancreatic damage due to 
inammation does not spare the islets of Langerhans, DM can 
develop concurrently. While some patients develop DM before 
EPI, others develop them at the same time, and yet others develop 
EPI before developing DM.29 is means that canine (ch. 291) or 
feline (ch. 292) patients with DM should be screened for EPI if 
they are losing weight and owners of patients with EPI should be 
educated on the clinical signs of DM.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
EPI can be subclinical and two large case series of German 
Shepherd Dogs identied several dogs with severely decreased 
serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI) concentrations that 
did not have any clinical signs.11 30 Some of the dogs under-
went exploratory laparotomy and pancreatic size was found 
to be severely decreased.30 is is suspected to be due to the 
redundancy of digestion of macronutrients mentioned above 
but is clinically of no signicance as animals with subclinical 
EPI do not need to be diagnosed or treated. e most common 
clinical sign reported in both dogs and cats with EPI is weight 
loss (Figures 279.1 and 279.2).28 31 Loose stools are also com-
monly observed (Figure 279.2, C), but watery diarrhea is less 
common.28 31 32 Oen times, patients have a poor hair coat and 
dogs with EPI are commonly reported to have borborygmus and 
increased atulence.28 32 Many dogs and cats with EPI will show 
an increased appetite, while dogs may even show coprophagia 
or pica.18 28 us, dogs that repeatedly ingest foreign bodies and 
are thin should be investigated for possible EPI. In cats, a greasy 
soiling of the hair coat in the perianal area can be observed, but 
this is not a common nding.31 Some dogs and cats with EPI 
have a decreased appetite that is believed to be due to concur-
rent chronic inammatory enteropathy (ch. 262) and has been 
reported as a negative prognostic factor in dogs.28 33
DIAGNOSIS
Measurement of serum TLI concentration is the diagnostic test 
of choice for both dogs and cats suspected of having EPI. Serum 
TLI concentration is measured by species-specic assays. e TLI 
assay measures the concentration of cationic trypsinogen, cationic 
Figure 279.1
Dog with exocrine pancreatic insuciency (EPI). is 
photograph shows a young adult male castrated Labrador Retriever 
with EPI. Note the thin appearance of the dog and the large pile of light-
colored stool. e owner reported that this dog defecated at least once 
an hour.
