SECTION XIII
•
Comorbidities
1248
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
80. Dandrieux JR, Timm K, Roosje PJ, etal. Unusual systemic signs in a dog 
with sterile neutrophilic-macrophagic lymphadenitis and nodular panniculitis. J 
Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2011;47:117-121.
81. Tipold A, Schatzberg SJ. An update on steroid responsive meningitis-
arteritis. J Small Anim Pract. 2010;51:150-154.
82. Nafe LA, Leach SB. Treatment of feline asthma with ciclosporin in a 
cat with diabetes mellitus and congestive heart failure. J Feline Med Surg
2014;12:1073-1076.
83. Windsor RC, Johnson LR. Canine chronic inammatory rhinitis. Clin Tech 
Small Anim Pract. 2006;21:76-81.
84. Segev G, Cowgill LD, Heiene R, etal. Consensus recommendations for im-
munosuppressive treatment of dogs with glomerular disease based on established 
pathology. J Vet Intern Med. 2013;27(Suppl 1):S44-S54.
85. Leal RO, Gil S, Brito MT, etal. e use of oral recombinant feline interferon 
omega in two cats with type II diabetes mellitus and concurrent feline chronic 
gingivostomatitis syndrome. Irish Vet J. 2013;66:19.
86. Higginbotham ML, McCaw DL, Roush JK, etal. Intermittent single-agent 
doxorubicin for the treatment of canine B-cell lymphoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2013;49:357-362.
87. Musser ML, Quinn HT, Chretin JD. Low apparent risk of CCNU 
(lomustine)-associated clinical hepatotoxicity in cats. J Feline Med Surg
2012;14:871-875.
Feline Triaditis
Jonathan Andrew Lidbury
INTRODUCTION
F
eline triaditis is the term used for 
describing concurrent inammation of 
the small intestine, pancreas, and liver.1-
3 is syndrome is somewhat ill-dened but 
it encompasses a range of intestinal, pancre-
atic, and hepatobiliary diseases, including inammatory bowel 
disease (IBD), pancreatitis, and cholangitis (Box 225.1). e clini-
cal signs and laboratory ndings for the diseases comprising tria-
ditis overlap and biopsy of all 3 organs is needed for a denitive 
diagnosis. Some cats have involvement of 2 of these organs but not 
the third (e.g., IBD with concurrent pancreatitis). Cats may also 
present with disease of 1 organ dominating the clinical picture but 
with histologically-conrmed inammation of other organs that 
may or may not be clinically relevant.
pREVALENCE
e reported prevalence of triaditis varies greatly depending on 
the population of cats studied.4-7 For example, in a retrospective 
study of 54 cats with cholangitis, 26% had pancreatitis, 46% had 
IBD, and 17% had triaditis.5 e authors found that interstitial 
nephritis was a common comorbidity and suggested that feline 
triaditis is part of a wider multisystemic process that they termed 
“feline inammatory syndrome.” However, it should be noted that 
interstitial nephritis is a common postmortem nding in cats. In 
300 cats with suspected small bowel signs, IBD and gastrointestinal 
(GI) small cell lymphoma were common but concurrent hepatic 
or pancreatic lesions were not.6 In a prospective study, IBD with 
cholangitis was noted to occur in 22% of 27 cats with GI signs, IBD 
with pancreatitis in 4%, and triaditis in 30%. However, some com-
bination of histopathological changes of 2 or more of these organs 
was also found in 55% of 11 overtly healthy cats undergoing ovar-
iohysterectomy. Interestingly, none of the cats in this control group 
had inammation of all 3 organs.7 Some controversy exists as what 
are the “normal” histological features of each of these organs.8 It 
is possible that the misclassication of histological variations as 
being “abnormal” may have increased the apparent prevalence of 
triaditis in the veterinary literature. e only safe conclusion to 
make is that cats can have combinations of intestinal disease, pan-
creatic disease, and inammatory liver disease.
ETIOpATHOGENESIS
IBD is caused by a loss of mucosal immune tolerance due to a 
combination of genetic and environmental (i.e., dietary or micro-
bial) factors.9 is results in cellular inltrates in the intestine 
that are usually lymphoplasmacytic in nature and architectural 
changes such a villous stunting, villous fusion, or brosis (ch. 
262).10
While infectious agents, trauma, certain drugs, and possibly 
autoimmune disease are occasionally recognized as causing pan-
creatitis in cats, an underlying cause is not identied in most cases 
(ch. 278).11 Enteric bacteria were visualized in the pancreata of 
some of cats with pancreatitis.12 However, the clinical signicance 
of this nding is unknown.
Bacteria (most commonly Escherichia coli or other enteric 
bacteria) can often be cultured from the bile of cats with neu-
trophilic cholangitis and these patients usually respond to 
antimicrobial therapy (ch. 272).13 The route by which these 
enteric bacteria reach the liver is controversial. Traditionally, 
it was thought that they ascended the biliary tract. However, 
the location of bacteria in a more recent study suggested that 
they are more likely to reach the liver by translocation across 
the intestinal wall or via the portal circulation.14 Lymphocytic 
cholangitis is caused by a loss of immune tolerance resulting 
in the targeting of bile ducts by the adaptive immune response 
(ch. 271).15 The mechanisms behind this have not been pre-
cisely determined.
CHAPTER 225
ACRONYMS
ALT alanine aminotransfer-
ase
GI gastrointestinal
IBD inflammatory bowel 
disease
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic asset onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Client Information Sheet.

CHApTER 225
•
Feline Triaditis
1249
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Several models that may explain the interplay between pan-
creatitis, IBD, and cholangitis have been proposed.1 In one of 
these, which could explain the development of acute pancreati-
tis and neutrophilic cholangitis, enteritis leads to dysbiosis and 
increased intestinal permeability. is results in hematogenous 
seeding of bacteria to the liver and/or pancreas. e aforemen-
tioned studies that demonstrated enteric bacteria in the livers14
and pancreata12 of cats support this. Alternatively, increased 
intra-abdominal pressure due to vomiting could cause reux 
of duodenal contents into the pancreaticobiliary duct system, 
allowing enteric bacteria to reach the liver and/or pancreas. In 
another model, the development of acute pancreatitis is the ini-
tial event. In turn, this leads to acute enteritis and/or cholangitis, 
possibly due to the close anatomical relationship among these 
3 organs. e enteritis then leads to bacterial translocation to 
the pancreas and/or liver. In an experimentally-induced feline 
acute pancreatitis model, seeding of the pancreas, liver, and gall-
bladder with enterically translocated E. coli was shown to occur, 
supporting this hypothesis.16-18 In a third model, which could 
explain the development of chronic pancreatitis and lympho-
cytic cholangitis, loss of immune tolerance originating in the 
small intestine secondarily aected the liver and/or pancreas.1
One potential mechanism is due to aberrant homing of T lym-
phocytes from the small intestine, as has been shown to occur 
in humans with primary sclerosing cholangitis.19 Alternatively, 
microbiota-derived or host-derived molecules in the portal cir-
culation may stimulate an immune response in the liver and/or 
pancreas.20 IBD could also be associated with the development 
of autoantibodies against hepatic and/or pancreatic proteins, 
possibly due to molecular mimicry between host and microbial 
proteins. Such autoantibodies have been described in humans 
with autoimmune pancreatitis.21 22
CLINICAL FINDINGS
ere is a paucity of data on the clinical presentation of cats with 
triaditis but it is likely that any age, breed, or sex of cat may be 
aected. In a prospective study, cats with triaditis were signi-
cantly older than those with IBD, cholangitis, or the combination 
of IBD and cholangitis.7
As triaditis is a syndrome that encompasses several disease 
processes, it is not surprising that its clinical features are very 
variable (Table 225.1). Common historical observations in cats 
with triaditis include decreased appetite, lethargy, vomiting, diar-
rhea, weight loss, and icterus.2 In a study of 8 cats with triaditis, 
the most common clinical signs were vomiting (88%), anorexia 
(63%), and polyphagia (37%).7
Possible physical examination ndings include poor body 
condition, thickened bowel loops, signs of abdominal pain asso-
ciated with pancreatitis or cholangitis, abdominal distension due 
to ascites, and icterus.2 3
DIAGNOSIS
LABORATORY TESTING
Triaditis and its components cannot be diagnosed with laboratory 
testing alone (Table 225.1). In 8 cats with triaditis, the most com-
mon biochemical abnormalities nding was increased alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT) activity while the most common hema-
tological changes were anemia, neutrophilia, and lymphocytosis.7
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
Triaditis (and its components) cannot be denitely diagnosed 
with abdominal imaging but ultrasound ndings may be sugges-
tive (Table 225.1).23-26 e absence of ultrasound ndings does 
not rule these conditions out.
pERCUTANEOUS CHOLECYSTOCENTESIS
Diagnostic percutaneous cholecystocentesis is performed using 
ultrasound guidance in heavily sedated or anesthetized cats 
(ch. 272).27 Cytologically conrmed septic suppurative inam-
mation and bacterial growth are diagnostic for neutrophilic 
cholangitis.28 e most commonly isolated bacteria are E. coli, 
Enterococcus spp., and Streptococcus spp.29-32
HISTOLOGIC ASSESSMENT
A denitive diagnosis of triaditis requires histological documen-
tation of inammation of the small intestine, pancreas, and liver. 
is necessitates laparotomy or laparoscopic liver and pancreatic 
biopsies followed by intestinal biopsy through a small abdominal 
incision. Bleeding risk assessment should be performed prior to 
liver biopsy and in icteric cats vitamin K (0.5-1.5 mg/kg SQ q12h 
for 3 doses) is oen administered to reduce the risk of hemor-
rhage.33 Pancreatitis is oen cited as a concern following pan-
creatic biopsy, but studies have shown that this procedure can 
be performed safely using careful technique.34 Samples of liver 
and bile should be submitted for aerobic and anaerobic bacterial 
culture.
e histological features of IBD include morphological (archi-
tectural) changes and inammatory inltrates (ch. 262). e 
morphological changes are more meaningful and can include 
villous stunting, epithelial injury, crypt distension, lacteal dila-
tion, and mucosal brosis. e inammatory inltrates are most 
commonly lymphoplasmacytic, but eosinophilic, neutrophilic, 
or mixed inltrates can also occur.10 e clinical importance of 
minimal or mild inammatory inltrates, especially when they 
are lymphoplasmacytic, is questionable.8 10 Furthermore, it can be 
dicult to distinguish severe lymphoplasmacytic enteritis from 
GI small cell lymphoma.35
Chronic pancreatitis, characterized by a monocytic inltrate 
and varying degrees of brosis, is the form of pancreatitis that is 
Possible Components of Feline Triaditis Syndrome
Small Intestinal Disease (ch. )
•
Inflammatory bowel disease
•
Diet-responsive enteropathy
•
Small cell lymphoma
•
Cobalamin deficiency
pancreatic Disease
•
Acute pancreatitis (ch. 7)
•
Chronic pancreatitis (ch. 7)
•
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (ch. 7)
•
Diabetes mellitus (ch. 292)
Heatobiliary Disease
•
Neutrophilic cholangitis (ch. 272)
•
Lymphocytic cholangitis (ch. 271)
•
Cholecystitis (ch. 272)
•
Cholelithiasis/choledocholithiasis (ch. 273)
•
Feline hepatic lipidosis (ch. 274)
BOX 225.1
