SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1158
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Large Airway Diseases
Cecile Clercx
CHAPTER 215
TRACHEAL DISEASES
M
ost tracheal disorders can involve 
both intra- and extrathoracic seg-
ments of the trachea. Noninfec-
tious tracheal diseases are common and 
include dorsal tracheal membrane accidity, 
tracheal collapse, tracheal injury/laceration, 
posttraumatic stenosis, foreign body, intra-
tracheal tumor, and tracheal avulsion (cat).
Tracheitis refers to an inammation of 
the epithelial lining of the trachea, which can 
be infectious or noninfectious. When dogs 
develop tracheitis, it is oen a part of the 
canine infectious respiratory disease com-
plex (CIRDC; ch. 203). Tracheitis can also be 
secondary to prolonged barking, or disease 
of the oropharynx, esophagus, or even the 
stomach (aerodigestive disorders; ch. 221) 
(see Figure 215.4). In cats, tracheitis is most 
oen associated with infectious feline respi-
ratory disease (ch. 205). Tracheitis in cats 
does not always induce a signicant cough, 
as it does in dogs.
Tracheal compromise can also result from 
extratracheal diseases, such as extreme car-
diac enlargement, mediastinal enlargement 
(hematopoietic neoplasia [ch. 322], or mega-
esophagus [ch. 259]), or space-occupying 
masses, which can cause deviation of the tra-
chea and possibly aect the shape or lumen 
of the trachea (Figures 215.1, 215.2).
TRACHEAL COLLAPSE (DOGS)
Tracheal collapse, also referred to as collapsing trachea and canine 
tracheal collapse syndrome, is a very common disorder encoun-
tered in middle-aged to older toy or miniature breeds. e “goose 
honk” sound of the cough is characteristic (Video 215.1).
Etiology and Pathophysiology
e cause of primary tracheal collapse syndrome is complex and 
is best regarded as multifactorial.1 e traditionally considered 
form of dynamic mechanical collapse can be caused by a combi-
nation of progressive malacia of the tracheal cartilages and lax-
ity of the trachealis muscle, resulting primarily in dorsoventral 
collapse, possibly associated with malacic airways (or bronchial 
collapse). In a dierent form, dorsoventral narrowing gives the 
trachea a W-shaped cross-section due to malformation of the tra-
cheal rings. is is referred to as tracheal malformation. It is a 
more static form of narrowing of the tracheal lumen that is dis-
tinct from, or occurs in addition to, dynamic narrowing caused by 
invagination of the trachealis muscle during respiration.
In the traditional form, clinical disease occurs when 2 fac-
tors exist concurrently: a primary cartilage abnormality that 
results in intrinsic weakness of the tracheal rings, and second-
ary factors capable of initiating progression to the point of caus-
ing clinical signs. Soening of cartilage rings seems to be due 
to a reduction of glycosaminoglycan and chondroitin sulfate 
content, which leads to a decreased ability to maintain func-
tional rigidity, further leading to a weakness and attening of 
the tracheal rings.2 3 Potential triggering factors include obe-
sity, cardiomegaly, inhalation of irritants and allergens, peri-
odontal disease, respiratory infections, and recent endotracheal 
intubation.4 e dynamic changes of tracheal collapse may be 
conned to either the cervical or the thoracic region of the tra-
chea, or both can be aected; frequently, the changes are more 
pronounced at the cervicothoracic junction. Dorsoventral at-
tening of the tracheal cartilaginous rings causes a stretch of the 
dorsal tracheal membrane, which becomes inamed and pen-
dulous. us, it can prolapse into the tracheal lumen as soon 
as extraluminal pressure exceeds intraluminal pressure, further 
reducing the diameter of the tracheal lumen.5 Inside the thorax, 
during inspiration, the redundant dorsal membrane is aspirated 
by/subjected to negative intrathoracic pressure during inspira-
tion and may excessively enlarge the tracheal lumen, as seen on 
lateral radiographs (Figure 215.3). e syndrome is perpetuated 
by the cycle of chronic inammation of the tracheal mucosa, 
which exacerbates—and in turn, is exacerbated by—the cough. 
In dogs with tracheal collapse, concurrent bronchomalacia is 
frequently encountered and does not appear to be related to air-
way inammation.6 Pulmonary hypertension (PH) can develop 
in dogs with tracheal collapse and bronchomalacia (ch. 218).7-9
Clinical Presentation
Primary tracheal collapse is commonly seen in middle-aged to 
older miniature, toy, and small breed dogs. Overrepresented 
breeds include the Yorkshire Terrier, Pomeranian, Pug, Poodle, 
Maltese, and Chihuahua.5 9
Clinical signs include chronic cough in all cases (ch. 34), mild 
to severe panting, exercise intolerance, and varying degree of respi-
ratory distress (ch. 37) as well as a varying degree of cyanosis in 
advanced cases (ch. 27). A prolonged clinical history is common.
e cough is harsh, oen followed by a terminal retch; it is 
oen described as “honking/goose honk”10 and is precipitated 
by activity, excitement, tracheal pressure (such as that caused by 
pulling on a leash) or drinking. is characteristic cough can be 
elicited easily by palpation of the trachea. Collapse of the cervi-
cal trachea can sometimes be appreciated as a attening of the 
tracheal rings on cervical palpation. In some cases, a cough is not 
ACRONYMS
AHR airway hyperrespon-
siveness
BALF bronchoalveolar 
lavage fluid
BWBP barometric whole-
body plethysmography
CB chronic bronchitis
CIRDC canine infectious respi-
ratory disease complex
COPD chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease
CT computed tomography
EB eosinophilic bronchitis
EBP eosinophilic broncho-
pneumopathy
EG eosinophilic granuloma
ELD eosinophilic lung disease
FLAD feline lower airway 
disease
GERD gastroesophageal 
reflux disease
GI gastrointestinal
IST inhaled steroid therapy
NK-1 neurokinin-1
NT-proBNP N-terminal pro-
B-type natriuretic peptide
PCD primary ciliary dyski-
nesia
PCR polymerase chain 
reaction
PH pulmonary hypertension
TBFVL tidal breathing flow 
volume loops
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 17 Videos.

CHAPTER 215
•
Large Airway Diseases
1159
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
audible as such and owners only report inspiratory-expiratory 
stertor, sometimes described as a pig-grunt- or -growl-like sound 
(Video 215.2). In severe cases, the cough or stertor almost never 
stops, leading to muscular fatigue and exhaustion of the animal. 
In rare cases, excitement can lead to cyanosis because of complete 
obstruction, vagally mediated syncope, or PH,7 8 especially when 
concomitant bronchomalacia is present.
During thoracic auscultation, crackles on both inspiration and 
expiration can be appreciated in dogs with small airway collapse, 
and/or concurrent bronchitis. A thorough cardiac auscultation 
is recommended (ch. 38), since a heart murmur associated with 
mitral regurgitation can be heard (ch. 232); indeed, concurrent 
myxomatous/degenerative mitral valve disease is a common nd-
ing in the same population aected by tracheal collapse; i.e. older, 
small-breed dogs. However, the role of cardiomegaly and speci-
cally le atrial enlargement in airway collapse by airway compres-
sion remains unclear, with evidence of airway inammation as the 
likely cause of cough in dogs that had both le atrial enlargement 
and airway collapse in one study.11 Hepatomegaly is common in 
dogs with tracheal collapse and could be a reection of obesity, 
although hepatic dysfunction has been reported in dogs with tra-
cheal collapse.12 Bronchial collapse/bronchomalacia is common 
in dogs with tracheal collapse.13
Diagnosis
e diagnosis of tracheal collapse is strongly suspected based on 
signalment, history of cough, and physical examination ndings.5
Additional diagnostic evaluation (radiography, uoroscopy [ch. 
212], tracheal ultrasound,14 echocardiography [ch. 97], bron-
choscopy [ch. 93] and pulmonary function testing15) can be used 
for conrming the extent and severity of the tracheal collapse, 
and the presence of concomitant or complicating diseases such 
as bronchomalacia, PH, cardiomegaly, or lower airway diseases. 
Imaging is required to obtain adequate measurements prior to 
placement of any tracheal stent (ch. 114).
Radiographic examination of animals with collapsed trachea 
can use both still and motion studies. e most useful radio-
graphic examinations include lateral projections over the thoracic 
inlet, and a tangential (craniocaudal) projection of the thoracic 
inlet (in this skyline projection, the collapsed trachea is seen as 
an oval, “C” or crescent shape). Because of the relationship of col-
lapse to the respiratory cycle, uoroscopic investigation may be 
more sensitive than radiographs (ch. 212).9
On lateral radiographs, a redundant dorsal tracheal mem-
brane that invaginates into the tracheal lumen can be seen 
as a soft-tissue opacity along the dorsal aspect of the caudal 
cervical tracheal lumen. This radiographic appearance can be 
seen in both small- and large-breed dogs as a consequence of 
coughing, and must be differentiated from a superimposed 
esophagus. Therefore, lateral radiographs made during both 
the maximal inspiratory and maximal expiratory phases of the 
respiratory cycle are needed to demonstrate dynamic collapse. 
Indeed, collapse of the cervical tracheal segment occurs in 
inspiration because of the decreased pressure within the tra-
chea whereas the thoracic portion tends to collapse during the 
expiration phase as a consequence of increased intrathoracic 
pressure. These dynamic changes are best viewed in real time 
using image-intensified fluoroscopy (Video 215.3). Radiogra-
phy and fluoroscopy are complementary imaging techniques; 
confirming the presence or absence of tracheal or bronchial 
collapse can require multiple imaging modalities as well as 
bronchoscopy.16 Cervical lung lobe herniation (CLLH), or 
protrusion of lung parenchyma beyond the musculoskeletal 
entrance of the thorax, is a frequent concurrent finding identi-
fied by fluoroscopy (ch. 212; Video 212.2).17-19
Although rarely needed to conrm the diagnosis, trache-
oscopy can reveal a decreased dorsoventral diameter due to 
attening of the cartilaginous rings with a pendulous dorsal 
membrane, potentially leading to complete obstruction of the 
tracheal lumen (Figure 215.4). Tracheobronchoscopy (Videos 
215.4 and 215.5; ch. 93) is advised in all cases since it is very 
helpful in determining the degree of severity of the tracheal and 
especially bronchial collapse, as well as in assessing concomi-
tant airway disease including secondary infection. ose nd-
ings should be properly addressed and taken into account for 
prognostic purposes before stent placement can be considered, 
although the presence of mainstem bronchial collapse at the 
time of stent placement might lack signicant association with 
outcome.20
Management
In animals with marked respiratory diculty, oxygen supplemen-
tation can be delivered (ch. 123), and sedation and antitussive 
agents are needed. Butorphanol (0.05-0.2 mg/kg q4-6h) and/or 
acepromazine (0.01-0.1 mg/kg) can be injected SC, and pred-
nisolone sodium succinate (15-30 mg/kg slow IV bolus) can be 
administered to decrease acute inammation.
Long-term treatment may involve multimodal medical 
therapy or mechanical stenting. Medical therapy is the corner-
stone of treatment for collapsing trachea-associated coughing 
(Video 215.1). Severely-aected dogs with clinical signs caused 
Figure 215.1
Lateral thoracic radiograph of a middle-aged mixed-
breed dog showing the presence of a large mediastinal mass, causing 
marked ventral deviation of the trachea.
Figure 215.2
Endoscopy of the trachea in a dog with severe respirato-
ry distress and cyanosis. Note the extreme reduction and altered shape 
of the tracheal lumen, caused by a huge mediastinal mass.
