SECTION XV
•
Neurologic Disease
1576
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
eventually dysphonia and dysphagia. Hypoventilation as a result 
of respiratory muscle dysfunction results in hypoxemia in later/
terminal stages of the disease.112
DIAGNOSIS
Several large breeds of dogs can be aected with DM but Ger-
man Shepherd Dogs and Boxers are the most commonly aected 
breeds; mixed-breed dogs have also been described with this 
disease.113 Age of onset of neurologic signs is usually 5 years or 
older with a mean age of 9 years in large dog breeds. e mean age 
of aected Pembroke Welsh Corgis was 11.2 years in 1 study.104
ere appears to be a female predominance (1.6:1) for the disease 
in Corgis but not in other breeds.99
The diagnosis is based primarily on the exclusion of other 
myelopathies. Spinal imaging (myelogram, MRI, CT [ch. 112]) 
is typically normal, but some dogs may have concurrent mild 
disc protrusions. The clinician must then consider the dura-
tion of clinical signs as well as the findings of the neurologi-
cal examination to determine the significance of these lesions. 
MRI is the imaging modality of choice to ensure that all other dif-
ferentials are ruled out, including intramedullary lesions such as 
neoplasms.114 Recent work has shown that dogs with DM under-
going MRI diusion tensor imaging had signicant decreases in 
fractional anisotropy (FA) within the regions of the spinal cord 
that had high expected lesion load.115 Decreases in FA were most 
signicant in dogs with severe forms of the disease and correlated 
with neurological grade.
Patients with DM typically have normal CSF results, or 
increased protein levels with a normal cell count (ch. 109).104
Phosphorylated neurolament heavy (pNF-H) concentration in 
CSF is elevated in all stages of DM compared to old control dogs 
and is now proposed as a promising sensitive biomarker for the 
diagnosis of DM.116
A DNA test based on the SOD1 mutation is commercially 
available. Dogs that are homozygous for the mutation are at risk 
for developing DM and will contribute one chromosome with the 
mutant allele to all of their ospring. e heterozygotes are DM 
carriers that are unlikely to develop clinical DM but could pass on 
a chromosome with the mutant allele to half of their ospring.98
Pembroke Welsh Corgis with DM have been demonstrated to 
have signicantly higher plasma levels of the microRNA miR-
26b, which correlates with disease progression. is has prompted 
the suggestion that this may be a potential novel diagnostic bio-
marker of DM.117
Corticosteroids can be used for assisting in the dierential 
diagnosis of this disease. ey will typically lead to improvement 
in dogs with chronic compressive myelopathies (such as IVDD) 
but will not benet dogs with DM. is strategy might be useful 
to convince pet owners to pursue advanced  imaging.78
TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS
No pharmacological therapy has been shown to alter the course 
of DM. Vitamin supplementation, glucocorticoid administration, 
aminocaproic acid, and N-acetylcysteine have all been used, but 
none of these medications showed benecial eects.118 e only 
treatment that has been shown to alter the long-term course of the 
disease is physical therapy (ch. 256).119 In one retrospective study, 
dogs with conrmed and suspected DM had controlled physical 
therapy, including walking, passive range of motion of the pelvic 
limbs, massage of pelvic limb and paraspinal muscles, and hydro-
therapy. Dogs that were treated with a more intense physical 
therapy regimen had a mean survival time of 255 days, compared 
with dogs receiving a moderate regimen (130 days) or no physical 
therapy (55 days).119 e long-term prognosis is poor, and most 
dogs are euthanized due to severe pelvic limb dysfunction within 
6-12 months. In the study of Pembroke Welsh Corgis, the average 
time from diagnosis to death was 1.25 years.120
INTERVERTEBRAL DISC DISEASE (IVDD)
ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
e intervertebral discs are interposed in every intervertebral 
space (except between C1 and C2), uniting the bodies of the 
adjacent vertebrae.121,122 Each intervertebral disc consists of an 
outer laminated brous ring (annulus brosus) and a central, 
amorphous, gelatinous center (nucleus pulposus).123 e nucleus 
pulposus is a highly hydrated gelatinous mesodermal remnant of 
the notochord.122 Chondrodystrophic breeds show progressive 
collagenation and calcication in the nucleus pulposus and inner 
parts of the annulus brosus at an early age.122 e annulus bro-
sus consists of bands of parallel bers that run obliquely from one 
vertebral body to the next. ey provide a means for the trans-
mission of stresses and strains that are required by all lateral and 
upward movements.123
Intervertebral disc degeneration or disease leads to extru-
sion or protrusion (both termed herniation) of disc material 
into the spinal canal, resulting in clinical signs due to spinal 
cord compression and/or contusion.121,124 The component of 
either compression and/or contusion varies with the specific 
type of IVDD.
e pathophysiologic mechanism of the resulting spinal 
cord injury, which has been well described elsewhere,124 doesn’t 
always explain the degree of associated neurological dysfunc-
tion.125 IVDD has been traditionally classied as Hansen type I 
and type II.126 Type I IVDD is herniation of the nucleus pulpo-
sus through the annular bers and extrusion of nuclear material 
into the spinal canal. It is typically associated with chondroid disc 
degeneration but sometimes a hydrated nucleus pulposus extru-
sion can be responsible for spinal cord dysfunction.127,128 e 
disc extrudes through the dorsal annulus, causing ventral, ven-
trolateral or circumferential compression of the spinal cord. Type 
I IVDD typically aects chondrodystrophic breeds and has an 
acute onset. However, large non-chondrodystrophic dog breeds 
such as the Doberman Pinscher and Labrador Retriever may also 
be aected,129 particularly when subsequent to trauma.130 Con-
genital vertebral malformations result in early degeneration of 
adjacent intervertebral discs,131 although clinical disc disease at 
these sites may not be as common as elsewhere in the vertebral 
column.132 Long backs, miniaturization and being overweight 
also increase the risk of type I IVDD.133 Hansen type II IVDD is 
annular protrusion caused by shiing of central nuclear material 
and is commonly associated with late chondroid disc degenera-
tion.96,134 e annulus brosus slowly protrudes into the vertebral 
canal to cause spinal cord compression. e chronic compression 
can lead to focal ischemic and other microvascular derangements 
of the spinal cord. Type II IVDD usually occurs at the mobile 
points of the vertebral column and is more common in older, 
non-chondrodystrophic breeds of dog. It is not uncommon to 
identify multiple aected disc spaces.
In addition to these two classic forms, with the widespread use 
of MRI, newer forms began to be recognized, such as acute non-
compressive nucleus pulposus extrusion (ANNPE, also known 
as “type III” missile discs, high-velocity low volume disc extru-
sion), hydrated nucleus pulposus extrusion (HNPE—formerly, 
intraspinal cyst or canine discal cyst), and intradural/intramedul-
lary intervertebral disc extrusion (also known as traumatic disc 
extrusion).135-140

1577
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
CERVICAL DISC DISEASE
Clinical Findings
Most dogs with cervical disc disease, which accounts for 14-25% 
of intervertebral disc disorders in dogs,141 142 have disc extrusion 
rather than protrusion.143 Chondrodystrophoid and other small 
breeds are at the greatest risk. Dachshunds, Toy Poodles and Bea-
gles have been documented to account for the majority of cases144; 
however, large-breed dogs such as Labrador Retrievers, Dalma-
tians and Doberman Pinschers can be aected with cervical disc 
extrusions, accounting for up to 24% of all cases.121 143 145 146 Most 
aected dogs are 4-8 years old when they present with clinical 
signs, with a mean age ranging from 6.3 years to 8.6 years; it is 
extremely rare for dogs <2 years of age to be aected.109-113 Males 
and females are evenly aected.144 When large-breed dogs have 
acute or chronic cervical disc disease, the disease might be part 
of CSM (see CSM, above). Most cases of cervical disc disease 
in chondrodystrophoid dogs occur in the cranial cervical spine, 
with 80% aecting C2-C4 spaces and 44-59% aecting C2-C3 
alone141 142; however, most large-breed dogs are aected at the 
C6-C7 intervertebral disc space and most protrusions versus 
extrusions are more caudally located.143 147
Approximately 45% of dogs with cervical disc extrusion 
will have an acute onset of signs, with the other 55% experi-
encing a slower onset of signs, whether the dogs are large non-
chondrodystrophoid or small breeds.143 e predominant clinical 
sign is evidence of cervical pain, which can be seen in up to 60% 
of dogs with no neurological decits and nearly 90% of aected 
dogs overall.143 148 Cervical pain, evident from the animal’s pos-
ture or from palpation of the spine and muscles of the neck, can 
be extreme, unremitting, and refractory to medication, which is 
apparently less likely with the newer forms, such as HNPE and 
ANNPE.128
e classic presentation of ANNPE is an acute myelopathy, 
typically associated with trauma or strenuous exercise, which is 
oen severe, and strongly asymmetric in 90% of cases136 149 (an 
important dierential for this presentation is brocartilaginous 
embolic myelopathy; MRI is required for dierentiation; ch. 251). 
In contrast, HNPE typically presents as a non-painful severe 
cervical myelopathy (non-ambulatory tetraparesis is the most 
common sign), usually with bilaterally symmetrical signs. It is 
important to emphasize that HNPE happens most commonly in 
the cervical region.
Nerve “root signature” is another frequent nding with cervical 
disc disease. It occurs in 22-50% of dogs, mostly with extrusions 
or protrusions.142 148 Neurological decits may be restricted to one 
thoracic limb or the animal may show hemiparesis, tetraparesis or 
even tetraplegia with hypoventilation. Ambulatory tetraparesis is 
seen in up to 42% of dogs and 11-22% exhibit non-ambulatory 
tetraparesis.143 148 150 Tetraplegia is uncommon and has been 
described in 2-7% of cases.143 Neurological decits are more com-
mon with lesions at C4-C5 to C6-C7 inclusive, which may reect 
the greater degree of space in the cranial vertebral canal compared 
to more caudally.151 e reduction or loss of thoracic limb reexes 
usually implies a C6-T2 spinal cord lesion; however, 36% of dogs 
with reduced to absent thoracic limb reexes actually have a C1-
C5 spinal cord lesion.146 Some large breed dogs with type II IVDD 
can also show signs of a C6-8 myelopathy, with decreased exor 
reexes and increased extensor tone.
Diagnosis
Survey radiographs can help to rule out discospondylitis, neopla-
sia, and anatomic malformations, which may be considerations 
given the clinical signs.152 Although radiographic signs such as 
narrowing of the intervertebral disc space and dorsal displace-
ment of mineralized disc material may be highly suggestive of 
disc extrusion, myelography, CT or MRI is essential for a deni-
tive diagnosis (ch. 112).152 e overall accuracy rate for correct 
identication of the site(s) of disc extrusion with radiography is 
35%.152 CSF analysis should be considered to rule out inamma-
tory disease (ch. 109). Deviation of the ventral contrast column is 
the most common myelographic nding of cervical disc disease; 
oblique views can help with lateralized localizations.153 154 CT 
performed aer myelography can provide more detailed informa-
tion on the localization of the compressive lesion (Figure 250.6), 
particularly for lateralized discs and intradural discs.138 155 MRI 
is the best method for evaluation of the cervical spinal cord and 
it provides a safe and non-invasive method for obtaining high-
resolution images (Figure 250.6).156 157 is imaging modality can 
provide detailed information on the structure of the interverte-
bral discs and spinal cord and may help with prognosis.158 159 MRI 
also allows diagnosis of the newer IVDD forms such as ANNPE 
and HNPE.
Treatment
Strict cage rest for 3-4 weeks is the most important aspect of a 
conservative approach to cervical disc extrusion. is can be fol-
lowed by restricted and gradual incremental exercise over the 
next month using a body harness rather than a collar and leash. 
e protracted period of rest enables resolution of the inamma-
tion and stabilization of the ruptured disc by brosis, preventing 
further herniation.121 e use of anti-inammatory medications 
such as corticosteroids or non-steroidal analgesics can be recom-
mended for a few days to accompany the rest (ch. 143). Analgesic 
medications may be necessary in some dogs in addition or in place 
of the anti-inammatory medications (ch. 6). e use of acupunc-
ture in dogs with cervical disc disease has been described and 
was reported to be associated with an initial recovery in 69% of 
cases.160 Muscle relaxants such as diazepam and methocarbamol 
are useful adjunctive medications in dogs with neck pain related 
to disc disease. Signs of nerve root involvement such as nerve 
root signature, or foraminal herniation identied on advanced 
imaging, may be treated with gabapentin (10-20 mg/kg PO q8h) 
A
B
D
C
Figure 250.6
Intervertebral disc disease. A, Sagittal reconstructed 
computed tomography (CT) scan post-myelography of the cervical spi-
nal cord of a dog with acute neck pain. e ventral contrast column is 
thinned and dorsally deviated over the C3-C4 disc space (arrow) due 
to a disc extrusion (type I disease). B, e transverse CT-myelographic 
image at the level of the C3-C4 disc space conrms ventral cord com-
pression. C, A sagittal T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
of the cervical spinal cord of a dog with acute tetraparesis. Ventral cord 
compression can be identied above the C4-C5 disc space due to a 
hyperintense lesion (arrow). D, A transverse T2-weighted MRI at the 
C4-C5 disc space conrms that the cord is ventrally compressed by a 
hyperintense structure, which is compatible with acute hydrated nu-
cleus pulposus extrusion.
CHAPTER 250
•
Spinal Cord Diseases: Congenital (Developmental), Inammatory
