SECTION XI
•
Infectious Disease
1032
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT
Diagnosis requires either organism identication using cytologic 
examination or PCR. Serologic testing to detect antibodies is not 
typically helpful due to its short incubation period.26 Approxi-
mately 60% of cats treated with combination therapy of atovaquone 
and azithromycin survived, compared to 26% of cats treated with 
imidocarb dipropionate.27 Cats with cytauxzoonosis are oen criti-
cally ill and require intensive care (IV uids [ch. 120], nutritional 
support [ch. 164]) as well as antiprotozoal medications.
LEISHMANIA
DESCRIPTION
More than 30 species of Leishmania cause disease in humans and 
dogs across the Americas, Europe, Asia, and Africa. Leishmani-
osis is an important disease of public health concern, particularly 
in geographic areas where poor sanitation and inadequate vector 
control result in pets serving as a reservoir for human infection.28
Leishmaniosis is a reportable disease in the US. Treatment is 
controversial as it is rarely curative and might be associated with 
selection for antiprotozoal drug resistance.29 30
PATHOGENESIS
Most dogs diagnosed with visceral leishmaniosis in North 
America were infected on another continent. Infected dogs are 
introduced every year from endemic regions in Europe and Latin 
America (ch. 9). Visceral disease has been described in US dogs 
with no history of travel.31 ough there are competent sandy 
vectors in North America, the prevalence of this disease is consid-
erably lower in the US than in endemic regions.28 Transmission 
by blood transfusion has been described.32
Visceral and focal cutaneous leishmaniosis have been described 
in dogs. In the Old World, Phlebotomus sand ies act as the vector; 
in the New World, Lutzomyia sand ies act as primary vectors.29
e regional distribution of disease depends on the regional dis-
tribution of the specic vectors involved. Leishmania transitions 
between two forms: the promastigote and the amastigote. Pro-
mastigotes are infectious to dogs and humans while amastigotes 
are the form that infects the sand y vector during feeding on the 
mammalian host. Promastigotes are inoculated into the skin when 
the sand y feeds. e promastigotes are then engulfed by macro-
phages and transform into intracellular amastigotes which repli-
cate and cause the macrophages to rupture and release amastigotes 
that then infect other macrophages. If the host immune response 
fails to control the infection, amastigotes disseminate via regional 
lymphatics and the blood to infect the entire reticuloendothelial 
system. Amastigotes ingested by a female sand y during feeding 
convert back into promastigotes in the sand y gut, and replication 
of promastigotes within the sand y completes the life cycle.33 Dogs 
that mount strong T-cell–mediated immune responses can elimi-
nate the infection, whereas those that mount weak cell-mediated 
immune responses and marked, nonprotective humoral (IgG) 
immune responses develop clinical disease.34 Others can remain 
subclinically infected and disease can reactivate later in life.35
CLINICAL SIGNS AND ROUTINE DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
e most common clinical signs in dogs are cutaneous lesions 
characterized by alopecia, scaling, and nodules or papules 
(Figure 197.2) that develop long before signs of systemic dis-
ease, despite the presence of disseminated infection. Systemic 
signs include fever, muscle wasting, splenomegaly, second-
ary immune-mediated polyarthritis (ch. 177), anterior uveitis 
(ch. 13), glomerulonephritis (ch. 302), and hematologic abnor-
malities such as nonregenerative anemia (ch. 172) and lympho-
penia.35 36 Leishmaniosis can induce either a mono- or polyclonal 
gammopathy (ch. 60).37
DEFINITIVE DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis of leishmaniosis can be achieved via direct identi-
cation of the organism in tissues using histopathologic or cyto-
logic examination. However, molecular detection using PCR is 
preferred due to its excellent sensitivity.38 Serologic testing to 
detect anti-Leishmania antibodies can pose diagnostic challenges 
in endemic areas as many dogs will remain seropositive despite 
clearance of infection.
TREATMENT
Treatment can be challenging since most dogs do not clear the 
infection. Some can relapse or, in endemic areas, become rein-
fected. Many treatments are not available in the US. Dual therapy 
with allopurinol and meglumine (a pentavalent antimonial) is the 
treatment of choice. Most dogs require weeks to months of treat-
ment before clinical improvement is evident. Clinical trials have 
shown that both miltefosine, an FDA approved drug for human 
leishmaniasis, and artesunate, an FDA approved drug for malaria, 
could be reasonable treatment options for canine Leishmania
infections.39 40
HEPATOZOON
DESCRIPTION
Two species of Hepatozoon cause disease in dogs.41 In Europe, 
Asia, Africa, and South America, Hepatozoon canis is vectored by 
the brown dog tick (Rhipicephalus sanguineus) (ch. 9). In the US, 
Hepatozoon americanum is vectored by the Gulf coast tick (Ambly-
omma maculatum).42 Sporozoites, found within tick vectors, are 
the infectious stage for dogs. Dogs are infected by ingestion of 
Figure 197.2
Image of a 7-year-old male terrier mixed breed dog with 
leishmaniosis imported from France to the US 2 years prior to presenta-
tion. Note the ulcerative and exudative crusting lesions across the nasal 
planum at the mucocutaneous junction.

CHAPTER 197
•
Systemic Protozoal Diseases
1033
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
infected ticks or by ingestion of infected mammalian prey.42 Cats 
are rarely infected. When a dog ingests an infected tick, sporozo-
ites are released from the tick’s gut, invade mononuclear cells, and 
spread systemically. In H. americanum infections, the organism 
spreads preferentially to skeletal muscle where it encysts between 
myocytes.
CLINICAL SIGNS AND ROUTINE DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
Infection results in a wasting disease characterized by fever, 
apparent pain or lameness, and mucopurulent ocular discharge. 
Clinicopathologic testing oen reveals a nonregenerative ane-
mia, marked leukocytosis, hypoglycemia, hypoalbuminemia, and 
increased activity of serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP). Cytologic 
evaluation of blood smears is insensitive for diagnosing hepato-
zoonosis because there tends to be low levels of parasitemia in 
circulating granulocytes. Once encysted in muscle, pyogranulo-
matous myositis develops.43 In some dogs, persistent infection 
is associated with glomerulonephritis. Osteoproliferative lesions 
are common in dogs infected with H. americanum; they are most 
common in the proximal appendicular skeleton, but can extend 
to distal tibia, bula, radius, and ulna. e axial skeleton is less 
commonly aected.44 Radiographs can reveal profound periosteal 
proliferation particularly at sites of muscle attachment.
DIAGNOSIS
ELISA assays that detect antibodies to both H. americanum and 
H. canis are available, sensitive and specic for diagnosing hepato-
zoonosis in dogs.45 e application of PCR assays to whole blood 
and buy coat specimens allows detection of Hepatozoon spp. and 
dierentiation between H. americanum and H. canis. PCR assays 
have been shown to be more sensitive than cytologic evaluation of 
blood smears for detection of Hepatozoon 46 47
TREATMENT
Treatment of hepatozoonosis is dicult. Even long-term adminis-
tration of anti-protozoal drugs such as potentiated sulfonamides, 
clindamycin, and pyrimethamine have been associated with 
relapsing infections. In one study, long-term administration of 
decoquinate (10-20 mg/kg PO q12h) achieved prolonged remis-
sion.48 Supportive care including administration of NSAIDs can 
be helpful in ameliorating clinical signs. Spontaneous remissions 
have been documented, but the reason for this outcome in dogs 
is unclear.
TOXOPLASMA
DESCRIPTION AND PATHOGENESIS
Toxoplasma gondii, an obligate intracellular coccidian parasite in 
the family Apicomplexa, is one of the most prevalent parasites 
infecting warm-blooded vertebrates. Cats are the denitive host, 
and the parasite depends on cats to complete its life cycle, undergo 
sexual reproduction and pass infectious oocysts via feces into 
their environment.49 ere are three life stages of Toxoplasma. 
e rst is sporozoites, which develop in oocysts aer 1 to 5 days 
of exposure to oxygen and appropriate environmental tempera-
ture and humidity. Tachyzoites develop aer extraintestinal infec-
tion, disseminate in blood or lymph during active infection and 
replicate rapidly intracellularly until the cell is destroyed.49 Brady-
zoites are the slowly dividing, persistent, tissue stage that form in 
the extraintestinal tissues of infected hosts as immune responses 
attenuate tachyzoite replication. Tissue cysts can occur in the cen-
tral nervous system (CNS), muscles, and visceral organs.
Infection of warm-blooded vertebrates occurs aer ingestion 
of any of the 3 life stages of the organism or transplacentally via 
tachyzoite spread during pregnancy.50 ere are rare reports of 
Toxoplasma transmission during transfusion or transplantation of 
organs.51 Most cats are not coprophagic, and therefore are typi-
cally infected by ingesting T. gondii tachy- or bradyzoites result-
ing from ingestion of prey. Following enteroepithelial infection, 
oocysts can be shed in feces from 3-21 days. Sporulated oocysts 
can survive in the environment for months to years and are resis-
tant to most disinfectants. Bradyzoites may persist in tissues for 
the life of the host. About 30-40% of cats and 20% of dogs in the 
US are seropositive and presumed infected.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Clinical disease during the gastrointestinal (GI) phase of infec-
tion is rare. Detection of T. gondii oocysts in feces has been rare 
in studies of naturally exposed cats with diarrhea. Most clinical 
signs result from systemic dissemination following extraintestinal 
infection that develops from overwhelming intracellular replica-
tion of tachyzoites. Disease can be severe, potentially resulting in 
death in dogs and cats. Liver, lungs, CNS, pancreas, and/or eye, 
are commonly involved (Figure 197.3).
Immune deciency secondary to viral infection or immune-
suppressive therapy can lead to fatal toxoplasmosis. Retroviral 
infection in cats does not seem to increase risk of disease reacti-
vation.52-54 Common clinical ndings in cats with disseminated 
toxoplasmosis include lethargy, anorexia, and fever followed 
by hypothermia, peritoneal eusion, icterus, and tachypnea or 
cough.55
In dogs, respiratory, GI, or neuromuscular infection result-
ing in respiratory signs (such as cough or tachypnea), vomiting, 
diarrhea, fever, cutaneous disease, and icterus are most common, 
occurring most frequently in immune-suppressed dogs, such as 
those with canine distemper virus infection or those receiving 
cyclosporine for control of immune-mediated disease (chs. 144 
and 204). Neurologic signs depend on primary lesion location 
and can range from ataxia, seizures, tremors, and cranial nerve 
decits, to paresis and paralysis. Dogs with myositis can be weak, 
be sti-gaited or have muscle wasting. Rapid progression to tet-
raparesis and paralysis with lower motor neuron dysfunction can 
occur.
Depending on geographic region, some dogs suspected of 
neuromuscular toxoplasmosis may have neosporosis (see below). 
Myocardial infection can result in ventricular arrhythmias in 
some infected dogs. Cough, tachypnea, vomiting, or diarrhea can 
occur in dogs with polysystemic disease. Chorioretinitis, anterior 
uveitis, iridocyclitis, and optic neuritis occur in some dogs but are 
less common than in cats. Keratitis due to T. gondii infection has 
also been reported.
Chronic toxoplasmosis occurs in some dogs and cats. Toxo-
plasma gondii infection can cause anterior or posterior uveitis in 
cats (Figure 197.3, A), fever, muscle hyperesthesia, weight loss, 
anorexia, seizures, ataxia, icterus, diarrhea, cutaneous disease, 
and pancreatitis.
ROUTINE DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
Toxoplasmosis can cause a variety of clinicopathologic and 
radiographic abnormalities, but none are pathognomonic. Non-
regenerative anemia, neutrophilic leukocytosis or neutropenia, 
lymphocytosis, monocytosis, eosinophilia, proteinuria, bilirubi-
nuria, hyperglobulinemia, hyperbilirubinemia, and increases in 
serum creatine kinase, alanine aminotransferase, ALP, and lipase 
activities occur in some animals.55 Pulmonary toxoplasmosis 
typically causes diuse interstitial to alveolar patterns or pleural 
