130      Bethanechol
Intra-articular administration (extra-label): Most dosage rec-
ommendations range from 3 – 18 mg/joint (NOT mg/kg) in-
tra-articularly. Repeat doses should be limited to the minimum 
required to achieve soundness.
Monitoring
Monitoring of glucocorticoid therapy is dependent on its reason for 
use, dosage, agent used, dosage schedule (daily versus alternate day 
therapy), route of administration, duration of therapy, and the ani-
mal’s age and condition. The following list may not be appropriate 
or complete for all animals; use clinical assessment and judgment 
should adverse effects be noted:
	■Body weight, appetite, GI signs (eg, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea)
	■Signs of edema
	■Serum electrolytes
	■Total plasma protein, albumin
	■Blood glucose
	■Growth and development in young animals
	■Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test, if con-
cerned about iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism
Client Information
	■Carefully follow the instructions for how to give this medicine to 
your animal. Do not suddenly stop giving this medicine without 
talking to your veterinarian.
	■Do not give other medications (including over-the-counter 
[OTC] medication) or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID) 
medications while your pet is on this medication without talking 
to your veterinarian first.
	■There are many potential side effects that can be seen with these 
drugs, including increased or decreased appetite, vomiting, ab-
normal stool, and increased thirst and urination. Contact your 
veterinarian if these effects become severe or worsen.
	■While your animal is taking this medication, it is important to 
return to your veterinarian for periodic examinations and blood 
work. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A synthetic glucocorticoid, betamethasone has been manufactured 
as the base and as the dipropionate, acetate, and sodium phosphate 
salts. The base is used for oral dosage forms. The sodium phosphate 
and acetate salts are used in injectable preparations. The dipropio-
nate salt is used in topical formulations.
Betamethasone occurs as an odorless, white to practically white 
crystalline powder. It is insoluble in water and practically insoluble 
in alcohol. The acetate salt occurs as a white or creamy-white odor-
less powder. It is practically insoluble in water and soluble in alcohol. 
The sodium phosphate salt occurs as an odorless, white to practically 
white hygroscopic powder. It is freely soluble in water and slightly 
soluble in alcohol.
Betamethasone may also be known as flubenisolone, BetaVet®, or 
Celestone®.
Storage/Stability
The combination injectable product should be stored between 20°C to 
25°C (68°F-77°F) and protected from light. Shake well before using.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
If coadministration with a local anesthetic is desired, lidocaine 
1% or 2% (without parabens or phenol) mixed with betamethasone 
sodium phosphate/acetate injection has been suggested.13 The lido-
caine should be drawn into the syringe after the dose of betametha-
sone is drawn up. Do not add lidocaine to the vial of betamethasone.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated betamethasone as a class 4 substance. Use of this drug 
may not be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and 
regulations before entering in a competition while this medication 
is being administered. Contact local racing authorities for further 
guidance. See Appendix for more information.
Betamethasone Injectable suspension: 6 mg/mL as 3.15 mg beta-
methasone sodium phosphate and 2.85 mg betamethasone acetate 
in 5 mL single-dose vials; BetaVet®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in 
horses. Not for use in horses intended for human consumption
Intra-articular injection: Betamethasone acetate 12 mg/mL (equiva-
lent to 10.8 mg betamethasone) and 3.9 mg/mL betamethasone di-
sodium phosphate (equivalent to 3 mg of betamethasone); Betavet 
Soluspan Suspension®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in horses. This 
product is listed in the FDA Green Book is no longer marketed.
Betamethasone valerate is also found in several otic and topical 
products either as a single agent or in combination with gentamicin.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Betamethasone Injection: betamethasone (as sodium phosphate) 
3 mg/mL and betamethasone acetate 3 mg/mL suspension in 5 mL 
multi-dose vials; Celestone Soluspan®, generic; (Rx)
Various topical formulations are also available.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Beta
Bethanechol
(beh-than-e-kole)  Urecholine® 
Cholinergic
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Cholinergic agent used primarily to increase urinary bladder 
contractility; bethanechol can also be used as a prokinetic 
agent and for treatment of clinical signs associated with 
dysautonomia. May be useful for adjunctive treatment of 
equine gastric ulcer syndrome (EGUS)
	
▶Principal contraindications are GI or urinary tract obstructions 
or when the integrity of the urinary bladder wall is of concern.
	
▶Adverse effects are related to cholinergic effects and include 
salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, GI distress, eme-
sis, and miosis (ie, SLUDGE-M).
	
▶Cholinergic crisis is possible when injecting bethanechol IV or 
IM; atropine should be readily available.
Uses/Indications
Bethanechol can be used to stimulate urinary bladder contractions 
in small animal species. This drug appears to be most effective in 
the treatment of acute and partial detrusor atony secondary to acute 
urinary bladder overdistension and partial neurogenic lesions and 
when given in combination with other agents (eg, alpha-adrenergic 
antagonists, benzodiazepines) to reduce urethral resistance. A pilot 
study in healthy beagles showed no changes in urethral or urinary 
bladder function after bethanechol treatment was given for 15 days.1 
Bethanechol can be used as an esophageal prokinetic. This drug can 
also be used as a general GI prokinetic agent, but other agents (eg, 
metoclopramide, cisapride) are better tolerated.
Bethanechol has been shown to increase abomasum and duode-
num contractility in both healthy dairy cattle and cattle with left dis-
placement of the abomasum (LDA)2; however, bethanechol did not 

Bethanechol      131
alter the abomasal emptying rate in calves.3
In horses, bethanechol has been suggested as an adjunctive proki-
netic agent for treatment of equine gastric ulcer syndrome (EGUS) 
and in cases with adynamic ileus and gastroduodenal reflux.4-6
Pharmacology/Actions
Bethanechol directly stimulates cholinergic receptors. Its effects are 
principally muscarinic and has negligible nicotinic activity at rec-
ommended dosages. This drug is more resistant to hydrolysis than 
acetylcholine by cholinesterase and, therefore, has an increased du-
ration of activity.
Pharmacologic effects include increased esophageal peristalsis 
and lower esophageal sphincter tone, increased tone and peristaltic 
activity of the stomach and intestines, increased gastric and pancre-
atic secretions, increased tone of the detrusor muscle of the urinary 
bladder, and decreased bladder capacity. High parenteral dosages 
can result in adverse effects related to cholinergic effects on other 
systems (eg, increased bronchial secretions and constriction, mio-
sis, lacrimation, salivation). When administered SC or PO, bethan-
echol’s effects are predominantly seen in the GI and urinary tracts. 
A ceiling effect (ie, decreased response despite higher dosages) can 
be seen secondary to receptor desensitization and calcium depletion.
Pharmacokinetics
No information was located on the pharmacokinetics of this agent in 
veterinary species. In humans, bethanechol is poorly absorbed from 
the GI tract, and the onset of action is usually within 30 to 90 minutes 
after oral administration. After SC administration, effects begin within 
5 to 15 minutes and usually peak within 30 minutes. The duration of 
action after oral administration may last up to 6 hours after large doses 
and 2 hours after SC administration. SC administration yields a more 
enhanced effect on urinary tract stimulation than oral administration.
Bethanechol does not enter the CNS when administered at rec-
ommended doses; other distribution aspects of the drug are not 
known. The metabolic and excretory fate of bethanechol has not 
been described.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Bethanechol is contraindicated in animals with a known hypersensi-
tivity to the drug. Additional contraindications to bethanechol ther-
apy include urinary outflow obstruction, when the integrity of the 
urinary bladder wall is of concern (eg, after recent bladder surgery), 
hyperthyroidism, peptic ulcer disease or when other inflammatory 
GI lesions are present, recent GI surgery with resection and anas-
tomosis, GI obstruction or peritonitis, hypersensitivity to the drug, 
epilepsy, bronchoconstrictive disease (eg, asthma), hypotension, 
severe bradycardia or vagotonia, and vasomotor instability. Bethan-
echol should only be used in conjunction with another agent that 
will sufficiently reduce outflow resistance (eg, diazepam, dantrolene 
[striated muscle], phenoxybenzamine [smooth muscle]) when uri-
nary outflow resistance is increased due to enhanced urethral tone 
(not mechanical obstruction).
Retrograde urinary reflux to the kidney may occur if bethanechol 
fails to relax the urethral sphincter.
Adverse Effects
When administered orally to small animal species, adverse effects 
are usually mild; vomiting, diarrhea, salivation, and anorexia are the 
effects most likely to occur. Cardiovascular effects (eg, tachycardia, 
arrhythmias, hypotension) and respiratory effects (eg, asthma, dys-
pnea) are typically only seen after overdose or with high doses given 
SC. Bethanechol may stimulate pancreatic stimulation of amylase 
and lipase, and serum bilirubin and AST may be increased due to 
retention caused by contraction of the sphincter of Oddi.
In horses, salivation, lacrimation, and abdominal pain (colic) are 
potential adverse effects.
IV or IM use is not recommended; however, the IV route may be 
necessary in an emergency situation. Severe cholinergic reactions are 
likely if the drug is given IV. If injecting the drug (IV or IM), it is 
recommended that atropine be immediately available.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
No data were located regarding bethanechol use in pregnant ani-
mals. It is unknown if bethanechol is distributed into milk. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Clinical signs of overdose are cholinergic in nature. Muscarinic ef-
fects (eg, salivation, urination, defecation) are usually seen with PO 
or SC administration. If given IM or IV, a cholinergic crisis can oc-
cur; circulatory collapse, bloody diarrhea, shock, and cardiac arrest 
are possible.
Treatment for bethanechol toxicity is atropine (see Atropine). 
Epinephrine may also be used to treat clinical signs of bronchospasm 
(see Epinephrine).
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving bethanechol and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
	■Anticholinergic Drugs (eg, atropine, glycopyrrolate, prop-
antheline): Can antagonize bethanechol’s effects
	■Beta Adrenergic Antagonists: May increase the risk for ar-
rhythmias and bronchospasm
	■Cholinergic Drugs (eg, neostigmine, physostigmine, pyr-
idostigmine): Because of additional cholinergic effects, bethan-
echol should generally not be used concomitantly with other cho-
linergic drugs.
	■Ganglionic Blocking Drugs (eg, mecamylamine, tri-
methaphan): Can produce severe GI and hypotensive effects
	■Quinidine, Procainamide: Can antagonize the effects of 
bethanechol
Laboratory Considerations 
	■None noted
Dosages
NOTE: The injectable product is no longer commercially available 
in the United States.
DOGS:
Increase urinary bladder contractility caused by detrusor mus-
cle atony or treatment for clinical signs related to dysautono-
mia (extra-label): 2.5 mg – 25 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO 3 times 
daily. Some dogs may respond to twice-daily administration.
GI prokinetic (extra-label): 5 – 15 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO ev-
ery 8 hours. May give up to 25 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) every 8 
hours. Improvement in esophageal motility in dogs with megae-
sophagus is possible.7,8
CATS:
Increase urinary bladder contractility caused by detrusor mus-
cle atony or treatment for clinical signs related to dysautono-
