Meloxicam      825
selected joining date.15 Follow label instructions for breed-based 
time of year to administer and guidance on separating ewes and 
rams.
GOATS:
Stimulate testosterone secretion in bucks during nonbreed-
ing season (extra-label): Following 2.5 months of long days, two 
18 mg implants (36 mg total dose) administered SC near the base 
of ears resulted in higher peak testosterone concentrations, which 
occurred 2 months earlier than in the control group.29
FERRETS:
Adjunctive treatment of adrenal disease to help control clinical 
signs (extra-label): 
a)	 Oral formulations: Anecdotally, 0.5 – 1 mg/ferret (NOT 
mg/kg) PO once daily 7 to 9 hours after sunrise17,30
b)	 Implant dosages: 2.7 mg/ferret (NOT mg/kg [under 600 g 
body weight]) or 5.4 mg/ferret (NOT mg/kg [over 600 g body 
weight]) SC every 3 to 4 months
MINK:
Accelerate fur priming cycle (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
2.7 mg/mink (NOT mg/kg) implanted SC21
Monitoring
	■Clinical efficacy (eg, depending on indication: hair regrowth, es-
trus suppression, improvement in sleep/unwanted behaviors)
	■Adverse effects (eg, sedation, lethargy, weight gain, sterile ab-
scesses [implants only])
Client Information
	■For treatment of hair loss, efficacy of melatonin varies. A 4-month 
trial is necessary to see if the treatment is beneficial.
	■The oral medicine may be given with or without food.
	■This medicine is usually well tolerated; sleepiness may occur.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Melatonin is a naturally occurring hormone produced in the pine-
al gland. It occurs as a white to pale yellow, crystalline solid that is 
slightly soluble in water and has a molecular weight of 232. It can be 
derived from natural sources or by synthetic means.
Melatonin may also be known as n-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine, 
MEL, MLT, or pineal hormone.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, store at room temperature in tight con-
tainers.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Melatonin implant 2.7 mg; PrimeX®; (OTC). FDA-approved for use 
in mink. NADA# 140-846. Although this product is still listed in 
FDA’s Green Book of approved animal drugs, marketing status is 
uncertain.
The following products are marketed for ferret and dog use. Their 
FDA approval status is not known, and they are not listed in FDA’s 
Green Book of approved animal drugs. 
Melatonin Implant 2.7 mg and 5.4 mg; Ferretonin®; (OTC); marketed 
for ferrets
Melatonin Implant 8 mg, 12 mg, 18 mg, and 24 mg; Dermatonin®; 
(OTC); marketed for dogs, cats, sheep, goats, skunk, cattle, and 
­horses. 
An 18 mg implant for sustained SC release is available in a variety of 
countries. One trade name is Regulin®. It is labeled for use in sheep 
(UK and AUS/NZ) and goats (AUS/NZ) to improve early breeding 
and ovulation rates.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Melatonin Capsules, Tablets, Chewable Tablets, Disintegrating Oral 
Tablets, Gummies, Extended-Release Tablets, Sublingual Tablets: 
0.2 – 20 mg, although 1 – 10 mg are most common; (OTC). Because 
melatonin is considered a “nutraceutical,” there is no official labeling 
or central quality control systems for it in the US. Purchase from 
reputable sources.
Melatonin Oral Solution: 0.25 mg/mL, 0.33 mg/mL, and 1 mg/mL; 
generic; (OTC)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Meloxicam
(mel-ox-i-kam)  Metacam®
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug (NSAID)
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶COX-2–preferential NSAID used in many species
	
▶Long-term use in cats is controversial. 
	
▶Available as both injectable and oral products
	
▶Primary adverse effects are GI- and renal-related, but idiosyn-
cratic hepatotoxicity has occurred in dogs (rare).
Uses/Indications
Meloxicam is FDA-approved for the treatment of pain, inflamma-
tion, and osteoarthritis in dogs.1,2 Short-term use (eg, single-dose in-
jectable, administered before surgery) of meloxicam is also FDA-ap-
proved in the United States in cats to control postoperative pain and 
inflammation associated with orthopedic surgery, ovariohysterecto-
my, and castration.3 Meloxicam is licensed in several countries for 
long-term use (at lower doses) in cats. 
Oral meloxicam may be a cost-effective agent for use during pain-
ful procedures such as castration or dehorning in calves4; however, 
meloxicam administration in calves prior to transportation did not 
affect movement or feeding or drinking behaviors5 and did not miti-
gate leukocyte function or inflammatory markers.6
Metronomic cyclophosphamide and meloxicam successfully 
managed oral squamous cell carcinoma in a horse.7
Pharmacology/Actions
Like other NSAIDs, meloxicam exhibits analgesic, anti-inflammato-
ry, and antipyretic activity, most likely through its inhibition of cy-
clooxygenase (COX) and prostaglandin synthesis. Meloxicam is con-
sidered COX-2 preferential (not COX-2 specific) because at higher 
doses, its COX-2 specificity is diminished.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, meloxicam is almost completely absorbed after PO and SC 
administration. The oral transmucosal spray product (not current-
ly marketed in the United States) is bioequivalent to the canine-ap-
proved oral suspension.8 Peak blood concentrations occur ≈4 to 8 
hours after oral administration and 2.5 hours after SC administra-
tion.1,3,9,10 The volume of distribution in dogs is 0.3 L/kg and ≈97% is 
bound to plasma proteins. Meloxicam is extensively biotransformed 
to several different metabolites in the liver; none of these appear to 
have pharmacologic activity. The majority of these metabolites (and 
unchanged drug) are eliminated in the feces. A significant amount 
of enterohepatic recirculation occurs. Elimination half-life is spe-
cies-specific. The elimination half-life in dogs averages 24 hours 
(range, 12 to 36 hours).
In cats, SC injection is nearly completely absorbed. Peak con-
centrations occur ≈1.5 hours after injection. Meloxicam is relatively 
highly bound to feline plasma proteins (97%), and volume of distri-
bution is ≈0.27 L/kg. After a single dose, total systemic clearance is 

826      Meloxicam
≈130 mL/hour/kg, and elimination half-life is ≈15 hours. The major 
pathway for biotransformation is oxidation, and the major elimina-
tion route is fecal.
In horses, oral meloxicam tablets appear to be well absorbed, 
regardless of feeding status.11 Elimination half-life in horses given 
0.6 mg/kg IV toward the end of laparotomy for colic syndrome was 
6.9 hours12 and 5 hours in horses given 0.6 mg/kg PO once daily for 
14 days.13 Absorption was similar in foals younger than 6 weeks of 
age, but elimination half-life was 2.5 hours.14
In ruminant calves (≈3 months of age), meloxicam 1 mg/kg PO 
was well absorbed and had an elimination half-life of ≈24 hours.4 
Half-life was 25.7 hours in 4- to 6-month-old beef calves given 
0.5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for 4 days, and meloxicam tissue 
concentrations were below the concentration of quantification 
15 days after treatment.15 In 6-month-old Holstein steers given 
1 mg/kg PO, the terminal half-life was 16.7 hours, and mean res-
idence time (MRT) was 34 hours.16 In adult cows given a single 
1 mg/kg PO dose, elimination half-life was 10 to 13 hours.15,17 MRT 
was 30.3 hours in postpartum cows as compared with 22.3 hours in 
mid-lactation cows. Meloxicam was detected in the milk of postpar-
tum cows up to 144 hours after administration, as compared with 96 
hours in mid-lactation cows, and the authors suggest that a 96-hour 
milk withdrawal period may be insufficient in postpartum cows to 
avoid a violative residue.18
In lactating goats, meloxicam 0.5 mg/kg IM was completely ab-
sorbed, and elimination half-life was 10.8 hours.19 Administration 
once every 24 hours was predicted to provide an analgesic plasma 
concentration. Meloxicam was quantifiable in milk up to 48 hours 
after IM administration. 
Elimination half-life was 15.4 hours in healthy sheep given 
0.5 mg/kg IV or 1 mg/kg PO; oral bioavailability was 72%, and time 
to peak concentration was 19 hours.20
Meloxicam was well absorbed (bioavailability, ≈90%) in mature 
swine given 0.5 mg/kg IV and PO, and elimination half-life was ≈6 
hours.21
In African gray parrots given 1 mg/kg IV, IM, and PO as a sin-
gle dose, peak drug concentrations were reached 30 minutes and 13 
hours after IM and PO administration, respectively. Bioavailability 
was 78% (IM) and 38% (PO) as compared with IV administration. 
Elimination half-life with IV administration was 31 hours.22 Plasma 
accumulation ratios of 2 (IM) and 2.4 (PO) were noted with meloxi-
cam dosages of 1 mg/kg PO or IM every 24 hours for 7 (IM) or 12 
(PO) days.23 In Hispaniolan parrots, peak meloxicam concentration 
occurred at 15 minutes, with 100% bioavailability after IM admin-
istration, while peak concentrations occurred 6 hours after oral ad-
ministration with 50% to 75% bioavailability. Elimination half-life 
was ≈15 hours regardless of the route of administration.24
In healthy white leghorn hens, a single dose of meloxicam 1 mg/kg 
PO produced peak concentrations after 2 hours, and the plasma 
elimination half-life was 2.8 hours. Meloxicam was not detected after 
4 days in egg whites and after 8 days in egg yolks.25
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Meloxicam is contraindicated in animals that are hypersensitive to 
it. The European and United Kingdom labels state that safe use has 
not been evaluated in dogs younger than 6 weeks of age9,10; the Unit-
ed States FDA label states that safe use has not been established in 
dogs younger than 6 months of age.1 The drug should not be used or 
should be used with extreme caution in dogs with active GI ulcer-
ation or bleeding or in dogs receiving glucocorticoids.10,26 To avoid 
accidental overdosing, dogs weighing less than 4.5 kg (10 lb) should 
have meloxicam doses carefully measured and applied on food only, 
never directly into the mouth.2
Meloxicam, like all NSAIDs, should be used with caution in ani-
mals with impaired hepatic, cardiac, or renal function and animals 
with hemorrhagic disorders. Hypotension, high doses, hypovolemia, 
sodium depletion, and inhalant anesthesia all appear to increase risk 
for NSAID renal toxicity.27
Concurrent use with other anti-inflammatory drugs may result 
in additional or increased adverse effects; therefore, a treatment-free 
period from all other anti-inflammatories should be observed for 
at least 24 hours before beginning treatment with meloxicam. The 
treatment-free period, however, should take into account the phar-
macokinetic properties of the products used previously. Use meloxi-
cam under strict veterinary monitoring in animals with a risk for 
GI ulcers, or if the animal previously displayed intolerance to other 
NSAIDs.  
The manufacturer warns that additional doses of meloxicam or 
other NSAIDs are contraindicated in cats, as no safe dose for re-
peated NSAID administration has been established, and the United 
States product labels contain a boxed warning stating that repeated 
use of meloxicam in cats has been associated with acute renal failure 
and death.3 Safe use in cats younger than 4 months of age has not 
been established. Preoperative use in cats undergoing major surgery, 
in which hypotensive episodes are possible, may result in a higher 
risk for renal damage.
The human label states that no dose adjustment is necessary in 
patients with mild to moderate hepatic or renal impairment. 
The veterinary oral suspension comes with a dosing syringe that is 
marked in pounds. If providing dosing directions in mL, make sure 
to supply an appropriately marked dosing syringe.
Adverse Effects
Experience in Europe and Canada has demonstrated a relatively 
safe adverse effect profile for meloxicam at labeled doses in healthy 
dogs.26 GI distress is the most commonly reported adverse effect, 
and in United States field trials, vomiting, soft stools, diarrhea, and 
inappetence were the most common adverse effects. Renal toxicity 
appears to be quite low in animals with normal renal blood flow. 
Adverse effects reported postapproval have included GI effects (eg, 
vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, melena, ulceration), elevated liver en-
zymes/hepatotoxicity, pruritus, azotemia, elevated creatinine, and 
renal failure. When NSAIDs are used long term in dogs, gastropro-
tectant drugs (eg, proton pump inhibitors [PPIs], H2 blockers, miso-
prostol) have been used in an attempt to prevent or limit GI adverse 
effects, but the benefits of these drugs have not been proven.28 
Like other COX-2 NSAIDs, meloxicam may have effects on plate-
let function, although no effect was demonstrated in healthy dogs 
in a small study.29 A case report of a dog developing vasculitis with 
ulcers, vesicles, and erosions has been published.30 In cats, single 
doses of meloxicam appear relatively safe. In field trials, some cats 
developed elevated BUN, posttreatment anemia, and residual pain 
at the injection site (rare). In other studies, meloxicam has caused 
GI effects (eg, vomiting, diarrhea, inappetence), behavior changes, 
and lethargy. Repeated use of meloxicam in cats is controversial, as 
repeated doses have been associated with renal failure and death. The 
FDA warns against repeated doses in cats; however, low-dose long-
term use is licensed in some countries, and guidelines for long-term 
NSAID use in cats suggest the benefits of treatment often outweigh 
the risks.31
Acute dosing studies in dogs have not demonstrated any hepatic 
toxicity.1,3 Administration to piglets for ≈2 months demonstrated no 
adverse effects on trabecular bone or growth plates.32 
Meloxicam is relatively safe in other species (eg, horses, cattle, 
camelids, swine, rabbits, small ruminants) when used at recom-
mended doses.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safe use has not been established in dogs or cats used for breeding 
