Amantadine      45
is preferred, as it can be mixed with food and is tasteless. Dose 
is divided and mixed with each meal. Start at low end of dosage 
range and adjust upward every 4 to 6 weeks until desired serum 
phosphorus is attained (see Monitoring). If a reduced-phosphorus 
diet and higher dosages of aluminum hydroxide do not adequate-
ly control serum phosphorus, consider adding a lanthanum- or 
calcium-based (eg, calcium acetate, calcium carbonate) phosphate 
binder to reduce the chances for aluminum toxicity.
RABBITS/RODENTS/SMALL MAMMALS: 
Hyperphosphatemia in chinchillas (extra-label): Aluminum hy-
droxide gel: 1 mL/animal (NOT mL/kg) PO as needed
Hyperphosphatemia in Guinea pigs (extra-label): 0.5 – 1 mL per 
animal (NOT mL/kg) PO as needed5
REPTILES: 
Hyperphosphatemia (extra-label): 100 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 
hours6
CATTLE:
Antacid (extra-label): 15 – 60 mg/kg PO every 8 – 24 hours.7 Ef-
ficacy in adult cattle is questionable since the drug becomes dilut-
ed in the rumen and may not provide therapeutic benefit in the 
abomasum.
Abomasal ulcers in calves using a combination of aluminum 
hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide (extra-label): 25 mL (each 
mL contains aluminum hydroxide 0.1 g/mL and magnesium hy-
droxide 0.09 g/mL) PO every 8 hours.8 NOTE: this study was done 
in healthy calves; based on the results from this study, this dose is 
expected to be beneficial for ill calves with abomasal ulcers. 
HORSES:
Adjunctive gastroduodenal ulcer therapy in foals (extra-label): 
Aluminum/magnesium hydroxide suspension: 15 mL (total dose) 
4 times a day9
Monitoring
	■After beginning therapy, check serum phosphorus (after a 12-
hour fast) every 4 to 6 weeks until target phosphorous levels are 
attained. Once phosphorous levels are stable, check phosphorous 
levels at the time of renal chemistry rechecks (eg, every 12 weeks). 
For chronic kidney disease (CKD), the International Renal Inter-
est Society (IRIS) recommends a target phosphorous range for 
dogs and cats at each stage:
•	 Stage 2 CKD target phosphorous levels: greater than 2.7 and 
less than 4.6 mg/dL (0.9 – less than 1.5 mmol/L)
•	 Stage 3 CKD target phosphorous levels: greater than 2.7 and 
less than 5.0 mg/dL (0.9 – less than 1.6 mmol/L)
•	 Stage 4 CKD target phosphorous levels: greater than 2.7 and 
less than 6.0 mg/dL (0.9 – less than 1.9 mmol/L)
	■To monitor for aluminum toxicity, watch for development of neu-
romuscular effects, progressive decreases in mean cell volume 
(MCV), and microcytosis.
Client Information
	■Oral aluminum hydroxide products are available without pre-
scription (OTC) but should be used under the supervision of your 
veterinarian.
	■Bulk powder or compounded capsules are easier to administer 
than liquids or suspensions. Shake the suspension thoroughly 
prior to administration.
	■Must be given either just before feeding or mixed in food to be 
effective.
	■Can cause constipation or decreased appetite 
	■Report to your veterinarian any unusual signs, such as weakness, 
difficulty walking, or stumbling.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Dried Aluminum Hydroxide Gel (CAS Registry: 21645-51-2) occurs 
as a white, odorless, tasteless, amorphous powder. It is insoluble in 
water or alcohol. The USP 36 standard allows varying amounts of 
basic aluminum carbonate and bicarbonate, but it must contain no 
less than 76.5% of Al(OH)3.
Aluminum hydroxide may also be known as aluminium hydrox-
ide.
Storage/Stability
Store powder forms in airtight containers. Liquid formulations 
should not be allowed to freeze.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Because aluminum hydroxide powder USP can vary in the concen-
tration of aluminum hydroxide (must be 76.5% or greater) and pow-
ders can vary in density, volume measurements can only approxi-
mate actual weight. However, ¼ teaspoonful (1.25 mL) of the dried 
USP powder has been reported to contain ≈300 mg of aluminum 
hydroxide.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Aluminum Hydroxide Concentrated Gel Suspension/Liquid (NOTE: 
These products are usually flavored (mint) and not well accepted by 
dogs or cats): 320 mg/5 mL in 473 mL; UD 15 mL and 30 mL; ge-
neric; (OTC)
Aluminum Hydroxide Gel, Dried Powder, USP; bulk powder is avail-
able from a variety of sources including many compounding phar-
macies. See: http://goo.gl/1lYJk for additional source information.
NOTE: There are also many products available that have aluminum 
hydroxide and a magnesium or calcium salt (eg, Maalox®) that are 
used as antacids. All oral aluminum and magnesium hydroxide 
preparations are OTC.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Amantadine
(a-man-ta-deen)  Symmetrel® 
Antiviral; NMDA Antagonist
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Limited published efficacy or safety data, although clinical 
experience suggests it is useful in adjunctive treatment for 
chronic pain in small animal species
	
▶Historically dosed every 24 hours; however, based on pharma-
cokinetic data, the same dose given every 12 hours may be 
more effective
	
▶Dogs may exhibit agitation and GI effects, especially early in 
treatment.
	
▶Large interpatient variations of pharmacokinetics in horses 
limit its therapeutic usefulness.
	
▶Overdoses are potentially very serious; it may need to be com-
pounded to accurately dose small animals.
	
▶Extra-label use is prohibited by the FDA in chickens, turkeys, 
and ducks.
Uses/Indications
Although amantadine may have efficacy and clinical usefulness 
against some veterinary viral diseases, presently the greatest interest 
for its use in small animal species is in the adjunctive treatment of 

46      Amantadine
neuropathic1 or chronic pain,2 often in those in which opioids do not 
provide adequate analgesia or who are intolerant of higher opioid 
doses. It is generally considered ineffective when used alone3; use 
in combination with an NSAID, opioid, or gabapentin/pregabalin is 
typical.1,4 Several weeks may be required to break a pain cycle.5,6 It 
has been suggested for use as an early intervention in the treatment 
of pain associated with osteosarcomas.7
Amantadine has also been investigated for treatment of equine-2 
influenza virus in a horse8; however, because of expense, interpatient 
variability in oral absorption and other pharmacokinetic parame-
ters, and the potential for causing seizures after IV dosing, it is not 
commonly used for treatment.
In humans, amantadine is used for parkinsonian syndrome and 
drug-induced extrapyramidal effects; its use for the treatment and 
prophylaxis of influenza A is no longer recommended.9 As in vet-
erinary medicine, the effect of amantadine on NMDA receptors in 
humans is of active interest, particularly its use as a coanalgesic with 
opioids and in the reduction of opioid tolerance development.
Pharmacology/Actions
Like ketamine, dextromethorphan, and memantine, amantadine in-
hibits the NMDA receptor by stabilizing it in the closed state.10 With-
in the CNS, chronic pain can be maintained or exacerbated when 
glutamate or aspartate bind to this receptor. It is believed that this 
receptor is particularly important in allodynia (ie, sensation of pain 
resulting from a normally non-noxious stimulus). Amantadine is ex-
pected to produce analgesic effects when pain or CNS sensitization 
is already present. Although there is limited evidence that amanta-
dine alone provides analgesia,2 it is thought that it may help alleviate 
chronic pain when used in combination with other analgesics (eg, 
opioids, NSAIDs).3
Amantadine’s antiviral activity is limited to strains of influenza A. 
Although its complete mechanism of action is unknown, it inhibits 
viral replication by interfering with influenza A virus M2 protein, 
preventing release of viral RNA into the host cell, and possibly in-
hibiting viral replication. Influenza A variants have demonstrated 
resistance to amantadine’s antiviral action, and it is currently not 
recommended for the treatment or prophylaxis of influenza A.9
Amantadine’s antiparkinsonian activity is not well understood, 
but it apparently increases dopamine concentrations in the brain. 
The drug appears to have potentiating effects on dopaminergic neu-
rotransmission in the CNS, is an NMDA antagonist, and has anti-
cholinergic activity.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, oral bioavailability of amantadine is reportedly very high.11 
A study in nonfasted greyhounds showed an oral dose of 2.8 mg/kg 
was well tolerated, and maximum concentration, time to maximum 
concentration, and terminal half-life were 271 ng/mL, 1 to 4 hours, 
and 4.9 hours respectively. This study also suggested that the “every 
24-hour dose interval” should be re-evaluated.12 The drug is renally 
eliminated.11
In cats, bioavailability was very high after oral administration, and 
peak levels occurred ≈2 hours after dosing. After IV administration, 
the steady-state volume of distribution was ≈4.3 L/kg and clearance 
(mean) was 8.2 mL/minute/kg.13 Elimination half-life was 5.5 to 6 
hours.
In horses, amantadine had a very wide interpatient variability of 
absorption after oral dosing (10 – 20 mg/kg); bioavailability ranged 
from 40% to 60% and was not affected by feed.8 The elimination half-
life in horses was ≈3.5 hours, and the steady-state volume of distri-
bution was ≈5 L/kg.
In Amazon parrots, the time to maximum concentration was ≈3 
to 4 hours, and half-life was 21 to 23 hours.14
In humans, amantadine was well absorbed after oral adminis-
tration with peak plasma concentrations occurring ≈3 hours after 
dosing.15 Volume of distribution was 3 to 8 L/kg, and protein bind-
ing was ≈67%. Amantadine is primarily eliminated via renal mech-
anisms. Oral clearance was ≈0.28 L/hour/kg and half-life was ≈16 
hours. Clearance is reduced in patients with renal impairment, and 
half-life may double.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
In humans, amantadine is contraindicated in patients with known 
hypersensitivity to it15 or to rimantadine, and in those with end-
stage renal disease. It should be used with caution in patients with 
hepatic disease, renal disease (dosage adjustment may be required), 
congestive heart failure, active psychoses, eczematoid dermatitis, sei-
zure disorders, or untreated angle-closure glaucoma. The drug is no 
longer recommended for the treatment or prevention of influenza A 
in humans due to high levels of amantadine resistance among circu-
lating influenza strains.9 In 2006, the FDA banned the use of aman-
tadine and other influenza antivirals in chickens, turkeys, and ducks.
The human liquid dosage form has an unpleasant taste.
Do not confuse AMANTadine with RIMantadine, AMIOdarone, 
or RANITidine.
Adverse Effects
Experience with amantadine in domestic animals is limited, and its 
adverse effect profile is not well described. It has been reported that 
dogs given amantadine occasionally develop agitation, flatulence, 
loose stools, or diarrhea, particularly early in treatment. Experience 
in cats is limited, and an adverse effect profile has yet to be fully elu-
cidated, but some clinicians report that GI effects are more likely 
than in dogs. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
In rats, amantadine 50 – 100 mg/kg/day PO (ie, ≈1.5 to 3 times 
the maximum recommended human dose) throughout pregnancy 
was embryotoxic and caused fetal malformations and reduced fe-
tal weight.15 Fertility was slightly impaired in rats that were given 
32 mg/kg/day.
Amantadine is excreted into maternal milk; its use is not recom-
mended in nursing women.16 Veterinary significance is unclear.
Because safety has not been established, this drug should only be 
used when the maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to off-
spring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The oral LD50 in mice and rats is 700 to 800 mg/kg and 25 to 
50 mg/kg in humans.17 The toxic amantadine dose reported for cats 
is 30 mg/kg18; behavioral effects may be noted at 15 mg/kg in dogs 
and cats.
Clinical signs associated with overdose in dogs include tremors, 
anxiety, ataxia, hypersalivation, and/or vomiting.
In humans, overdoses as low as 1 gram (total dose) have been as-
sociated with fatalities. Cardiac dysfunction (eg, arrhythmias, hyper-
tension, tachycardia), pulmonary edema, CNS toxicity (eg, tremors, 
seizures, psychosis, agitation, coma), hyperthermia, renal dysfunc-
tion, and respiratory distress syndrome have all been document-
ed. There is no known specific antidote for amantadine overdose. 
Treatment should consist of GI decontamination when appropriate, 
intensive monitoring (including ECG), and supportive therapy. Hy-
dration and urinary acidification, with or without diuresis, may in-
crease renal amantadine excretion. The drug is poorly removed by 
hemodialysis. Physostigmine has been suggested for cautious use in 
treating CNS effects.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
