Sucralfate      1189
Sucralfate
(soo-kral-fate)  Carafate®
GI-Mucosal Protectant
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Local-acting treatment for GI ulcers/esophagitis; may also 
protect somewhat against GI ulceration
	
▶No contraindications have been identified; however, sucralfate 
should be used with caution when decreased GI transit times 
may be harmful.
	
▶Adverse effects are unlikely, although constipation is possible. 
Vomiting has been reported in cats.
	
▶Tablets should be dissolved in water before administration. 
Should be administered on an empty stomach, if possible
	
▶To avoid possible drug interactions (eg, drug binding, de-
creased drug bioavailability), other medications should be 
administered 2 hours before sucralfate is administered. 
Uses/Indications
Sucralfate has been used to treat oral, esophageal, gastric, and duode-
nal ulcers and to prevent drug (eg, aspirin)-induced gastric erosions. 
Despite sucralfate’s theoretical benefits and widespread use, research 
has shown limited or no evidence to support the effectiveness of su-
cralfate for these indications.1–3 A consensus panel has determined 
that evidence supporting sucralfate use in small animal species for 
the prevention or treatment of esophageal injury is weak4; howev-
er, sucralfate in combination with omeprazole is recommended for 
treating horses with equine glandular gastric disease.5
Sucralfate has been used in humans with hyperphosphatemia 
secondary to renal failure and could be useful for this indication in 
animals; however, in a study, sucralfate did not significantly change 
serum or urine phosphorus levels in healthy cats or normophospha-
temic cats with CKD, and adverse effects (eg, vomiting, anorexia, 
constipation, worsening azotemia) may interfere with treatment.6 
Pharmacology/Actions
Although the exact mechanism of action of sucralfate as an antiulcer 
agent is unknown, the drug appears to have a local effect rather than 
a systemic one. After oral administration, sucralfate may react with 
hydrochloric acid in the stomach to form a paste-like complex that 
preferentially binds to the proteinaceous exudates that are generally 
found at ulcer sites (eg, albumin, fibrinogen). This insoluble com-
plex may form a barrier at the site and protect the ulcer from further 
damage caused by pepsin, acid, or bile. Sucralfate can bind bile acids 
and reduce pepsin activity. As an aluminum salt, sucralfate can bind 
to GI phosphorus.
Sucralfate may have some cytoprotective effects, possibly by stim-
ulation of prostaglandins E2 and I2. It also has some antacid activity, 
although this may not be of clinical importance. Sucralfate may also 
bind to intact GI mucosa to form a protective layer. 
Sucralfate does not significantly affect gastric acid output or tryp-
sin or pancreatic amylase activity. It may slightly decrease the rate of 
gastric emptying but will not alter peristalsis.
Pharmacokinetics
By reacting with hydrochloric acid in the gut, most of the drug is 
converted to sucrose sulfate, which is excreted in the feces within 
48 hours.7 The duration of action (binding to ulcer site) may persist 
up to 6 hours after oral administration. A negligible amount of an 
oral dose is absorbed into the systemic circulation and excreted in 
the urine unchanged within 48 hours.8
Dissolving tablets in water before administration to dogs and cats 
is recommended to increase the dispersion of the drug, as tablet frac-
tions have been observed in dog feces.9
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Sucralfate is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity 
to it. Because it may cause constipation, it should be used with cau-
tion in animals in which decreased GI transit times might be dele-
terious. Hyperglycemia has been reported rarely in diabetic humans 
receiving sucralfate suspension. Small amounts of aluminum may be 
absorbed following oral administration and may accumulate in pa-
tients with renal failure. 
Concurrent use of sucralfate with proton pump inhibitors (eg, 
omeprazole) or histamine-H2 receptor antagonists (eg, ranitidine) 
does not enhance the treatment of gastroduodenal injury in small 
animal species.4
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are uncommon with sucralfate therapy. Constipation 
is the most prominent adverse effect reported in humans (2%) and 
dogs receiving the drug. Vomiting has been reported in cats. Sucral-
fate can have an unpalatable taste, and patient acceptance may be a 
problem.
Sucralfate administration to cats with CKD resulted in clinical 
decompensation (vomiting, anorexia, constipation, worsening azo-
temia) in 3 of the 5 studied cats.6
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
In rats, sucralfate doses up to 38 times those used in humans have 
not been shown to cause impaired fertility, and doses up to 50 times 
normal used in humans have not been shown to cause signs of tera-
togenicity.7 
Sucralfate is most likely not excreted in breast milk because of 
minimal systemic absorption.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdoses are unlikely to cause significant problems. Laboratory an-
imals receiving up to 12 g/kg PO have demonstrated no incidence of 
mortality.7 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving sucralfate and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
	■Antacids, Aluminum Containing: Additive absorption of 
aluminum may occur, particularly in patients with renal insuf-
ficiency.
Sucralfate may impair the oral absorption of the following medica-
tions; administration should be separated by at least 2 hours to min-
imize this effect (with other medication being administered before 
sucralfate)4:
	■Alendronate: Other oral bisphosphonates should be assumed 
to have the same effects.
	■Antacids, Aluminum Containing: Can decrease sucralfate 
effectiveness; administration should be separated by 30 minutes. 
Additive absorption of aluminum may occur, particularly in pa-
tients with renal insufficiency.
	■Antacids, Calcium/Magnesium Containing: Can decrease 
sucralfate effectiveness; administration should be separated by 30 
minutes.
	■Ciprofloxacin: Other oral fluoroquinolones, except enrofloxa-
cin, should be assumed to be affected.9,10 

1190      Sufentanil
	■Diclofenac
	■Digoxin
	■Feeding, Enteral: Administration should be separated by an 
hour.
	■Ferrous Sulfate
	■Furosemide
	■Ketoconazole
	■Lanthanum
	■Levothyroxine: Administration should be separated by 4 
hours.
	■Macrolide Antibiotics (eg, azithromycin, clarithromycin, 
erythromycin)
	■Penicillamine
	■Tetracyclines (eg, doxycycline, minocycline, tetracycline)11,12
	■Theophylline
	■Vitamins, Fat Soluble
	■Warfarin
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
GI-mucosal protectant for conditions such as esophagitis, gas-
tric or duodenal ulcers, and uremic gastritis (extra-label): Em-
pirically administered at ¼ to ½ of a 1 g tablet (250 – 500 mg)/ani-
mal (NOT g/kg) for toy-breed dogs and cats and 1 g/animal (NOT 
g/kg) PO 2 to 4 times daily for large-sized dogs. When using tablet 
formulations, it is recommended to crush the tablet then suspend 
it in a small amount of water prior to administration.
FERRETS:
GI-mucosal protectant (extra-label): 
a)	75 mg/kg PO every 4 to 6 hours; should be administered 10 
minutes prior to feeding13
b)	25 – 125 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours14
HORSES:
GI-mucosal protectant (extra-label): 
a)	 Gastric glandular disease: Sucralfate 12 – 20 mg/kg PO twice 
daily in combination with omeprazole 4 mg/kg PO once dai-
ly.5,15,16
b)	 Prevention of stress-induced ulcers (used with acid-sup-
pressive drugs) in foals: 
i.	10 – 20 mg/kg PO every 6 to 8 hours17
ii.	20 – 40 mg/kg PO every 6 hours18
iii.	2 – 4 g/foal (NOT g/kg) PO every 6 hours18
c)	 Right dorsal colitis | colonic ulcers: 22 mg/kg PO every 6 to 8 
hours19,20 
REPTILES:
GI irritation in most species (extra-label): 500 – 1000 mg/kg PO 
every 6 to 8 hours21
BIRDS:
Upper GI mucosal hemorrhage (extra-label): 50 – 100 mg/kg PO 
every 12 hours22
Monitoring
	■Clinical efficacy (dependent on the reason for use); may be moni-
tored by a decrease in clinical signs, endoscopic examination, and 
fecal occult blood testing
Client Information
	■This medicine is best given on an empty stomach and not at the 
same time as other medications. If you are giving your animal any 
other medication, be sure to give the other medications 2 hours 
before you give the sucralfate. 
	■Sucralfate be given several times a day to be most effective.
	■Shake liquids well before using. If using tablets, it is best to dis-
solve the tablets in lukewarm water just before giving them.
	■This medicine is usually tolerated well. Some animals may devel-
op constipation. Some cats may vomit after receiving this medi-
cine. Contact your veterinarian if you have concerns about your 
animal taking this medicine.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Sucralfate, a basic aluminum complex of sucrose sulfate, can occur 
as a white, amorphous powder. It is practically insoluble in alcohol 
or water. Each 1 g sucralfate tablet contains ≈207 mg of aluminum.
Sucralfate is structurally related to heparin but does not possess 
any appreciable anticoagulant activity. It is also structurally related to 
sucrose but is not utilized as sugar by the body.
Sucralfate is also known as basic aluminum sucrose sulfate and 
Carafate®, Sulcrate®, and Cytogard®.
Storage/Stability
Store sucralfate tablets in tight containers at room temperature 
(15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]). Store sucralfate suspension at controlled 
room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]); do not freeze.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
A sucralfate 200 mg/mL suspension can be extemporaneously pre-
pared. For a volume of 100 mL, twenty (20) sucralfate 1 g tablets 
should be crushed, and a sufficient quantity of distilled water added 
to bring the volume to 100 mL. Suspending agents (eg, acacia, trag-
acanth) should not be used, as they can bind to sucralfate and make 
it inactive. “Shake well” and “refrigerate” should be labeled on the 
compounded solution. When refrigerated, it is stable for 14 days.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Sucralfate Tablets: 1 g; Carafate®, generic; (Rx)
Sucralfate Suspension: 1 g/10 mL in 10 mL unit-dose cups and 
415 mL bottles; Carafate®, generic; (Rx)
Formulations are available as oral mucosal coating agents and regu-
lated by the FDA as medical devices.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Sufentanil
(soo-fen-ta-nil)  Sufenta®
Opioid Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Injectable opioid that is 5 to 7 times more potent than 
fentanyl. May be useful for adjunctive anesthesia or epidural 
analgesia
	
▶Dose-related respiratory and CNS depression most likely 
adverse effects
	
▶DEA Schedule II (C-II) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Sufentanil is an opioid analgesic that may be useful as an anesthesia 
adjunct or as an epidural analgesic. In humans, it has been used as 
the primary anesthetic in intubated patients with assisted ventilation 
and as a postoperative analgesic.
Pharmacology/Actions
Sufentanil is a potent mu opioid with the expected sedative, anal-
gesic, and anesthetic properties. When comparing analgesic poten-
cies when injecting IM, 0.01 to 0.04 mg of sufentanil is equivalent to 
