1006      Phenobarbital
may get sick if they eat horse feed mixed with this medicine.
	■Decreased appetite is the most common side effect seen with this 
medicine.
	■Watch for unpredictable behavior and colic while your horse is 
taking this medicine. Contact your veterinarian if you have any 
concerns.
	■Your veterinarian will need to monitor your horse while it is tak-
ing this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Pergolide is an ergot derivative that occurs as white to off-white pow-
der and is slightly soluble in water, dehydrated alcohol, or chloro-
form. It is very slightly soluble in acetone, practically insoluble in 
ether, and sparingly soluble in methyl alcohol.
Pergolide mesylate may also be known as LY-127809, pergolide 
mesilate, pergolidi mesilas, Prascend®, Celance®, Nopar®, Parkotil®, 
Parlide®, or Pharken®.
Storage/Stability
Store pergolide tablets in tight containers at room temperature (25°C 
[77°F]); excursions permitted to 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
FDA-approved products should be the first choice when prescribing 
pergolide for pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID). Com-
pounded products are available; however, because of concerns re-
garding stability, the use of this product is questionable when the 
approved product is accessible. 
A 1 mg/mL oral suspension of pergolide mesylate was prepared 
using bulk powder obtained from a commercial supplier. 20 mg of 
pergolide mesylate was added to the plunger of a 35 mL Luer-lock 
syringe containing 10 mL of Ora-Plus® suspending liquid. The 35 mL 
syringe was connected to an empty 35 mL Luer-lock syringe using a 
fluid-dispensing connector. Using the plunger of the original 35 mL 
syringe, the suspension was mixed by depressing the plungers back 
and forth for a total of 50 depressions (or until uniformly mixed). 
10 mL of OraSweet® was added to the suspension and mixed in a 
similar manner for a final suspension volume of 20 mL. The suspen-
sion was found to be stable for 30 days when protected from light 
and stored under refrigeration (2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]). Formulations 
that have undergone a color change should be considered unstable 
and discarded. NOTE: The use of a mortar and pestle to prepare this 
suspension is not recommended, as it has resulted in a loss of sus-
pending vehicle that caused a 20% increase in final concentration. 
Proper precautions to prevent eye and skin irritation from exposure 
to free powder should be taken.8
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Pergolide Mesylate Tablets: 1 mg; Prascend®; (Rx) FDA-approved for 
use in horses. NADA# 141-331. Do not use this product in horses 
intended for human consumption.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
Because of an increased potential for heart valve damage associat-
ed with pergolide use in humans, all dosage forms were withdrawn 
from the United States market in the spring of 2007. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Phenobarbital
Phenobarbitone
 (fee-noe-bar-bi-tal) 
Barbiturate
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Used primarily as an antiseizure medication
	
▶Contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity, 
severe liver disease, severe respiratory distress, or nephritis 
(with large doses). Phenobarbital should be used with caution 
in patients with hypovolemia, anemia, borderline hypoadrenal 
function, or severe cardiac or respiratory disease.
	
▶Cats are more sensitive to respiratory depression when receiv-
ing phenobarbital at high doses.
	
▶Adverse effects in dogs include anxiety/agitation or lethargy 
(when treatment is initiated); profound depression is possible 
even at low doses. Sedation, ataxia, polyuria/polydipsia, and 
polyphagia can be seen at moderate to high serum phenobar-
bital concentrations. An increase in liver enzymes (ALP more 
so than ALT) is common; however, overt hepatotoxicity is not. 
Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia are rarely seen.
	
▶Adverse effects in cats include ataxia, lethargy, facial pruri-
tus, polyphagia with weight gain, and polyuria/polydipsia. 
Immunemediated reactions and bone marrow hypoplasia are 
rare. Hepatotoxicity has not been reported in cats.
	
▶Should be given slowly when administered IV; should not 
be administered SC or perivascularly, as it can cause severe 
irritation
	
▶Drug and drug–laboratory test interactions are possible.
	
▶When therapy is discontinued, phenobarbital doses should be 
tapered over several weeks (see Dosages).
	
▶DEA Schedule IV (C-IV) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Based on its efficacy, relative safety, and reasonable dose frequency 
(every 12 hours), phenobarbital is considered a first-line treatment 
for epilepsy in dogs and cats.1,2 Phenobarbital has a slower onset of 
action than benzodiazepines, which should be used first to manage 
status epilepticus. Phenobarbital is generally used for long-term 
control to prevent seizure recurrence in dogs, cats, and horses. In a 
study, more dogs receiving phenobarbital were seizure-free as com-
pared with those receiving potassium bromide (85% vs 52%); phe-
nobarbital reduced seizure duration more than potassium bromide.3 
Phenobarbital may also be useful in controlling excessive drool-
ing (ie, sialadenosis) in horses4 and dogs.5–9 Phenobarbital improves 
clinical signs in dogs with orthostatic tremor; however, most re-
sponses were partial rather than complete.10
In cattle, it has been suggested that the microsomal–enzyme-stim-
ulating properties of phenobarbital increase the detoxification pro-
cess of organochlorine (ie, chlorinated hydrocarbon) insecticide 
poisoning.
Phenobarbital has also been used in the treatment and preven-
tion of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in human infants. It is unknown 
if phenobarbital effectively treats hyperbilirubinemia in veterinary 
patients.
Pharmacology/Actions	
Although barbiturates are nonselective CNS depressants, they can 
invoke all levels of CNS mood alteration, from paradoxical excite-
ment to deep coma and death. The exact mechanisms of the CNS 
effects caused by barbiturates are unknown. Barbiturates have been 
shown to inhibit the release of acetylcholine, norepinephrine, and 
glutamate; they also have effects on gamma-aminobutyric acid 

Phenobarbital      1007
(GABA). At high anesthetic doses, barbiturates have been demon-
strated to inhibit the uptake of calcium at nerve endings. The seizure 
threshold is raised, and the spread of seizures is limited. In humans, 
selective anticonvulsant activity of phenobarbital is independent of 
the degree of sedation produced.
The degree of CNS depression produced is dependent on the 
dose, route of administration, the pharmacokinetics of the drug, and 
species treated. In addition, patient age, physical condition, and/or 
concurrent use of other drugs can alter drug effects. Barbiturates 
may depress the sensory cortex, lessen motor activity, and produce 
sedation at low doses. In humans, barbiturates have been shown to 
reduce the rapid eye movement (REM) stage of sleep. Barbiturates 
have no true intrinsic analgesic activity.
In most species, barbiturates can cause dose-dependent respira-
tory depression and, in some species, can cause slight respiratory 
stimulation. At sedative/hypnotic doses, respiratory depression is 
similar to that during normal physiologic sleep. As doses increase, 
the medullary respiratory center is progressively depressed, with re-
sultant decreases in rate, depth, and volume. Respiratory arrest can 
occur at doses 4 times lower than those that can cause cardiac arrest. 
Barbiturates must be used very cautiously in cats, as cats are particu-
larly sensitive to their respiratory depressant effects.
Barbiturates can cause reduced tone and motility of the intestinal, 
uterine, ureteral, and bladder musculature, likely secondary to their 
central depressant action. Barbiturates can reduce the sensitivity of 
the motor endplate to acetylcholine, thereby slightly relaxing the 
skeletal muscle. 
Liver function is not directly affected when barbiturates are used 
short-term, but hepatic microsomal enzyme induction is well doc-
umented with extended barbiturate administration,11–14 particularly 
with phenobarbital, and may persist for up to 4 weeks after discon-
tinuation.11 Although barbiturates reduce oxygen consumption in all 
tissue, no change in metabolic rate is measurable when barbiturates 
are administered at sedative doses; however, basal metabolic rates 
may be reduced with resultant decreases in body temperature when 
barbiturates are administered at anesthetic doses.
Pharmacokinetics
Phenobarbital is slowly absorbed from the GI tract. Bioavailability 
ranges from 70% to 90% in humans and ≈90% in dogs.15,16 Absorp-
tion is practically complete in cats17 and adult horses.18 Peak concen-
trations occur 4 to 8 hours after oral administration in dogs19 and 8 
to 12 hours in humans. One study in cats showed that phenobarbi-
tal compounded in PLO gel and applied transdermally to the pinna 
twice daily achieved steady-state serum concentrations within the 
therapeutic range in some cats; more individual variation was seen 
when Lipoderm ActiveMax® was used instead of PLO.20
Phenobarbital is widely distributed throughout the body, but be-
cause of its lower lipid solubility, it does not distribute as rapidly into 
the CNS as compared with most other barbiturates. In humans, peak 
drug concentration in the CNS may be delayed up to 15 minutes after 
IV administration. In humans, the amount of phenobarbital bound 
to plasma proteins has been reported to be 40% to 60%. The report-
ed apparent volumes of distribution are ≈0.8 to 1 L/kg in horses,21,22 
≈0.86 L/kg in foals, ≈0.7 L/kg in cats,23 and ≈0.75 L/kg in dogs.24
The drug is metabolized in the liver primarily by hydroxylated 
oxidation to p-hydroxyphenobarbital; sulfate and glucuronide con-
jugates are also formed. In humans, elimination half-life ranges 
from 2 to 6 days compared to 12 to 125 hours (average of ≈2 days) 
in dogs.16,19,24 Elimination half-life in dogs fed protein- or fat-re-
stricted diets appears to be shorter (26 and 24 hours, respectively).25 
Because of phenobarbital’s ability to induce the hepatic enzymes 
used to metabolize itself and other drugs, elimination half-life may 
decrease with time, along with concomitant reductions in serum 
concentrations. The half-life of phenobarbital may be less than 24 
hours in some dogs that may require 3 times daily administration 
for maximal control.26 An elimination half-life of 34 to 43 hours has 
been reported in cats.23 Elimination half-life in horses is considerably 
shorter, with reported values of ≈13 hours in foals and 10 to 12 hours 
in adult horses with chronic administration.21,22 Approximately 25% 
of a dose is excreted unchanged by the kidney; alkalinizing urine 
and/or substantially increasing urine flow increases phenobarbital 
excretion rates. The remaining 75% of a dose is renally excreted as 
metabolites. Anuric or oliguric patients may accumulate the unmet-
abolized drug; dose adjustments may be required.
In dogs, changes in diet, body weight, and body composition may 
alter the pharmacokinetics of phenobarbital and necessitate dosage 
adjustment.
In goats given phenobarbital 10 mg/kg IV and PO, bioavailability 
was ≈25%, and half-life was ≈4 hours for both routes.27
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Barbiturates are contraindicated in patients that have severe liver 
disease, severe respiratory distress, or those that have demonstrat-
ed previous hypersensitivity reactions to these drugs.28 Large doses 
are contraindicated in patients with nephritis.29 Barbiturates should 
be used cautiously in patients with hypovolemia, anemia, border-
line hypoadrenal function, and/or cardiac or respiratory disease. 
Dose reductions may be necessary in patients with significant renal 
­impairment.
The drug should be given slowly (not more than 1 – 2 mg/kg per 
minute) when administered IV; IV administration that is too rapid 
can cause respiratory depression. Commercially available injectable 
preparations are very alkaline and must not be administered SC, in-
traarterially, or perivascularly, as significant pain, tissue irritation, 
and possible necrosis can result.29 Extreme care should be taken to 
avoid extravasation. Applications of moist heat and local infiltration 
of 0.5% procaine solution have been recommended to treat extrava-
sation reactions.
In humans, IM injection is limited to a total volume of 5 mL and 
injected into a large muscle to avoid tissue irritation.29
PHENobarbital should not be confused with PENTobarbital.
Adverse Effects
Dogs may exhibit increased clinical signs of anxiety/agitation or 
lethargy when therapy is initiated. These effects are generally transi-
tory in nature. Occasionally, dogs will exhibit profound depression at 
lower doses (and plasma concentrations). Decreased physical activ-
ity levels have been observed in dogs receiving phenobarbital-con-
taining antiepileptic drug combinations.30
Polydipsia, polyuria, and polyphagia are also commonly observed; 
these signs usually begin 2 to 3 weeks after initiating phenobarbital 
therapy. Sedation and/or ataxia often become significant concerns 
as serum phenobarbital concentrations reach the higher ends of the 
therapeutic range. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and/or neutropenia 
occur rarely and are reversible if detected early.31–33 Increased tri-
glycerides34 and pancreatic lipase activity35,36 have been reported in 
dogs. 
Increases in liver enzymes with phenobarbital in dogs are well de-
scribed37–39 and are not necessarily indicative of liver dysfunction but 
should raise concern if serum ALT or ALP is more than 4 to 5 times 
the upper limit of normal or if any elevation in gamma-glutamyl-
transferase (GGT) is noted. Of note, in a study, serum ALP was high-
er in dogs receiving phenobarbital and fed protein- or fat-restricted 
diets as compared with dogs receiving a maintenance diet.25 Pheno-
barbital should generally be discontinued if any increases in serum 
bilirubin, total serum bile acids, or hypoalbuminemia are detected. If 
phenobarbital needs to be discontinued yet antiepileptic medication 
is required, alternative antiepileptic therapy (eg, potassium bromide, 
