Sulfa-/Trimethoprim      1193
Sulfa-/Trimethoprim
Sulfadiazine/Trimethoprim
Sulfamethoxazole/Trimethoprim
(sul-fa-dye-a-zeen; sul-fa-meth-ox-a-zole/trye-meth-ohe-prim)
Bactrim®, EquiSul-SDT®, Uniprim®
Potentiated Sulfonamide Antimicrobial
NOTE: In the United States, 2 FDA-approved combinations of sulfon-
amide with trimethoprim (ie, sulfa-/trimethoprim) are used clinically 
in animals: sulfadiazine/trimethoprim for parenteral and oral use in 
dogs, cats, and horses and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim for oral 
use in humans. In Canada, sulfadoxine is also available in combina-
tion with trimethoprim for veterinary use.
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Combination antimicrobial agent, often referred to as a po-
tentiated sulfonamide, used to treat bacterial and protozoal 
infections
	
▶Contraindications include hypersensitivity to sulfonamides 
and severe renal or hepatic impairment.
	
▶Caution is advised in cases of diminished renal or hepatic 
function, urinary obstruction, urolithiasis, and in dog breeds 
predisposed to sulfonamide hypersensitivity (eg, Doberman 
pinschers).
	
▶Adverse effects in dogs include keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 
hypersensitivity (type 1 or type 3), acute neutrophilic hepatitis 
with icterus, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, fever, hemolytic 
anemia, urticaria, polyarthritis, facial swelling, polydipsia, 
crystalluria, hematuria, polyuria, cholestasis, hypothyroidism, 
anemia, agranulocytosis, and idiosyncratic hepatic necrosis.
	
▶Adverse effects in cats include anorexia, crystalluria, hematu-
ria, leukopenia, and anemia.
	
▶Adverse effects in horses include diarrhea, hypersensitivity 
reactions, and hematologic effects (eg, anemia, thrombocy-
topenia, leukopenia) when administered orally and transient 
pruritus after IV injection.
	
▶Local injection adverse effects (eg, warmth, edema, pain) are 
possible.
	
▶Sulfa-/trimethoprim is potentially teratogenic; weigh the risks 
versus the benefits before prescribing.
	
▶In the United States, extra-label use of sulfonamides is prohib-
ited in lactating dairy cattle.
Uses/Indications
Although sulfadiazine/trimethoprim is only FDA-approved for use 
in dogs and horses, this drug is used to treat infections caused by 
susceptible bacteria and parasitic organisms in various species. 
Sulfadiazine/trimethoprim is commonly used in horses because it 
is 1 of a limited number of safe oral options. Although use in dogs is 
more limited because of concerns about adverse effects and availabil-
ity of other antimicrobial options, this antibiotic is a potential choice 
for treatment of various infections (eg, cystitis, prostatitis) and is also 
sometimes used for treatment of atypical pathogens (eg, Nocardia 
spp). Prophylactic use of sulfadiazine/trimethoprim reduced mor-
bidity in dogs receiving doxorubicin.1
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated sulfa-
methoxazole/trimethoprim as a Highly Important antimicrobial for 
human medicine.2 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) An-
timicrobial Classification has designated sulfadiazine/trimethoprim 
as a Veterinary Critically Important antimicrobial.3
Pharmacology/Actions
Sulfonamides are bacteriostatic agents while trimethoprim is bac-
tericidal; both agents are time-dependent antibiotics. When used in 
combination, the resulting potentiated sulfonamides are bactericid-
al. Potentiated sulfonamides sequentially inhibit enzymes in the folic 
acid pathway, inhibiting bacterial thymidine synthesis. Sulfonamides 
compete with para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) to reduce bacterial 
dihydrofolic acid (DFA) formation, and trimethoprim blocks the 
conversion of DFA to tetrahydrofolic acid by preferentially inhibiting 
bacterial dihydrofolate reductase. Infected tissue and cellular debris 
can inhibit the activity of sulfa-/trimethoprim by secreting PABA 
and thymidine. The effects of sulfa-/trimethoprim on the equine GI 
microbiome appear to be reversible.4
The in vitro optimal ratio for most susceptible bacteria is ≈1:20 
(trimethoprim:sulfonamide), but synergistic activity can reportedly 
occur with ratios of 1:1 to 1:40. The serum concentration of the tri-
methoprim component is considered more important than the sul-
fonamide concentration. 
Potentiated sulfonamides have a fairly broad spectrum of activi-
ty. Generally susceptible gram-positive bacteria include most strep-
tococci and staphylococci and Nocardia spp. Many gram-negative 
organisms of the Enterobacteriaceae family are inherently suscep-
tible to potentiated sulfonamides but acquired resistance can occur. 
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is ineffective against Pseudomonas aeruginosa; 
some protozoa (ie, Pneumocystis jiroveci, Coccidia spp, Neospora spp, 
Toxoplasma spp) are also inhibited. Potentiated sulfonamides appear 
to have little activity against most atypical bacteria and anaerobes; 
methicillin-resistant staphylococci are usually resistant. Enterococcus 
spp infections may appear to be susceptible to sulfonamide-contain-
ing antibiotics in vitro; however, they are intrinsically resistant, so 
sulfa-/trimethoprim should not be used for these bacteria.
Resistance development is thought to occur more slowly to the 
combination of drugs than to either drug alone. In gram-negative 
organisms, sulfamethoxazole resistance is usually plasmid mediat-
ed, although a point mutation for dihydropteroate synthase also may 
confer resistance.  
Pharmacokinetics
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is relatively well absorbed after oral adminis-
tration, with peak concentrations occurring ≈1 to 4 hours after ad-
ministration; however, the drug is absorbed more slowly after SC 
absorption. Oral bioavailability in fed horses after a single dose of 
30 mg/kg paste was 74% for sulfadiazine and 46% for trimethoprim.5 
Bioavailability was ≈84% in male goats.6 Food has no apparent effect 
on the absorption of sulfadiazine, but trimethoprim absorption is 
decreased.
In calves 1 day and 1 week of age, trimethoprim and sulfadia-
zine were absorbed after oral administration, although serum tri-
methoprim concentration was diminished in the 1-week-old calves. 
In calves 6 weeks of age, peak sulfadiazine concentration was only 
60% as compared with calves 1 day of age, and trimethoprim was 
undetectable.7 In a separate study, sulfadiazine half-life was 8.5 to 10 
hours in calves 6 weeks of age and ≈8 to 13 hours in calves 12 weeks 
of age.8 In ruminants older than 8 weeks of age, trimethoprim is ap-
parently trapped in the ruminoreticulum after oral administration 
and undergoes some degradation that limits its usefulness.
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is well distributed in the body; however, in 
horses, concentrations are lower in the pulmonary epithelial lining 
fluid than in plasma.5 Both sulfadiazine and trimethoprim attain 
therapeutic concentrations in the equine endometrium.9 In dogs, 
therapeutic concentrations of both agents are reached in the skin.10 
In patients with inflamed meninges, the drugs enter the CSF in con-
centrations ≈50% of those found in the serum. Sulfa-/trimethoprim 

1194      Sulfa-/Trimethoprim
is relatively well distributed into the prostate, and both drugs con-
centrate in the urine. The volume of distribution for trimethoprim is 
1.49 L/kg in dogs; 0.59 to 1.51 L/kg in horses; and 2.7 L/kg in don-
keys.11 The volume of distribution for sulfadiazine is 1.02 L/kg in 
dogs and 0.6 L/kg in donkeys.11 Sulfadiazine and trimethoprim are 
20% and 35% bound to equine plasma proteins.12
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is both renally excreted unchanged via glo-
merular filtration and tubular secretion and metabolized by the liver. 
Sulfonamides are primarily acetylated (not in dogs) and conjugated 
with glucuronic acid, and trimethoprim is metabolized to oxide and 
hydroxylated metabolites. Trimethoprim may be more extensively 
metabolized in the liver of adult ruminants than in other species. The 
serum elimination half-life for trimethoprim is 2.5 hours in dogs, ≈2 
to 3 hours in horses, 10.9 hours in goats,6 and 1.5 hours in cattle. The 
serum elimination half-life for sulfadiazine is 9.84 hours in dogs, ≈4 
to 8 hours in horses, and 2.5 hours in cattle. Sulfadiazine and tri-
methoprim clearances in donkeys were 1.7 and 4.4 mL/minute/kg, 
respectively.11 Although trimethoprim is rapidly eliminated from the 
serum, the drug may persist for a longer period of time in tissue.
Because of the number of variables involved, it is extremely dif-
ficult to apply pharmacokinetic values in making dosage recom-
mendations with these combinations. Each drug (ie, trimethoprim, 
sulfonamide) has different pharmacokinetic parameters (eg, absorp-
tion, distribution, elimination) in each species. Because different 
organisms have different MIC values and the optimal ratio of tri-
methoprim to sulfonamides differs from organism to organism, this 
problem is exacerbated.
Considerable controversy exists regarding the frequency of ad-
ministration of these combinations. Sulfadiazine/trimethoprim is 
labeled for once daily administration in dogs and horses, but many 
clinicians believe that sulfa-/trimethoprim is more efficacious if giv-
en twice daily, regardless of the sulfonamide used.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
The veterinary manufacturer states that sulfadiazine/trimethoprim 
should not be used in dogs or horses with marked liver parenchymal 
damage, impaired hepatic function, blood dyscrasias, or a history 
of sulfonamide or trimethoprim sensitivity. Sulfadiazine/trimetho-
prim is not for use in horses (or FDA-approved for other animals) 
intended for food. Sulfonamides are not considered contraindicated 
in patients allergic to thiazide diuretics or sulfonylurea agents.13
Doberman pinschers, Samoyeds, and miniature schnauzers ap-
pear to be more susceptible to sulfonamide-induced polysystemic 
immune complex disease14; use sulfa-/trimethoprim with caution in 
these breeds.
Sulfa-/trimethoprim should be used with caution in patients with 
pre-existing hepatic or renal disease or folate deficiency. In animals 
with moderate to severe renal dysfunction, consider dosage reduc-
tion; avoid products containing sulfadiazine.
Sulfadiazine has potential for crystallization in the urine, so use 
should be avoided in dogs with uroliths, at increased risk for devel-
oping uroliths, with highly concentrated urine (from dehydration), 
or with acidic urine.
Horses receiving sulfadiazine/trimethoprim that are under con-
ditions of stress may develop potentially fatal acute diarrhea.15 Dis-
continue antimicrobial therapy if acute diarrhea or persistent changes 
in fecal consistency are observed and initiate appropriate treatment. 
Sulfadiazine/trimethoprim should not be administered to horses with 
drug-induced cardiac arrhythmias (eg, anesthetic and sedative agents) 
and it should not be given IV concurrently or with previous adminis-
tration of CNS depressants (eg, anesthetic agents, phenothiazines).16
In humans, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim is contraindicated in 
patients younger than 2 months of age, with known hypersensitivity 
to either drug component, with marked hepatic or renal impairment, 
and with megaloblastic anemia due to folate deficiency.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects noted in dogs include keratoconjunctivitis sic-
ca (KCS; which may be irreversible), acute neutrophilic hepatitis 
with icterus, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, fever, hemolytic anemia, 
urticaria, polyarthritis, facial swelling, polydipsia, polyuria, and 
cholestasis. Potentiated sulfonamides may cause clinical hypothy-
roidism in dogs, particularly with extended therapy. Acute hyper-
sensitivity reactions manifesting as type I (ie, anaphylaxis) or type 
III (ie, formation of antigen:antibody complexes) reactions can be 
seen. Hypersensitivity reactions appear to be more common in large-
breed dogs. Doberman pinschers, Samoyeds, and miniature schnau-
zers may be more susceptible to hypersensitivity reactions than other 
breeds.14 Other hematologic effects (eg, anemia, agranulocytosis) are 
possible but are rare, although the incidence may increase with pro-
longed use of high doses.17 Sulfa-/trimethoprim has rarely caused an 
idiosyncratic, moderate to massive hepatic necrosis in dogs.18 Use 
of sulfa-/trimethoprim may increase the risk for developing acute 
pancreatitis,14 but cause and effect have not been definitively shown.
Adverse effects noted in cats may include anorexia, leukopenia, 
and anemia.
In horses, transient pruritus has been noted after IV injection. 
Oral therapy has resulted in dose-related diarrhea, but incidence is 
relatively low. Previous administration of potentiated sulfonamides 
has been implicated in increasing the mortality rate associated with 
severe diarrhea. If the 48% injectable product is administered IM or 
SC, or if it extravasates after IV administration, swelling, pain, and 
minor tissue damage may result. Hypersensitivity reactions, neuro-
logic effects (eg, gait alterations, behavior changes), cutaneous vas-
culitis, and hematologic effects (eg, anemia, thrombocytopenia, leu-
kopenia) may also be seen.19 In experimental models, trimethoprim 
inhibited equine voltage-gated K+ channel K(v)11.1, suggesting that 
trimethoprim could induce repolarization disorders in horses20,21; 
validation with in vivo studies are needed. Neurologic adverse ef-
fects (agitation, erratic behavior, hypermetric gait) have been noted 
in horses being treated with typical doses of sulfa-/trimethoprim; all 
adverse effects resolved with discontinuation of the drug.22
Sulfonamides (and their metabolites) can precipitate in the urine, 
particularly when given at high dosages for prolonged periods. Acid-
ic or highly concentrated urine may also contribute to increased risk 
for crystalluria, hematuria, and renal tubule obstruction.
Regurgitation may occur in birds.
Sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim can markedly reduce tear pro-
duction in rabbits,23 but sulfadiazine/trimethoprim had no effect in 
horses.24
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Trimethoprim and sulfonamides cross the placenta. Safety of sulfa-/
trimethoprim has not been clearly established in pregnant animals. 
Reports of teratogenicity (eg, cleft palate, fetal loss) have been re-
ported in rats and rabbits. Studies in male animals have not demon-
strated reduced reproductive performance. First trimester exposure 
in humans has been associated with increased risk for congenital 
malformations. 
Trimethoprim and sulfonamides are distributed into milk. Use 
sulfa-/trimethoprim products in nursing animals with caution. 
Sulfonamides are distributed into maternal milk, but in humans 
are considered compatible with breastfeeding in healthy, full-term 
infants.25,26 Premature infants and infants with hyperbilirubinemia 
may be at risk for adverse effects.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Manifestations of an acute overdose can include clinical signs of GI 
distress (eg, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea), CNS toxicity (eg, depres-
sion,), facial swelling, bone marrow depression, and increased se-
rum aminotransferase (ie, ALT, AST) activity. Oral overdoses can be 
