230      Ceftriaxone
Ceftriaxone
(sef-try-ax-ohn)  Rocephin®
Third-Generation Cephalosporin 
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Injectable antibiotic used to treat serious bacterial infections 
	
▶Achieves therapeutic concentrations in CNS; long half-life
	
▶Adverse effects include hypersensitivity reactions and injec-
tion site reactions (eg, skin tightness, induration).
	
▶Administer ceftriaxone IV over 30 minutes (or longer). Pain on 
IM injection is reduced when reconstituted with lidocaine.
	
▶In the United States, extra-label drug use of cephalospo-
rins is restricted in food-producing animals.
Uses/Indications
Ceftriaxone is used to treat serious infections (particularly against 
susceptible Enterobacteriaceae) that are not susceptible to other 
agents or when aminoglycosides are not indicated because of their 
potential toxicity. Its long half-life, good CNS penetration, and ac-
tivity against Borrelia burgdorferi have also made ceftriaxone a po-
tential choice for treating Lyme borreliosis and other infections in 
animals. Although ceftriaxone has been reported for the treatment 
of uncomplicated lower UTI,1 its use is not recommended for this 
purpose.2 In dogs, ceftriaxone’s lower protein binding and shorter 
half-life (when compared with humans) give it no advantage over the 
other parenteral third-generation cephalosporins. In horses, intra-
peritoneal ceftriaxone successfully treated cases of septic peritonitis.3
The World Health Organization (WHO) classifies third-gen-
eration cephalosporins as Critically Important, Highest Priority 
antimicrobials for human medicine.4 The Office International des 
Epizooties (OIE) has designated third-generation cephalosporins 
as Veterinary Critically Important Antimicrobial (VCIA) agents in 
avian, bovine, ovine, and swine species.5
Pharmacology/Actions 	
Ceftriaxone is a third-generation injectable cephalosporin agent that 
is bactericidal and displays time-dependent killing. Third-genera-
tion cephalosporins retain the gram-positive activity of the first- and 
second-generation agents, but have much expanded gram-negative 
activity. This class of antibiotics is often chosen for their excellent 
gram-negative coverage and significantly less toxic potential (as 
compared with the aminoglycosides). As with the second-generation 
cephalosporins, enough variability exists with individual bacterial 
sensitivities that susceptibility testing is necessary. 
Ceftriaxone is ineffective against methicillin-resistant staphy-
lococci, enterococci, extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)- 
producing Enterobacterales, and AmpC-producing Enterobactera-
les. It generally has excellent activity against gram-negative bacteria; 
however, it is not a good choice for Serratia spp, Pseudomonas spp, 
some Proteus spp, Citrobacter spp, and Enterobacter spp (“SPICE” 
organisms).
Pharmacokinetics
In humans, ceftriaxone is not absorbed after oral administration and 
must be given parenterally. It is widely distributed throughout the 
body and highly bound (95%-98%) to plasma proteins. Ceftriaxone 
crosses into the CNS; CSF concentrations are higher when meninges 
are inflamed. Ceftriaxone is excreted by both renal and biliary mech-
anisms; elimination half-lives are ≈6 to 11 hours.
In dogs, ceftriaxone bioavailability after IM or SC administration 
was equal after IV administration, but peak concentrations occur 
much faster after IM (≈30 minutes) than SC (80 minutes) adminis-
tration.6 Peak concentrations are higher with IM administration than 
with SC, but total area under the curve is similar for both routes. 
Elimination half-life is longer after SC administration (1.73 hours) 
than after either IM (1.17 hours) or IV administration (0.88 hours). 
The authors of the study concluded that once or twice daily IM or SC 
injections of 50 mg/kg should be adequate to treat most susceptible 
infections in dogs. 
In a study of cats, ceftriaxone was well-absorbed when adminis-
tered IM and SC.7 Elimination half-life averaged between 1.5 and 2 
hours. Protein binding was not determined. 
One study compared healthy cows with endometritic cows.8 After 
a single ceftriaxone IV dose, elimination half-life was about 1 hour 
in healthy cows, clearance was 0.3 L/kg/hour, and volume of distri-
bution was 0.5 L/kg. In endometritic cows, elimination half-life was 
slightly longer at 1.56 hours, clearance was 0.56 L/kg/hour, and vol-
ume of distribution was 1.55 L/kg. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Cephalosporins are contraindicated in patients with a history of 
hypersensitivity to them. Because there may be cross-reactivity, 
cephalosporins should be used cautiously in patients that have a 
documented hypersensitivity to other beta-lactam antibiotics (eg, 
penicillins, cefamycins, carbapenems).
Human patients that have significant renal insufficiency with con-
comitant hepatic impairment may need dosage adjustments9; the rel-
evance of this finding for veterinary patients is unclear. 
Ceftriaxone can be easily confused with other cephalosporins. 
Consider writing orders and prescriptions using tall man lettering: 
cefTRIAXone.
Adverse Effects
Because use of ceftriaxone is limited in veterinary patients, an accu-
rate adverse effect profile has not been determined. Pain at the injec-
tion site has been reported.6,7 In dogs, very high dosages (100 mg/kg 
per day) of ceftriaxone have caused sludge in the bile. 
One case report describes 2 horses that were experimentally in-
fected with Borrelia burgdorferi and experienced anaphylactoid re-
actions (ie, nonimmunologic anaphylaxis) after receiving ceftriax-
one treatment.10 Each horse was supposed to receive 25 mg/kg IV, 
but both infusions were stopped early because of the reaction. Both 
horses had previously received penicillin without any problems. It 
is unclear whether the reactions were due to the drug itself, caused 
by a reaction between the drug and the infection, or due to massive 
die-off of the bacteria. 
The following adverse effects have been reported in humans and 
may or may not apply to veterinary patients: hematologic effects, in-
cluding eosinophilia (6%), thrombocytosis (5%), leukopenia (2%), 
and, more rarely, anemia, neutropenia, lymphopenia, and thrombo-
cytopenia.9 Approximately 2% to 4% of humans get diarrhea. Hy-
persensitivity reactions (usually a rash) have been noted. Increased 
serum concentrations of liver enzymes, BUN, creatinine, and urine 
casts have been described in ≈1% to 3% of patients. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Cephalosporins cross the placenta. Teratogenic effects were not 
demonstrated in studies in pregnant mice and rats that received up 
to 20 times the label doses of ceftriaxone.9 Ceftriaxone is considered 
compatible with human pregnancy.11
Ceftriaxone enters maternal milk in low concentrations.12 Ceftri-
axone is considered compatible with breastfeeding in humans.11
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
All beagles receiving ceftriaxone 300 mg/kg/day IV developed soft 
or mucoid feces and diarrhea; emesis was common.13 As limited in-
formation is available, overdoses should be monitored and treated 

Ceftriaxone      231
supportively based on clinical signs.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions either have been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving ceftriaxone and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
	■Aminoglycosides and other Nephrotoxic Drugs (eg, 
amphotericin B): Concurrent use of parenteral aminoglycosides 
or other nephrotoxic drugs with cephalosporins is somewhat 
controversial. Cephalosporins could cause additive nephrotox-
icity when used with these drugs, but this interaction has only 
been well-documented with cephaloridine (no longer marketed). 
In vitro studies have demonstrated that cephalosporins can have 
synergistic or additive activity against certain bacteria when used 
with aminoglycosides.
	■Calcium Salts, Intravenous (IV): Concomitant use with 
calcium-containing solutions has caused fatal calcium/ceftriax-
one precipitates in lungs and kidneys of neonatal humans. Do 
not mix with calcium or administer calcium-containing solutions 
(eg, lactated Ringers, Hartmann’s solution) or products within 48 
hours of ceftriaxone administration. There have been no reported 
interactions between oral calcium products and ceftriaxone.
Laboratory Considerations
	■Because bacterial sensitivity to third-generation cephalosporin 
antibiotics is unique, when Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion procedures 
are employed for testing susceptibility, a specific ceftriaxone 30 µg 
disk should be used. A cephalosporin-class disk containing ceph-
alothin should not be used to test for ceftriaxone susceptibility.
	■Except for cefotaxime, cephalosporins may cause false-positive 
urine glucose determinations when cupric sulfate solution (Ben-
edict’s solution, Fehling’s solution, Clinitest®) is used. Tests that use 
glucose oxidase (Tes-Tape®, Clinistix®) are not affected by cephalo-
sporins.
	■Ceftriaxone in high concentrations (50 µg/mL or greater) may 
cause falsely elevated serum creatinine levels when manual 
methods of testing are used. Automated methods do not appear 
to be affected.
Dosages
NOTE: In humans, it is recommended that IV infusions be ad-
ministered over 30 minutes (60 minutes in neonates) at concen-
trations between 10 – 40 mg/mL.9 
DOGS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 50 mg/kg IM or SC once or 
twice daily,6 based on a pharmacokinetic study
Borreliosis | Lyme disease | Borrelia burgdorferi infection (ex-
tra-label): 25 mg/kg IV or SC once daily for 14 to 30 days14
Infective endocarditis caused by Streptococcus canis (extra-la-
bel): 20 mg/kg IV twice daily for 2 weeks, followed by long-term 
treatment with oral antibiotics15
CATS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 25 mg/kg IM or SC every 12 
hours7, based on a pharmacokinetic study
Borreliosis | Lyme disease | Borrelia burgdorferi infection (ex-
tra-label): 25 mg/kg IV or SC once daily for 14 to 30 days14
HORSES:
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 25 – 50 mg/kg every 12 
hours IV or IM16
Adjuvant treatment for septic peritonitis (extra-label): 25 mg/kg 
diluted in 250 mL of warmed 0.9% sodium chloride and adminis-
tered intraperitoneally once daily until resolution of clinical signs 
and laboratory parameters.3 Used in combination with parenteral 
antimicrobial therapy (eg, gentamicin) and supportive treatment. 
The study authors recommend reserving intraperitoneal ceftriax-
one for aggressive cases or cases that have failed to respond to 
routine antibiotics.
Monitoring
	■Culture and susceptibility testing as indicated by clinical condi-
tion
	■Because cephalosporins usually have minimal toxicity associat-
ed with their use, monitoring for efficacy is usually all that is re-
quired.
	■With long-term administration, consider periodic monitoring of 
CBC, chemistry panel, and urinalysis.
Client Information
	■This drug must be injected; it does not work when given by mouth.
	■This drug causes pain when administered in the muscle. If the 
drug is given at home to small animals, it usually is administered 
by injecting under the skin (subcutaneously).
Chemistry/Synonyms
A third-generation cephalosporin, ceftriaxone sodium occurs as a 
white to yellowish-orange crystalline powder. It is soluble in water 
(400 mg/mL at 25°C [77°F)). Potencies of commercial products are 
expressed in terms of ceftriaxone. One gram of ceftriaxone sodium 
contains 3.6 mEq of sodium.
Ceftriaxone sodium may also be known as ceftriaxonum na-
tricum, Ro-13-9904, or Ro-13-9904/000; many trade names are 
­available.
Storage/Stability
The sterile powder for reconstitution should be stored between 20°C 
to 25°C (68°F-77°F) and protected from light.
After reconstituting with sterile water, 0.9% sodium chloride, or 
D5W, ceftriaxone solutions (at concentrations of up to 100 mg/mL) 
are stable for 2 days at room temperature and for 10 days when re-
frigerated. Solutions of 250 mg/mL are stable for 24 hours at room 
temperature and 3 days when refrigerated. At concentrations of 
10 – 40 mg/mL, solutions frozen at -20°C (-4°F) are stable for 26 
weeks. Reconstituted solutions do not need to be protected from 
normal light; solution color may darken over time.
Solutions reconstituted with 1% lidocaine to a concentration of 
100 – 350 mg/mL are stable for 24 hours at room temperature and 3 
days when refrigerated.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
When ceftriaxone is used IM in humans, it may be reconstituted 
with lidocaine 1% (10 mg/mL, without epinephrine) to reduce pain 
on administration.
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Ceftriaxone is compatible with dextrose 5% and sodium chloride 
0.9%. The manufacturer does not recommend admixing any other 
anti-infective drugs with ceftriaxone sodium, but amikacin and met-
ronidazole are reported to be compatible.
Do not mix with calcium or calcium-containing solutions (eg, 
lactated Ringer’s) or administer simultaneously (Y-site) with cal-
cium or calcium-containing products (see Drug Interactions) as a 
