796      Marbofloxacin 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Marbofloxacin 
(mar-boe-flox-a-sin)  Zeniquin®
Fluoroquinolone Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Veterinary oral fluoroquinolone antibiotic effective against a 
variety of bacterial pathogens
	
▶Contraindications include hypersensitivity to fluoroquinolo-
nes, cats younger than 12 months, and immature dogs during 
the rapid growth phase.
	
▶May produce erosions of cartilage in weight-bearing joints 
and other signs of arthropathy in immature animals of various 
species
	
▶Use with caution in patients with hepatic or renal insufficien-
cy or dehydration, in those that are prone to seizures, and in 
immature dogs and cats during the rapid growth phase.
	
▶Adverse effects include GI distress; marbofloxacin has not 
been proven to cause ocular toxicity in cats or predispose to 
Streptococcus canis necrotizing fasciitis.
	
▶Many drug interactions
	
▶Prohibited for extra-label use in food animals in the United 
States
Uses/Indications
Marbofloxacin is labeled for treatment of susceptible bacterial in-
fections in dogs and cats. It is recommended that marbofloxacin be 
reserved for cases of bacterial cystitis with documented resistance to 
first-line agents (eg, amoxicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid); however, 
it is a good first-line choice for pyelonephritis or prostatic infections.1 
Fluoroquinolones are considered second-tier drugs for treatment of 
bacterial folliculitis.2 In dogs, marbofloxacin appears to have some 
efficacy for treating the clinical signs associated with canine leish-
maniasis.3 Broad-spectrum antibacterial coverage can be achieved by 
combining marbofloxacin with an antibiotic with gram-positive and 
anaerobic activity (eg, clindamycin, ampicillin/amoxicillin).
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated fluoro-
quinolones as Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobials 
for human medicine.4 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) 
has designated second-generation quinolones as Veterinary Critical-
ly Important Antimicrobial (VCIA) Agents in avian, bovine, equine, 
lagomorph, and swine species.5
Pharmacology/Actions
Marbofloxacin is a third-generation, concentration-dependent, bac-
tericidal fluoroquinolone. It acts by inhibiting bacterial DNA-gyrase 
(type-II topoisomerase), thus preventing DNA supercoiling and 
DNA synthesis, with susceptible bacteria cell death occurring within 
20 to 30 minutes of exposure. Like other fluoroquinolones, marbo-
floxacin has demonstrated a significant postantibiotic effect for both 
gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria and is active in both sta-
tionary and growth phases of bacterial replication. Clinical efficacy 
is associated with achieving a peak marbofloxacin concentration 10 
times greater than bacterial MIC.6,7
Marbofloxacin has a similar spectrum of activity as the other vet-
erinary commercially available fluoroquinolones, although marbo-
floxacin is considered more active against Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
as compared with enrofloxacin.8 Fluoroquinolone agents have good 
activity against many gram-negative bacilli and cocci, including 
most species and strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella spp, 
Escherichia coli, Enterobacter spp, Campylobacter spp, Shigella spp, 
Salmonella spp, Aeromonas spp, Haemophilus spp, Pasteurella spp, 
Proteus spp, Yersinia spp, Serratia spp, and Vibrio spp. Other organ-
isms that are generally susceptible include Brucella spp, Chlamydia 
trachomatis, Staphylococcus spp (including penicillinase-producing 
and methicillin-resistant strains), Mycoplasma spp, and some Myco-
bacterium spp. Bordetella bronchiseptica was susceptible, and a sig-
nificant postantibiotic effect was demonstrated ex vivo.9
Fluoroquinolones have variable activity against most streptococci 
and are not usually recommended to treat these infections. Marbo-
floxacin is ineffective in treating anaerobic infections. Fluoroquino-
lones are ineffective against viral, protozoal, or fungal infections.
Resistance can occur by mutation, particularly with Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter spp, Staphylococcus 
spp, and enterococci, but plasmid-mediated resistance is thought to 
occur only rarely.
Marbofloxacin’s leishmanicidal activity is via the TNF-alpha and 
nitric oxide synthase pathways.3
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, marbofloxacin is rapidly absorbed after oral administration 
and has a bioavailability of 94%.10 Mean peak plasma concentra-
tions in dogs given 2.75 mg/kg or 5.5 mg/kg PO were 2 µg/mL and 
4.2 µg/mL, respectively. Peak concentrations occur in ≈1.5 hours. 
Protein binding is low, and the apparent volume of distribution is 
1.2 to 1.9 L/kg. Marbofloxacin is widely distributed in canine tissues, 
and relatively high concentrations can be found in prostatic fluid. 
Elimination half-life averages 9 to 12 hours.11,12 The drug is eliminat-
ed unchanged in the urine (40%) and bile/feces.11 Only ≈15% of a 
dose is metabolized in the liver. Mild to moderate renal impairment 
does not significantly alter dose requirements in dogs.13
In cats, absorption after oral administration is nearly complete 
and peak serum concentrations occur ≈1 to 2 hours post-adminis-
tration.10,14 Mean peak plasma concentrations in cats given 5.5 mg/kg 
PO were 4.8 µg/mL. Terminal elimination half-life is ≈13 hours, with 
≈70% of a dose excreted in the urine mostly as unchanged drug.
In rabbits, 5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours produced a peak plasma 
concentration of 1.7 µg/mL 24 hours after the first administration 
and 2.6 µg/mL after the tenth daily dose. Elimination half-life was 4 
to 8 hours.15
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Marbofloxacin is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it or 
other fluoroquinolones. Fluoroquinolones may cause cartilage ero-
sions in weight-bearing joints in immature animals; dogs appear to 
be more susceptible to this effect.10 To avoid cartilage damage, mar-
bofloxacin is contraindicated in immature dogs during the rapid 
growth phase (small- and medium-breed dogs up to 8 months of 
age, large breeds to 12 months of age, and giant breeds to 18 months 
of age). It is also contraindicated in cats younger than 12 months. 
Marbofloxacin can (rarely) cause CNS stimulation and should be 
used with caution in patients with seizure disorders. Patients with 
severe renal or hepatic impairment may require dosage adjustments 
(eg, increased dosing interval) to prevent drug accumulation. 
Fluoroquinolones may cause photosensitization, and prolonged 
exposure of bare skin (eg, nose) or thinly haired skin to direct sun-
light should be avoided.10
The FDA has prohibited the extra-label use of this drug in 
food-producing animals.
Adverse Effects
With the exception of potential cartilage abnormalities in young an-
imals (see Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings), the adverse 
effect profile of marbofloxacin is usually limited to GI distress (eg, 
vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea) and decreased activity.
Other fluoroquinolones have, in rare incidences, caused elevated 
hepatic enzymes, ataxia, seizures, depression, lethargy, and nervous-

Marbofloxacin       797
ness in dogs. Hypersensitivity reactions or crystalluria could occur.
Although unlikely to occur, the FDA’s Adverse Drug Reaction da-
tabase has received some reports of blindness associated with mar-
bofloxacin. Unlike enrofloxacin, causal effect of ocular toxicity has 
not yet been proven with marbofloxacin, but higher dosages should 
be used carefully.
Induction of Streptococcus canis necrotizing fasciitis, which can be 
seen with enrofloxacin, does not appear to be a problem with mar-
bofloxacin.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
The safety of marbofloxacin in pregnant or lactating animals or 
those used for breeding purposes has not been demonstrated.10 Flu-
oroquinolones should be used cautiously in pregnant animals due to 
their adverse effects on cartilage.
In cattle, marbofloxacin distributes into milk, attaining milk con-
centration similar to that of plasma.16
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
It is unlikely that an acute overdose of marbofloxacin would result 
in signs more serious than either anorexia or vomiting, but the ad-
verse effects noted previously could occur. Dogs receiving 55 mg/kg 
per day PO for 12 days have developed anorexia, vomiting, dehydra-
tion, tremors, red skin, facial swelling, lethargy, and weight loss.10 All 
large-breed, 3- to 4-month-old puppies given 11 mg/kg/day devel-
oped marked lameness due to articular cartilage lesions. Increased 
salivation, vomiting, and redness of the pinnae occurred in cats giv-
en 27.5 – 55 mg/kg/day.10 Macroscopic and microscopic cartilage 
changes were noted but without accompanying lameness.
Acute bilateral blindness occurred in a dog following an acciden-
tal overdose of 35 mg/kg/day for 3 days.17
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving marbofloxacin or related flu-
oroquinolones and may be of significance in veterinary patients. Un-
less otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, 
but the potential risks should be weighed and additional monitoring 
performed when appropriate.
	■Aluminum-, Calcium-, and Magnesium-Containing Oral 
Products: May bind to marbofloxacin and prevent its absorp-
tion; separate doses of by at least 2 hours.
	■Antibiotics, Other (eg, aminoglycosides, third-generation 
cephalosporins, penicillins—extended-spectrum): Synergism 
may occur but is not predictable against some bacteria (particu-
larly Pseudomonas aeruginosa) with these compounds. Although 
marbofloxacin has minimal activity against anaerobes, in vitro 
synergy has been reported when it was used with clindamycin 
against strains of Peptostreptococcus spp, Lactobacillus spp, and 
Bacteroides fragilis. 
	■Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one): Con-
comitant use with fluoroquinolones may increase the risk for ten-
donitis and tendon rupture.
	■Cyclosporine (systemic): Fluoroquinolones may exacerbate 
the nephrotoxicity and reduce the metabolism of cyclosporine 
when used systemically.
	■Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs, 
eg, flunixin): Flunixin has been shown in dogs to increase the 
AUC and elimination half-life of enrofloxacin, and enrofloxacin 
increases the AUC and elimination half-life of flunixin; it is un-
known if marbofloxacin also causes this effect, if other NSAIDs 
interact with marbofloxacin, or if this interaction applies to other 
species.
	■Iron (oral): May decrease marbofloxacin absorption; doses 
should be separated by at least 2 hours after marbofloxacin.
	■Methotrexate (MTX): May increase MTX concentrations and 
risk for MTX toxicity
	■Nitrofurantoin: May antagonize the antimicrobial activity of 
the fluoroquinolones; concomitant use is not recommended
	■Probenecid: May block tubular secretion of ciprofloxacin; may 
increase the blood concentration and half-life of marbofloxacin
	■QT-Prolonging Agents (eg, cisapride, sotalol, quinidine, 
erythromycin, ondansetron): In humans, fluoroquinolones may 
enhance the QT-prolonging effect of other drugs.
	■Sucralfate: May inhibit absorption of marbofloxacin; adminis-
tration of these drugs should be separated by at least 2 hours after 
marbofloxacin.
	■Theophylline, Aminophylline: Marbofloxacin may increase 
theophylline blood concentrations; this interaction is more likely 
to occur with enrofloxacin than with marbofloxacin.18
	■Urine Acidifiers (eg, ammonium chloride, methionine): 
Low urinary pH could have an inhibitory effect on the activity of 
marbofloxacin.
	■Warfarin: Potential for increased warfarin effects; monitor pro-
thrombin time (PT)
	■Zinc (oral): May decrease marbofloxacin absorption; doses 
should be separated by at least 2 hours after marbofloxacin.
Laboratory Considerations
	■In some humans, fluoroquinolones have caused increases in liver 
enzymes, BUN, and creatinine and decreases in hematocrit. The 
clinical relevance of these mild changes in veterinary medicine is 
not known.
Dosages
DOGS:
Skin and soft tissue infections: 
•	 Label dosage; FDA-approved: 2.75 – 5.5 mg/kg PO once dai-
ly.10 Give for 2 to 3 days beyond cessation of clinical signs to a 
maximum duration of 30 days. 
•	 Extra-label dosage: 5.5 mg/kg PO once daily19 
UTIs:
•	 Label dosage; FDA-approved: 2.75 – 5.5 mg/kg PO once daily 
for at least 10 days to a maximum duration of 30 days. NOTE: 
A shorter treatment duration (ie, 3 to 5 days) is adequate for 
most cases of bacterial cystitis.1
•	 Extra-label dosage for sporadic bacterial cystitis: 2.75 – 5.5 mg/kg 
PO once daily for 3 to 5 days.1 NOTE: When treating Pseudo-
monas spp infections, most clinicians recommend using the 
higher end of the dose range.
Leishmaniasis (extra-label): 2 mg/kg PO once daily for 28 days. 
At the one-year follow-up, marbofloxacin has shown some effica-
cy in 70% of treated dogs. At 3 months, there was a 61% decrease 
in the sum of clinical scores. Though clinically improved, dogs 
remained parasitologically positive.3,20,21
CATS:
Skin and soft tissue infections: 
•	 Label dosage; FDA-approved: 2.75 – 5.5 mg/kg PO once dai-
ly.10 Give for 2 to 3 days beyond cessation of clinical signs to a 
