
--- plumb PDF 39 ---
12      Acetylcysteine
cosis. It is also used as a potential adjunctive treatment to prevent 
enterolith formation in horses by reducing colonic pH.
Pharmacology/Actions
Acetic acid in the rumen lowers pH by shifting ammonia (NH3) to 
ammonium ions (NH4
+) to reduce ammonia absorption; it may also 
slow the hydrolysis of urea.
Pharmacokinetics
No information is noted.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Acetic acid should not be administered to ruminants until lactic aci-
dosis (eg, grain overload, rumen acidosis) is ruled out.
Do NOT use concentrated forms of acetic acid; use only vinegar 
(3%-5% acetic acid).
Adverse Effects
Because of the unpleasant taste and potential for causing mucous 
membrane irritation, it is generally recommended to administer ace-
tic acid via stomach tube.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
When acetic acid is used for appropriate indications, there is little 
likelihood of serious toxicity occurring after minor overdoses. Be-
cause of its potential corrosiveness, the greatest concern is when a 
concentrated form of acetic acid is mistakenly used.
Drug Interactions
There are no documented drug interactions with oral acetic acid. 
Because of its acidic qualities, acetic acid could theoretically affect 
the pharmacokinetics of several drugs, which may have clinical sig-
nificance in veterinary species. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks should be 
weighed and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
	■Aspirin: Acidified urine can decrease the excretion of salicylates.
	■Azole Antifungals (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole): Acetic 
acid may increase absorption of azole antifungal agents.
	■Iron: Acetic acid may increase iron absorption.
	■Phenobarbital: Acidified urine can decrease the excretion of 
phenobarbital.
	■Quinidine: Acidified urine can decrease the excretion of quini-
dine.
Dosages
CATTLE/RUMINANTS:
Urea poisoning/nonprotein nitrogen-induced ammonia tox-
icosis (extra-label): Using 5% acetic acid (ie, vinegar), infuse 
4 – 10 L (for cattle) or 250 mL – 1 L (sheep/goa

--- plumb PDF 71 ---
44      Aluminum Hydroxide
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Altrenogest 0.22% (2.2 mg/mL) in oil solution in 150 mL and 
1000 mL bottles; Regu-Mate®, generic (Rx). FDA-approved for use in 
horses that are not intended for food. This medication is banned in 
racing animals in some countries.
Altrenogest 0.22% (2.2 mg/mL) in 1000 mL bottles; Matrix®, generic; 
(OTC). FDA-approved for use in sexually mature gilts that have had 
at least 1 estrous cycle. Gilts must not be slaughtered for human con-
sumption for 21 days after the last treatment. The FDA prohibits the 
extra-label use of this medication, including to enhance food and/or 
fiber production in animals.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Aluminum Hydroxide
(ah-loo-min-um hye-droks-ide)  Amphojel®
Oral Antacid/Phosphate Binder
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Used to treat hyperphosphatemia in small animals and some-
times as an antacid for gastric ulcers
	
▶Chronic use may lead to electrolyte abnormalities; possible 
aluminum toxicity.
	
▶Many potential drug interactions
	
▶Bulk dried powder available from several sources
Uses/Indications
Orally administered aluminum hydroxide is used to reduce hyper-
phosphatemia in patients with chronic kidney disease when dietary 
phosphorus restriction fails to maintain serum phosphorus concen-
trations in the normal range. Occasionally, it has been used as an oral 
antacid in veterinary patients, although its short duration of action 
for this purpose may make its use less practical. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Aluminum salts reduce the amount of phosphorus absorbed from 
the intestine by physically binding to dietary phosphorus to form 
insoluble aluminum phosphate, which is then excreted in the feces. 
When used as an antacid, the hydroxyl ion interacts with hydrogen 
ions in the stomach to increase gastric/abomasal pH.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Aluminum-containing antacids may inhibit gastric emptying; use 
cautiously in patients with gastric outlet obstruction. Also, us

--- plumb PDF 72 ---
Amantadine      45
is preferred, as it can be mixed with food and is tasteless. Dose 
is divided and mixed with each meal. Start at low end of dosage 
range and adjust upward every 4 to 6 weeks until desired serum 
phosphorus is attained (see Monitoring). If a reduced-phosphorus 
diet and higher dosages of aluminum hydroxide do not adequate-
ly control serum phosphorus, consider adding a lanthanum- or 
calcium-based (eg, calcium acetate, calcium carbonate) phosphate 
binder to reduce the chances for aluminum toxicity.
RABBITS/RODENTS/SMALL MAMMALS: 
Hyperphosphatemia in chinchillas (extra-label): Aluminum hy-
droxide gel: 1 mL/animal (NOT mL/kg) PO as needed
Hyperphosphatemia in Guinea pigs (extra-label): 0.5 – 1 mL per 
animal (NOT mL/kg) PO as needed5
REPTILES: 
Hyperphosphatemia (extra-label): 100 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 
hours6
CATTLE:
Antacid (extra-label): 15 – 60 mg/kg PO every 8 – 24 hours.7 Ef-
ficacy in adult cattle is questionable since the drug becomes dilut-
ed in the rumen and may not provide therapeutic benefit in the 
abomasum.
Abomasal ulcers in calves using a combination of aluminum 
hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide (extra-label): 25 mL (each 
mL contains aluminum hydroxide 0.1 g/mL and magnesium hy-
droxide 0.09 g/mL) PO every 8 hours.8 NOTE: this study was done 
in healthy calves; based on the results from this study, this dose is 
expected to be beneficial for ill calves with abomasal ulcers. 
HORSES:
Adjunctive gastroduodenal ulcer therapy in foals (extra-label): 
Aluminum/magnesium hydroxide suspension: 15 mL (total dose) 
4 times a day9
Monitoring
	■After beginning therapy, check serum phosphorus (after a 12-
hour fast) every 4 to 6 weeks until target phosphorous levels are 
attained. Once phosphorous levels are stable, check phosphorous 
levels at the time of renal chemistry rechecks (eg, every 12 weeks). 
For chronic kidney disease (CKD), the International Renal Inter-
est Society (IRIS) recommends a target phosphorous range for 
dogs and cats at each stage:
•	 Stage 2 CKD target phosphorous levels: greater than 2.7 and 
less than 4.6 mg

--- plumb PDF 97 ---
70      Amoxicillin/Clavulanate
a) 125 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. Mix oral solution to double 
strength to a final concentration of 125 mg/mL21  
b) 100 mg/kg IM, SC, PO every 8 hours22 
FERRETS: 
Helicobacter spp gastritis infections using triple therapy (extra- 
label): 
a)	Amoxicillin 20 mg/kg PO every 12 hours, with metronida-
zole 20 mg/kg PO every 12 hours and bismuth subsalicylate 
17.5 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for 21 days. Sucralfate 25 mg/kg 
PO every 8 hours and famotidine 0.5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours 
may also be used. Fluids and assisted feeding should be contin-
ued while the primary cause of disease is investigated.23 
b)	Amoxicillin 10 mg/kg, metronidazole 20 mg/kg, and bismuth 
subsalicylate 17.5 mg/kg, all given PO 3 times daily for 3 to 4 
weeks24
c)	Amoxicillin 30 mg/kg, metronidazole 20 mg/kg, and bismuth 
subsalicylate 17.5 mg/kg, all given PO 3 times daily for 3 to 4 
weeks25
RABBITS/RODENTS/SMALL MAMMALS:
See Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings.
Hedgehogs (extra-label): 15 mg/kg IM, SC, or PO every 12 hours26 
REPTILES:
Susceptible infections for all species (extra-label): 22 mg/kg PO 
every 12 to 24 hours; not useful unless used in combination with 
aminoglycosides.27
Monitoring
	■Efficacy: resolution of clinical signs
	■Culture and susceptibility as indicated for clinical condition being 
treated
	■Urine culture may be considered after 5 to 7 days when treating 
bacterial cystitis for longer periods of time.14  It is important to 
note that positive cultures taken at this time should prompt ques-
tioning the owner about compliance and further investigation as 
to why the infection has not been eliminated (eg, underlying path- 
ology [eg, cystic calculi, neoplasia]); a positive culture at this time 
should not simply prompt a change in antibiotic choice. A nega-
tive culture during this time frame does not necessarily guarantee 
resolution of the infection.
Client Information
	■It is preferred that the oral suspension be refrigerated but this is 
not absolutely necessary. Any unused oral suspension should be 
discarded after 14 days.
	■This m

--- plumb PDF 109 ---
82      Ampicillin/Sulbactam 
Ampicillin/Sulbactam 
(am-pi-sill-in; sul-bak-tam)  Unasyn®
Potentiated Aminopenicillin
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Parenteral potentiated aminopenicillin that may be used to 
treat infections for which amoxicillin/clavulanate would be 
appropriate, but an injectable antibiotic is required
	
▶May be used for surgical prophylaxis 
	
▶Hypersensitivity reactions possible; contraindicated in patients 
with documented severe hypersensitivity to penicillins
	
▶Usually administered SC, IM, or IV every 6 to 8 hours
Uses/Indications
The addition of sulbactam to ampicillin broadens ampicillin’s spec-
trum through inhibition of some beta-lactamases. 
Ampicillin/sulbactam may be indicated when parenteral therapy 
is required for the treatment of aerobic or anaerobic gram-positive 
and gram-negative infections. In dogs and cats, ampicillin/sulbac-
tam may be considered when oral amoxicillin/clavulanate is not 
viable (eg, patient NPO, in cases of critical illness [eg, sepsis, pneu-
monia, other severe infections]), or for surgical prophylaxis. For 
broad-spectrum uses, ampicillin/sulbactam is often combined with 
another drug such as a fluoroquinolone or aminoglycoside to pro-
vide enhanced gram-negative coverage.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated ampicil-
lin/sulbactam as a Critically Important, High Priority antimicrobial 
in human medicine.1 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) 
has designated ampicillin/sulbactam as Veterinary Critically Im-
portant Antimicrobial (VCIA) Agents in avian, bovine, and swine 
species.2
Pharmacology/Actions
Ampicillin is a time-dependent bactericidal agent that acts via in-
hibition of cell wall synthesis. Penicillins are bactericidal against 
susceptible bacteria and act by inhibition of mucopeptide synthesis 
in the cell wall, which results in a defective barrier and an osmoti-
cally unstable spheroplast. The exact mechanism for this effect has 
not been definitively determined, but beta-lactam antibiotics have 
been shown to bind to several enzymes in the bacterial cytoplasmic 
membrane th

--- plumb PDF 157 ---
130      Bethanechol
Intra-articular administration (extra-label): Most dosage rec-
ommendations range from 3 – 18 mg/joint (NOT mg/kg) in-
tra-articularly. Repeat doses should be limited to the minimum 
required to achieve soundness.
Monitoring
Monitoring of glucocorticoid therapy is dependent on its reason for 
use, dosage, agent used, dosage schedule (daily versus alternate day 
therapy), route of administration, duration of therapy, and the ani-
mal’s age and condition. The following list may not be appropriate 
or complete for all animals; use clinical assessment and judgment 
should adverse effects be noted:
	■Body weight, appetite, GI signs (eg, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea)
	■Signs of edema
	■Serum electrolytes
	■Total plasma protein, albumin
	■Blood glucose
	■Growth and development in young animals
	■Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test, if con-
cerned about iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism
Client Information
	■Carefully follow the instructions for how to give this medicine to 
your animal. Do not suddenly stop giving this medicine without 
talking to your veterinarian.
	■Do not give other medications (including over-the-counter 
[OTC] medication) or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID) 
medications while your pet is on this medication without talking 
to your veterinarian first.
	■There are many potential side effects that can be seen with these 
drugs, including increased or decreased appetite, vomiting, ab-
normal stool, and increased thirst and urination. Contact your 
veterinarian if these effects become severe or worsen.
	■While your animal is taking this medication, it is important to 
return to your veterinarian for periodic examinations and blood 
work. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A synthetic glucocorticoid, betamethasone has been manufactured 
as the base and as the dipropionate, acetate, and sodium phosphate 
salts. The base is used for oral dosage forms. The sodium phosphate 
and acetate salts are used in injectable preparations. The dipropio-
nate salt is used in topical formulations.
Beta

--- plumb PDF 177 ---
150      Buprenorphine
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Bupivacaine Liposome Injectable Suspension 1.3% (13.3 mg/mL) in 
10 mL and 20 mL single-use vials; Exparel®; (Rx)6
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Buprenorphine
(byoo-pre-nor-feen)  Buprenex®, Simbadol®, Zorbium®
Opioid Partial Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Partial mu-opioid agonist used primarily as an injectable and 
buccal (ie, oral transmucosal [OTM]) analgesic, especially in 
cats
	
▶Often used as a component of short-term immobilization and 
anesthetic drug combinations 
	
▶Buccal/OTM administration is well tolerated and can be effec-
tive, but bioavailability is low by this route, as is standard  
(0.3 mg/mL) buprenorphine administered SC.
	
▶Longer onset of action and longer duration of action as com-
pared with most other opioids
	
▶Rarely, may cause respiratory depression
	
▶Because of tight buprenorphine receptor binding, standard 
doses of naloxone may not completely reverse drug effects.
	
▶DEA Schedule III (C-III) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Buprenorphine is most often used as an analgesic for mild to mod-
erate pain or in preanesthetic drug combinations in small animals. 
In most species, buprenorphine provides less analgesia than pure 
mu-opioid agonists (eg, morphine, hydromorphone) and it is less se-
dating than most other opioids (particularly butorphanol). For acute 
pain control, buprenorphine may have the disadvantage of a longer 
onset of action than other opioids.
In dogs, an isoflurane MAC-sparing effect occurs at IV dosages of 
0.01 mg/kg, 0.05 mg/kg, and 0.1 mg/kg1 but methadone (0.3 mg/kg) 
provided more effective presurgical analgesia than buprenorphine 
(0.02 mg/kg) in dogs sedated with acepromazine and medetomi-
dine prior to undergoing ovariohysterectomy (OHE).2 Use of the 
feline-labeled Simbadol® (0.02 mg/kg IM) prior to surgery in dogs 
(pretreated with acepromazine and carprofen and undergoing ovari-
ohysterectomy) provided similar postoperative analgesia as standard 
buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg IM) but more dogs in the standar

--- plumb PDF 212 ---
Carbimazole      185
ly1,10 (≈10%), are often transient, and can typically be managed with a 
dosage reduction.11 Eosinophilia, leukopenia, and/or lymphocytosis 
may be noted in ≈5% of cats12; these hematologic effects are usually 
also transient and generally do not require drug withdrawal unless 
the blood dyscrasia is persistent or severe.1 
Methimazole and carbimazole may also rarely cause self-induced 
excoriations and hepatopathy, and potentially trigger immune-me-
diated hemolytic anemia and immune-mediated thrombocytopenia 
in cats1,9,13-15; these more serious effects generally require withdrawal 
of the drug. In one study, increased antinuclear antibodies (ANA) 
were noted in ≈22% of all cats receiving methimazole, and in ≈50% 
of cats receiving methimazole for greater than 6 months, but none 
of the cats had signs of a lupus-like syndrome.9 The occurrence of 
ANA is dose dependent,16 and although elevated ANA have histor-
ically been viewed as an indication for dose reduction, this may not 
be necessary in the absence of clinical signs or other indications of 
autoimmune disease.9 Rarely, cats treated with methimazole or car-
bimazole have developed acquired myasthenia gravis that requires 
drug withdrawal.17,18 One case report indicated that a cat developed 
hypersensitivity vasculitis after receiving carbimazole.19
Potentially, treatment with methimazole or carbimazole could 
unmask underlying renal dysfunction in some cats.20 The hyperthy-
roid state may increase GFR and, by treating the hyperthyroidism, 
this effect is abolished.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Carbimazole has been associated with teratogenic and embryotoxic 
effects in rats.1 Do not use carbimazole in pregnant animals as it may 
also affect offspring thyroid development or function. 
Methimazole enters milk and reaches concentrations higher than 
those found in maternal serum.1 If treatment with carbimazole is 
necessary for nursing queens, switch to milk replacer for nursing 
animals.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 	
Acute toxicity that may be seen with overdoses includes those effects 
liste

--- plumb PDF 257 ---
230      Ceftriaxone
Ceftriaxone
(sef-try-ax-ohn)  Rocephin®
Third-Generation Cephalosporin 
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Injectable antibiotic used to treat serious bacterial infections 
	
▶Achieves therapeutic concentrations in CNS; long half-life
	
▶Adverse effects include hypersensitivity reactions and injec-
tion site reactions (eg, skin tightness, induration).
	
▶Administer ceftriaxone IV over 30 minutes (or longer). Pain on 
IM injection is reduced when reconstituted with lidocaine.
	
▶In the United States, extra-label drug use of cephalospo-
rins is restricted in food-producing animals.
Uses/Indications
Ceftriaxone is used to treat serious infections (particularly against 
susceptible Enterobacteriaceae) that are not susceptible to other 
agents or when aminoglycosides are not indicated because of their 
potential toxicity. Its long half-life, good CNS penetration, and ac-
tivity against Borrelia burgdorferi have also made ceftriaxone a po-
tential choice for treating Lyme borreliosis and other infections in 
animals. Although ceftriaxone has been reported for the treatment 
of uncomplicated lower UTI,1 its use is not recommended for this 
purpose.2 In dogs, ceftriaxone’s lower protein binding and shorter 
half-life (when compared with humans) give it no advantage over the 
other parenteral third-generation cephalosporins. In horses, intra-
peritoneal ceftriaxone successfully treated cases of septic peritonitis.3
The World Health Organization (WHO) classifies third-gen-
eration cephalosporins as Critically Important, Highest Priority 
antimicrobials for human medicine.4 The Office International des 
Epizooties (OIE) has designated third-generation cephalosporins 
as Veterinary Critically Important Antimicrobial (VCIA) agents in 
avian, bovine, ovine, and swine species.5
Pharmacology/Actions 	
Ceftriaxone is a third-generation injectable cephalosporin agent that 
is bactericidal and displays time-dependent killing. Third-genera-
tion cephalosporins retain the gram-positive activity of the first- and 
second-generation agents, but have much expanded gram-negativ

--- plumb PDF 270 ---
Chlorambucil      243
potassium chloride 35 mg/mL gel/paste in 80 mL and 300 mL; D-Tox-
Besc®, Activated Charcoal Gel with Electrolytes®; (OTC). Labeled for 
use in small and large animal species
Activated hardwood charcoal and thermally activated attapulgite 
clay (concentrations not labeled) in an aqueous gel suspension in 8 fl 
oz bottle, 60 mL tube, and 300 mL tube with easy dose syringe; UAA® 
(Universal Animal Antidote) Gel; (OTC). Labeled for use in dogs and 
cats and for grain overload in ruminants
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Activated charcoal oral powder: 15 g, 30 g, 40 g, 120 g, 240 g, and UD 
30 g; generic; (OTC)
Activated charcoal oral liquid/suspension with sorbitol: 25 g in 
120 mL and 50 g in 240 mL; Actidose® with Sorbitol, generic; (OTC)
Activated charcoal liquid/suspension without sorbitol: 208 mg/mL 
to 12.5 g in 60 mL, 15 g in 72 mL, 25 g in 120 mL, and 50 g in 240 
mL; Actidose-Aqua®, generic; (OTC)
Activated charcoal oral granules: 25 g; EZ Char®; (OTC)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Chlorambucil
(klor-am-byoo-sil)  Leukeran®
Antineoplastic, Immunosuppressant 
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Nitrogen mustard derivative antineoplastic and immunosup-
pressant in dogs, cats, and horses
	
▶Caution: Pre-existing bone marrow depression or infection
	
▶Adverse effects: Primarily myelosuppression and GI toxicity
	
▶Known teratogen; National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health (NIOSH) hazardous drug; use appropriate precau-
tions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Chlorambucil may be useful as part of multidrug protocols in a va-
riety of neoplastic diseases, including lymphocytic leukemia, T-cell 
lymphoma,1 GI lymphoma,2,3 multiple myeloma, lymphangiosarco-
ma,4 mast cell tumor,5 cutaneous plasmacytosis, polycythemia vera, 
macroglobulinemia, and ovarian adenocarcinoma. Chlorambucil 
may also be used as a solo metronomic agent for some neoplasias 
(eg, hemangiosarcoma, transitional cell carcinoma).6,7 It may also be 
useful as adjunctive therapy for some immune-mediated conditions 
(eg, inflammatory bowel d

--- plumb PDF 309 ---
282      Clindamycin 
	■Dinoprost: Clenbuterol may antagonize the effects of dinoprost 
(prostaglandin F2 alpha).23
	■Oxytocin: Clenbuterol may antagonize the effects of oxyto-
cin.23,31
	■Sympathomimetic Amines, Other (eg, albuterol, phenyl-
propanolamine): Concomitant administration with other sym-
pathomimetic amines may enhance the adverse effects of clen-
buterol.
	■Theophylline/Aminophylline: May enhance the adverse ef-
fects (eg, tachycardia, CNS stimulation) of clenbuterol
	■Tricyclic antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline, clomip-
ramine): May potentiate the vascular effects of clenbuterol
	■Xylazine: Clenbuterol may antagonize the uterine contractility 
effects of xylazine32; this effect likely applies to other alpha-2 ag-
onists.
Dosages
HORSES: 
Management of airway obstruction (label dosage; FDA-ap-
proved): Initially, 0.8 μg/kg PO twice daily for 3 days; if no im-
provement, dose can be increased to 1.6 μg/kg twice daily for 3 
days; if no improvement, dose can be increased to 2.4 μg/kg twice 
daily for 3 days; if no improvement, dose can be increased to 
3.2 μg/kg twice daily for 3 days; if no improvement, therapy should 
be discontinued. Recommended duration of therapy is 30 days, 
then it should be withdrawn and therapy should be reevaluated. 
If signs return, the above stepwise dosage schedule can be reiniti-
ated.1 NOTE: One study of horses with SEA noted increased air-
way reactivity and reduced bronchodilatory effects after 21 days 
of administration of clenbuterol. Use clenbuterol no longer than 
is needed for clinical benefit.6 
Adjunctive treatment for dystocia emergencies (extra-label): 
300 μg/500 kg (1102 lb) mare IV slowly (NOTE: Parenteral for-
mulation not available commercially in the United States). The 
drug’s fast onset of action when given IV allows the veterinarian 
to decide quickly if uterine relaxation will correct the problem. 
Clenbuterol is particularly useful when repelling the equine fe-
tus to allow manipulation of the head and limbs. May be used in 
combination with sedatives, analgesics, and tranquilizers. Xyla-
zine or d

--- plumb PDF 349 ---
322      Cyclosporine (Systemic)
Cyclosporine (Systemic)
Ciclosporin, Cyclosporine A
(sye-kloe-spor-een)  Atopica®, Cyclavance®, Neoral®, 
­Sandimmune®
Immunosuppressive
See also Cyclosporine Ophthalmic
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶FDA-approved products are available for dogs to control 
­atopic dermatitis and for cats to control allergic dermatitis. 
	
▶Often used extra-label for treatment of immune-mediated 
disorders in dogs and cats, and to prevent rejection of kidney 
transplants in cats
	
▶GI adverse effects (eg, vomiting, soft stools) are common at 
the start of treatment but typically resolve within a few weeks.
	
▶Use of microemulsion or “modified” formulations is highly rec-
ommended. If using human-labeled products, Sandimmune® 
is not bioequivalent to, and must not be interchanged with, 
Atopica®, Cyclavance®, Neoral®, or Gengraf®. 
	
▶Counseling pet owners to ensure knowledge of the dispens-
ing system is important when using solutions FDA-approved 
for animals. 
	
▶For indications other than atopic dermatitis, consider ther-
apeutic drug monitoring (pharmacokinetic and pharma-
codynamic) to assess efficacy and minimize adverse effect 
­potential.
	
▶Many potential drug interactions
	
▶The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies cyclosporine as a hazardous drug; personal 
protective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to 
minimize the risk for exposure.
Uses/Indications
Cyclosporine is FDA-approved for use in dogs for the control of 
atopic dermatitis. In cats, it is FDA-approved for the control of feline 
allergic dermatitis as manifested by excoriations (including facial 
and neck), miliary dermatitis, eosinophilic plaques, and self-induced 
alopecia. Therapeutic effect for atopic dermatitis may not be seen 
in the first few weeks of treatment, and the drug is unsuitable for 
acute flares of atopic dermatitis.1 Concurrent treatment with corti-
costeroids1,2 or oclacitinib3 can be considered during this interval to 
control pruritus. 
In dogs, extra-label indications include perianal fistulas (anal fu-
runculosis)

--- plumb PDF 409 ---
382      Diazoxide
	■Respiratory system: respiratory rate, ETCO2, and SpO2—mild re-
spiratory depression can occur, with a more moderate impact if 
other respiratory depressants (eg, opioids) are administered.
	■Horses should be observed carefully for ataxia. 
	■Clinical response to treatment
Client Information 
	■This medicine may cause sedation and/or disorientation, which 
may impair the performance of working animals.
	■When using this medicine for thunderstorm phobias or other 
triggers (eg, separation anxiety), give the medicine to your animal 
about an hour before the event or trigger.
	■This medicine may be given with or without food. If your animal 
vomits or acts sick after receiving the medication on an empty 
stomach, give the medicine with food or small treats. Contact 
your veterinarian if vomiting continues.
	■Contact your veterinarian immediately if your animal develops 
yellowing of the skin, gums, or whites of the eyes (jaundice).
	■Sleepiness is the most common side effect. This medicine can 
change your animal’s behavior (eg, hyperactivity, anxiety) in un-
expected ways.
	■This medicine may increase your animal’s appetite, especially in 
cats.
	■Contact your veterinarian immediately if your animal stops eat-
ing or seems depressed.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Diazepam, a benzodiazepine, is a white-to-yellow, practically 
odorless, crystalline powder with a melting point between 131°C 
(267.8°F) and 135°C (275°F) and pKa of 3.4. Diazepam is tasteless 
initially but develops a bitter aftertaste. One gram of diazepam is sol-
uble in 333 mL of water or 25 mL of alcohol and is sparingly soluble 
in propylene glycol. The pH of the commercially prepared injectable 
solution is 6.2 to 6.9. It consists of a 5 mg/mL solution with 40% pro-
pylene glycol, 10% ethanol, 5% sodium benzoate/benzoic acid buffer, 
and 1.5% benzyl alcohol as a preservative.
Diazepam may also be known as diazepamum, LA-III, NSC-
77518, or Ro-5-2807; many trade names are available. 
Storage/Stability 
Store all diazepam products at room temperature (15°C to 30°C 
[59°F-86°F]). Keep the inje

--- plumb PDF 440 ---
Dipyrone      413
	■CNS Depressant Drugs (eg, anesthetic agents, barbiturates, 
cannabidiol): Concurrent use may cause increased CNS or re-
spiratory depression when used with opioid antidiarrheal agents.
	■Digoxin: Concurrent use may result in increased serum digoxin 
concentrations.
	■Laxatives (eg, oral magnesium salts, polyethylene glycol 
3350): Concurrent use may decrease efficacy of diphenoxylate. 
	■Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, 
linezolid, methylene blue, selegiline): Opioid antidiarrheal 
agents are contraindicated in human patients receiving systemic 
MAOIs for at least 14 days after receiving MAOIs because of an 
increased risk of a hypertensive crisis.  
	■Opioids (eg, buprenorphine, morphine, tramadol): Therapeu-
tic duplication. Concurrent use may increase risk of CNS or respi-
ratory depression and have additive anticholinergic effects.
	■Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine, chlorpromazine): Con-
current use may increase risk of CNS depression and have addi-
tive anticholinergic effects.
	■Potassium Salts, Oral: Reduced GI motility may increase the 
risk for GI irritation and ulceration caused by potassium salts. The 
use of solid oral forms of potassium concurrently with drugs that 
decrease GI motility is contraindicated in humans; consider use 
of liquid/gel potassium formulations.  
	■Prokinetic Agents (eg, cisapride, erythromycin, metoclopr-
amide): Concurrent use may result in decreased efficacy of both 
agents.
	■Tricyclic Antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline, clomip-
ramine): Concurrent use may increase risk of CNS depression 
and have additive anticholinergic effects.
Laboratory Considerations 
	■Opioids may increase biliary tract pressure, resulting in increased 
plasma amylase and lipase values up to 24 hours following their 
administration. 
Dosages
DOGS:
Antidiarrheal agent (extra-label): Dosage is based on the diphe-
noxylate component: 
a)	 0.05 – 0.1 mg/kg PO 3 to 4 times daily 7–9
b)	 0.1 – 0.2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 
Antitussive agent (extra-label): 0.2 – 0.5 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 
hours2  
CATS:
Antidiarrheal age

--- plumb PDF 477 ---
450      Enrofloxacin
target anti-Xa peak range of 0.5 to 1 IU/mL, extrapolated from hu-
man literature, has been suggested for use in dogs and cats. The sug-
gested thromboprophylactic range for horses is 0.1 – 0.2 IU/mL.15
NOTE: To measure peak anti-Xa activity, sample at 2 hours post-
dose for cats, 3 hours postdose for dogs, and 3 to 4 hours postdose 
for horses.16 If an anti-Xa assay is not available, consider activated 
clotting time, aPTT, thrombin generation, or viscoelastic tests to 
monitor anticoagulant treatment.1,17
Client Information 
	■This medicine must be injected subcutaneously (under the skin). 
Be sure you understand how to correctly give the injections. Sev-
eral injections a day may be required, and treatment can be very 
expensive. Administration of the injections may be painful for 
your animal.
	■Bleeding is not likely, but if it does occur, contact your veterinar-
ian immediately.
	■If your animal is very listless (lacking energy), appears to be hav-
ing trouble breathing, trouble walking, or loses the use of its rear 
legs, contact your veterinarian immediately, as it may mean blood 
clots have formed.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), enoxaparin sodium is 
obtained by alkaline depolymerization of heparin derived from pork 
intestinal mucosa. The average molecular weight is ≈4500 and rang-
es from 3500 to 5500 (heparin sodium has a molecular weight of 
≈12,000); 1 mg of enoxaparin is equivalent to 100 units of anti-factor 
Xa.
Enoxaparin sodium may also be known as Enoxaparinum natri-
cum, PK-10169, RP-54563, Clexane®, Decipar®, Klexane®, Lovenox®, 
Plaucina®, and Trombenox®.
Storage/Stability 
The commercially available injection should be stored at room 
temperature (25°C [77°F]); excursions permitted to 15°C to 30°C 
(59°F-86°F).
One study showed that diluting the 100 mg/mL commercially 
available solution with sterile water to 20 mg/mL resulted in a prod-
uct that was stable for 4 weeks when stored in a glass vial or in plastic 
syringes at room temperature or refrigerated.18
Compatibility/Compounding Consider

--- plumb PDF 773 ---
746      Levetiracetam
Levetiracetam
(lee-ve-tye-ra-see-tam)  Keppra®
Anticonvulsant
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Levetiracetam is a broad-spectrum anticonvulsant that can be 
used as adjunct therapy for canine epilepsy or when pheno-
barbital or bromides are not tolerated. Dogs may become 
refractory to therapy over time.
	
▶In cats, levetiracetam may be used as a second-line drug when 
phenobarbital alone does not control seizures but can also be 
tried as sole therapy when phenobarbital is not tolerated.
	
▶Appears to be well tolerated; adverse effects may be transient 
and can include sedation in dogs, and lethargy, decreased 
appetite, and ataxia in cats
	
▶In dogs, phenobarbital may cause significant drug interactions 
with levetiracetam.
	
▶Owner compliance with dosing frequency (every 8 hours) of 
immediate-release tablets and oral solution may be problem-
atic.
	
▶Do not confuse immediate-release and extended-release tab-
lets; use caution when prescribing and dispensing.
Uses/Indications
Levetiracetam can be useful as adjunct therapy to phenobarbital and 
bromides in patients with canine epilepsy. Convincing evidence for 
efficacy of levetiracetam monotherapy is lacking.1–3 Levetiracetam 
has been shown to be useful in the treatment of status epilepticus and 
acute repetitive seizures (ie, cluster seizures) in dogs.4 It has been used 
at home for oral pulse therapy to abort seizure activity,5 and SC admin-
istration at home may be useful in dogs that develop status epilepticus 
or acute repetitive seizures that do not always respond sufficiently to 
benzodiazepine (via rectal and/or intranasal administration).4 A small 
open-label study found that the addition of rectal levetiracetam to 
standard treatment (rectal/IV diazepam and IV phenobarbital) sig-
nificantly increased response rate for dogs with cluster seizures com-
pared to the standard treatment alone.6 In addition, in a study, IV le-
vetiracetam was used successfully to treat refractory seizures in a dog 
that ingested a lethal dose of fluorouracil (5-FU).7 In one case report, 
levetiracetam was suc

--- plumb PDF 823 ---
796      Marbofloxacin 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Marbofloxacin 
(mar-boe-flox-a-sin)  Zeniquin®
Fluoroquinolone Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Veterinary oral fluoroquinolone antibiotic effective against a 
variety of bacterial pathogens
	
▶Contraindications include hypersensitivity to fluoroquinolo-
nes, cats younger than 12 months, and immature dogs during 
the rapid growth phase.
	
▶May produce erosions of cartilage in weight-bearing joints 
and other signs of arthropathy in immature animals of various 
species
	
▶Use with caution in patients with hepatic or renal insufficien-
cy or dehydration, in those that are prone to seizures, and in 
immature dogs and cats during the rapid growth phase.
	
▶Adverse effects include GI distress; marbofloxacin has not 
been proven to cause ocular toxicity in cats or predispose to 
Streptococcus canis necrotizing fasciitis.
	
▶Many drug interactions
	
▶Prohibited for extra-label use in food animals in the United 
States
Uses/Indications
Marbofloxacin is labeled for treatment of susceptible bacterial in-
fections in dogs and cats. It is recommended that marbofloxacin be 
reserved for cases of bacterial cystitis with documented resistance to 
first-line agents (eg, amoxicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid); however, 
it is a good first-line choice for pyelonephritis or prostatic infections.1 
Fluoroquinolones are considered second-tier drugs for treatment of 
bacterial folliculitis.2 In dogs, marbofloxacin appears to have some 
efficacy for treating the clinical signs associated with canine leish-
maniasis.3 Broad-spectrum antibacterial coverage can be achieved by 
combining marbofloxacin with an antibiotic with gram-positive and 
anaerobic activity (eg, clindamycin, ampicillin/amoxicillin).
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated fluoro-
quinolones as Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobials 
for human medicine.4 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) 
has designated second-generation quinolones as Veterinary Critical-
ly Important Antimicro

--- plumb PDF 852 ---
Meloxicam      825
selected joining date.15 Follow label instructions for breed-based 
time of year to administer and guidance on separating ewes and 
rams.
GOATS:
Stimulate testosterone secretion in bucks during nonbreed-
ing season (extra-label): Following 2.5 months of long days, two 
18 mg implants (36 mg total dose) administered SC near the base 
of ears resulted in higher peak testosterone concentrations, which 
occurred 2 months earlier than in the control group.29
FERRETS:
Adjunctive treatment of adrenal disease to help control clinical 
signs (extra-label): 
a)	 Oral formulations: Anecdotally, 0.5 – 1 mg/ferret (NOT 
mg/kg) PO once daily 7 to 9 hours after sunrise17,30
b)	 Implant dosages: 2.7 mg/ferret (NOT mg/kg [under 600 g 
body weight]) or 5.4 mg/ferret (NOT mg/kg [over 600 g body 
weight]) SC every 3 to 4 months
MINK:
Accelerate fur priming cycle (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
2.7 mg/mink (NOT mg/kg) implanted SC21
Monitoring
	■Clinical efficacy (eg, depending on indication: hair regrowth, es-
trus suppression, improvement in sleep/unwanted behaviors)
	■Adverse effects (eg, sedation, lethargy, weight gain, sterile ab-
scesses [implants only])
Client Information
	■For treatment of hair loss, efficacy of melatonin varies. A 4-month 
trial is necessary to see if the treatment is beneficial.
	■The oral medicine may be given with or without food.
	■This medicine is usually well tolerated; sleepiness may occur.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Melatonin is a naturally occurring hormone produced in the pine-
al gland. It occurs as a white to pale yellow, crystalline solid that is 
slightly soluble in water and has a molecular weight of 232. It can be 
derived from natural sources or by synthetic means.
Melatonin may also be known as n-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine, 
MEL, MLT, or pineal hormone.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, store at room temperature in tight con-
tainers.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Melatonin implant 2.7 mg; PrimeX®; (OTC). FDA-approved for use 
in mink. NADA# 140-846. Although this product is still listed in 


--- plumb PDF 869 ---
842      Methadone
curs as white to off-white crystals that are slightly soluble in alcohol 
and freely soluble in water. It is a weak base—a 1% aqueous solution 
of metformin HCl has a pKa of 6.68, and a metformin base has a pKa 
of 12.4.
Metformin HCl may also be known as dimethylbiguanide HCl 
or metforimini hydrochloridium. There are many proprietary names 
outside of the United States for this drug.
Storage/Stability
Store metformin HCl oral products (tablets, sustained-release tab-
lets) protected from light at a controlled room temperature of 
20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F). Excursions permitted to 15°C to 30°C 
(59°F-86°F). 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Metformin HCl Oral Tablets: 500 mg, 850 mg, and 1000 mg; Gluco-
phage®, generic; (Rx)
Metformin HCl Extended-Release Oral Tablets: 500 mg, 750 mg, and 
1000 mg; Glucophage XR®, Glumetza®, Fortamet®, generic; (Rx)
Metformin HCl Oral Solution: 500 mg/5 mL (100 mg/mL) in 
118 mL and 473 mL; Riomet®; (Rx)
There are also fixed-dose oral tablet combination products available 
containing metformin and glyburide or glipizide.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Methadone
(meth-a-done)  Dolophine®, Methadose®
Opioid Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Opioid mu-receptor agonist with NMDA blocking properties 
used in dogs, cats, and horses
	
▶Can be used for sedation, as premedication before anesthesia, 
and for analgesia 
	
▶Adverse effects include panting, vomiting, vocalization, defe-
cation postinjection, bradycardia, and respiratory depression.
	
▶Many possible drug interactions
	
▶DEA Schedule II (C-II) controlled substance in the United States
	
▶Effects can be reversed with naloxone.
Uses/Indications
Methadone may be used as an opioid sedative, preanesthetic, or an-
algesic agent. Methadone use as a premedication reduces MAC re-
quirements.1 Methadone has demonstrated an analgesic effect after 
epidural use in horses.2 Poor bioavailability pr

--- plumb PDF 947 ---
920      Mycophenolate
Mycophenolate
Mycophenolate Mofetil (MMF)
(mye-koe-fen-oh-late)  Cellcept®
Immunosuppressant
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Immunosuppressive drug that may be useful for treating dogs 
with IMHA, IMTP, glomerulonephritis, myasthenia gravis, or 
meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown etiology in dogs; po-
tentially useful in cats, but there is little information available 
on safety or efficacy.
	
▶Limited experience in veterinary medicine, especially in cats or 
with long-term use
	
▶Adverse effects include GI signs (eg, diarrhea, vomiting, an-
orexia) most commonly are dose-limiting and can be severe.
	
▶Can be administered PO or IV. Compounding into appropriate 
oral dosage forms may be needed.
	
▶Teratogenic in humans
	
▶The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies mycophenolate as a hazardous drug; use 
appropriate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Although clinical experience using mycophenolate in veterinary 
medicine has been limited and no large well-controlled studies were 
located, mycophenolate appears useful in the treatment of a variety 
of autoimmune diseases, including immune-mediated hemolytic 
anemia (IMHA),1-4 immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMTP),5,6 
myasthenia gravis,7,8 meningoencephalomyelitis,9,10 glomerulo-
nephritis,11 and pemphigus foliaceous.12 Mycophenolate has been 
suggested for use in treating inflammatory bowel disease in dogs; 
however, the drug’s primary adverse effects in dogs are gastritis, di-
arrhea, and intestinal inflammation. Mycophenolate is also used in 
anti-rejection protocols for organ transplants in animals. Mycophe-
nolate is often used as part of a combination immunosuppressive 
therapy protocol in a patient, although it has also been used alone as 
monotherapy. The drug was ineffective for the treatment of sudden 
acquired retinal degeneration syndrome (SARDS) in dogs.13
In humans, although this drug is used off-label for a variety of au-
toimmune disease indications, it is labeled only for use in preventing 
transplant rejection.
Pharmacology/Actions 
Myc

--- plumb PDF 1033 ---
1006      Phenobarbital
may get sick if they eat horse feed mixed with this medicine.
	■Decreased appetite is the most common side effect seen with this 
medicine.
	■Watch for unpredictable behavior and colic while your horse is 
taking this medicine. Contact your veterinarian if you have any 
concerns.
	■Your veterinarian will need to monitor your horse while it is tak-
ing this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Pergolide is an ergot derivative that occurs as white to off-white pow-
der and is slightly soluble in water, dehydrated alcohol, or chloro-
form. It is very slightly soluble in acetone, practically insoluble in 
ether, and sparingly soluble in methyl alcohol.
Pergolide mesylate may also be known as LY-127809, pergolide 
mesilate, pergolidi mesilas, Prascend®, Celance®, Nopar®, Parkotil®, 
Parlide®, or Pharken®.
Storage/Stability
Store pergolide tablets in tight containers at room temperature (25°C 
[77°F]); excursions permitted to 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
FDA-approved products should be the first choice when prescribing 
pergolide for pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID). Com-
pounded products are available; however, because of concerns re-
garding stability, the use of this product is questionable when the 
approved product is accessible. 
A 1 mg/mL oral suspension of pergolide mesylate was prepared 
using bulk powder obtained from a commercial supplier. 20 mg of 
pergolide mesylate was added to the plunger of a 35 mL Luer-lock 
syringe containing 10 mL of Ora-Plus® suspending liquid. The 35 mL 
syringe was connected to an empty 35 mL Luer-lock syringe using a 
fluid-dispensing connector. Using the plunger of the original 35 mL 
syringe, the suspension was mixed by depressing the plungers back 
and forth for a total of 50 depressions (or until uniformly mixed). 
10 mL of OraSweet® was added to the suspension and mixed in a 
similar manner for a final suspension volume of 20 mL. The suspen-
sion was found to be stable for 30 days when protected from light 
and sto

--- plumb PDF 1075 ---
1048      Pradofloxacin
flicts or is dependent on diluent or concentration factors with the 
following drugs or solutions: fat emulsion 10%, amikacin sulfate, 
dobutamine HCl, mannitol, methylprednisolone sodium succinate 
(at Y-site), ondansetron, penicillin G sodium, promethazine HCl (at 
Y-site), and sodium bicarbonate. 
Potassium chloride for injection is reportedly physically incom-
patible with the following solutions or drugs: amphotericin B, diaz-
epam (at Y-site), and phenytoin sodium (at Y-site).
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Parenteral Products: There are several products for parenteral use 
that contain potassium; refer to Appendix tables or individual pro-
prietary veterinary products for additional information.
Oral Products: These products are not found in the FDA Green 
Book; approval status is uncertain.
Potassium Gluconate Tablets: 2 mEq (468 mg); Tumil-K®, Renakare®, 
generic; (Rx). Labeled for use in cats and dogs
Potassium Gluconate Oral Powder: Each 0.65 g (¼ teaspoon) con-
tains 2 mEq of potassium in 4 oz containers; Renakare®, Tumil-K®; 
(Rx). Labeled for use in dogs and cats
Potassium Gluconate Gel: Each 2.34 g (½ teaspoon) contains 2 mEq 
of potassium in 5 oz tubes; Tumil-K® Gel, Renakare®; (Rx). Labeled 
for use in dogs and cats
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS (NOT A COMPLETE LIST):
Parenteral Products:
Potassium Chloride for Injection Concentrate: 2 mEq/mL in sin-
gle-dose and multi-dose vials and must be diluted before adminis-
tering; generic; (Rx)
Potassium Chloride for Injection, Highly Concentrated: 10 mEq and 
20 mEq in 50 mL or 100 mL bags, and 40 mEq/100 mL bags; gener-
ic; (Rx). Ready-to-use solution for fluid-restricted patients; requires 
administration through a central line via calibrated infusion device.
There are also premixed IV bags of saline and dextrose (both sep-
arately and in various combinations) that contain potassium 
10 mEq/L, 20 mEq/L, 30 mEq/L, or 40 mEq/L. 
Potassium Acetate for Injection Concentrate: 2 mEq/mL and 
4 mEq/mL and must be diluted before administering; (Rx)
Potassium Phosph

--- plumb PDF 1085 ---
1058      PrednisoLONE/Prednisone/ PrednisoLONE Sodium Succinate
is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks should be 
weighed and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
	■Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors (ACEIs; eg, 
benazepril, enalapril): May increase risk for hypotension
	■Amlodipine: May increase risk for hypotension
	■Beta-Blocking Agents (eg, propranolol): May enhance the 
postural hypotensive effects seen after the first dose of prazosin
	■Clonidine: May decrease prazosin antihypertensive effects
	■Pentoxifylline: May increase risk for hypotension
	■Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors (eg, sildenafil): May increase 
risk for hypotension
	■Telmisartan: May increase risk for hypotension
	■Vasopressors (eg, dopamine, norepinephrine): Prazosin may 
reduce dopamine pressor effect.
	■Verapamil: May cause synergistic hypotensive effects when 
used concomitantly with prazosin
Laboratory Considerations
None noted
Dosages
DOGS:
Decrease urethral resistance in idiopathic vesico-urethral re-
flex dyssynergia (VURD; extra-label): 
a)	0.5 mg/kg PO twice daily. If adverse effects develop, decrease 
the dose by 50%. Moderate to good effect was noted in 60% of 
the dogs treated.13 
b)	Anecdotally, 1 mg/15 kg (33 lb) PO 2 to 3 times daily
Dysuria in patients with prostatic carcinoma (extra-label): 
From a case report, 0.1 – 0.4 mg/kg PO daily was helpful in man-
aging dysuria associated with prostatic carcinoma.1
Systemic hypertension (extra-label): 
a)	Weight-based dosage: 0.5 – 2 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours7
b)	Dosage per dog: 0.5 – 2 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO every 8 to 
12 hours14,15
Adjunctive treatment of heart failure (extra-label): 1 mg/dog 
(NOT mg/kg) PO 3 times daily for dogs weighing less than 15 kg 
(33 lb); 2 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) 3 times daily PO for dogs weigh-
ing more than 15 kg (33 lb)16,17
CATS:
Decreasing urethral resistance with functional urethral ob-
struction (extra-label): Use is controversial, and efficacy has been 
questioned.2,6 Several dosages have been suggested, but most 
commonly 0.25 – 1 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 12

--- plumb PDF 1216 ---
Sucralfate      1189
Sucralfate
(soo-kral-fate)  Carafate®
GI-Mucosal Protectant
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Local-acting treatment for GI ulcers/esophagitis; may also 
protect somewhat against GI ulceration
	
▶No contraindications have been identified; however, sucralfate 
should be used with caution when decreased GI transit times 
may be harmful.
	
▶Adverse effects are unlikely, although constipation is possible. 
Vomiting has been reported in cats.
	
▶Tablets should be dissolved in water before administration. 
Should be administered on an empty stomach, if possible
	
▶To avoid possible drug interactions (eg, drug binding, de-
creased drug bioavailability), other medications should be 
administered 2 hours before sucralfate is administered. 
Uses/Indications
Sucralfate has been used to treat oral, esophageal, gastric, and duode-
nal ulcers and to prevent drug (eg, aspirin)-induced gastric erosions. 
Despite sucralfate’s theoretical benefits and widespread use, research 
has shown limited or no evidence to support the effectiveness of su-
cralfate for these indications.1–3 A consensus panel has determined 
that evidence supporting sucralfate use in small animal species for 
the prevention or treatment of esophageal injury is weak4; howev-
er, sucralfate in combination with omeprazole is recommended for 
treating horses with equine glandular gastric disease.5
Sucralfate has been used in humans with hyperphosphatemia 
secondary to renal failure and could be useful for this indication in 
animals; however, in a study, sucralfate did not significantly change 
serum or urine phosphorus levels in healthy cats or normophospha-
temic cats with CKD, and adverse effects (eg, vomiting, anorexia, 
constipation, worsening azotemia) may interfere with treatment.6 
Pharmacology/Actions
Although the exact mechanism of action of sucralfate as an antiulcer 
agent is unknown, the drug appears to have a local effect rather than 
a systemic one. After oral administration, sucralfate may react with 
hydrochloric acid in the stomach to form a paste-like complex that 
preferentially bind

--- plumb PDF 1220 ---
Sulfa-/Trimethoprim      1193
Sulfa-/Trimethoprim
Sulfadiazine/Trimethoprim
Sulfamethoxazole/Trimethoprim
(sul-fa-dye-a-zeen; sul-fa-meth-ox-a-zole/trye-meth-ohe-prim)
Bactrim®, EquiSul-SDT®, Uniprim®
Potentiated Sulfonamide Antimicrobial
NOTE: In the United States, 2 FDA-approved combinations of sulfon-
amide with trimethoprim (ie, sulfa-/trimethoprim) are used clinically 
in animals: sulfadiazine/trimethoprim for parenteral and oral use in 
dogs, cats, and horses and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim for oral 
use in humans. In Canada, sulfadoxine is also available in combina-
tion with trimethoprim for veterinary use.
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Combination antimicrobial agent, often referred to as a po-
tentiated sulfonamide, used to treat bacterial and protozoal 
infections
	
▶Contraindications include hypersensitivity to sulfonamides 
and severe renal or hepatic impairment.
	
▶Caution is advised in cases of diminished renal or hepatic 
function, urinary obstruction, urolithiasis, and in dog breeds 
predisposed to sulfonamide hypersensitivity (eg, Doberman 
pinschers).
	
▶Adverse effects in dogs include keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 
hypersensitivity (type 1 or type 3), acute neutrophilic hepatitis 
with icterus, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, fever, hemolytic 
anemia, urticaria, polyarthritis, facial swelling, polydipsia, 
crystalluria, hematuria, polyuria, cholestasis, hypothyroidism, 
anemia, agranulocytosis, and idiosyncratic hepatic necrosis.
	
▶Adverse effects in cats include anorexia, crystalluria, hematu-
ria, leukopenia, and anemia.
	
▶Adverse effects in horses include diarrhea, hypersensitivity 
reactions, and hematologic effects (eg, anemia, thrombocy-
topenia, leukopenia) when administered orally and transient 
pruritus after IV injection.
	
▶Local injection adverse effects (eg, warmth, edema, pain) are 
possible.
	
▶Sulfa-/trimethoprim is potentially teratogenic; weigh the risks 
versus the benefits before prescribing.
	
▶In the United States, extra-label use of sulfonamides is prohib-
ited in lactating dairy cattle.
Uses/Indications
Although sulfadiazine/

--- plumb PDF 1288 ---
Tramadol      1261
Monitoring
	■Serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, glucose (if diabetic)
	■Hydration status
	■Blood pressure, if indicated
	■Clinical signs of edema, patient weight, if indicated
Client Information
	■While taking this medicine, your animal will drink and urinate 
more often than usual. Be sure your animal always has access to 
freshwater. You may give this medicine with or without food. 
	■While your animal is taking this medicine, your veterinarian will 
need to monitor your animal closely. Do not miss these important 
follow-up visits. 
	■Contact your veterinarian immediately if you notice excessive 
thirst, weakness, collapse (passing out), head tilt, lack of urina-
tion, or a racing heartbeat.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Torsemide is a lipophilic anilinopyridine sulfonylurea loop diuretic 
that occurs as white to off-white, crystalline powder. It is practically 
insoluble in water and slightly soluble in alcohol.
Torsemide may also be known as torasemide, AC-3525, AC 4464, 
BM-02.015, JDL-464, and Demadex®. International trade names 
include Isemid®, Torem®, and Unat®.
Storage/Stability
Store torsemide tablets below 40°C (104°F); preferably between 15°C 
and 30°C (59°F and 86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE IN THE US.
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula-
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Torsemide Oral Tablets: 5 mg, 10 mg, 20 mg, and 100 mg; Demadex®, 
generic; (Rx)
Torsemide Injection: 10 mg/mL; generic; (Rx). NOTE: This product 
has been discontinued.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Tramadol
(tram-ah-doll)  Ultram®
Opioid Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Synthetic mu-