920      Mycophenolate
Mycophenolate
Mycophenolate Mofetil (MMF)
(mye-koe-fen-oh-late)  Cellcept®
Immunosuppressant
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Immunosuppressive drug that may be useful for treating dogs 
with IMHA, IMTP, glomerulonephritis, myasthenia gravis, or 
meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown etiology in dogs; po-
tentially useful in cats, but there is little information available 
on safety or efficacy.
	
▶Limited experience in veterinary medicine, especially in cats or 
with long-term use
	
▶Adverse effects include GI signs (eg, diarrhea, vomiting, an-
orexia) most commonly are dose-limiting and can be severe.
	
▶Can be administered PO or IV. Compounding into appropriate 
oral dosage forms may be needed.
	
▶Teratogenic in humans
	
▶The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies mycophenolate as a hazardous drug; use 
appropriate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Although clinical experience using mycophenolate in veterinary 
medicine has been limited and no large well-controlled studies were 
located, mycophenolate appears useful in the treatment of a variety 
of autoimmune diseases, including immune-mediated hemolytic 
anemia (IMHA),1-4 immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMTP),5,6 
myasthenia gravis,7,8 meningoencephalomyelitis,9,10 glomerulo-
nephritis,11 and pemphigus foliaceous.12 Mycophenolate has been 
suggested for use in treating inflammatory bowel disease in dogs; 
however, the drug’s primary adverse effects in dogs are gastritis, di-
arrhea, and intestinal inflammation. Mycophenolate is also used in 
anti-rejection protocols for organ transplants in animals. Mycophe-
nolate is often used as part of a combination immunosuppressive 
therapy protocol in a patient, although it has also been used alone as 
monotherapy. The drug was ineffective for the treatment of sudden 
acquired retinal degeneration syndrome (SARDS) in dogs.13
In humans, although this drug is used off-label for a variety of au-
toimmune disease indications, it is labeled only for use in preventing 
transplant rejection.
Pharmacology/Actions 
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) is a prodrug that must be hydrolyzed 
in vivo to mycophenolic acid (MPA) to be pharmacologically active. 
Mycophenolic acid noncompetitively, but reversibly, inhibits inosine 
monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH). Two distinct forms of 
IMPDH exist in the body, including type 1 found in most cells and 
type 2 existing in activated lymphocytes. Mycophenolic acid has a 
5-fold greater affinity for the type 2 IMPDH isoform. Inosine mo-
nophosphate dehydrogenase is the rate-limiting enzyme in de novo 
synthesis of guanosine nucleotides. As T cells and B cells are depen-
dent on de novo synthesis of purines (eg, guanosine) and, unlike 
other cells, cannot use salvage pathways, proliferative responses of 
T cells and B cells are inhibited, and suppression of B cell antibody 
formation occurs, thus inhibiting both cell-mediated and humoral 
immune responses. These effects enable MPA to inhibit leukocyte 
recruitment to inflammatory sites and allotransplant tissues.
In a study in juvenile dachshunds, MMF administration did not 
inhibit proliferating CD5+ T lymphocytes at any time point.14 In 
healthy cats, MMF administration resulted in little change in periph-
eral blood mononuclear cell counts or CD4+/CD8+:T-cell ratios.15
Pharmacokinetics
Mycophenolate mofetil is absorbed after oral administration, but 
limited bioavailability studies in dogs have shown both a wide inter-
patient and interdose variation. A study performed in a single dog 
showed bioavailabilities of 54%, 65%, and 87% after administration 
of 10, 15, and 20 mg/kg of MMF, respectively.16 
A study in dogs compared the pharmacokinetic parameters of my-
cophenolic acid (MPA) with its pharmacodynamic effects on inosine 
monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) activity in lymphocytes17; 
volume of distribution at steady-state was ≈5 L/kg, but inter-patient 
variability (±4.5) was wide. Elimination half-life for MPA was ≈8 
hours (±4 hours). In a study performed in juvenile dachshunds re-
ceiving 13 mg/kg PO, peak MPA concentration occurred within 1 
hour of administration, and half-life was 5.5 minutes.14 Mycophe-
nolic acid is primarily excreted in the urine, both unchanged (≈5%) 
and as the glucuronide metabolite (≈90%). In this study, the authors 
concluded that the pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic profile of 
MMF in dogs suggests that an every 8-hour dosing schedule would 
be required for optimization of immunosuppressive efficacy. Howev-
er, dosing every 8 hours can be clinically challenging because of the 
severity of adverse effects, and thus has not entered common clinical 
usage (see Adverse Effects). 
In a study in healthy cats, administration of 20 mg/kg MMF IV 
as a CRI over 2 hours resulted in all cats forming the active MPA 
metabolite. Disposition of plasma MPA was highly variable and 
unpredictable. The major metabolite was a glucoside product, and 
a glucuronide product was found in only 3 of 6 cats.18 An in vitro 
study similarly demonstrated a relative deficiency of MPA glucuro-
nidation in cats.19 
In humans, oral bioavailability averages 94%; food reduces peak 
MPA concentrations by 40%.20 After absorption, MMF is rapidly and 
completely hydrolyzed to mycophenolic acid. Peak blood concentra-
tions are seen ≈1 to 2 hours after oral administration. Mycophenolic 
acid 97% protein (albumin) bound and undergoes extensive hepatic 
metabolism, primarily via glucuronidation. Mycophenolic acid un-
dergoes extensive enterohepatic recirculation, and reactivation to 
MPA within the gut may result in a second peak blood concentra-
tion 4 to 12 hours after administration. Elimination half-life of MPA 
is ≈17 hours. Metabolites are eliminated primarily via the kidneys.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Do not use mycophenolate in patients with documented hypersensi-
tivity reactions to mycophenolate. Patients with severe renal dysfunc-
tion may require dosage adjustment. Because MMF can cause diar-
rhea, use with caution in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. 
IV mycophenolate must be administered over at least 2 hours; do 
not give it as an IV bolus or via rapid IV infusion.
In humans, the active metabolite, MPA, is primarily excreted as 
the MPA-glucuronide metabolite. Mycophenolate should be used 
with caution in cats because of deficient MPA glucuronidation in 
this species.
For humans, mycophenolate has a black box warning regarding 
potential increased risk for lymphoma and serious infection associ-
ated with its use. Severe neutropenia has occurred in human trans-
plant patients receiving mycophenolate.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies mycophenolate as a group II hazardous drug 
(non-antineoplastic agent representing an occupational hazard to 
healthcare workers); personal protective equipment (PPE) should be 
used accordingly to minimize the risk of exposure.21
Do not confuse mycophenolate mofetil with mycophenolic acid. 
A study comparing adverse effects in dogs with MMF capsules and 
mycophenolate sodium (the sodium salt of mycophenolic acid) en-
teric-coated tablets demonstrated significantly greater occurrences 

Mycophenolate      921
and severity of diarrhea, weight loss, and decreased activity in dogs 
that received the sodium salt enteric-coated tablets.22
Adverse Effects
Because of limited experience with mycophenolate in veterinary pa-
tients, the adverse effect profile is not well established. At usual doses 
(10 mg/kg PO twice daily), mycophenolate is usually well tolerated 
in dogs. Dose-dependent diarrhea appears to be the most common 
adverse effect, but vomiting, anorexia, lethargy/reduced activity, 
lymphopenia, papillomatosis, and increased rates of dermal infec-
tions can be seen. In a study evaluating MMF in dogs for the treat-
ment of IMHA at a dosage of 10 to 15 mg/kg PO every 8 hours, the 
authors concluded that the level of GI toxicity observed could not 
justify the use of MMF with this dosing regimen, despite the fact that 
4 of 5 dogs achieved disease remission.1 Ulcerative colitis may devel-
op.4 Mild hypersensitivity reactions after IV administration are pos-
sible. Because of the drug’s immunosuppressive actions, increased 
systemic infection and malignancy rates are possible, especially with 
long-term use.
Diarrhea was the most common adverse effect in healthy cats en-
rolled in mycophenolate pharmacokinetic studies. Diarrhea was less 
frequent after IV administration and appeared dose related with oral 
use. Hyporexia was noted in 1 cat. Decreases in PCV and platelet 
counts have been noted, but the reduced values remained within the 
reference range.15,18,23 Hepatopathy and pancreatitis were reported in 
one cat after receiving MMF for treatment of IMHA.24
In humans, the most common adverse effects include constipa-
tion, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and headache. Hypertension and 
peripheral edema occur in ≈30% of patients. Leukopenia has been 
reported in 25% to 45% of patients taking the medication. Other ef-
fects that occur more rarely include GI bleeding, severe neutropenia, 
cough, confusion, tremor, fatal neurologic disease, infection, and 
malignant lymphoma (0.4% to 1%).
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Mycophenolate should be avoided, if at all possible, during pregnan-
cy. Mycophenolate is a known teratogen in humans, causing con-
genital malformations and first trimester pregnancy loss. At doses 
significantly lower than those used in humans, increased resorptions 
and malformations were noted in rabbits and rats. 
Mycophenolic acid is distributed in rat milk. It is unknown if my-
cophenolate is safe to use during nursing and it should be considered 
contraindicated.25 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In acute toxicity studies performed in mice and monkeys, no deaths 
occurred in oral doses of mycophenolate up to 4000 mg/kg and 1000 
mg/kg, respectively. In small animals, acute GI disturbances or neu-
tropenia are possible. Treat supportively, if required. Cholestyramine 
may increase mycophenolate excretion.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving mycophenolate and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
	■Acyclovir and Valacyclovir: Increased serum concentra-
tions of acyclovir and the phenolic glucuronide of mycophenolic 
acid
	■Aminoglycosides (eg, amikacin, gentamicin): In rats, use to-
gether induced greater nephrotoxicity.
	■Antacids, Oral (Aluminum-, Calcium-, or Magne-
sium-Containing): Decreased absorption of mycophenolate; 
separate dosing by at least 2 hours.
	■Azathioprine: Increased risk for myelosuppression; concur-
rent use is not recommended.
	■Cholestyramine: May inhibit enterohepatic recycling of my-
cophenolate, reducing serum concentrations
	■Immunosuppressive Agents (eg, corticosteroids [eg, dexa-
methasone, predniso(lo)ne], leflunomide): Additive immuno-
suppressant effects could occur
	■Iron (oral): Decreased absorption of mycophenolate; separate 
dosing by at least 2 hours.
	■Lanthanum Carbonate: May decrease mycophenolate plas-
ma concentrations
	■Probenecid: Potentially increased serum concentrations of my-
cophenolic acid and the phenolic glucuronide of mycophenolic 
acid
	■Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs; eg, omeprazole, pantopra-
zole): May reduce mycophenolate absorption, decreasing MPA 
exposure (AUC)
	■Salicylates (eg, aspirin, bismuth subsalicylate): Potentially 
increased concentrations of free mycophenolic acid
	■Sevelamer: Decreased absorption of mycophenolate; adminis-
ter MMF at least 2 hours prior to sevelamer.
	■Telmisartan: May decrease mycophenolate exposure (AUC)
	■Vaccines, Modified Live: Vaccines may be less effective; ad-
minister vaccines prior to initiating mycophenolate therapy and 
avoid concurrent use.
The following drugs or drug classes may reduce MPA exposure by 
inhibiting the enterohepatic recycling of the mycophenolate glucu-
ronide metabolite:
	■Cephalosporins (eg, cephalexin, cefpodoxime)
	■Clindamycin 
	■Cyclosporine: additive immunosuppressant effects also possi-
ble
	■Fluoroquinolones (eg, ciprofloxacin, enrofloxacin)
	■Metronidazole
	■Rifampin
	■Penicillins (eg, amoxicillin/clavulanate)
	■Sulfonamides, Potentiated (eg, sulfa-/trimethoprim)
Laboratory Considerations
	■No issues noted
Dosages
DOGS:
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (extra-label): 8 – 12 mg/kg 
PO or IV every 12 hours in combination with predniso(lo)ne 
2 – 3 mg/kg/day PO (50 – 60 mg/m2/day [NOT mg/kg/day] for 
dogs greater than 25 kg)2,4    
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMTP) (extra-label): 
7 – 9 mg/kg PO every 12 hours in combination with pred- 
niso(lo)ne (≈2 mg/kg/day)5,6  
Meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown etiology (extra-label): 
10 – 20 mg/kg PO or IV every 12 hours in conjunction with cor-
ticosteroids.9,10 One study described administering MMF IV over 
20 minutes using a syringe pump.10
Adjunctive immunosuppressive treatment of glomerular dis-
ease based on established pathology (extra-label): The Interna-
tional Renal Interest Society (IRIS) consensus statement recom-
