842      Methadone
curs as white to off-white crystals that are slightly soluble in alcohol 
and freely soluble in water. It is a weak base—a 1% aqueous solution 
of metformin HCl has a pKa of 6.68, and a metformin base has a pKa 
of 12.4.
Metformin HCl may also be known as dimethylbiguanide HCl 
or metforimini hydrochloridium. There are many proprietary names 
outside of the United States for this drug.
Storage/Stability
Store metformin HCl oral products (tablets, sustained-release tab-
lets) protected from light at a controlled room temperature of 
20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F). Excursions permitted to 15°C to 30°C 
(59°F-86°F). 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Metformin HCl Oral Tablets: 500 mg, 850 mg, and 1000 mg; Gluco-
phage®, generic; (Rx)
Metformin HCl Extended-Release Oral Tablets: 500 mg, 750 mg, and 
1000 mg; Glucophage XR®, Glumetza®, Fortamet®, generic; (Rx)
Metformin HCl Oral Solution: 500 mg/5 mL (100 mg/mL) in 
118 mL and 473 mL; Riomet®; (Rx)
There are also fixed-dose oral tablet combination products available 
containing metformin and glyburide or glipizide.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Methadone
(meth-a-done)  Dolophine®, Methadose®
Opioid Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Opioid mu-receptor agonist with NMDA blocking properties 
used in dogs, cats, and horses
	
▶Can be used for sedation, as premedication before anesthesia, 
and for analgesia 
	
▶Adverse effects include panting, vomiting, vocalization, defe-
cation postinjection, bradycardia, and respiratory depression.
	
▶Many possible drug interactions
	
▶DEA Schedule II (C-II) controlled substance in the United States
	
▶Effects can be reversed with naloxone.
Uses/Indications
Methadone may be used as an opioid sedative, preanesthetic, or an-
algesic agent. Methadone use as a premedication reduces MAC re-
quirements.1 Methadone has demonstrated an analgesic effect after 
epidural use in horses.2 Poor bioavailability precludes oral adminis-
tration in dogs.3 
Pharmacology/Actions
In small animal species, methadone acts similarly to morphine with 
regard to its degree of analgesia and duration of action. Methadone is 
a synthetic mu-receptor agonist that is supplied as a racemic mixture; 
the L-isomer is up to 50 times more potent as a µ-agonist than the 
D-isomer. Agonism of the mu-opioid receptor (a g-protein coupled 
receptor) on both pre- and postsynaptic neurons results in decreased 
transmission and modulation of pain. Presynaptically, binding of the 
mu-opioid receptor results in closure of calcium ion channels and 
reduction of neurotransmitter release. Postsynaptically, agonism will 
open potassium channels, resulting in hyperpolarization and inhi-
bition of postsynaptic neurons.4 Both methadone isomers are non-
competitive inhibitors of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors5 
and can reduce reuptake of norepinephrine,6 which may also con-
tribute to its analgesic effects, especially in patients tolerant to other 
opioids7,8; however, the therapeutic application of this is unknown. 
Methadone’s depression of the medullary respiratory center re-
sults in respiratory depression, and stimulation at the vagal center 
can cause bradycardia. Methadone is more lipid-soluble than mor-
phine and is therefore more potent due to having more favorable 
pharmacokinetics. IV administration of methadone has potential for 
histamine release, but studies have shown no resulting hemodynam-
ic instability9; histamine release following administration of metha-
done by other routes is unknown but possible.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, methadone has poor oral bioavailability due to extensive 
first-pass metabolism.3,10 Coadministration of multiple CYP450 in-
hibitors (eg, ketoconazole, fluconazole, fluoxetine, trimethoprim, 
chloramphenicol) presumably affects different isoenzymes in dogs 
and has been shown to significantly increase oral absorption, area 
under the curve (AUC), and plasma concentrations of methadone.3,11 
Methadone absorption after oral transmucosal administration is 
slower and reduced as compared with methadone given IM.12 SC ad-
ministration has a bioavailability of ≈80%, with peak concentrations 
occurring ≈1 hour after administration. Bioavailability is ≈90% after 
IM administration,6 with peak concentrations occurring within 5 to 
15 minutes. VdSS is ≈5 to 6 L/kg, and protein binding is 60% to 90%.6 
Terminal elimination half-life after IV administration is ≈1.75 to 4 
hours; clearance is ≈25 to 50 mL/kg/minute.13,14 After SC and IM ad-
ministration, half-life is ≈11 hours and ≈1 to 2 hours, respectively; 
however, there is wide interpatient variation.6,14
In cats, bioavailability of buccal (ie, oral transmucosal [OTM]) 
methadone is 44%.15 After administration of methadone 0.3 mg/kg 
IV or 0.6 mg/kg via OTM administration, peak concentrations oc-
curred at 10 minutes (IV) and 2 hours (OTM).16 A 0.6 mg/kg IM 
dose provides 4 hours of analgesia and reaches plasma concentration 
between 40 to 124 ng/mL. Tmax and clearance were 20 minutes and 
9.1 mL/kg/minute, respectively.17
In horses, methadone given PO appears to be well absorbed, but 
bioavailability is ≈3 times lower when administered intragastrically. 
P-glycoprotein may play a role in the poor intestinal absorption of 
methadone in vivo. Elimination half-life is ≈1 to 2 hours, and clear-
ance is 5 to 8 mL/kg/minute.18,19
In goats, methadone has a high bioavailability and volume of distri-
bution (7 L/kg) after SC administration, with a half-life of ≈3.6 hours. 
IV administration resulted in a terminal half-life of ≈1.5 hours.20 Elim-
ination half-life after IM administration was ≈1.4 hours.21 
In humans, methadone is well absorbed from the GI tract via PO 
administration and after parenteral injection (SC or IM). Methadone 
is widely distributed and extensively bound to plasma proteins (60% 
to 90%, principally alpha1-acid glycoprotein). Methadone is metab-
olized in the liver to inactive metabolites primarily by the CYPP450, 
CYP3A, and CYP2B6 isoenzymes, but other isoenzymes also play 
metabolic roles. Methadone’s half-life in humans is widely variable 
(15 to 60 hours). Elimination half-lives of methadone may be ex-
tended if giving multiple doses.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Methadone is contraindicated in animals hypersensitive to narcotic 
analgesics and in animals with any condition associated with respira-
tory depression, acute respiratory dysfunction, advanced respiratory 
failure, and severe hepatic or renal dysfunction, as well as during 
parturition.6,22,23

Methadone      843
Use methadone with extreme caution in patients with head inju-
ries, increased intracranial pressure, or acute abdominal conditions 
(eg, colic), as it may obscure the diagnosis or clinical course of these 
conditions.
Use opioids with caution in patients with hypothyroidism and 
hypoadrenocorticism (ie, Addison’s disease), as well as geriatric and 
severely debilitated patients. Neonatal, debilitated, and geriatric pa-
tients or patients with severe hepatic disease may be more suscepti-
ble to the effects of methadone, may require lower doses, and should 
be monitored closely. Greyhounds may require higher doses than 
other breeds.24
Methadone can cause bradycardia and therefore should be used 
cautiously in patients with pre-existing bradyarrhythmia. Hypoten-
sion may occur and result in decreased cardiac output and blood 
pressure.
Because vomiting may occur, methadone as a preanesthetic in 
animals with suspected gastric dilatation-volvulus or intestinal ob-
struction is usually not recommended.
Opioid analgesics are contraindicated in patients stung by scorpi-
ons (eg, Centruroides spp) as it may potentiate venom effects.25
Some dosage forms may contain benzylalcohol as a preservative. 
In human newborns, benzylalcohol and derivatives can potentially 
displace bilirubin from protein binding sites; caution in human ne-
onates is advised. There is an FDA black-box warning regarding the 
risk for misuse and abuse, respiratory depression, QT prolongation, 
neonatal withdrawal syndrome, accidental ingestion, and addiction 
treatment when prescribing methadone for humans. QT intervals 
may be prolonged in patients taking methadone, which can result in 
life-threatening arrhythmia. Use caution in patients with prolonged 
QT intervals or those receiving medications that can further prolong 
QT intervals. See Drug Interactions.
Extreme care should be taken when administering methadone; 
spillage onto the skin can result in respiratory depression. If metha-
done comes in contact with skin, wash the area thoroughly and seek 
medical advice.
Adverse Effects
In dogs, adverse effects can include panting,26 whining/vocaliza-
tion,14 dysphoria, sedation, anorexia,27 emesis, urination and/or 
defecation (shortly after injection), constipation or paralytic ileus, 
reduced body temperature,3 bradycardia, and respiratory depression 
or apnea. Systemic vascular resistance may increase.28,29 Adverse 
effects appear to be dose-related.1,30 Methadone tends to cause less 
sedation or vomiting than morphine.31 Methadone has a greater car-
diodepressant effect than morphine.32
In cats, methadone appears to cause less excitation (eg, lip licking, 
salivation, tremors, urination, vocalization) and vomiting than some 
other mu-agonists, but these effects can occur. Pupil dilation persists 
after analgesia in cats.6 Hyperalgesia has also been reported in cats. 
In horses, methadone 0.1 mg/kg IV or greater has caused pro-
nounced CNS excitement. Gut sounds may be diminished.33 Mean 
arterial pressure may be increased when administered in combina-
tion with detomidine.34
In sheep, methadone 0.5 mg/kg IV may result in drooling, brux-
ism, mydriasis, nystagmus, vocalization, and tremors. Rumination 
was inhibited in goats receiving SC methadone.20
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Effects on the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis may cause tes-
ticular regression, decreased testosterone concentrations, and re-
duced sexual activity in males. Administration to animals from the 
time of organogenesis through lactation has resulted in increased 
neonate mortality, decreased litter size, neural tube defects, and life-
long behavior alterations.35 
In humans, methadone is relatively safe to use at low doses for 
short periods during the first 2 trimesters of pregnancy; methadone 
administered late in term has caused significant respiratory depres-
sion and increased stillbirths. 
Epidural administration results in lower umbilical cord meth-
adone concentration than IV methadone.36 Some veterinary-ap-
proved product labels outside of the United States state that metha-
done is contraindicated for use in animals during parturition.23  
Methadone has been found in breast milk and there are subse-
quently low plasma concentrations in nursing human infants.
Although methadone enters maternal milk, it is considered com-
patible with breastfeeding in women.37
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdose may produce profound respiratory and/or CNS depression 
in most species. Newborn animals may be more susceptible to these 
effects than adults. In dogs, a lethal dose of 50% (LD50) is reported 
to be 29 mg/kg.38 A dose of 4 mg/kg can be fatal in cats.6 Other toxic 
effects can include cardiovascular collapse, hypothermia, and skele-
tal muscle hypotonia. Seizures may occur at very high doses (ie, 10 
times the therapeutic dose).22,23 
Naloxone, an opioid antagonist, is the agent of choice in treating 
respiratory depression. Naloxone may need to be readministered in 
cases of larger overdoses. Patients given naloxone must be observed 
closely because naloxone’s effects may diminish before subtoxic con-
centrations of methadone are reached. Mechanical respiratory sup-
port should be considered in cases of severe respiratory depression. 
Dialysis, charcoal hemoperfusion, and forced diuresis do not appear 
to be beneficial in treating methadone overdose.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving methadone and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate. In hu-
mans, the FDA-approved product has a black-box warning regard-
ing the risk for fatal respiratory depression when methadone is ad-
ministered with other CYP inhibitors. 
	■Alpha2-Receptor Agonists (eg, detomidine, dexmedeto-
midine, xylazine): Although methadone combinations with al-
pha2-receptoragonists are generally safe and effective,39 severe 
hypoxemia was seen in dogs breathing room air in one study us-
ing methadone/medetomidine combination.40 Detomidine may 
reduce methadone clearance in horses41
	■Antiarrhythmics, Class I and III (eg, amiodarone, lido-
caine, procainamide, quinidine): Use with methadone may in-
crease the risk for arrhythmia, including QT prolongation.
	■Anticholinergic Agents (eg, atropine, clomipramine, di-
phenhydramine, hyoscyamine, procainamide): Medications 
with anticholinergic properties may increase the risk for urinary 
retention and constipation when combined with opioids.
	■Azole Antifungals (eg, fluconazole, itraconazole, keto-
conazole): May increase methadone plasma concentrations. 
Methadone is contraindicated with ketoconazole in humans. 
In dogs, ketoconazole did not appreciably increase methadone 
absorption following oral administration in one study10 but ap-
peared to increase oral methadone absorption, peak methadone 
concentration, and total drug exposure (AUC) in another study.3 
Fluconazole appears to increase oral methadone absorption, peak 
