44      Aluminum Hydroxide
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Altrenogest 0.22% (2.2 mg/mL) in oil solution in 150 mL and 
1000 mL bottles; Regu-Mate®, generic (Rx). FDA-approved for use in 
horses that are not intended for food. This medication is banned in 
racing animals in some countries.
Altrenogest 0.22% (2.2 mg/mL) in 1000 mL bottles; Matrix®, generic; 
(OTC). FDA-approved for use in sexually mature gilts that have had 
at least 1 estrous cycle. Gilts must not be slaughtered for human con-
sumption for 21 days after the last treatment. The FDA prohibits the 
extra-label use of this medication, including to enhance food and/or 
fiber production in animals.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Aluminum Hydroxide
(ah-loo-min-um hye-droks-ide)  Amphojel®
Oral Antacid/Phosphate Binder
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Used to treat hyperphosphatemia in small animals and some-
times as an antacid for gastric ulcers
	
▶Chronic use may lead to electrolyte abnormalities; possible 
aluminum toxicity.
	
▶Many potential drug interactions
	
▶Bulk dried powder available from several sources
Uses/Indications
Orally administered aluminum hydroxide is used to reduce hyper-
phosphatemia in patients with chronic kidney disease when dietary 
phosphorus restriction fails to maintain serum phosphorus concen-
trations in the normal range. Occasionally, it has been used as an oral 
antacid in veterinary patients, although its short duration of action 
for this purpose may make its use less practical. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Aluminum salts reduce the amount of phosphorus absorbed from 
the intestine by physically binding to dietary phosphorus to form 
insoluble aluminum phosphate, which is then excreted in the feces. 
When used as an antacid, the hydroxyl ion interacts with hydrogen 
ions in the stomach to increase gastric/abomasal pH.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Aluminum-containing antacids may inhibit gastric emptying; use 
cautiously in patients with gastric outlet obstruction. Also, use with 
caution in patients prone to developing constipation. Aluminum 
may accumulate in patients with renal failure.
Adverse Effects
In small animals, the most likely adverse effect of aluminum hydrox-
ide is constipation. Hypophosphatemia can develop if the patient is 
receiving a low phosphate diet and chronically receives aluminum 
antacids.
Potentially, aluminum toxicity could occur with prolonged use. 
Although previously believed unlikely to occur in small animals, 
at least 2 dogs with renal failure have developed aluminum toxici-
ty after receiving aluminum-containing phosphate binders.1 Osteo-
malacia related to hypophosphatemia or aluminum accumulation 
is also possible with chronic use. Aluminum-containing and calci-
um-containing phosphate binders may be used in combination to 
reduce the dose of each and reduce the risk for aluminum toxicity 
or ­hypercalcemia.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Use during pregnancy and lactation has not been studied; however, it 
is considered generally safe since oral absorption of this drug is poor.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdosage/Acute Toxicity
Acute toxicity is unlikely with an oral overdose. If necessary, GI ef-
fects (eg, constipation) and electrolyte imbalances that may occur 
with acute or chronic overdose should be treated based on clinical 
presentation.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged to consult with one of 
the 24-hour poison consultation centers that specialize in providing 
information specific for veterinary patients. For general information 
related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact informa-
tion for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions with aluminum hydroxide have ei-
ther been reported or are theoretical in humans or animals and may 
be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
	■Diazepam: Concurrent aluminum may increase diazepam 
­absorption.
	■Quinidine: Increased gastric pH caused by aluminum hydrox-
ide can potentially increase the absorption of basic drugs such as 
quinidine; separate from aluminum hydroxide by at least 2 hours.
	■Vitamin D Analogues (eg, calcitriol, ergocalciferol): May in-
crease aluminum absorption. Avoid combination.
Aluminum hydroxide can decrease the amount absorbed (orally) or 
the pharmacologic effect of the drugs listed below; separate oral dos-
es of aluminum hydroxide and these drugs by at least 2 hours to help 
reduce the potential for this interaction.
	■Allopurinol
	■Aspirin
	■Azole Antifungals (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole)
	■Cefpodoxime
	■Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one)
	■Digoxin
	■Ethambutol
	■Fexofenadine
	■Fluoroquinolones (eg, enrofloxacin, marbofloxacin)
	■Gabapentin
	■H2 Antagonists (eg, famotidine, ranitidine)
	■Iron Salts (eg, ferrous sulfate)
	■Isoniazid (INH)
	■Mycophenolate
	■Penicillamine
	■Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine, chlorpromazine)
	■Phenytoin
	■Sotalol
	■Tetracyclines (eg, doxycycline, minocycline)
	■Thyroid Hormones
Doses
NOTE: All dosages are extra-label.
DOGS/CATS:
Hyperphosphatemia secondary to chronic kidney disease 
(extra-label): 30 – 100 mg/kg per day as adjunct to reduced di-
etary phosphorus.2-4 Aluminum hydroxide gel powder (USP) 

Amantadine      45
is preferred, as it can be mixed with food and is tasteless. Dose 
is divided and mixed with each meal. Start at low end of dosage 
range and adjust upward every 4 to 6 weeks until desired serum 
phosphorus is attained (see Monitoring). If a reduced-phosphorus 
diet and higher dosages of aluminum hydroxide do not adequate-
ly control serum phosphorus, consider adding a lanthanum- or 
calcium-based (eg, calcium acetate, calcium carbonate) phosphate 
binder to reduce the chances for aluminum toxicity.
RABBITS/RODENTS/SMALL MAMMALS: 
Hyperphosphatemia in chinchillas (extra-label): Aluminum hy-
droxide gel: 1 mL/animal (NOT mL/kg) PO as needed
Hyperphosphatemia in Guinea pigs (extra-label): 0.5 – 1 mL per 
animal (NOT mL/kg) PO as needed5
REPTILES: 
Hyperphosphatemia (extra-label): 100 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 
hours6
CATTLE:
Antacid (extra-label): 15 – 60 mg/kg PO every 8 – 24 hours.7 Ef-
ficacy in adult cattle is questionable since the drug becomes dilut-
ed in the rumen and may not provide therapeutic benefit in the 
abomasum.
Abomasal ulcers in calves using a combination of aluminum 
hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide (extra-label): 25 mL (each 
mL contains aluminum hydroxide 0.1 g/mL and magnesium hy-
droxide 0.09 g/mL) PO every 8 hours.8 NOTE: this study was done 
in healthy calves; based on the results from this study, this dose is 
expected to be beneficial for ill calves with abomasal ulcers. 
HORSES:
Adjunctive gastroduodenal ulcer therapy in foals (extra-label): 
Aluminum/magnesium hydroxide suspension: 15 mL (total dose) 
4 times a day9
Monitoring
	■After beginning therapy, check serum phosphorus (after a 12-
hour fast) every 4 to 6 weeks until target phosphorous levels are 
attained. Once phosphorous levels are stable, check phosphorous 
levels at the time of renal chemistry rechecks (eg, every 12 weeks). 
For chronic kidney disease (CKD), the International Renal Inter-
est Society (IRIS) recommends a target phosphorous range for 
dogs and cats at each stage:
•	 Stage 2 CKD target phosphorous levels: greater than 2.7 and 
less than 4.6 mg/dL (0.9 – less than 1.5 mmol/L)
•	 Stage 3 CKD target phosphorous levels: greater than 2.7 and 
less than 5.0 mg/dL (0.9 – less than 1.6 mmol/L)
•	 Stage 4 CKD target phosphorous levels: greater than 2.7 and 
less than 6.0 mg/dL (0.9 – less than 1.9 mmol/L)
	■To monitor for aluminum toxicity, watch for development of neu-
romuscular effects, progressive decreases in mean cell volume 
(MCV), and microcytosis.
Client Information
	■Oral aluminum hydroxide products are available without pre-
scription (OTC) but should be used under the supervision of your 
veterinarian.
	■Bulk powder or compounded capsules are easier to administer 
than liquids or suspensions. Shake the suspension thoroughly 
prior to administration.
	■Must be given either just before feeding or mixed in food to be 
effective.
	■Can cause constipation or decreased appetite 
	■Report to your veterinarian any unusual signs, such as weakness, 
difficulty walking, or stumbling.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Dried Aluminum Hydroxide Gel (CAS Registry: 21645-51-2) occurs 
as a white, odorless, tasteless, amorphous powder. It is insoluble in 
water or alcohol. The USP 36 standard allows varying amounts of 
basic aluminum carbonate and bicarbonate, but it must contain no 
less than 76.5% of Al(OH)3.
Aluminum hydroxide may also be known as aluminium hydrox-
ide.
Storage/Stability
Store powder forms in airtight containers. Liquid formulations 
should not be allowed to freeze.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Because aluminum hydroxide powder USP can vary in the concen-
tration of aluminum hydroxide (must be 76.5% or greater) and pow-
ders can vary in density, volume measurements can only approxi-
mate actual weight. However, ¼ teaspoonful (1.25 mL) of the dried 
USP powder has been reported to contain ≈300 mg of aluminum 
hydroxide.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Aluminum Hydroxide Concentrated Gel Suspension/Liquid (NOTE: 
These products are usually flavored (mint) and not well accepted by 
dogs or cats): 320 mg/5 mL in 473 mL; UD 15 mL and 30 mL; ge-
neric; (OTC)
Aluminum Hydroxide Gel, Dried Powder, USP; bulk powder is avail-
able from a variety of sources including many compounding phar-
macies. See: http://goo.gl/1lYJk for additional source information.
NOTE: There are also many products available that have aluminum 
hydroxide and a magnesium or calcium salt (eg, Maalox®) that are 
used as antacids. All oral aluminum and magnesium hydroxide 
preparations are OTC.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Amantadine
(a-man-ta-deen)  Symmetrel® 
Antiviral; NMDA Antagonist
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Limited published efficacy or safety data, although clinical 
experience suggests it is useful in adjunctive treatment for 
chronic pain in small animal species
	
▶Historically dosed every 24 hours; however, based on pharma-
cokinetic data, the same dose given every 12 hours may be 
more effective
	
▶Dogs may exhibit agitation and GI effects, especially early in 
treatment.
	
▶Large interpatient variations of pharmacokinetics in horses 
limit its therapeutic usefulness.
	
▶Overdoses are potentially very serious; it may need to be com-
pounded to accurately dose small animals.
	
▶Extra-label use is prohibited by the FDA in chickens, turkeys, 
and ducks.
Uses/Indications
Although amantadine may have efficacy and clinical usefulness 
against some veterinary viral diseases, presently the greatest interest 
for its use in small animal species is in the adjunctive treatment of 
