322      Cyclosporine (Systemic)
Cyclosporine (Systemic)
Ciclosporin, Cyclosporine A
(sye-kloe-spor-een)  Atopica®, Cyclavance®, Neoral®, 
­Sandimmune®
Immunosuppressive
See also Cyclosporine Ophthalmic
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶FDA-approved products are available for dogs to control 
­atopic dermatitis and for cats to control allergic dermatitis. 
	
▶Often used extra-label for treatment of immune-mediated 
disorders in dogs and cats, and to prevent rejection of kidney 
transplants in cats
	
▶GI adverse effects (eg, vomiting, soft stools) are common at 
the start of treatment but typically resolve within a few weeks.
	
▶Use of microemulsion or “modified” formulations is highly rec-
ommended. If using human-labeled products, Sandimmune® 
is not bioequivalent to, and must not be interchanged with, 
Atopica®, Cyclavance®, Neoral®, or Gengraf®. 
	
▶Counseling pet owners to ensure knowledge of the dispens-
ing system is important when using solutions FDA-approved 
for animals. 
	
▶For indications other than atopic dermatitis, consider ther-
apeutic drug monitoring (pharmacokinetic and pharma-
codynamic) to assess efficacy and minimize adverse effect 
­potential.
	
▶Many potential drug interactions
	
▶The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies cyclosporine as a hazardous drug; personal 
protective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to 
minimize the risk for exposure.
Uses/Indications
Cyclosporine is FDA-approved for use in dogs for the control of 
atopic dermatitis. In cats, it is FDA-approved for the control of feline 
allergic dermatitis as manifested by excoriations (including facial 
and neck), miliary dermatitis, eosinophilic plaques, and self-induced 
alopecia. Therapeutic effect for atopic dermatitis may not be seen 
in the first few weeks of treatment, and the drug is unsuitable for 
acute flares of atopic dermatitis.1 Concurrent treatment with corti-
costeroids1,2 or oclacitinib3 can be considered during this interval to 
control pruritus. 
In dogs, extra-label indications include perianal fistulas (anal fu-
runculosis),4–7 immune-mediated blood disorders (eg, IMHA),8 in-
flammatory bowel disease,9 idiopathic chronic hepatitis, sebaceous 
adenitis, sterile nodular panniculitis, sterile granuloma/pyogranu-
loma complex, neutrophilic dermatosis resembling pyoderma gan-
grenosum, eosinophilic dermatitis with edema (ie, Wells syndrome), 
neutrophilic dermatitis (ie, Sweet syndrome), alopecia areata, vas-
culitis, ulcerative dermatoses of the nasal philtrum, dermatomyo-
sitis, contact allergy, chronic pedal furunculosis, metatarsal sinus 
tracts, refractory cases of juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis 
and lymphadenitis (ie, juvenile cellulitis), reactive histiocytic disor-
ders, proliferative otitis externa, idiopathic keratinization disorders 
(ie, primary seborrhea in springer spaniels, cairn terriers, and West 
Highland white terriers and follicular hyperkeratosis in cocker span-
iels), autoimmune diseases such as pemphigus foliaceus (controver-
sial results), lupus erythematosus complex, meningoencephalitis of 
unknown etiology (MUE),10 erythema multiforme, and uveoderma-
tologic syndrome.11 Ketoconazole may be concurrently prescribed to 
reduce cyclosporine dose requirements as a cost-saving measure (see 
Drug Interactions).
In cats, extra-label indications include feline urticaria pigmento-
sa, chronic stomatitis,12 feline acquired alopecia (ie, pseudopelade), 
pemphigus erythematosus and foliaceus,13 dirty face syndrome in 
Persian cats,11 idiopathic pruritus, allograft transplant rejection,14 
pure red cell aplasia,15 immune-mediated thrombocytopenia,16,17 and 
inflammatory bowel disease.18 
The microemulsion form, or “modified” version, of oral products 
(ie, Atopica®, Cyclavance®, Neoral®) is highly recommended, as it is 
better absorbed and provides more consistent peak and trough drug 
concentrations.19 
Pharmacology/Actions
Cyclosporine, a calcineurin inhibitor, is an immunosuppressive 
agent that focuses on cell-mediated immune responses, with some 
humoral immunosuppressive action. Cyclosporine binds to T-cell 
cyclophilin and blocks calcineurin-mediated T-cell activation. 
T-helper lymphocytes are the primary target, but T-suppressor cells 
are also affected. Cyclosporine can also inhibit cytokine produc-
tion and release (including IL-2 and interferon-gamma in dogs20–22 
and IL-3, IL-4, and tissue necrosis factor-alpha in humans), there-
by affecting the function of eosinophils, mast cells, granulocytes, 
and macrophages. It may also inhibit antigen-presenting functions 
of the dermal immune system.23 It is not considered myelosuppres-
sive. One study suggests that cyclosporine therapy does not affect 
circulating lymphocyte CD4/CD8 ratio.24 Cyclosporine appears to 
increase thromboxane production in dogs,25,26 and low-dose aspirin 
inhibits this effect.27
Pharmacokinetics
Cyclosporine is a substrate for the P-glycoprotein (P-gp) efflux trans-
porter, resulting in a wide range of bioavailability between patients. 
NOTE: Neoral®, Gengraf®, Atopica®, and Cyclavance® are NOT bio-
equivalent with Sandimmune®. In addition, the human microemul-
sion product (ie, Neoral®) has not been proven to be as equally bio-
available as Atopica® in dogs; however, a generic veterinary-modified 
cyclosporine product (ie, Cyclavance®) has demonstrated bioequiva-
lence with Atopica®.28 
In dogs, the veterinary-labeled oral product (ie, cyclosporine 
modified, Atopica®) is rapidly absorbed, and bioavailability is 45% 
in fasted dogs. Food in the GI tract increases variability of bioavail-
ability and reduces it by ≈20%.29 Protein binding is ≈90%,23 and vol-
ume of distribution is 7.8 L/kg.30 Cyclosporine is distributed in high 
concentrations into the liver, fat, and blood cells (granulocytes, 5% 
to 12%; lymphocytes, 5% to 9%) and significantly accumulates in the 
skin.23 It does not appreciably enter the CNS; this may be because it 
is a P-glycoprotein efflux transporter substrate.29 The drug is primar-
ily metabolized in the liver via the cytochrome P450 system (like-
ly CYP3A), excreted into the bile, and eliminated in the feces. Less 
than 1% of a dose is excreted unchanged into the urine. Elimination 
half-life in dogs has been reported as ≈5 to 12 hours.31 Clearance 
has been consistently found to be 3.66 to 7.1 mL/minute/kg.29 Dogs 
with diabetes mellitus demonstrate increased clearance and reduced 
elimination half-life.32 Pharmacokinetic parameters were not altered 
when the veterinary-labeled cyclosporine capsules were stored fro-
zen (-20°C [-4°F]) for 28 days.33
In cats, oral cyclosporine (modified) bioavailability is ≈25% and is 
highly variable, but drug absorption is not significantly altered when 
administered with or without food.23,34 Additionally, the bioavailabil-
ity of subcutaneous cyclosporine was reported to be very good in 
cats.35 The drug does not appear to be absorbed transdermally.36 The 
product label recommends administering on a consistent schedule 
(ie, with or without food, time of day).37 Volume of distribution is 
3.3 L/kg, time to maximum absorption (Tmax) is 1 to 2 hours, and 
maximum concentration (Cmax) is 480 ng/mL.23,34 Hepatic and intes-
tinal metabolism (eg, hydroxylation, demethylation) produce inac-

Cyclosporine (Systemic)      323
tive metabolites. Elimination half-life in cats is ≈24 hours but varies 
considerably, with estimates as short as 6.8 hours to more than 40 
hours in some healthy cats. Elimination occurs mainly in the feces.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Cyclosporine is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive 
to it or any component (eg, polyoxyethylated castor oil) in the prod-
ucts. It is contraindicated in animals with malignant disorders or a 
history of malignant neoplasia and in cats infected with FeLV or FIV. 
Safe use has not been established in dogs weighing less than 1.8 kg 
(4 lb); in cats weighing less than 1.4 kg (3 lb); or in dogs or cats less 
than 6 months of age.37,38
This drug should be used with caution in animals with diabetes 
mellitus or renal insufficiency, as it may cause elevated levels of se-
rum glucose, creatinine, and/or urea nitrogen.37,38 Cats should test 
negative for FeLV and FIV before being treated with this drug. Cats 
on cyclosporine therapy appear to be at risk for developing systemic 
toxoplasmosis.39 High cyclosporine blood concentrations (adminis-
tered doses of 7.5 mg/kg/day orally) may be associated with a higher 
risk for developing systemic toxoplasmosis.40 To avoid infection, cats 
should be kept indoors, not eat raw meat, and not be allowed to hunt 
during treatment.41 Ideally, toxoplasma titers should be evaluated 
prior to starting cyclosporine in cats.42 Only use cyclosporine in ani-
mals with active infection when the benefits outweigh the risks.23 Use 
may increase susceptibility to opportunistic bacterial and fungal in-
fections and development of neoplasia.43,44 Diminished immune re-
sponse to vaccinations can occur. Killed vaccines are recommended 
if vaccination is considered in dogs receiving cyclosporine therapy. 
The drug’s impact on the immune response to modified live vaccines 
is not known. 
Cyclosporine is a P-gp substrate. Historically, reports have not 
shown increased sensitivity to cyclosporine and dose reductions 
in dogs with the multidrug resistance (MDR1) gene mutation (also 
known as ABCB1-1delta) have not been recommended.45,46 Howev-
er, there is a case report of one dog receiving a low dose of cyclo-
sporine (3.3 mg/kg PO every 12 hours) who developed a secondary 
infection. Subsequent pharmacodynamic testing revealed marked 
immunosuppression and MDR1 testing showed that the dog was 
heterozygous for the MDR1 gene mutation. The MDR1 mutation was 
suspected to have contributed to the excessive immunosuppression 
experienced in this patient.47 Careful use with clinical and therapeu-
tic drug monitoring is recommended, especially when the patient is 
not responding to therapy at recommended dosages, or when sec-
ondary infections develop at dosages lower than expected to cause 
significant immunosuppression.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies cyclosporine as a hazardous drug (nonantineo-
plastic agent representing an occupational hazard to healthcare 
workers); personal protective equipment (PPE) should be used ac-
cordingly to minimize the risk for exposure. 
Do not confuse cycloSPORINE (ciclosporin) with cycloPHOS-
phamide.49 In addition, do not write prescriptions for this drug 
using the abbreviation SID. Many human-medicine pharmacists 
are not aware of this abbreviation and could interpret it as another 
abbreviation (eg, QID).
NOTE: Neoral®, Gengraf®, Atopica, and Cyclavance® are NOT bio-
equivalent with Sandimmune®.
Adverse Effects
In dogs, vomiting, anorexia, soft stools, and diarrhea50 are the most 
commonly seen adverse effects. Dogs commonly vomit when start-
ing therapy, but this generally abates with time. GI effects rarely 
require discontinuation of the drug. Giving the drug with a small 
amount of food or freezing capsules for 30 to 60 minutes before ad-
ministration have been suggested to alleviate vomiting.33 
Gingival hyperplasia, altered glucose metabolism/diabetes melli-
tus,51 hypertrichosis, excessive shedding, psoriasiform lichenoid-like 
dermatosis, and papillomatosis have been reported in dogs. Gingival 
hyperplasia has been treated with oral and toothpaste forms of azi-
thromycin with limited efficacy.52 Hepatotoxicity or thromboembol-
ic events have been reported but are believed to be rare. One study 
showed that low-dose aspirin inhibits cyclosporine-induced throm-
boxane synthesis.27 One case series of 6 dogs describes the devel-
opment of Burkholderia cepacia complex deep skin infections while 
receiving oral cyclosporine.53 Bacteriuria and UTIs may occur.54
In one appraisal study, the prevalence of bacterial infections in 
828 dogs with atopic dermatitis receiving anti-allergic dosages of 
oral cyclosporine was 11%, most commonly affecting the cutaneous 
and urinary systems and not multiple systems.55 In 95 dogs receiving 
higher dosages of cyclosporine for other diseases, the prevalence of 
bacterial infection was 17%, occurring most often in the GI, urinary, 
and respiratory systems. The prevalence of bacterial infections in 
atopic dogs treated with cyclosporine appears to be low and occur 
most often in the skin. However, when given for immunosuppres-
sion, the prevalence of bacterial infections appears to be higher and 
to affect 1 or more body systems.
In cats, GI effects (including vomiting, diarrhea, hypersalivation, 
decreased appetite, and anorexia) are often reported during the first 
month of therapy.56,57 Resulting weight loss may lead to hepatic lip-
idosis in this species (rare). Lethargy, malaise, behavior changes, 
increased hair growth, acute bullous keratopathy,58 gingival hyper-
plasia, and flares of latent viral infections have also been noted in 
cats receiving cyclosporine. Hemolytic uremic syndrome has been 
reported after renal transplant.59 Cats developing fatal systemic toxo-
plasmosis while on cyclosporine therapy have been reported.39,41,60 
Anaphylaxis is rare but possible. 
Although nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity61 are potential con-
cerns in dogs and cats, extremely high blood cyclosporine concen-
trations (ie, greater than 3000 ng/mL) must be present before neph-
rotoxicity is a significant problem.
Because of the drug’s immunosuppressive effects, animals may be 
more susceptible to opportunistic infections (eg, nocardiosis62, atyp-
ical fungal infections63,64). Cyclosporine use may predispose dogs 
and cats to development of neoplastic diseases; however, evidence 
is lacking. In humans, this risk is increased with long-term use and 
when administered in combination with other immunosuppressive 
agents (eg, steroids).65 
Because the drug has an unpleasant taste, it has been suggested 
that oral solutions be placed in gelatin capsules or used with water or 
taste-masking flavoring agents. In one study, Cyclavance® oral solu-
tion was shown to be significantly more often accepted by dogs, im-
proving dosing compliance, compared with Atopica® capsules, when 
both were mixed with dry food (99.3% vs 27.1%, respectively).66  
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Cyclosporine has been shown to be fetotoxic and embryotoxic in rats 
and rabbits at doses 2 to 5 times the recommended dose.65 Reduced 
fetal weight and growth, skeletal retardation, and premature birth 
have occurred. The manufacturer does not recommend use in preg-
nant or breeding dogs or cats. Use during pregnancy only when the 
risks outweigh the benefits.
Cyclosporine is distributed into maternal milk; the manufacturer 
does not recommend use in lactating queens or bitches.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Oral LD50 in rabbits is greater than 320 mg/kg.65 Single oral doses of 
33 mg/kg in dogs and 40 mg/kg in cats have resulted in no clinical 
