1048      Pradofloxacin
flicts or is dependent on diluent or concentration factors with the 
following drugs or solutions: fat emulsion 10%, amikacin sulfate, 
dobutamine HCl, mannitol, methylprednisolone sodium succinate 
(at Y-site), ondansetron, penicillin G sodium, promethazine HCl (at 
Y-site), and sodium bicarbonate. 
Potassium chloride for injection is reportedly physically incom-
patible with the following solutions or drugs: amphotericin B, diaz-
epam (at Y-site), and phenytoin sodium (at Y-site).
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Parenteral Products: There are several products for parenteral use 
that contain potassium; refer to Appendix tables or individual pro-
prietary veterinary products for additional information.
Oral Products: These products are not found in the FDA Green 
Book; approval status is uncertain.
Potassium Gluconate Tablets: 2 mEq (468 mg); Tumil-K®, Renakare®, 
generic; (Rx). Labeled for use in cats and dogs
Potassium Gluconate Oral Powder: Each 0.65 g (¼ teaspoon) con-
tains 2 mEq of potassium in 4 oz containers; Renakare®, Tumil-K®; 
(Rx). Labeled for use in dogs and cats
Potassium Gluconate Gel: Each 2.34 g (½ teaspoon) contains 2 mEq 
of potassium in 5 oz tubes; Tumil-K® Gel, Renakare®; (Rx). Labeled 
for use in dogs and cats
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS (NOT A COMPLETE LIST):
Parenteral Products:
Potassium Chloride for Injection Concentrate: 2 mEq/mL in sin-
gle-dose and multi-dose vials and must be diluted before adminis-
tering; generic; (Rx)
Potassium Chloride for Injection, Highly Concentrated: 10 mEq and 
20 mEq in 50 mL or 100 mL bags, and 40 mEq/100 mL bags; gener-
ic; (Rx). Ready-to-use solution for fluid-restricted patients; requires 
administration through a central line via calibrated infusion device.
There are also premixed IV bags of saline and dextrose (both sep-
arately and in various combinations) that contain potassium 
10 mEq/L, 20 mEq/L, 30 mEq/L, or 40 mEq/L. 
Potassium Acetate for Injection Concentrate: 2 mEq/mL and 
4 mEq/mL and must be diluted before administering; (Rx)
Potassium Phosphate for Injection (see Phosphate, Intravenous) is 
also available. 
Oral Products: There are many human-labeled potassium salts for 
oral use available in several dosage forms; refer to human drug ref-
erences for more information on these products. Tablets, controlled/
sustained release tablets and capsules, effervescent tablets, liquids, 
and powder in varying strengths available; (OTC, Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Pradofloxacin
(pra-doe-flox-a-sin)  Veraflox®
Fluoroquinolone Antibiotic 
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶FDA-approved for use in cats; approved for dogs in some 
countries
	
▶Enhanced aerobic gram-positive activity and activity against 
anaerobes; its gram-negative activity is similar to other fluoro-
quinolones. 
	
▶Contraindications include hypersensitivity to fluoroquino-
lones; do not administer to pregnant or lactating animals, 
or kittens less than 12 weeks of age, as safety has not been 
determined.
	
▶May produce erosions of cartilage of weight-bearing joints 
and other signs of arthropathy in immature animals of various 
species
	
▶Use with caution in patients with renal insufficiency, pre-exist-
ing CNS disorders (eg, epilepsy), or underlying conditions that 
predispose to arrhythmias (eg, electrolyte imbalances, cardiac 
disease); use with caution in immunocompromised cats (ie, 
infected with feline leukemia and/or feline immunodeficiency 
virus), as safety has not been determined. 
	
▶Adverse effects may include GI distress, photosensitivity, mye-
losuppression, and arrhythmias (dogs only).
	
▶Many potential drug interactions
	
▶FDA prohibits extra-label use in food animals. Should not be 
used in humans
Uses/Indications
In cats, pradofloxacin oral suspension is FDA-approved for the 
treatment of skin infections (wounds and abscesses) caused by sus-
ceptible strains of Pasteurella multocida, Streptococcus canis, Staphy-
lococcus aureus, Staphylococcus felis, and Staphylococcus pseudinter-
medius. Pradofloxacin has also been used clinically in cats for the 
treatment of bacterial UTIs, Bartonella spp,1 Mycoplasma haemofelis 
upper respiratory infections, and in combination with other antimy-
cobacterial drugs for feline leprosy syndromes. One study showed 
pradofloxacin to be equivalent to amoxicillin for treatment of bacte-
rial upper respiratory infections.2
Pradofloxacin is not FDA-approved for use in dogs (see Contra-
indications/Precautions/Warnings). In other countries, pradoflox-
acin is labeled for the treatment of wound infections, superficial 
and deep pyoderma caused by susceptible strains of the S pseudin-
termedius group (including S pseudintermedius); acute UTIs caused 
by susceptible strains of Escherichia coli and the S pseudintermedius 
group (including S pseudintermedius); and as adjunctive treatment 
to mechanical or surgical periodontal therapy in the treatment of 
severe infections of the gingiva and periodontal tissues caused by 
susceptible strains of anaerobic organisms (eg, Porphyromonas spp 
and Prevotella spp). 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated fluoro-
quinolones as Critically Important (Highest Priority) antimicrobials 
for human medicine.3 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) 
has designated fluoroquinolones as Veterinary Critically Important 
Antimicrobial (VCIA) Agents for veterinary species.4
Pharmacology/Actions
Pradofloxacin is a broad-spectrum third-generation bactericidal flu-
oroquinolone antibiotic. The bactericidal activity of pradofloxacin is 
concentration dependent, so its antibacterial activity is dependent 
on high peak concentrations. Its antibacterial action is via inhibition 
of DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV, thereby preventing DNA su-
percoiling and DNA synthesis.

Pradofloxacin      1049
Pradofloxacin is unique among veterinary fluoroquinolones 
in that it has enhanced aerobic gram-positive activity and activity 
against anaerobes; its gram-negative activity is similar to other flu-
oroquinolones. This spectrum of activity is similar to the human 
fluoroquinolone, moxifloxacin. Pradofloxacin, compared with other 
veterinary fluoroquinolones, also has enhanced activity against My-
coplasma spp. It is the only antibiotic shown to date that can elimi-
nate Mycoplasma haemofelis from the blood of experimentally inoc-
ulated cats.5 Methicillin-resistant staphylococci (MRSP) isolates are 
usually resistant to all fluoroquinolones, including pradofloxacin.6 
Proposed ALCS breakpoints during the FDA approval process of less 
than 1 µg/mL were considered susceptible and breakpoints greater 
than 2 µg/mL were considered resistant.
Pradofloxacin has weak activity against streptococci and entero-
cocci and is not recommended in the treatment of these infections. 
Unlike enrofloxacin, pradofloxacin does not cause retinal toxicity 
in cats.7 It has also not been linked to Streptococcus canis-associated 
necrotizing fasciitis.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, after oral administration, pradofloxacin is rapidly absorbed 
with peak plasma concentrations occurring ≈2 hours after a dose.8 
Bioavailability is reported to be high and not affected by tablet size or 
the dose administered. Repeated doses do not impact pharmacoki-
netics. Volume of distribution is more than 2 L/kg, and only ≈35% of 
the drug is bound to plasma proteins. Peak drug concentrations are 
slightly higher in serum than in interstitial fluid but persist at con-
centrations higher than in plasma for most of the 24-hour dosing pe-
riod. Pradofloxacin at 3 mg/kg PO resulted in 5 times as high PK-PD 
values in leukocytes compared with plasma, with the lowest values 
in CSF, synovial fluid, and aqueous humor.9 Highest tissue concen-
trations were found in cartilage, liver, and kidneys and measured 1 
to 1.5 hours after a dose. Clearance was 0.24 L/hour/kg, and plasma 
elimination half-life was ≈8 hours. Pradofloxacin is primarily metab-
olized via glucuronidation and sulfation; ≈40% of a dose is excreted 
in the urine. Approximately 85% of a dose is excreted into the urine 
within 24 hours—40% is excreted unchanged and the rest is excreted 
primarily as glucuronide metabolites.10–13
In cats, pradofloxacin is rapidly absorbed with peak plasma con-
centrations occurring within 1 to 2 hours.8,14 Oral bioavailability is 
≈60% with oral suspension and ≈70% with oral tablets. Repeat dos-
es do not significantly alter the pharmacokinetics. A 5 mg/kg PO 
dose produced a peak concentration of 2.1 μg /mL when given to 
fasted cats; administration with food reduces peak concentrations 
by 50% and total absorption by ≈25%. Volume of distribution is rel-
atively high, and only ≈30% of the drug is bound to plasma pro-
teins. Like in dogs, glucuronidation is the major metabolic pathway 
for cats; 70% of a dose is excreted into the urine within 24 hours, 
but only ≈10% of it is excreted as unchanged drug. Clearance is 
0.27 L/hour/kg, and terminal plasma elimination half-life has been 
variably reported from 3 to 8 hours.11,12,15 Clinical efficacy is asso-
ciated with achieving a peak pradofloxacin concentration 10 times 
greater than bacterial MIC.16,17
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Pradofloxacin is contraindicated in animals that are hypersensitive 
to it or other quinolones. It should not be used in kittens younger 
than 12 weeks of age18 (younger than 6 weeks on United Kingdom 
label14), as safety has not been evaluated. Pradofloxacin has been 
shown to produce erosions of cartilage of weight-bearing joints and 
other signs of arthropathy in immature animals of various species.18 
Pradofloxacin should not be used in dogs and cats with pre-existing 
articular cartilage lesions.8,14 Additionally, pradofloxacin adminis-
tration to healthy cats for longer than 7 days resulted in reversible 
leukopenia, neutropenia, and lymphopenia.18 
Although pradofloxacin is approved for use in dogs in other 
countries (eg, United Kingdom, Europe), it is not FDA-approved in 
the United States due to myelosuppression (thrombocytopenia and 
leukopenia) observed in canine safety studies at daily oral pradoflox-
acin doses of 27 mg/kg (6 times the maximum recommended dose) 
and above, but not at lower, recommended doses.12,18 Additional con-
traindications for dogs include use in dogs less than 12 months of age 
(most breeds), in giant breeds less than 18 months old due to effects 
on articular cartilage, and with CNS disorders (eg, epilepsy).19
Use with caution in animals with impaired renal function or se-
verely impaired hepatic function. It should also be used with caution 
in dogs predisposed to arrhythmias and in cats with pre-existing 
CNS disorders18 (eg, epilepsy, a contraindication on the United King-
dom label8,14). The safety of pradofloxacin in immune-compromised 
cats (eg, cats infected with feline leukemia virus and/or feline immu-
nodeficiency virus) has not been evaluated.18
Fluoroquinolones may cause photosensitization, and prolonged 
exposure of bare (eg, nose) or thinly haired skin to direct sunlight 
should be avoided.
The artificial beef flavor used in the tablets originates from irradi-
ated (to inactivate any viruses or micro-organisms) pig livers. Dogs 
that are hypersensitive to pork products could potentially react to 
these proteins.
Extra-label use of fluoroquinolones is prohibited in food animals.
Adverse Effects
In dogs and cats, pradofloxacin at recommended dosages appears 
to be well tolerated with diarrhea/loose stools occasionally reported. 
Articular cartilage abnormalities have been noted in young, rapid-
ly growing animals given fluoroquinolones (see Contraindications/
Precautions/Warnings).8,14,18
Myelosuppression (thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, lymphope-
nia) is possible in dogs and cats (when used for longer than 7 days).18 
Therapy should be discontinued if this occurs. See Contraindica-
tions/Precautions/Warnings
In dogs, QT interval can be increased and pradofloxacin poten-
tially could have proarrhythmic effects, especially in patients with 
coexisting risk factors (eg, hypothyroidism, bradycardia, electrolyte 
disturbances, heart failure, or liver or kidney disease).20
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Pradofloxacin is labeled as contraindicated for use during pregnancy 
or lactation.8,14 The drug does not pose additional risk when used in 
breeding animals.8
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Pradofloxacin appears to be quite safe in acute overdose situations, 
with vomiting and diarrhea possible. The approximate LD50 after a 
single intraperitoneal application in rats was more than 50 mg/kg, 
and single oral doses of 100 mg/kg were tolerated well in young cats, 
and in dogs; however, in one dog there was temporary overloading 
of renal excretory capacity.12
Acute overdoses should be managed supportively. Consider per-
forming baseline white blood cell counts in dogs with overdoses.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions either have been reported or are 
