Carbimazole      185
ly1,10 (≈10%), are often transient, and can typically be managed with a 
dosage reduction.11 Eosinophilia, leukopenia, and/or lymphocytosis 
may be noted in ≈5% of cats12; these hematologic effects are usually 
also transient and generally do not require drug withdrawal unless 
the blood dyscrasia is persistent or severe.1 
Methimazole and carbimazole may also rarely cause self-induced 
excoriations and hepatopathy, and potentially trigger immune-me-
diated hemolytic anemia and immune-mediated thrombocytopenia 
in cats1,9,13-15; these more serious effects generally require withdrawal 
of the drug. In one study, increased antinuclear antibodies (ANA) 
were noted in ≈22% of all cats receiving methimazole, and in ≈50% 
of cats receiving methimazole for greater than 6 months, but none 
of the cats had signs of a lupus-like syndrome.9 The occurrence of 
ANA is dose dependent,16 and although elevated ANA have histor-
ically been viewed as an indication for dose reduction, this may not 
be necessary in the absence of clinical signs or other indications of 
autoimmune disease.9 Rarely, cats treated with methimazole or car-
bimazole have developed acquired myasthenia gravis that requires 
drug withdrawal.17,18 One case report indicated that a cat developed 
hypersensitivity vasculitis after receiving carbimazole.19
Potentially, treatment with methimazole or carbimazole could 
unmask underlying renal dysfunction in some cats.20 The hyperthy-
roid state may increase GFR and, by treating the hyperthyroidism, 
this effect is abolished.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Carbimazole has been associated with teratogenic and embryotoxic 
effects in rats.1 Do not use carbimazole in pregnant animals as it may 
also affect offspring thyroid development or function. 
Methimazole enters milk and reaches concentrations higher than 
those found in maternal serum.1 If treatment with carbimazole is 
necessary for nursing queens, switch to milk replacer for nursing 
animals.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 	
Acute toxicity that may be seen with overdoses includes those effects 
listed in Adverse Effects. Agranulocytosis, thrombocytopenia, auto-
immune hemolytic anemia, GI bleeding (potentially with hemate-
mesis), hepatitis, and nephritis are perhaps the most serious effects 
that may be seen.1 Coat and skin abnormalities (erythema, alopecia) 
can also occur. Treatment of overdose/toxicity consists of following 
standard protocols for handling an oral ingestion (eg, empty stom-
ach, administer charcoal if not contraindicated) and to treat sup-
portively and based on clinical signs.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving carbimazole or methimazole 
and may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise 
noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but veterinar-
ians should weigh the potential risks and perform additional moni-
toring when appropriate.
	■Anticoagulants (eg, heparin, rivaroxaban): Methimazole 
may potentiate anticoagulant activity.
	■Benzimidazole Antiparasitics (eg, albendazole, fenben-
dazole, thiabendazole): Concurrent use with methimazole can 
reduce hepatic oxidation of benzimidazoles and increase blood 
levels of the parent drug or its metabolites.1,16,21-23 
	■Beta-Adrenergic Antagonists (eg, atenolol, propranolol): 
Beta-blocker dose may need to be decreased once the patient be-
comes euthyroid.16 
	■Chloramphenicol: Combination with carbimazole may in-
crease the risk for myelosuppression
	■Digoxin: Correction to euthyroidism reduces digoxin clear-
ance,16 resulting in increased digoxin exposure and risk for tox-
icity. A reduction in the digoxin dose may be needed when the 
patient becomes euthyroid.
	■Dipyrone: Combination with carbimazole may increase the risk 
for myelosuppression.
	■Iodine 131: There was no difference in response to radioiodine 
based on when methimazole was discontinued relative to I131 ad-
ministration.24 
	■Phenobarbital: Concurrent use of phenobarbital may reduce 
the clinical effectiveness of carbimazole.
	■Prednis(ol)one: A reduction in predniso(lo)ne dose may be 
needed when the patient becomes euthyroid.
	■Theophylline: Theophylline dose may need to be reduced once 
the patient becomes euthyroid.16 
	■Warfarin: In humans with hyperthyroidism, the metabolism of 
vitamin K clotting factors is increased, resulting in increased sen-
sitivity to oral anticoagulants.25 By reducing the effects of hyper-
thyroidism, methimazole may decrease clotting factor metabo-
lism, thus reducing the effects of warfarin. However, patients that 
are euthyroid on methimazole and receiving warfarin may de-
velop hypoprothrombinemia if methimazole is stopped and they 
become thyrotoxic again. Methimazole also has antivitamin K 
activity, so anticoagulants may be potentiated by methimazole.16 
Recommendation: If methimazole and warfarin are used togeth-
er, increased monitoring of anticoagulant effect is warranted.
Laboratory Considerations
	■Methimazole and carbimazole may affect serum fructosamine 
levels in diabetic cats. Increased serum fructosamine after 6 weeks 
of treatment has been reported. It has been recommended that 
serum fructosamine not be used to initially diagnose or assess the 
adequacy of diabetic control in cats with concurrent hyperthy-
roidism until hyperthyroidism is controlled for at least 6 weeks.26
	■Technetium-99m Pertechnetate: Carbimazole adminis-
tration should be discontinued at least 2 weeks prior to thyroid 
scintigraphy, as it may interfere with accurate detection of ectopic 
thyroid tissue.12,27,28
Dosages
CATS:
Hyperthyroidism:
a)	Immediate-release tablets (extra-label): Most dosage recom-
mendations are initially 5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 8 to 
12 hours.10,12,15 Once a euthyroid state is established, the dosage 
amount or frequency is slowly decreased to the lowest effective 
dose. Most cats will require 2.5 – 5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO 
every 12 hours, but some cats can be controlled on once-daily 
dosing.12,29
b)	Sustained-release tablets (extra-label): 15 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) 
PO once daily at the same time each day.1,30 10 mg/cat 
(NOT mg/kg) PO once daily can be considered for cats with 
moderate hyperthyroidism (TT4 between 50 and 100 nmol/L; 
3.9 – 7.8 µg/dL). Adjust dosage within a range of 10 – 25 mg/cat/
day (NOT mg/kg) in 5 mg increments depending on clinical 
signs and TT4 (NOTE: Tablets cannot be split, so combinations of 
10 mg and 15 mg tablets must be used). If cat requires doses less 
than 10 mg/day, use alternate-day dosing (eg, 10 – 15 mg/cat 
[NOT mg/kg] every other day), or consider different ­treatment.

186      Carboplatin
Monitoring
During the first 3 months of therapy (baseline and after every 3 and 
6 weeks of treatment or dosage change)5,16:
	■Physical examination to include body weight, body condition 
score, heart rate, and fundic examination
	■Blood pressure
	■CBC (including platelet count)
	■Serum chemistry profile
	■Serum TT4: Blood samples can be collected at any time (ie, do not 
need to be collected at a prescribed time after methimazole treatment).
	■Serum fT4: Note that this assay is not indicated as a sole monitor-
ing parameter for hyperthyroidism.
	■Serum TSH: May be useful to evaluate for iatrogenic hypothyroidism
	■NOTE: Cats receiving higher dosages should be monitored more 
frequently.
After stabilization (at least 3 months of therapy)16:
	■Body weight
	■Blood pressure
	■TT4 at 3- to 6-month intervals
	■Other diagnostic tests as indicated by adverse effects
Client Information
	■Give this medicine with food. Do not crush or split tablets.
	■For this medication to work, give it exactly as your veterinarian 
prescribed.
	■This medicine will decrease excessive thyroid hormones but does 
not cure the condition. It may take several weeks before your cat 
shows improvement.
	■While your cat is taking this medicine, your cat will require close 
monitoring with regular examinations by your veterinarian as 
well as blood tests. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
	■Treatment is long term, often for the remainder of your cat’s life.  
	■Most side effects (including vomiting, decreased appetite, or low 
energy level occur in the first 3 months of therapy. If any of these 
side effects are seen, stop giving this medicine to your cat and 
contact your veterinarian before restarting this medicine.
	■Serious side effects are rare. If your cat develops yellow skin, eyes, 
or gums (jaundice) or becomes intensely itchy, discontinue this 
medicine and contact your veterinarian immediately.
	■Wash your hands with soap and water after handling the medicine 
(even if gloves are worn) or used litter. 
	■Pregnant women or women who may become pregnant, nursing 
mothers, or people with low thyroid hormones should avoid han-
dling carbimazole. If this is not possible, wear disposable gloves 
while handling this medication and cat litter or bodily fluids (ie, 
feces, blood, saliva) of treated animals. Do not reuse gloves. Once 
used, the gloves should be thrown away in the trash.
	■This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined by 
the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). 
Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the use of personal 
protective equipment when handling this medicine.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A thioimidazole-derivative antithyroid drug, carbimazole occurs 
as a white to creamy white powder with a characteristic odor. It is 
slightly soluble in water and soluble in alcohol.
Carbimazole may also be known as carbimazolum, Basolest®, Cam-
azol®, Carbimazole®, Carbazole®, Carbistad®, Cazole®, Neo Tomizol®, 
NeoMercazole®, Neo-Thyreostat®, Thyrostat®, Tyrazol®, Vidalta®, or 
Neo-morphazole®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, carbimazole tablets should be stored at 
room temperature (not above 77°F [25°C]) in tightly closed contain-
ers and protected from light.1 Do not remove desiccants from man-
ufacturer’s bottle.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted. Do not crush or break the pro-
longed-release tablets.1
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE IN THE UNITED STATES
In some countries: Carbimazole Oral Prolonged-Release Tablets: 
10 mg and 15 mg; Vidalta®; (POM-V)
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
There are no FDA-approved products in the United States; elsewhere 
it may be available as: 
Carbimazole Oral Tablets: 5 mg, 10 mg, 15 mg, and 20 mg. Many 
trade names available outside the US; (POM) 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Carboplatin
(kar-boe-pla-tin)  Paraplatin®
Antineoplastic
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Platinum antineoplastic agent used for a variety of carcino-
mas and sarcomas. In general, less nephrotoxic and fewer GI 
adverse effects as compared to cisplatin.
	
▶Unlike cisplatin, carboplatin may be used safely in cats.
	
▶Contraindicated in patients with a history of hypersensitivity 
to carboplatin or other platinum agents, and with severe bone 
marrow depression. Use with caution in patients with hepatic 
or renal disease, or active infection.
	
▶Primary adverse effects include bone marrow suppression 
(dose-limiting toxicity) and GI upset. Neutrophil nadir in dogs 
typically occurs around day 14 or 21 after administration.
	
▶Embryotoxic, teratogenic
	
▶The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies carboplatin as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling. 
Uses/Indications
Carboplatin is a broad-spectrum antineoplastic agent used to treat 
a variety of neoplastic diseases, including carcinoma (squamous cell 
carcinoma, ovarian carcinoma, pulmonary carcinoma, nasal carcino-
ma, anal sac apocrine gland adenocarcinoma,1 colonic adenocarcino-
ma, urinary tract carcinoma,2 hepatocellular carcinoma, and thyroid 
adenocarcinoma), melanoma,3 and sarcoma (osteosarcoma4). 
Unlike cisplatin, systemic carboplatin appears to be safe and 
well-tolerated in cats.5,6
Intracavitary carboplatin may be used to treat carcinomatosis 
and other malignant effusions.7 Interventional radiology techniques 
can be used to facilitate intra-arterial carboplatin administration for 
the treatment of lower urinary tract carcinoma.8 Carboplatin may 
be considered for intralesional use in conditions such as equine sar-
coids9 and to treat adenocarcinoma in birds.10,11 Carboplatin beads 
and poloxamer gel have also been used locally. They have been well 
tolerated in different species (equines, canines, and felines), though 
efficacy has not been thoroughly established.12–14
Carboplatin is a radiation sensitizing agent.15 Small studies have 
shown the tolerability of carboplatin in combination with other che-
motherapy agents, such as toceranib16 or 5-fluorouracil1716,17; how-
ever, further studies are needed to determine the efficacy of these 
combinations.
