282      Clindamycin 
	■Dinoprost: Clenbuterol may antagonize the effects of dinoprost 
(prostaglandin F2 alpha).23
	■Oxytocin: Clenbuterol may antagonize the effects of oxyto-
cin.23,31
	■Sympathomimetic Amines, Other (eg, albuterol, phenyl-
propanolamine): Concomitant administration with other sym-
pathomimetic amines may enhance the adverse effects of clen-
buterol.
	■Theophylline/Aminophylline: May enhance the adverse ef-
fects (eg, tachycardia, CNS stimulation) of clenbuterol
	■Tricyclic antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline, clomip-
ramine): May potentiate the vascular effects of clenbuterol
	■Xylazine: Clenbuterol may antagonize the uterine contractility 
effects of xylazine32; this effect likely applies to other alpha-2 ag-
onists.
Dosages
HORSES: 
Management of airway obstruction (label dosage; FDA-ap-
proved): Initially, 0.8 μg/kg PO twice daily for 3 days; if no im-
provement, dose can be increased to 1.6 μg/kg twice daily for 3 
days; if no improvement, dose can be increased to 2.4 μg/kg twice 
daily for 3 days; if no improvement, dose can be increased to 
3.2 μg/kg twice daily for 3 days; if no improvement, therapy should 
be discontinued. Recommended duration of therapy is 30 days, 
then it should be withdrawn and therapy should be reevaluated. 
If signs return, the above stepwise dosage schedule can be reiniti-
ated.1 NOTE: One study of horses with SEA noted increased air-
way reactivity and reduced bronchodilatory effects after 21 days 
of administration of clenbuterol. Use clenbuterol no longer than 
is needed for clinical benefit.6 
Adjunctive treatment for dystocia emergencies (extra-label): 
300 μg/500 kg (1102 lb) mare IV slowly (NOTE: Parenteral for-
mulation not available commercially in the United States). The 
drug’s fast onset of action when given IV allows the veterinarian 
to decide quickly if uterine relaxation will correct the problem. 
Clenbuterol is particularly useful when repelling the equine fe-
tus to allow manipulation of the head and limbs. May be used in 
combination with sedatives, analgesics, and tranquilizers. Xyla-
zine or detomidine may inhibit the uterine relaxant effects of 
­clenbuterol.33
CATTLE:
Uterine relaxant in cattle (extra-label): 300 μg/cow (NOT μg/kg) 
slow IV once. May be used during embryo transfer or during the 
final stages of pregnancy, including labor. NOTE: IV formulation 
not available in the United States. Extra-label use of clenbuterol in 
food-producing animals is prohibited by the FDA.23
Monitoring
	■Clinical efficacy
	■Adverse effects
Client Information
	■This medicine is usually used in horses with asthma or airway 
obstruction to relax muscles and improve breathing.
	■Clenbuterol may be used to treat difficult delivery (dystocia) 
emergencies in mares.
	■This medicine can be used to prevent labor and thus, it should be 
used with caution in pregnant animals.
	■Seek immediate medical attention if accidental ingestion occurs 
in humans.
	■Extra-label use in food animals in the United States is illegal. Use 
may also be prohibited in show or racing horses. Check rules and 
regulations before entering your animal in a competition while 
this medication is being administered.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Clenbuterol HCl is a substituted phenylaminoethanol beta-2-adren-
ergic agonist. It is very slightly soluble in water and has a molecular 
weight of 313.65. The commercial syrup is a colorless solution.
Clenbuterol HCl may also be known as NAB-365, clebuterolum, 
Bronchopulmin®, Dilaterol®, Planipart®, Respipulmin®, Spiropent®, or 
Ventipulmin®.
Storage/Stability
The commercially available syrup should be stored at or below 25°C 
(77°F); avoid freezing. The manufacturer warns to replace the safety 
cap on the bottle when not in use. 
Clenbuterol injection should be stored below 25°C (77°F) and dis-
carded 28 days after first use.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information is noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Clenbuterol HCl Oral Syrup: 72.5 μg/mL in 100 mL and 330 mL bot-
tles; Ventipulmin® Syrup; (Rx). NADA #140-973. Do not use in horses 
intended for human consumption.
Clenbuterol HCl for Injection: 0.03 mg/mL (30 μg/mL) in 10 mL 
vials; Planipart® (POM-V, CD [Sch 4 pt 2])
Extra-label clenbuterol use in food animals is prohibited by federal 
United States law.
Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) Uni-
form Classification Guidelines for Foreign Substances (UCGFS) 
Class 3 Drug. Use of this drug may not be allowed in certain ani-
mal competitions. Check rules and regulations before entering in a 
competition while this medication is being administered. Contact 
local racing authorities for further guidance. See Appendix for more 
information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Clindamycin 
(klin-da-mye-sin) 
Antirobe®, Cleocin®
Lincosamide Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Used for broad-spectrum coverage against many anaerobes, 
gram-positive aerobic cocci, and Toxoplasma spp
	
▶Contraindicated in hindgut fermenters (eg, horses, rodents, 
ruminants, lagomorphs) and patients that are hypersensitive 
to lincosamides
	
▶Use with caution in patients with liver or renal dysfunction; 
dose reduction should be considered if the dysfunction is 
severe.
	
▶Potential adverse effects include gastroenteritis, and esopha-
geal injuries if dry pilled.
Uses/Indications
Labeled indications for clindamycin include treatment of skin infec-
tions (eg, wounds, abscesses), dental infections, and osteomyelitis 
(in dogs) caused by coagulase-positive staphylococci (ie, Staphy-
lococcus aureus, Staphylococcus intermedius), Streptococcus spp (in 
cats), Bacteroides fragilis, Prevotella melaninogenicus, Fusobacterium 
necrophorum, and Clostridium perfringens.1 

Clindamycin       283
Clindamycin is also used for a variety of protozoal infections, in-
cluding toxoplasmosis, but high doses may be required to achieve 
adequate CNS concentrations.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated clinda-
mycin as a Highly Important antimicrobial for human medicine.2 
The Office International des Epizooties  (OIE) has designated lin-
cosamides as Veterinary Highly Important Antimicrobial (VHIA) 
Agents in veterinary species.3
Pharmacology/Actions
Lincosamide antibiotics may act as bacteriostatic or bactericidal 
agents, depending on the concentration of the drug at the infec-
tion site and the susceptibility of the organism. Lincosamides act by 
binding to the 50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible bacteria, there-
by inhibiting peptide bond formation and protein synthesis of the 
bacterial cell wall. The lincosamides—lincomycin and clindamy-
cin—share mechanisms of action and have similar spectrums of ac-
tivity, although lincomycin is usually less active against susceptible 
organisms. Complete cross-resistance occurs between the 2 drugs, 
and at least partial cross-resistance occurs between lincosamides and 
erythromycin.
Most aerobic gram-positive cocci are susceptible to lincosamides. 
Clindamycin has excellent activity against staphylococci and strep-
tococci. Other organisms that are generally susceptible include Cory-
nebacterium diphtheriae, Nocardia asteroides, Erysipelothrix spp, and 
Mycoplasma spp. Enterococci are inherently resistant. Acquired re-
sistance is a potential problem, particularly among staphylococci. In-
ducible resistance to clindamycin is common in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and occurs less commonly in other 
methicillin-resistant staphylococci.4–6 Methicillin-resistant staphy-
lococci, particularly methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus pseudinter-
medius, are usually resistant to clindamycin. This resistance cannot 
be detected with routine testing and can lead to treatment failure. 
Testing for inducible clindamycin resistance is important in any 
Staphylococcus spp that have been reported as erythromycin-resis-
tant or in cases in which erythromycin susceptibility has not been 
reported; erythromycin-susceptible staphylococci will not be induc-
ibly resistant.5,6 Streptococcal resistance is rare.
Most anaerobic bacteria are susceptible to lincosamides. There is a 
low prevalence of resistance in the Bacteroides fragilis group.
Clindamycin has activity against a variety of protozoal organisms, 
but it may be more suppressive than curative in the treatment of 
Toxoplasma gondii infections. Clindamycin can have a delayed onset 
of action (1 to 3 days), and drug concentrations may not be high 
enough to achieve complete efficacy. Clindamycin is not effective 
against the extracellular tachyzoites associated with these protozoal 
infections.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, oral bioavailability is ≈73%, and the elimination half-life is 
reportedly 5 hours after oral administration and 10 to 13 hours after 
SC administration. The volume of distribution is ≈0.9 L/kg. Half-life 
may be longer with higher dosages. One study in dogs found a mean 
half-life of ≈4 hours after administration of 5.5 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours as compared with 7 to 10 hours after administration of 11 mg/kg 
PO every 24 hours; overall drug exposure (area under the curve 
[AUC]0-24/MIC) was higher with the higher, once-daily dose.7
In cats, clindamycin half-life after a dose of 11 mg/kg is ≈16 
hours (capsules) and 8 hours (liquid). The volume of distribution is 
≈1.6 L/kg to 3 L/kg. The highest concentrations are found in the 
lungs, liver, spleen, jejunum, and colon.
In humans, the drug is rapidly absorbed from the gut, and ≈90% 
of the total dose is absorbed. Food decreases the rate of absorption 
but not the extent. Peak serum concentrations are attained ≈45 to 
60 minutes after oral administration. After IM administration, peak 
concentrations are attained ≈1 to 3 hours postinjection.
Clindamycin is distributed in most tissue and fluids. Therapeu-
tic concentrations are achieved in bone, synovial fluid, bile, pleural 
fluid, peritoneal fluid, skin, and myocardial tissue. Clindamycin also 
penetrates well into abscesses, scar tissue, and WBCs. CNS concen-
trations may only reach 40% of those found in serum if meninges are 
inflamed and use for this indication in humans is not recommended. 
Clindamycin does not penetrate the eye at concentrations required 
to treat infections. Clindamycin is ≈93% bound to plasma proteins. 
The drug crosses the placenta and can be distributed in milk at con-
centrations equal to those in plasma.
Clindamycin palmitate and clindamycin phosphate are inactive, 
and hydrolysis in vivo to free (active) clindamycin usually occurs 
rapidly. Clindamycin is partially metabolized in the liver to both ac-
tive and inactive metabolites. The unchanged drug and metabolites 
are excreted in the urine, feces, and bile; however, active drug con-
centrations in urine are poor (low). Halflives can be prolonged in 
patients with severe renal or hepatic dysfunction.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Clindamycin should never be administered undiluted as a bolus.8 A 
calculated dose should be administered by IV intermittent infusion 
over at least 10 to 60 minutes (see Dosages).
Although there have been case reports of parenteral administra-
tion of lincosamides to horses, cattle, and sheep, lincosamides are 
contraindicated in hind-gut fermenters, such as horses, ruminants, 
rabbits, hamsters, chinchillas, and guinea pigs, as serious GI effects, 
including death, can occur. Clindamycin is also contraindicated in 
patients with known hypersensitivity to it or lincomycin.
Clindamycin has been implicated in causing esophagitis and, po-
tentially, esophageal strictures in small animal species.9 Dry pilling 
should be avoided when administering this drug.
Patients with severe renal and/or hepatic disease should receive 
the drug with caution; the manufacturer suggests monitoring serum 
clindamycin levels in dogs or cats receiving high-dose therapy.1
In humans, it has been suggested to use the drug with caution in 
patients with atopy or a history of GI disease, particularly colitis; the 
significance of this suggestion for veterinary patients is not known.
Clindamycin use is becoming more scrutinized and restricted in 
humans due to the risk for severe Clostridium difficile infection and 
Clostridium difficile–associated diarrhea (CDAD). Clindamycin in 
5% dextrose injection therapy has been associated with severe colitis, 
which may end up fatal. Though of lesser concern in dogs and cats, it 
may need to be monitored.
Adverse Effects
Reported adverse effects after oral administration in dogs and cats 
include gastroenteritis (eg, emesis, loose stool, infrequently bloody 
diarrhea [dogs]). In a study of healthy cats, administration of a sym-
biotic (prebiotic and probiotic mixture) 1 hour after administration 
of oral clindamycin reduced antibiotic-associated GI signs.10 In rab-
bits, cholestyramine reduced enterotoxemia caused by IV clindamy-
cin administration.11
There have been case reports of esophageal injuries (eg, esoph-
agitis, strictures) in cats when solid dose forms were administered 
without food or a water bolus. Cats may occasionally show signs of 
hypersalivation or lip-smacking after oral administration. IM injec-
tions reportedly cause pain at the injection site.
In humans, eye pain and contact dermatitis have been reported.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Clindamycin crosses the placenta, and cord blood concentrations 
are ≈46% of those found in maternal serum. Safe use in dogs and 
cats during pregnancy has not been established, but the drug has not 
been implicated in causing teratogenic effects. 
Clindamycin is distributed in milk; nursing puppies or kittens of 
