746      Levetiracetam
Levetiracetam
(lee-ve-tye-ra-see-tam)  Keppra®
Anticonvulsant
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Levetiracetam is a broad-spectrum anticonvulsant that can be 
used as adjunct therapy for canine epilepsy or when pheno-
barbital or bromides are not tolerated. Dogs may become 
refractory to therapy over time.
	
▶In cats, levetiracetam may be used as a second-line drug when 
phenobarbital alone does not control seizures but can also be 
tried as sole therapy when phenobarbital is not tolerated.
	
▶Appears to be well tolerated; adverse effects may be transient 
and can include sedation in dogs, and lethargy, decreased 
appetite, and ataxia in cats
	
▶In dogs, phenobarbital may cause significant drug interactions 
with levetiracetam.
	
▶Owner compliance with dosing frequency (every 8 hours) of 
immediate-release tablets and oral solution may be problem-
atic.
	
▶Do not confuse immediate-release and extended-release tab-
lets; use caution when prescribing and dispensing.
Uses/Indications
Levetiracetam can be useful as adjunct therapy to phenobarbital and 
bromides in patients with canine epilepsy. Convincing evidence for 
efficacy of levetiracetam monotherapy is lacking.1–3 Levetiracetam 
has been shown to be useful in the treatment of status epilepticus and 
acute repetitive seizures (ie, cluster seizures) in dogs.4 It has been used 
at home for oral pulse therapy to abort seizure activity,5 and SC admin-
istration at home may be useful in dogs that develop status epilepticus 
or acute repetitive seizures that do not always respond sufficiently to 
benzodiazepine (via rectal and/or intranasal administration).4 A small 
open-label study found that the addition of rectal levetiracetam to 
standard treatment (rectal/IV diazepam and IV phenobarbital) sig-
nificantly increased response rate for dogs with cluster seizures com-
pared to the standard treatment alone.6 In addition, in a study, IV le-
vetiracetam was used successfully to treat refractory seizures in a dog 
that ingested a lethal dose of fluorouracil (5-FU).7 In one case report, 
levetiracetam was successfully used to manage a dog with paroxysmal 
exertion-induced dyskinesia.8 Another study found levetiracetam to 
be effective for reactive seizures that were thought to be due to exoge-
nous toxicity.9 Levetiracetam may have reduced efficacy in dogs over 
time (ie, “honeymoon effect”), and there have been reports that phe-
nobarbital can significantly affect levetiracetam pharmacokinetics in 
dogs.3,10 Lack of efficacy has also been noted when levetiracetam was 
used as adjunct therapy in dogs with refractory epilepsy.11 
Levetiracetam appears to be useful as add-on therapy in cats when 
phenobarbital does not control seizures or as sole therapy in cats that 
are unable to tolerate phenobarbital.12 Studies have shown levetirac-
etam to be more effective than phenobarbital and well tolerated as a 
monotherapy agent in cats with myoclonic seizures.13
Pharmacokinetic data in horses suggest that levetiracetam may be 
efficacious when given orally.14–16
Pharmacology/Actions
The exact mechanism of levetiracetam’s antiseizure activity is not 
well understood. Levetiracetam appears to affect the release of neu-
rotransmitters in the CNS by selective binding to the presynaptic 
protein SV2A on synaptic vesicles, and it may selectively prevent 
hypersynchronization of epileptiform burst-firing and propagation 
of seizure activity.17 It does not affect normal neuronal excitability. 
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, levetiracetam (immediate-release tablet or oral solution) is 
rapidly and almost completely absorbed after oral administration. 
Volume of distribution is 0.5 to 0.7 L/kg.18–20 Protein binding is min-
imal, and ≈90% of a dose is renally eliminated.21 Peak concentration 
(Cmax, ≈34 μg/mL; range, 9.2 to 60 μg/mL) occurs 0.6 to 2.2 hours 
after a single dose of immediate-release tablets, and elimination 
half-life (T½) is 2.2 to 4.4 hours.18,22,23 Concurrent phenobarbital re-
duces Cmax and T½.24–26 Repeat oral doses do not appreciably alter 
pharmacokinetic values.24,26 In a study, peak concentrations occurred 
40 minutes after IM administration; the drug was completely ab-
sorbed, and peak concentration was similar to IV administration.27 
SC levetiracetam (60 mg/kg, undiluted) yielded drug concentrations 
between 65 μg/mL and 114 μg/mL, 15 to 420 minutes after admin-
istration.28 In fasted dogs given an extended-release tablet formula-
tion at 30 mg/kg PO, maximum plasma drug concentration, time to 
reach maximum plasma concentration, disappearance half-life, and 
bioavailability were 27 μg/mL, 3.4 hours, 4.4 hours, and 100%, re-
spectively. Pharmacokinetics were similar when dogs were fed, with 
the exception of the time to reach maximum plasma concentration, 
which was longer (6.6 hours), and bioavailability, which was greater 
(126%).29 Data from different studies suggest that administering ex-
tended-release tablets every 12 hours should maintain therapeutic 
levels in dogs.22,23,29,30 In a study in dogs, when levetiracetam solution 
for injection was administered rectally at 40 mg/kg, the maximum 
serum concentration was 36 μg/mL and time to reach maximum se-
rum concentration was 1.5 to 1.7 hours. Presence of feces may limit 
absorption.31,32 Bioequivalence of generic extended-release tablets to 
Keppra XR® has been demonstrated in dogs.22 
In cats, oral bioavailability of immediate-release levetiracetam is 
≈100%, and elimination half-life is ≈3 hours. The authors concluded 
that 20 mg/kg administered IV or PO every 8 hours should be ade-
quate in most cats.33 Similar pharmacokinetic values were reported 
in cats concurrently receiving phenobarbital.12 In healthy cats receiv-
ing a single 500 mg tablet dose of extended-release levetiracetam, 
serum concentrations remained above 5 μg/mL for 21 hours, with 
an average peak concentration of ≈90 μg/mL.34 CSF concentrations 
appear to parallel serum concentrations, suggesting adequate CSF 
concentrations are attained after oral administration in cats.35 With 
daily administration of extended-release levetiracetam tablets for 7 
days, median peak and trough serum concentrations were 92.3 μg/
mL and 7 μg/mL, respectively. In a small pilot study, a compounded 
liposomal levetiracetam cream was administered to the inner pinna 
at 60 mg/kg every 8 hours for 6 days, which resulted in serum con-
centrations above 5 µg/mL.36 
In 1- to 10-day-old foals receiving levetiracetam (32 mg/kg PO 
and IV as single doses), oral absorption was ≈100%. Peak concentra-
tion (38.3 μg/mL) occurred after 0.9 hours, and elimination half-life 
was 7.8 hours.15 In adult horses, terminal half-life and volume of dis-
tribution at steady-state after IV administration of levetiracetam at 
20 mg/kg were 6.22 hours and 630 mL/kg, respectively. When imme-
diate-release and extended-release tablets were crushed and admin-
istered orally at 30 mg/kg, maximum plasma concentration, terminal 
half-life, bioavailability, clearance/bioavailability, and time to peak 
concentration were 50.72 μg/mL and 53.58 μg/mL, 6.38 hours and 
7.07 hours, 96% and 98%, 76.8 mL/kg/hour and 76.8 mL/kg/hour, 
and 0.66 hours and 0.64 hours, respectively.14,37 No difference was 
found between these formulations; however, the extended-release 
tablets were crushed, which may have affected its pharmacokinetic 
profile. The authors concluded that oral administration of 30 mg/kg 
of either the regular or extended-release tablets in healthy adult 
horses is likely to achieve therapeutic concentrations for at least 12 
hours.14 In another study, generic immediate-release levetiracetam 
tablets administered to healthy adult horses resulted in equivalent 

Levetiracetam      747
pharmacokinetic parameters as branded levetiracetam.38 Healthy 
adult horses receiving levetiracetam 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 
achieved trough levetiracetam CSF and serum concentrations of 
33.7 μg/mL and 28.8 μg/mL, respectively, after 4 days.16
In humans, levetiracetam is rapidly and nearly completely ab-
sorbed after oral administration. Peak levels occur ≈60 minutes after 
administration. The presence of food in the gut delays the rate but 
not the extent of drug absorbed, and the drug can be administered 
regardless of feeding status. Less than 10% of the drug is bound to 
plasma proteins. Although not extensively metabolized, the drug’s 
acetamide group is enzymatically hydrolyzed to the carboxylic acid 
metabolite that is apparently not active. Hepatic CYP450 isoenzymes 
are not involved. In humans, half-life is ≈7 hours and ≈66% of a 
given dose is excreted unchanged via renal mechanisms, primarily 
glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion. Clearance can be 
significantly reduced in patients with impaired renal function.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Levetiracetam is contraindicated in patients that have previously ex-
hibited hypersensitivity to it or any of its components. Respiratory 
failure and cardiac arrest were reported in a dog with cluster seizures 
that received an undiluted levetiracetam injection of 60 mg/kg IV.39 
Levetiracetam should be used with caution in patients with re-
nal impairment; changes in dose or frequency should be considered. 
One small retrospective study found that dogs with chronic kidney 
disease (CKD) had a higher incidence of adverse effects from leveti-
racetam than dogs without CKD.40 In humans, renal elimination of 
levetiracetam correlates with creatinine clearance; total clearance is 
reduced by 40% in patients with mild renal impairment and up to 
60% in patients with severe renal impairment.17,41
Anecdotally, it has been reported that extended-release tablets 
may not fully disintegrate in the canine GI tract. Some neurologists 
have had experience with this situation and found that these patients 
still had levetiracetam concentrations within the therapeutic range. 
The presumption amongst many neurologists is that what is found 
in the stool is the matrix of the pill and that the medication is still 
being absorbed.42 
Discontinuation should be done gradually to decrease risk for 
withdrawal seizures.
LevETIRAcetam should not be confused with levOCARNitine or 
levOFLOXacin. Do not confuse immediate-release tablets with ex-
tended-release tablets; use caution when prescribing or dispensing. 
Immediate-release prescriptions can be written as “levetiracetam” or 
“levetiracetam IR” (immediate-release). “Levetiracetam ER” or “Le-
vetiracetam XR” refers to extended-release tablets.
Adverse Effects
Levetiracetam appears to be well tolerated in dogs and cats. The 
most common adverse effects reported include sedation and ataxia 
in dogs and reduced appetite, ataxia, hypersalivation, and lethargy 
in cats. These effects may be transient. Changes in behavior and GI 
effects (eg, vomiting) can occur.43 Transient head-lowering has been 
observed in horses.14
In a study, IM administration produced less muscle inflammation 
in dogs than the saline control solution.27 In another study, SC ad-
ministration of undiluted levetiracetam solution for injection was 
well-tolerated, but the sample size was small (n = 4 healthy dogs).28
A systematic review and meta-analysis of adverse effects of antie-
pileptic drugs in dogs showed a strong level of evidence for levetirac-
etam’s safety profile as monotherapy and adjunct therapy. Only type 
I adverse effects (ie, dose-dependent, predictable) were reported and 
these included vomiting and sedation, followed by ataxia and hyper-
activity. Less common adverse effects included anorexia, polyphagia, 
and polydipsia, followed by polyuria, diarrhea, aggression, disobedi-
ence, and attention-seeking.44
In humans, adverse effects include sedation, asthenia, anxiety, and 
headache. Neuropsychiatric adverse effects (eg, aggression, agitation, 
irritability, depression) have also been reported. It is recommended 
to withdraw the drug slowly to prevent withdrawal seizures. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
In pregnant dogs or cats, levetiracetam should be used with caution. 
At high dosages, levetiracetam has caused increased embryofetal 
mortality in rabbits and rats. At doses equivalent to the maximum 
human therapeutic dose, levetiracetam has caused minor skeletal ab-
normalities and retarded offspring growth in rats.45 
Levetiracetam is excreted into maternal milk, and its safety in 
nursing offspring is unknown. Levetiracetam should be used with 
caution in nursing patients. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Levetiracetam is a relatively safe agent. Dogs receiving 1200 mg/kg/
day (≈20 times the therapeutic dose) developed only salivation and 
vomiting.46 Other clinical signs seen with overdose in dogs include 
lethargy, hyperthermia, and recumbency. Human patients receiving 
6000 mg/kg during drug testing developed only drowsiness.45 Other 
effects noted in human overdoses (doses not specified) after the drug 
was released included depressed levels of consciousness, agitation, 
aggression, and respiratory depression.
Treatment is supportive based on clinical signs; levetiracetam can 
be removed with hemodialysis. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving levetiracetam and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks 
should be weighed and additional monitoring performed when ap-
propriate.
	■Carbamazepine: Concurrent use may result in signs of carba-
mazepine toxicity (eg, nystagmus, ataxia, dizziness).
	■CNS Depressants (eg, antihistamines, benzodiazepines, gab-
apentin, opioids): May increase risk for CNS depression
	■Methotrexate: May increase methotrexate concentrations and 
risk for toxicity
	■Phenobarbital: In dogs, ongoing (21 days in the study) phe-
nobarbital use significantly increased levetiracetam clearance and 
reduced half-life; levetiracetam dose adjustments (increases) may 
be required.24,25 Pharmacokinetic values of levetiracetam appear 
unchanged in cats concurrently receiving phenobarbital.12
Laboratory Considerations
	■No specific laboratory interactions or considerations were noted.
Dosages
DOGS:
Refractory epilepsy (extra-label):
a)	Using immediate-release tablets: 20 mg/kg PO every 8 hours,10 
although recommendations up to 30 mg/kg PO every 8 hours 
have been noted. Because of the drug’s safety, doses may be in-
creased (every 1 to 2 weeks; up to 60 mg/kg PO every 8 hours) 
further until efficacy is achieved, adverse effects become ap-
