382      Diazoxide
	■Respiratory system: respiratory rate, ETCO2, and SpO2—mild re-
spiratory depression can occur, with a more moderate impact if 
other respiratory depressants (eg, opioids) are administered.
	■Horses should be observed carefully for ataxia. 
	■Clinical response to treatment
Client Information 
	■This medicine may cause sedation and/or disorientation, which 
may impair the performance of working animals.
	■When using this medicine for thunderstorm phobias or other 
triggers (eg, separation anxiety), give the medicine to your animal 
about an hour before the event or trigger.
	■This medicine may be given with or without food. If your animal 
vomits or acts sick after receiving the medication on an empty 
stomach, give the medicine with food or small treats. Contact 
your veterinarian if vomiting continues.
	■Contact your veterinarian immediately if your animal develops 
yellowing of the skin, gums, or whites of the eyes (jaundice).
	■Sleepiness is the most common side effect. This medicine can 
change your animal’s behavior (eg, hyperactivity, anxiety) in un-
expected ways.
	■This medicine may increase your animal’s appetite, especially in 
cats.
	■Contact your veterinarian immediately if your animal stops eat-
ing or seems depressed.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Diazepam, a benzodiazepine, is a white-to-yellow, practically 
odorless, crystalline powder with a melting point between 131°C 
(267.8°F) and 135°C (275°F) and pKa of 3.4. Diazepam is tasteless 
initially but develops a bitter aftertaste. One gram of diazepam is sol-
uble in 333 mL of water or 25 mL of alcohol and is sparingly soluble 
in propylene glycol. The pH of the commercially prepared injectable 
solution is 6.2 to 6.9. It consists of a 5 mg/mL solution with 40% pro-
pylene glycol, 10% ethanol, 5% sodium benzoate/benzoic acid buffer, 
and 1.5% benzyl alcohol as a preservative.
Diazepam may also be known as diazepamum, LA-III, NSC-
77518, or Ro-5-2807; many trade names are available. 
Storage/Stability 
Store all diazepam products at room temperature (15°C to 30°C 
[59°F-86°F]). Keep the injection from freezing temperatures and 
protect from light. Store the oral forms (eg, tablets, capsules) in tight-
ly closed containers and protect them from light. 
Because diazepam may adsorb to plastic, it should not be stored 
in plastic syringes but can be drawn up in syringes if intended to be 
administered within 4 hours. The drug may also significantly adsorb 
to IV solution plastic (eg, PVC) bags and infusion tubing. This ad-
sorption appears to be dependent on several factors (eg, tempera-
ture, drug concentration, flow rates, line length). 
Consider the following to minimize the adsorption of diazepam. 
Use glass or polyolefin containers; if you use PVC bags, select the 
lowest possible surface:volume ratio and minimize the storage time. 
The use of non-PVC administration sets will reduce loss. If you use 
PVC tubing, it should be the shortest possible length with a small 
diameter, and the set should not contain a burette chamber. More 
rapid flow rates (consistent with safe clinical use) will also reduce the 
loss of diazepam.64
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations 
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
The manufacturers of injectable diazepam do not recommend the 
drug be mixed with any other medication or IV diluent, and diluting 
for infusion cannot be recommended. Although some studies have 
shown that dilution in some IV solutions at low concentrations may 
not exhibit visible precipitates, microcrystal formation could not be 
ruled out. Because there is continued interest in IV infusions of di-
azepam, some studies indicate that diazepam injection may be com-
patible with various drugs and IV fluids (eg, diluted to a concentra-
tion of 5 mg/50 mL to 5 mg/100 mL with 0.9% sodium chloride, 5% 
dextrose, Ringer’s, or lactated Ringer’s injection).
Mixing ketamine with diazepam in the same syringe or IV bag has 
been suggested but is not recommended, as precipitation may occur. 
Although there are many anecdotal reports of mixing ketamine with 
diazepam in the same syringe just prior to injection, there does not 
appear to be any published information documenting the stability of 
the drugs after mixing. Use should be avoided if a visible precipitate 
forms.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE IN THE UNITED STATES 
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula-
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
The International Federation for Equestrian Sports (FEI) lists this 
drug as a prohibited substance–controlled substance. 
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Diazepam Injection: 5 mg/mL in 2 mL Carpuject® cartridges; gener-
ic; (Rx, C-IV) 
Diazepam Oral Tablets: 2 mg, 5 mg, and 10 mg; Valium®, generic; 
(Rx, C-IV)
Diazepam Oral Solution: 1 mg/mL in 500 mL, and 5 mg and 10 mg 
patient cups; generic; (Rx, C-IV); Concentrated oral solution: 
5 mg/mL in 30 mL with dropper; Diazepam Intensol®; (Rx, C-IV)
Diazepam Rectal Gel: 2.5 mg, 10 mg, and 20 mg; Diastat®, generic; 
(Rx, C-IV)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Diazoxide
(di-az-ok-side)  Proglycem®
Direct Vasodilator/Hyperglycemic 
Prescriber Highlights 
	
▶Orally administered drug used in the management of insulino-
mas in small animal species
	
▶Contraindications include functional hypoglycemia or 
hypoglycemia secondary to insulin overdose (diabetics) and 
hypersensitivity to thiazide diuretics.
	
▶Use with caution in patients with congestive heart failure or 
renal insufficiency
	
▶Most common adverse effects include anorexia, vomiting, 
and/or diarrhea (may be reduced by giving with food).
	
▶Availability and expense may be problematic. May need to be 
compounded
	
▶Bitter taste may make administration difficult.
Uses/Indications 
Oral diazoxide has been used for the treatment of hypoglycemia sec-
ondary to hyperinsulin secretion (eg, insulinoma) in patients refrac-
tory to glucocorticoid and dietary therapy.

Diazoxide      383
Pharmacology/Actions 
Although related structurally to the thiazide diuretics, diazoxide 
does not possess any appreciable diuretic activity. By directly causing 
a vasodilatory effect on the smooth muscle in peripheral arterioles, 
diazoxide reduces peripheral resistance and blood pressure. 
Diazoxide exhibits hyperglycemic activity by directly inhibiting 
pancreatic insulin secretion, stimulating hepatic gluconeogenesis 
and glycogenolysis, and stimulating the beta-adrenergic system to 
cause epinephrine release and inhibit tissue use of glucose. Diazox-
ide’s inhibition of insulin release may be a result of the drug’s ability 
to decrease the intracellular release of ionized calcium, thus prevent-
ing release of insulin from beta cell insulin granules. Diazoxide does 
not apparently affect the synthesis of insulin, nor does it possess any 
antineoplastic activity. 
Pharmacokinetics 
The serum half-life of diazoxide has been reported to be ≈5 hours 
in dogs; other pharmacokinetic parameters in dogs appear to be un-
available. In humans, serum diazoxide levels (dosed at 10 mg/kg PO) 
peaked at ≈12 hours after dosing with capsules. It is unknown what 
blood levels are required to obtain hyperglycemic effects. Highest 
concentrations of diazoxide are found in the kidneys with high levels 
also found in the liver and adrenal glands. Approximately 90% of 
the drug is bound to plasma proteins and it crosses the placenta and 
into the CNS. It is not known if diazoxide is distributed into milk. 
Diazoxide is partially metabolized in the liver and is excreted as both 
metabolites and unchanged drug by the kidneys. Serum half-life of 
the drug is prolonged in patients with renal impairment.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Diazoxide should not be used in patients with functional hypogly-
cemia or for treating hypoglycemia secondary to insulin overdose in 
diabetic patients. Unless the potential advantages outweigh the risks, 
do not use in patients hypersensitive to thiazide diuretics.
Because diazoxide can cause sodium and water retention, use 
cautiously, and consider dose reductions in patients with congestive 
heart failure or renal insufficiency.
Do not confuse diaZOXide with DIAZepam or diltiazem.
Adverse Effects 
When used to treat insulinomas in dogs, the most common adverse 
effects include hypersalivation, anorexia, vomiting, and/or diarrhea. 
Other effects that may be seen include tachycardia, hematologic ab-
normalities (eg, agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, thrombocytope-
nia), pancreatitis, diabetes mellitus, cataracts, and sodium and water 
retention.
Administering the drug with meals or temporarily reducing the 
dosage may alleviate the GI side effects. Because diazoxide is metab-
olized in the liver, adverse effects may be more readily noted in dogs 
with concurrent hepatic disease.
Adverse effects reported in ferrets include inappetence, vomiting, 
diarrhea, malaise, and myelosuppression.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety 
Diazoxide crosses the placenta.1 Fetal islet cell degeneration has been 
demonstrated in animals. In addition, fetal resorption has been ob-
served in rats, and fetal skeletal and cardiac malformations or terato-
genicity have been observed in rabbits. Diazoxide may cause cessa-
tion of uterine contractions when administered during labor.
It is unknown if diazoxide enters milk. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 
Oral doses of up to 500 mg/kg have been tolerated in dogs.1 The oral 
LD50 is over 5000 mg/kg in rats and 219 mg/kg in guinea pigs. An 
acute overdose may result in severe hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis. 
Treatment should include insulin (see specific Insulin monographs), 
fluids, and electrolytes. Intensive and prolonged monitoring is rec-
ommended.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions 
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving diazoxide and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
	■Alpha-Adrenergic Agents (eg, phenoxybenzamine): May 
decrease the effectiveness of diazoxide by increasing glucose levels
	■Glucocorticoids (eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one): If 
used in combination with diazoxide, may enhance hyperglycemic 
effects
	■Hypotensive Agents, Other (eg, amlodipine, hydralazine, 
prazosin, telmisartan): Diazoxide may enhance the hypotensive 
actions of other hypotensive agents. 
	■Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine, chlorpromazine): May 
enhance the hyperglycemic effects of diazoxide
	■Thiazide diuretics: May potentiate the hyperglycemic effects 
of oral diazoxide.1 Some clinicians have recommended using hy-
drochlorothiazide in combination with diazoxide, if diazoxide 
alone is ineffective to increase blood glucose levels. Caution: hy-
potension may occur.
Laboratory Considerations 
	■Diazoxide will cause a false negative insulin response to the glu-
cagon-stimulation test.
	■Diazoxide may displace bilirubin from plasma proteins.
Dosages
DOGS:
Adjunctive treatment of hypoglycemia secondary to insulin-­
secreting islet cell or non-islet cell tumors (extra-label): Ini-
tially 5 mg/kg PO twice daily.2 May gradually increase to effect 
up to a maximum dosage of 30 mg/kg PO twice daily. If diazox-
ide alone is ineffective, may consider using hydrochlorothiazide 
(1 – 2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours) in combination with diazoxide. 
FERRETS:
Hypoglycemia secondary to insulin-secreting islet cell tumors 
(extra-label): After surgical resection of pancreatic nodules or 
partial pancreatectomy: Prednisone 0.5 – 2 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours will usually control mild to moderate clinical signs. Begin 
at lowest dose and gradually increase as needed. Add diazoxide 
when clinical signs cannot be controlled with prednisone alone. 
Begin diazoxide 5 – 10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. Prednisone 
dosage may need to be lowered at the same time. If the initial dos-
age does not control clinical signs, the dosage can be gradually 
increased to a maximum of 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours.
SMALL MAMMALS:
Guinea pigs; Hypoglycemia secondary to insulin-secreting is-
let cell tumors (extra-label): Based on a single case report: Initial-
ly, 5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. Based on the blood glucose curve, 
dosage was gradually increased to 25 mg/kg PO every 12 hours.
Monitoring
	■Blood (serum) glucose. The goal of therapy is to identify a dosage 
