12      Acetylcysteine
cosis. It is also used as a potential adjunctive treatment to prevent 
enterolith formation in horses by reducing colonic pH.
Pharmacology/Actions
Acetic acid in the rumen lowers pH by shifting ammonia (NH3) to 
ammonium ions (NH4
+) to reduce ammonia absorption; it may also 
slow the hydrolysis of urea.
Pharmacokinetics
No information is noted.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Acetic acid should not be administered to ruminants until lactic aci-
dosis (eg, grain overload, rumen acidosis) is ruled out.
Do NOT use concentrated forms of acetic acid; use only vinegar 
(3%-5% acetic acid).
Adverse Effects
Because of the unpleasant taste and potential for causing mucous 
membrane irritation, it is generally recommended to administer ace-
tic acid via stomach tube.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
When acetic acid is used for appropriate indications, there is little 
likelihood of serious toxicity occurring after minor overdoses. Be-
cause of its potential corrosiveness, the greatest concern is when a 
concentrated form of acetic acid is mistakenly used.
Drug Interactions
There are no documented drug interactions with oral acetic acid. 
Because of its acidic qualities, acetic acid could theoretically affect 
the pharmacokinetics of several drugs, which may have clinical sig-
nificance in veterinary species. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks should be 
weighed and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
	■Aspirin: Acidified urine can decrease the excretion of salicylates.
	■Azole Antifungals (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole): Acetic 
acid may increase absorption of azole antifungal agents.
	■Iron: Acetic acid may increase iron absorption.
	■Phenobarbital: Acidified urine can decrease the excretion of 
phenobarbital.
	■Quinidine: Acidified urine can decrease the excretion of quini-
dine.
Dosages
CATTLE/RUMINANTS:
Urea poisoning/nonprotein nitrogen-induced ammonia tox-
icosis (extra-label): Using 5% acetic acid (ie, vinegar), infuse 
4 – 10 L (for cattle) or 250 mL – 1 L (sheep/goats) into the rumen.1 
Follow with cold water (up to 30 L in cattle; 2 – 8 L in sheep/goats) 
to reduce rumen temperature and reduce formation of urea. Re-
peat treatment as required if clinical signs reoccur.
HORSES:
Adjunctive treatment for enterolith prevention (extra-­
label): Using 5% acetic acid (ie, vinegar), add 250 mL/450 kg 
(250 mL/990 lb) body weight to food once daily.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Glacial acetic acid is C2H4O2. Acetic acid has a distinctive odor and a 
sharp acid taste. It is miscible with water, alcohol, or glycerin. Much 
confusion can occur with the percentages of C2H4O2 contained in 
various acetic acid solutions. Acetic Acid USP is defined as having a 
concentration of 36% to 37% C2H4O2. Diluted Acetic Acid NF con-
tains 5.7% to 6.3% w/v of C2H4O2. Solutions containing ≈3% to 5% 
w/v of C2H4O2 are commonly known as vinegar. Be certain of the 
concentration of the product you are using and your dilutions.
Acetic acid may also be known as E260, eisessig (glacial acetic 
acid), essigsäure, etanoico, or ethanoic acid.
Storage/Stability
Acetic acid solutions should be stored in airtight containers.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
If diluting more concentrated forms of acetic acid to concentrations 
equivalent to vinegar (3% to 5%), use safety precautions to protect 
eyes and skin. It is strongly recommended to have someone check 
your calculations to prevent potentially serious consequences.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
No systemic products are commercially available. Acetic acid (in 
various concentrations) may be purchased from chemical supply 
houses. Distilled white vinegar is available in gallon sizes from gro-
cery stores or mass merchandisers.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Acetylcysteine
N-Acetylcysteine
NAC, ACC
(assah-teel-sis-tay-een)  Mucomyst®
Antidote; Mucolytic
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Used primarily as a treatment for acetaminophen toxicity or 
other hepatotoxic conditions in which glutathione synthesis is 
inhibited or oxidative stress occurs
	
▶When using as an antidote, if possible, give first dose IV; oral 
doses should be given on an empty stomach and via gastric 
tube.
	
▶Has also been used as an inhaled solution for its mucolytic 
effect and, anecdotally, orally for treating degenerative my-
elopathy
	
▶Administration via nebulization has caused hypersensitivity 
and bronchospasm. 
	
▶Dilute prior to IV administration; use a 0.2 micron in-line filter if 
administering inhalation solution IV
Uses/Indications
Acetylcysteine (N-acetylcysteine, NAC) is used in veterinary medi-
cine as both a mucolytic agent in the pulmonary tree and as a treat-
ment for acetaminophen, xylitol, or phenol toxicity in small animals. 
It potentially could be useful in the adjunctive treatment of sulfon-
amide hypersensitivity, sago palm hepatotoxicity, mushroom hepa-
totoxicity, doxorubicin-induced hepatotoxicity, cadmium toxicity, or 
phenazopyridine toxicity.1-4 Acetylcysteine may also be used topical-
ly in the eye to halt the melting effect of collagenases and proteinases 
on the cornea (see Acetylcysteine Ophthalmic).
Acetylcysteine has been used anecdotally with aminocaproic acid 
to treat degenerative myelopathy in dogs, but efficacy data are lack-
ing. 
In horses with strangles (ie, Streptococcus equi subsp equi infec-
tion), acetylcysteine instilled into the guttural pouch has been used 
to help break up chondroids and avoid the need for surgical remov-
al.5 Acetylcysteine enemas have been used in neonatal foals to break 
up meconium refractory to repeated enemas. In mares in estrus, 
intrauterine acetylcysteine instillation could potentially be useful as 
an adjunctive treatment of endometritis, as acetylcysteine appears 
to have anti-inflammatory effects on equine endometrial cells and 
improves pregnancy rates.6,7

Acetylcysteine      13
Pharmacology/Actions
When administered into the pulmonary tree, acetylcysteine reduc-
es the viscosity of both purulent and nonpurulent secretions and 
expedites the removal of these secretions via coughing, suction, or 
postural drainage. The free sulfhydryl group on the drug is believed 
to reduce disulfide linkages in mucoproteins; this effect is most pro-
nounced at a pH from 7 to 9. The drug has no effect on living tissue 
or fibrin.
In the management of toxicity, acetylcysteine acts as a thiol donor, 
stimulating glutathione synthesis, and is a free radical scavenger. It 
also improves hepatic blood flow through increased production of 
nitric oxide. In acetaminophen hepatotoxicity, glutathione stores are 
maintained allowing elimination via nontoxic metabolites.
When administered to sick dogs (n = 30) during the first 48 hours 
of hospitalization, acetylcysteine stabilized erythrocyte glutathione 
concentrations, but when compared with the placebo group, illness 
severity scores and survival rates were unchanged.8
Pharmacokinetics
When given orally, some acetylcysteine is absorbed from the GI 
tract. Oral bioavailability in healthy cats has been reported as ≈20%.9 
When administered via nebulization or intratracheally into the pul-
monary tract, most of the drug is involved in the sulfhydryl-disulfide 
reaction and the remainder is absorbed. Absorbed drug is converted 
(deacetylated) into cysteine in the liver and then further metabo-
lized. Elimination half-life in cats is ≈0.8 hours (IV) and ≈1.3 hours 
(PO). The authors postulated that oral doses of 100 mg/kg may be ef-
fective in cats when treating chronic diseases, but additional studies 
are required to confirm safety and efficacy.9
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Acetylcysteine is contraindicated (for pulmonary indications) in 
animals hypersensitive to it. Use as an antidote has no contraindi-
cations.
Acetylcysteine administration via inhalation (nebulization) may 
cause bronchospasm, and this drug should be used very cautious-
ly, if at all, in animals with bronchospastic conditions (eg, asthma, 
bronchitis). 
Oral or IV administration requires dilution to a 5% (50 mg/mL) 
solution. Although acetylcysteine is not labeled for injection, this 
route is used anecdotally; a 0.2 micron in-line filter must be used 
when giving IV. The taste and smell of the solution is unpleasant (sul-
furous), and taste-masking agents (eg, colas, juices) have been used 
in humans. Because oral dosing of these drugs may be difficult in 
animals, gastric tubes may be necessary.
Adverse Effects
When given orally for acetaminophen toxicity, acetylcysteine can 
cause GI effects (eg, nausea, vomiting) and rarely, urticaria. 
IV administration appears to be well-tolerated in veterinary pa-
tients. IV boluses in humans have caused changes in blood pressure 
(ie, hyper- or hypotension), GI effects, erythema and flushing 30 to 
60 minutes after infusion, and hypersensitivity reactions (eg, in hu-
mans, rash, hypotension, wheezing).
Adverse effects reported when acetylcysteine is administered 
into the pulmonary tract include hypersensitivity, stomatitis, chest 
tightness, bronchoconstriction, and bronchial or tracheal irritation. 
A sticky residue may be noted on the face following nebulization 
with a mask. A study in cats with experimentally induced asthma 
demonstrated that endotracheal nebulization with acetylcysteine in-
creased airway resistance and caused other adverse effects in some 
cats, including increased airway secretions, cough, and unilateral 
strabismus.10
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Acetylcysteine crosses the placenta. Reproduction studies in rabbits 
and rats have not demonstrated any evidence of teratogenic or em-
bryotoxic effects when used in doses up to 3 times normal. Studies in 
laboratory animals have not demonstrated impaired fertility.
It is unknown whether acetylcysteine enters milk. Because safety 
has not been established, this drug should only be used when the 
maternal benefits outweigh the potential fetal risks. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The LD50 of acetylcysteine in dogs is 1 g/kg (PO) and 700 mg/kg (IV). 
It is believed that acetylcysteine is quite safe (with the exception of 
the adverse effects listed above) in most overdose situations.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
	■Activated Charcoal: The use of activated charcoal as a gut 
adsorbent of acetaminophen is controversial, as charcoal may also 
adsorb orally-administered acetylcysteine.  
	■Nitroglycerin: May enhance hypotension when given IV con-
comitantly with acetylcysteine
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Maintain or restore glutathione levels for the adjunctive treat-
ment of hepatotoxicity associated with oxidative damage (ex-
tra-label): Initial dose 140 – 180 mg/kg IV (dilute to 5% and give 
via slow IV using a 0.2 micron filter over 15 to 20 minutes) or 
280 mg/kg PO (via gastric tube), followed by 70 mg/kg PO or IV 
every 6 hours for a minimum of 7 treatments.2,11-13 Large overdos-
es may require up to 17 doses. IV administration is preferred in 
serious intoxications or in animals with uncontrolled vomiting.
Canine degenerative myelopathy (extra-label): 25 mg/kg PO 
every 8 hours for 2 weeks, then every 8 hours every other day. 
The 20% solution should be diluted to 5% with chicken broth 
or suitable diluent. Used in conjunction with aminocaproic acid 
at a dosage of 500 mg per dog (NOT mg/kg) PO every 8 hours 
indefinitely. Adjunctive treatments may include prednisone 
(0.25 – 0.5 mg/kg PO daily for 10 days, then every other day), Vi-
tamin C (1000 mg PO every 12 hours), and Vitamin E (1000 units 
PO every 12 hours). NOTE: No treatment has been shown to be 
effective in published trials.14
Adjunctive treatment of hepatic lipidosis (extra-label): Iden-
tify underlying cause of anorexia and provide a protein replete 
feline diet, give acetylcysteine at 140 mg/kg IV over 20 minutes, 
then 70 mg/kg IV every 12 hours; dilute 10% acetylcysteine with 
saline 1:4 and administer IV using a 0.2 micron filter.15 See also 
­Carnitine.
HORSES:
To help break up chondroids in the guttural pouch (extra- 
label): Instill 20% solution.5
In neonatal foals to break up meconium refractory to repeated 
enemas (extra-label): 8 g in 20 g sodium bicarbonate in 200 mL 
water (pH of 7.6), give as enema as needed to effect16 or with foal 
in lateral recumbency, insert a 30 Fr Foley catheter with a 30-
cc bulb for a retention enema. Using gravity flow, slowly infuse 
100 – 200 mL of 4% acetylcysteine solution and retain for 30 to 
45 minutes. IV fluids and pain medication should be considered. 
Monitor for possible bladder distention.17 
Monitoring
	■When used for inhalational therapy (ie, nebulization), monitor 
