Dipyrone      413
	■CNS Depressant Drugs (eg, anesthetic agents, barbiturates, 
cannabidiol): Concurrent use may cause increased CNS or re-
spiratory depression when used with opioid antidiarrheal agents.
	■Digoxin: Concurrent use may result in increased serum digoxin 
concentrations.
	■Laxatives (eg, oral magnesium salts, polyethylene glycol 
3350): Concurrent use may decrease efficacy of diphenoxylate. 
	■Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, 
linezolid, methylene blue, selegiline): Opioid antidiarrheal 
agents are contraindicated in human patients receiving systemic 
MAOIs for at least 14 days after receiving MAOIs because of an 
increased risk of a hypertensive crisis.  
	■Opioids (eg, buprenorphine, morphine, tramadol): Therapeu-
tic duplication. Concurrent use may increase risk of CNS or respi-
ratory depression and have additive anticholinergic effects.
	■Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine, chlorpromazine): Con-
current use may increase risk of CNS depression and have addi-
tive anticholinergic effects.
	■Potassium Salts, Oral: Reduced GI motility may increase the 
risk for GI irritation and ulceration caused by potassium salts. The 
use of solid oral forms of potassium concurrently with drugs that 
decrease GI motility is contraindicated in humans; consider use 
of liquid/gel potassium formulations.  
	■Prokinetic Agents (eg, cisapride, erythromycin, metoclopr-
amide): Concurrent use may result in decreased efficacy of both 
agents.
	■Tricyclic Antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline, clomip-
ramine): Concurrent use may increase risk of CNS depression 
and have additive anticholinergic effects.
Laboratory Considerations 
	■Opioids may increase biliary tract pressure, resulting in increased 
plasma amylase and lipase values up to 24 hours following their 
administration. 
Dosages
DOGS:
Antidiarrheal agent (extra-label): Dosage is based on the diphe-
noxylate component: 
a)	 0.05 – 0.1 mg/kg PO 3 to 4 times daily 7–9
b)	 0.1 – 0.2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 
Antitussive agent (extra-label): 0.2 – 0.5 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 
hours2  
CATS:
Antidiarrheal agent (extra-label): 0.08 – 0.1 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours10; NOTE: Not usually recommended for cats.
Monitoring 
	■Clinical efficacy: as antidiarrheal, decrease in volume and fre-
quency of diarrhea; for tracheal collapse, improved cough sup-
pression
	■Monitor hydration and serum electrolytes in patients with severe 
diarrhea
	■Adverse effects: respiratory and CNS depression, constipation, 
vomiting
Client Information 
	■This medicine may be used to treat diarrhea or as a cough ­suppressant.
	■May be given with or without food. If your animal vomits or acts 
sick after receiving the drug on an empty stomach, try giving the 
next dose with food or a small treat. If vomiting continues, con-
tact your veterinarian. 
	■Constipation and sleepiness are the most common side effects in 
dogs. 
	■Must use cautiously in cats as they can get overly excited 
	■This medicine is a controlled drug in the United States. It is against 
federal law to use, give away, or sell this medication to others than 
for whom it was prescribed. 
	■Contact your veterinarian if diarrhea does not improve or if your 
animal appears listless.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Structurally related to meperidine, diphenoxylate HCl is a synthetic 
phenylpiperidine-derivative opioid agonist. It occurs as an odorless, 
white, crystalline powder that is slightly soluble in water and spar-
ingly soluble in alcohol. Commercially available preparations also 
contain a small amount of atropine sulfate as a bittering agent to dis-
courage abuse of diphenoxylate for its narcotic effects; at therapeutic 
doses, the atropine component has no clinical effect in humans. 
This combination may be known as co-phenotrope in the Unit-
ed Kingdom and elsewhere. Other synonyms include R 1132, NIH 
7562, or difenoxilato. A commonly used trade name is Lomotil®.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations 
No specific information is noted.
Storage/Stability 
Diphenoxylate/atropine tablets should be stored at room tempera-
ture of 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F). Diphenoxylate/atropine oral 
solution should be stored at room temperature of 20°C to 25°C 
(68°F-77°F); avoid freezing.
Follow applicable local, state, and federal rules regarding con-
trolled drug storage, waste, and disposal.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Diphenoxylate HCl and Atropine Sulfate Tablets: Diphenoxylate 
2.5 mg and Atropine 0.025 mg; Lomotil®, generic; (Rx, C-V) 
Diphenoxylate HCl and Atropine Sulfate Liquid: Diphenoxylate 
2.5 mg and Atropine Sulfate 0.025 mg per 5 mL; Lomotil®, generic; 
(Rx, C-V)
Report prescribing and/or dispensing to state monitoring programs 
where required.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Dipyrone
Metamizole
(dye-purr-own)  Zimeta®
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug (NSAID) 
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Approved for short-term (up to 3 days) control of pyrexia in 
horses 
	
▶Not approved for use in food-producing animals in the United 
States
	
▶May also be useful for analgesia in dogs and cats
	
▶Use with caution in horses at risk for hemorrhage or those 
receiving nephrotoxic drugs (eg, aminoglycosides).
	
▶Do not administer concurrently with other NSAIDs or with 
corticosteroids.
	
▶Adverse effects include increased serum sorbitol dehydroge-
nase, hypoalbuminemia, and gastric ulcers. Prolongation of 
coagulation parameters (eg, PT, aPTT) may occur.
Uses/Indications
Dipyrone injection is indicated for the control of pyrexia in horses. 

414      Dipyrone
The drug was deemed effective (decrease of rectal temperature by 
more than 1.1°C [2°F] or return to normothermia by 6 hours after 
drug administration) in ≈75% of treated horses.1
Historically, dipyrone was FDA-approved for use in humans but 
was withdrawn from the market in 1977 due to reports of agranulo-
cytosis. Dipyrone had been used in a variety of veterinary species as 
an analgesic, antipyretic, and muscle relaxant. An unapproved dipy-
rone product continued to be sold for equine use until 1996 when the 
FDA removed the product due to concerns of use in food-producing 
animals. Veterinary use of compounded dipyrone formulations in-
creased after its withdrawal. A commercially prepared formulation 
for use in horses is now available and is strongly recommended over 
use of a compounded product.
In countries outside the United States, dipyrone may be approved 
for use in other species as an analgesic and/or antipyretic. Dipyrone 
has demonstrated analgesic properties in dogs.2–5 In cats, dipyrone 
may be useful for postoperative analgesia6 but efficacy is unclear.7
Pharmacology/Actions
Dipyrone is an NSAID. It is a prodrug that is rapidly hydrolyzed to 
the active compound 4-methylaminoantipyrine (4-MAA).8
Dipyrone is thought to inhibit peripheral cyclooxygenase COX-1 
and COX-2 mediated production of prostaglandins. Dipyrone also 
inhibits cyclooxygenase (COX-3) within the CNS9 and may have 
agonist activity on cannabinoid and opioid systems. In addition to 
its antipyretic effects, the drug has analgesic and weak anti-inflam-
matory properties. It may also have antispasmodic activity on bra-
dykinin-induced spasms on the intestinal tract without appreciably 
altering spontaneous intestinal motility.10–12  
Dipyrone inhibits platelet aggregation in dogs.13 In horses, it pro-
longs coagulation parameters (eg, PT, aPTT) at higher doses.8  
Pharmacokinetics
Dipyrone circulates only briefly before rapid hydrolysis into the 
active primary metabolite 4-methylaminoantipyrine (4-MAA). In 
humans, 4-MAA is hepatically metabolized to 4-aminoantypyrine 
(4-AA) and other inactive end metabolites that are renally excreted.8 
4-MAA and 4-AA are both considered active metabolites in humans 
and therefore pharmacokinetic studies focus primarily on 4-MAA 
and 4-AA. In veterinary species, it is unknown if 4-AA contributes 
to analgesic activity as plasma concentrations are very low compared 
with 4-MAA.14,15
In healthy dogs, peak 4-MAA concentration occurs ≈2 hours after 
oral dosing and ≈0.6 hours after IM injection. Volume of distribu-
tion is ≈5 to 7.5 L/kg, clearance is 552 to 921 mL/kg/hour, and elim-
ination half-life is ≈6 hours. Plasma 4-MAA concentrations remain 
at or above human inhibitory concentrations (IC50) for COX-1 and 
COX-2 enzymes for ≈12 and 8 hours, respectively.15,16 Rectal admin-
istration produces low levels of 4-MAA and is likely the least effec-
tive route in dogs.15
In healthy cats, oral absorption is high with maximum concentra-
tions achieved ≈6 hours after dosing. Volume of distribution is ≈1 to 
1.4 L/kg, clearance is ≈92 to 131 mL/kg/hour, and half-life is ≈6 to 7 
hours. Low absorption was seen after IM administration compared 
to both IV and PO routes.17
In healthy horses receiving dipyrone, 4-MAA elimination half-life 
is reported as 3 to 5 hours and clearance is 230 to 285 mL/kg/hour.14,18 
4-MAA has a large volume of distribution (1 to 1.9 L/kg), moderate 
protein binding (low compared with other NSAIDs), and readily 
penetrates into the CNS.10  When dipyrone was given IM, time to 
peak concentration was ≈1.2 hours and the maximum concentration 
was lower than when given IV, but otherwise the pharmacokinetic 
profiles were similar between routes.14 When dipyrone was given to 
horses at the labeled dose every 12 hours, minimal accumulation was 
seen after 9 days. However, higher doses and more frequent dosing 
did result in drug accumulation and increases in trough concen-
trations and AUC that were not proportional to increases in dose 
alone, which suggests the possibility of nonlinear pharmacokinetics 
at higher doses.19
In healthy donkeys, 4-MAA volume of distribution is 0.5 to 
0.8 L/kg, clearance is 160 to 300 mL/kg/hour, and elimination half-
life is ≈1.9 hours.20
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Dipyrone is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to it. 
Safe use in horses younger than 3 years has not been evaluated.8 Due 
to the potential for prolongation of PT, dipyrone should not be given 
more frequently than every 12 hours.8
The drug should be used with caution in horses at risk for hem-
orrhage and those that are dehydrated, receiving diuretics, or with 
preexisting renal, cardiac, or hepatic dysfunction. Use with caution 
in animals with a history of or current hematologic or bone marrow 
abnormalities.
In humans, a significant decrease in clearance was seen in patients 
with liver cirrhosis. In humans with renal impairment, elimination 
of end metabolites was impaired, but 4-MAA clearance was not sig-
nificantly altered.21 It is unclear how this translates to veterinary spe-
cies, but dipyrone should be used with caution in animals with renal 
or hepatic dysfunction. 
Do not use dipyrone in horses intended for human consumption 
or in any food-producing animal.8 
Due to risk for agranulocytosis in humans, those preparing or 
administering the drug should avoid direct contact with skin or ac-
cidental injection.8
Do not confuse meTAMizole with meTHIMazole. Do not con-
fuse ZImeta (dipyrone) with ZOmeta (zoledronic acid).
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects associated with administration of dipyrone to horses 
during an FDA field study were elevated serum sorbitol dehydro-
genase (SDH; an acute marker of hepatocellular injury) (5%), hy-
poalbuminemia (3%), and gastric ulcers (2%).8 In addition, one of 
each of the following occurred in different horses: hyperemic mu-
cosa right dorsal colon, prolonged aPTT, elevated creatinine, injec-
tion site reaction, and anorexia. Bloody nasal discharge and death 
occurred in one horse during a safety study. Clinical signs associated 
with NSAID intolerance may include colic, diarrhea, and decreased 
appetite.8
Reported adverse effects in dogs and cats include vomiting and 
salivation.15,17 In dogs, dipyrone has been shown to inhibit platelet 
aggregation.22 
Experience in EU countries suggests the drug is well tolerated in 
horses at approved dosages.23 Historically, the occurrence of agran-
ulocytosis and leukopenia was associated with high doses and pro-
longed treatment. 
In humans, dipyrone seems to have a lower risk for GI bleeding as 
compared with other NSAIDs such as piroxicam and aspirin.24
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safe use in horses used for breeding, or in pregnant or lactating hors-
es has not been evaluated. Because safety has not been established in 
animals, this drug should only be used when the maternal benefits 
outweigh the potential risks to offspring.
Decreased pup survival was observed in rats treated with 
250 – 625 mg/kg/day prior to and throughout pregnancy.23
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Dipyrone 30 mg/kg given every 8 hours did not demonstrate an ad-
equate margin of safety due to prolongation of PT and aPTT, clinical 
signs of coagulopathy, and hepatotoxicity (increased bilirubin and 
liver weight). In healthy horses receiving 60 mg/kg or 90 mg/kg IV 3 
