82      Ampicillin/Sulbactam 
Ampicillin/Sulbactam 
(am-pi-sill-in; sul-bak-tam)  Unasyn®
Potentiated Aminopenicillin
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Parenteral potentiated aminopenicillin that may be used to 
treat infections for which amoxicillin/clavulanate would be 
appropriate, but an injectable antibiotic is required
	
▶May be used for surgical prophylaxis 
	
▶Hypersensitivity reactions possible; contraindicated in patients 
with documented severe hypersensitivity to penicillins
	
▶Usually administered SC, IM, or IV every 6 to 8 hours
Uses/Indications
The addition of sulbactam to ampicillin broadens ampicillin’s spec-
trum through inhibition of some beta-lactamases. 
Ampicillin/sulbactam may be indicated when parenteral therapy 
is required for the treatment of aerobic or anaerobic gram-positive 
and gram-negative infections. In dogs and cats, ampicillin/sulbac-
tam may be considered when oral amoxicillin/clavulanate is not 
viable (eg, patient NPO, in cases of critical illness [eg, sepsis, pneu-
monia, other severe infections]), or for surgical prophylaxis. For 
broad-spectrum uses, ampicillin/sulbactam is often combined with 
another drug such as a fluoroquinolone or aminoglycoside to pro-
vide enhanced gram-negative coverage.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated ampicil-
lin/sulbactam as a Critically Important, High Priority antimicrobial 
in human medicine.1 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) 
has designated ampicillin/sulbactam as Veterinary Critically Im-
portant Antimicrobial (VCIA) Agents in avian, bovine, and swine 
species.2
Pharmacology/Actions
Ampicillin is a time-dependent bactericidal agent that acts via in-
hibition of cell wall synthesis. Penicillins are bactericidal against 
susceptible bacteria and act by inhibition of mucopeptide synthesis 
in the cell wall, which results in a defective barrier and an osmoti-
cally unstable spheroplast. The exact mechanism for this effect has 
not been definitively determined, but beta-lactam antibiotics have 
been shown to bind to several enzymes in the bacterial cytoplasmic 
membrane that are involved with cell wall synthesis (eg, carboxypep-
tidases, transpeptidases, endopeptidases). Various beta-lactam anti-
biotics have different affinities for these enzymes (ie, penicillin-bind-
ing proteins), which helps explain the differences in spectrums of 
activity not explained by the influence of beta-lactamases. Like other 
beta-lactam antibiotics, penicillins are generally considered to be 
more effective against actively growing bacteria.
Sulbactam has some intrinsic antibacterial activity against some 
bacteria (eg, Neisseria spp, Moraxella spp, Bacteroides spp); however, 
for most bacteria, sulbactam alone does not achieve levels sufficient 
to act as an antibacterial agent. Sulbactam binding to certain pen-
icillin-binding proteins may explain its activity and, when used in 
combination with ampicillin, synergistic effects may result. On an 
mg-for-mg basis, clavulanic acid is a more potent beta-lactamase in-
hibitor than sulbactam, but sulbactam offers reduced likelihood of 
inducing chromosomal beta-lactamases, greater tissue penetration, 
and stability.
When sulbactam is combined with ampicillin, ampicillin’s spec-
trum of activity is extended to bacteria (eg, Escherichia coli, Pasteurella 
spp, Staphylococcus spp, Klebsiella spp, Proteus spp) that produce 
beta-lactamases of Richmond-Sykes types II through VI that would 
otherwise render ampicillin ineffective. Sulbactam binds to be-
ta-lactamases, thereby protecting the beta-lactam ring of ampicillin 
from hydrolysis. The efficacy of sulbactam involves how well it binds 
the specific beta-lactamase and the relative levels of sulbactam and 
beta-lactamase. In cases in which there is a high bacterial biobur-
den or bacteria are producing large amounts of beta-lactamase, 
efficacy may be limited. Other aerobic bacteria that may be sus-
ceptible to ampicillin/sulbactam include Streptococcus spp, Listeria 
monocytogenes, Bacillus anthracis, Salmonella spp, Pasteurella spp, 
and Acinetobacter  spp. Anaerobic bacterial infections caused by 
Clostridium spp, Bacteroides spp, Fusobacterium spp, Peptostrepto-
coccus spp, and Propionibacterium spp may also be susceptible to 
ampicillin/sulbactam.3–5 Similar to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, am-
picillin/sulbactam can be used in the treatment of bacterial respi-
ratory tract infections, although ampicillin/sulbactam is ineffective 
against Mycoplasma spp and resistance in Bordetella spp is an in-
creasing problem in some regions. In general, ampicillin/sulbactam 
is excellent for beta-lactamase–producing gram-positive aerobic 
and anaerobic bacteria, but less effective for beta-lactamase–pro-
ducing gram-negative bacteria. 
Methicillin-resistant staphylococci are resistant to ampicillin/sul-
bactam. Ampicillin/sulbactam is usually ineffective against AmpC 
(type I) cephalosporinases, and efficacy against extended-spectrum 
beta-lactamase–producing bacteria is variable and often unpredict-
able. There is little—if any—synergistic activity against organisms 
already susceptible to ampicillin. 
Pharmacokinetics
See Ampicillin for pharmacokinetic information. 
Because sulbactam sodium is not appreciably absorbed from the 
GI tract, this medication must be given parenterally. A covalently 
linked double ester form of ampicillin/sulbactam (ie, sultamicillin) is 
orally absorbed, but this combination is not commercially available 
in the US. When sulbactam is administered parenterally (ie, IV, IM), 
its pharmacokinetic profile closely mirrors that of ampicillin’s phar-
macokinetic profile in most species studied. In a study of calves, plas-
ma concentrations of sulbactam during the elimination phase were 
consistently higher than those of ampicillin, leading the study au-
thors to propose using a higher ratio (greater than 2:1 ampicillin/
sulbactam) if the combination is used in calves.6
A regional IV limb perfusion (RIVLP; 45-minute duration) with 
ampicillin/sulbactam (1.5 g; ratio, 2:1; total volume, 4 mL) admin-
istered in the dorsal common digital vein of the right rear limb of 
healthy, adult nonlactating cattle resulted in peak ampicillin serum 
concentrations of ≈5 mg/mL in the perfused limb and 2 mg/mL 
in the synovial fluid of the metatarsophalangeal joint 1 hour after 
RIVLP. Ampicillin concentration in synovial fluid remained above 
8 μg/mL for 19 hours. Maximum systemic ampicillin concentration 
was 2.5 μg/mL 5.4 hours after RIVLP. Sulbactam pharmacokinetics 
followed trends similar to ampicillin.7
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Penicillins are contraindicated in patients with a history of severe 
hypersensitivity (anaphylaxis) to them. Because cross-reactivity can 
occur, penicillins should be used cautiously in patients documented 
as being hypersensitive to other beta-lactam antibiotics (eg, cephalo-
sporins, cephamycins, carbapenems).
Ampicillin/sulbactam is contraindicated in humans with a his-
tory of ampicillin/sulbactam-associated cholestatic jaundice or he-
patic dysfunction; veterinary significance is unknown. In humans, 
ampicillin has been shown to lower seizure threshold and should be 
used with caution with any drug that also lowers seizure threshold8; 
significance in veterinary patients is not known.
Increased plasma ampicillin drug concentrations, AUC, and in-
creased elimination half-life have been documented in azotemic dogs.9 
Dosage adjustment (ie, reduced dosing frequency) may be needed. 

Ampicillin/Sulbactam       83
Penicillins, cephalosporins, and macrolides should not be admin-
istered to rabbits, guinea pigs, chinchillas, or hamsters, as serious 
enteritis and clostridial enterotoxemia may occur.
Adverse Effects
IM injections may be painful, as pH of the solution is high. IV in-
jections may cause thrombophlebitis and phlebitis. Although hy-
persensitivity reactions to penicillins occur infrequently in animals, 
they can be severe (anaphylaxis), particularly after IV ­administration.
Hepatotoxicity (ie, cholestatic hepatitis, cholestasis) has been re-
ported in some humans receiving ampicillin/sulbactam. Toxicity is 
usually reversible with discontinuation of therapy, but deaths have 
been reported. Veterinary significance is unknown. 
High doses or increased CNS penetration of penicillins have been 
associated with neurotoxicity (eg, ataxia in dogs).10 Although peni-
cillins are not considered to be hepatotoxic, elevated liver enzymes 
have been reported in some dogs. Other effects reported in dogs in-
clude tachypnea, dyspnea, edema, and tachycardia. GI disturbances 
are possible, and Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea (CDAD) 
has been reported in humans.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Both ampicillin and sulbactam have been shown to cross the pla-
centa. Ampicillin/sulbactam should be used only when the potential 
benefits outweigh the risks. 
Both ampicillin and sulbactam are distributed into human breast 
milk in low concentrations but are considered to be compatible with 
breastfeeding. Nursing offspring should be monitored for GI distur-
bances.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Neurologic effects (eg, ataxia) have rarely been reported, and risk 
increases with higher doses or conditions that can lead to increased 
CNS penetration (eg, meningitis); should these signs develop, the 
risks for continued use should be weighed with those associated 
with dose reduction or use of a different antibiotic. In humans, par-
ticularly those with renal disease, high doses of parenteral penicillins 
have induced CNS effects.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison control 
center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions with ampicillin/sulbactam either 
have been reported or are theoretical in humans or animals and may 
be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks 
should be weighed and additional monitoring performed when ap-
propriate.
	■Allopurinol: In humans, concurrent use has been implicated 
in increased occurrences of skin rashes; veterinary significance of 
this interaction is unknown. 
	■Aminoglycosides (eg, amikacin, gentamicin): Beta-lactam 
antibiotics can inactivate aminoglycosides in vitro (and in vivo in 
patients with chronic kidney disease).
	■Bacteriostatic Antimicrobials (eg, chloramphenicol, 
erythromycin and other macrolides, tetracyclines, sulfon-
amides): Because there has been evidence of in vitro antagonism 
between beta-lactam antibiotics and bacteriostatic antibiotics, use 
together generally has not been recommended, but actual clinical 
importance is not clear and is currently in doubt.
	■Dichlorphenamide: Concurrent use may increase risk for 
­hypokalemia.
	■Methotrexate (MTX): Ampicillin may decrease the renal ex-
cretion of MTX, causing increased MTX concentrations and po-
tential toxic effects.
	■Mycophenolate: Concurrent use may reduce concentrations 
or effects of mycophenolate.
	■Probenecid: Can reduce the renal tubular secretion of both 
ampicillin and sulbactam, thereby maintaining higher systemic 
concentrations for a longer period. This potentially beneficial in-
teraction requires further investigation before dosing recommen-
dations can be made for veterinary patients.
	■Warfarin: Concurrent use may decrease vitamin K production 
and increase risk for bleeding.
Laboratory Considerations
	■Ampicillin may cause false-positive urine glucose determina-
tions when using cupric sulfate solution (Benedict’s solution, 
Clinitest®). Tests using glucose oxidase (Test-Tape®, Clinistix®) are 
not affected by ampicillin.
	■Because penicillins and other beta-lactams can inactivate amino- 
glycosides in vitro and in vivo in patients in renal failure or when 
penicillins are used in larger doses, serum concentrations of ami-
noglycosides may be falsely decreased, particularly when the se-
rum is stored prior to analysis. It is recommended that samples 
should be drawn at times when the beta-lactam antibiotic is at a 
trough level, and if the assay cannot be run right away, samples 
should be frozen immediately.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
NOTE: Dosages are listed for combined amounts of ampicillin/
sulbactam.
Empiric antibiotic therapy in critically ill animals (extra-label): 
22 – 30 mg/kg IV every 6 to 8 hours; used in combination with 
a parenteral drug with gram-negative activity (eg, aminoglyco-
side, fluoroquinolone)
Infections susceptible to amoxicillin/clavulanate in patients 
unable to receive oral doses (extra-label): 22 mg/kg SC, IV, or 
IM every 8 hours
Surgical prophylaxis (extra-label): 22 mg/kg IV ≈1 hour prior 
to incision; redosing can be performed intraoperatively every 2 
hours if needed based on duration of surgery.
Monitoring
	■Because penicillins usually have minimal toxicity associated with 
their use, monitoring for efficacy is usually all that is required un-
less toxic signs develop.
	■Periodic liver panel (eg, liver enzymes, bilirubin) in patients with 
pre-existing hepatic dysfunction 
	■Serum concentrations and therapeutic drug monitoring are not 
routinely performed.
Client Information
	■Because of the dosing intervals required, this drug is best admin-
istered to inpatients only.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Commercial drug formulations contain sodium salts of both ampi-
cillin and sulbactam in a 2:1 ratio (eg, ampicillin, 250 mg; sulbactam, 
125 mg). Ampicillin sodium/sulbactam sodium for injection occurs 
as a white to off-white powder that is freely soluble in water or other 
aqueous solutions. The reconstituted solution is yellow to pale yellow 
and has a pH of 8 to 10. 
Ampicillin/sulbactam may also be known as Ampibactan®, Baci-
mex®, Begalin-P®, Bethacil®, Comabactan®, Galotam®, Loricin®, Sulam®, 
Sulperazon®, Synergistin®, Unacid®, Unacim®, Unasyn®, or Unasyna®.
