Tramadol      1261
Monitoring
	■Serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, glucose (if diabetic)
	■Hydration status
	■Blood pressure, if indicated
	■Clinical signs of edema, patient weight, if indicated
Client Information
	■While taking this medicine, your animal will drink and urinate 
more often than usual. Be sure your animal always has access to 
freshwater. You may give this medicine with or without food. 
	■While your animal is taking this medicine, your veterinarian will 
need to monitor your animal closely. Do not miss these important 
follow-up visits. 
	■Contact your veterinarian immediately if you notice excessive 
thirst, weakness, collapse (passing out), head tilt, lack of urina-
tion, or a racing heartbeat.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Torsemide is a lipophilic anilinopyridine sulfonylurea loop diuretic 
that occurs as white to off-white, crystalline powder. It is practically 
insoluble in water and slightly soluble in alcohol.
Torsemide may also be known as torasemide, AC-3525, AC 4464, 
BM-02.015, JDL-464, and Demadex®. International trade names 
include Isemid®, Torem®, and Unat®.
Storage/Stability
Store torsemide tablets below 40°C (104°F); preferably between 15°C 
and 30°C (59°F and 86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE IN THE US.
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula-
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Torsemide Oral Tablets: 5 mg, 10 mg, 20 mg, and 100 mg; Demadex®, 
generic; (Rx)
Torsemide Injection: 10 mg/mL; generic; (Rx). NOTE: This product 
has been discontinued.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Tramadol
(tram-ah-doll)  Ultram®
Opioid Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Synthetic mu-receptor partial opioid agonist that also inhibits 
the reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine
	
▶Appears useful as an analgesic in cats, but studies in dogs pro-
vide conflicting evidence of analgesia; may take up to 2 weeks 
for full analgesic activity in chronic pain states
	
▶It is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it and other 
opioids, and in those with GI obstruction. Use with caution in 
patients with a history of seizures or patients receiving other 
CNS or respiratory depressants.
	
▶Appears well tolerated in dogs; sedation is the most likely 
adverse effect.
	
▶Several potential clinically significant drug interactions exist; 
avoid use with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; 
eg, fluoxetine) or monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs; eg, 
selegiline).
	
▶DEA Schedule IV (C-IV) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Tramadol is used for adjunct treatment of postoperative or chronic 
pain in many species. It is most useful when used in combination 
with NSAIDs or other analgesic drugs (eg, amantadine, gabapentin, 
alpha-2  agonists).1 Tramadol use as an analgesic was widely adopt-
ed in veterinary medicine in part based on its low cost and previ-
ous status as a noncontrolled drug; however, evidence of efficacy is 
conflicting and studies demonstrating tramadol’s efficacy as a sole 
analgesic2–5 are outweighed by studies that cite its limitations.1,6–11 A 
meta-analysis that reviewed the efficacy of tramadol for postopera-
tive pain management in dogs found that tramadol likely results in 
a decreased need for rescue analgesia compared to no treatment or 
placebo, but the certainty of the evidence was determined to be low.12 
Studies of tramadol in dogs with osteoarthritis did not show benefits 
compared to placebo.10,13 Anecdotally, tramadol has also been used 
as an anti-tussive agent; however, evidence of efficacy is lacking.
Tramadol’s efficacy as an analgesic in cats is more robust.14–19 
In horses, tramadol administered as an epidural may also be use-
ful as an analgesic, but no appropriate commercial dosage forms are 
available in the United States; however, studies evaluating the an-
tinociceptive effects in horses after IV administration have found 
that IV tramadol is not an effective analgesic in horses when used 
alone.20,21 Some studies have shown benefits when used in combi-
nation therapy.21,22 In donkeys, tramadol used with lidocaine as an 
epidural has a shorter onset and longer duration of action than when 
lidocaine is used alone.23
Tramadol administered systemically in sheep, camels, and came-
lids has noticeable adverse effects and a lack of efficacy and should 
not be used in those species.24–28
Pharmacology/Actions
Tramadol is a centrally acting partial opioid agonist with primar-
ily mu-receptor activity. It also weakly inhibits the reuptake of se-
rotonin and norepinephrine. Analgesic activity is due to the parent 
compound and its active metabolite, M1 (O-desmethyltramadol 
[ODT]). When compared with tramadol in laboratory animal stud-
ies, M1 was 20 times more potent in binding to mu receptors and was 
6 times more potent as an analgesic. 
Naloxone only partially antagonizes the analgesic effects of trama-
dol; other partial antagonists include yohimbine and ondansetron.

1262      Tramadol
Pharmacokinetics
Bioavailability is ≈65% after oral administration of immediate-re-
lease tablets in dogs, but there is significant interpatient variabili-
ty. Rectal bioavailability is ≈10%. The volume of distribution (VD), 
total body clearance, and half-life are 3.8 L/kg, 55 mL/kg/minute, 
and 1.7 hours, respectively.29 Tramadol is extensively metabolized via 
several pathways to at least 20 metabolites. The active M1 metabolite 
is formed by cytochrome P450 2D15 (CYP2D15) but is a minor me-
tabolite in dogs.30,31 M1 has a half-life of ≈2 hours after oral tramadol 
administration.29 Dogs appear to produce substantial quantities of 
the inactive metabolite M2 via CYP2B11. M1 and M2 are further 
metabolized to M5 (N,O-didesmethyltramadol) via CYP2C21 and 
2D15.30,32 Pharmacokinetics of tramadol have been reported for 
young and middle-aged dogs. After IV administration at 4 mg/kg, 
the VD, elimination half-life, and total body clearance were 4.77 ± 
1.07 L/kg, 1.91 ± 0.26 hours, and 29.9 ± 7.3 mL/kg/minute, respec-
tively, in young dogs and 4.73 ± 1.43 L/kg, 2.39 ± 0.97 hours, and 
23.7 ± 5.4 mL/kg/minute, respectively, in middle-aged dogs. Excre-
tion was significantly prolonged in older animals.33 In greyhounds, 
tramadol’s half-life is slightly shorter (ie, 1.1 hours).34 
After intranasal administration in dogs, tramadol was rapidly 
absorbed into the systemic circulation, becoming detectable after 5 
minutes and reaching maximum concentrations ≈40 minutes after 
administration. Bioavailability was determined to range from 3.3% 
to 20.6%. In general, plasma concentrations were low and variable. 
Tramadol half-life was ≈1 hour. M1 was largely undetectable. Plas-
ma concentrations were low, and because they did not correlate with 
analgesic effect it was hypothesized that tramadol bypassed systemic 
circulation and traveled directly to the CNS. 
A study of 8 cats that received the immediate-release oral tablet 
showed high interpatient variability in absorption (2 cats had inad-
equate data and could not be analyzed). The main metabolite pro-
duced in cats is the active M1 metabolite. The elimination half-life 
for the parent compound was ≈2.25 to 3.5 hours and was 4.5 hours 
for the M1 metabolite.35 Another study in 6 cats demonstrated the 
following approximate values: 60% oral bioavailability, 2 L/kg vol-
ume of distribution at steady state (VSS), 12 mL/kg/minute clearance, 
and 3.2 hours terminal half-life. The terminal half-life of M1 after 
oral administration was ≈4.8 hours. After transdermal application of 
a compounded tramadol gel, a dose of ≈2.8 mg/kg resulted in unde-
tectable or very low plasma concentrations.36
In adult horses, tramadol had relatively poor oral absorption (≈3% 
to 10%)37,38 and an elimination half-life of ≈1.5 to 2.5 hours after IV 
or IM administration and up to 10 hours when given orally.37–41 The 
M1 active metabolite half-life was ≈4 hours. Oral doses of 10 mg/kg 
yielded concentrations of tramadol and M1 that are believed to be 
therapeutic, whereas lower doses (3 to 6 mg/kg) were inconsistent 
and transient.41–44 M2 appears to be the main metabolite produced by 
horses, with very low and variable M1 concentrations.37,45 In donkeys 
given single IV doses of 2 mg/kg, the half-life of the parent com-
pound was ≈1 hour, and the halflife of the M1 metabolite was ≈8.5 
hours.46
Tramadol has different pharmacokinetics in neonatal and weaned 
foals. After oral administration, higher bioavailability (53% vs 20%), 
shorter time to peak concentration (1 hour vs 1.25 hours), and peak 
levels occurred with neonatal (2 weeks of age) vs weaned (4 months 
of age) foals. The elimination half-life did not significantly differ (≈2 
hours). The active metabolite (M1) remained above the reported 
therapeutic concentration for humans for 3 hours in neonatal foals 
and 8 hours in weaned foals.47 In another study, the elimination half-
life was ≈1.5 hours in foals up to 6 weeks of age.48 
In llamas administered 2 mg/kg IV, tramadol and M1 pharmaco-
kinetics values (approximate means) were: VSS, 4 L/kg and 26.5 L/kg; 
clearance, 1.7 L/kg/hour and 2.03 L/kg/hour; half-life, 2.1 hours and 
10.4 hours. IM (2 mg/kg) bioavailability was high.49 Data in camels 
were similar to those in llamas.24 In alpacas, oral bioavailability was 
poor (6% to 19%).28 After IV administration (3.4 to 4.4 mg/kg), VD 
was 5.50 ± 2.66 L/kg, total body clearance was ≈4.6 L/kg/hour, and 
half-life was ≈0.9 hours. The M1 metabolite was not detected.
The elimination half-life of tramadol in sheep receiving IV trama-
dol (4 and 6 mg/kg) was 0.6 hours and 1.2 hours for M1.27 Bioavail-
ability in goats given tramadol at 2 mg/kg IV and PO was 37%, and 
the half-life was ≈1 hour (IV) and 2.7 hours (PO). The M1 half-life 
was 2.9 hours after IV administration but was undetectable after oral 
administration.50
In red-tailed hawks given an oral dose of 11 mg/kg, plasma levels 
of tramadol reached or exceeded concentrations associated with an-
algesia in humans for at least 4 hours after administration. The elim-
ination half-lives were 1.3 hours (tramadol) and 1.9 hours (M1).51 
Single IV doses given to Hispaniolan Amazon parrots resulted in 
half-lives of 1.54 hours (tramadol) and 2.55 hours (M2). Oral bio-
availability was ≈24%.52 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tramadol is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to it 
or other opioids. The combination product containing acetamino-
phen is contraindicated in cats. In humans, the drug is contraindicat-
ed in patients with GI obstruction or paralytic ileus and in children 
younger than 12 or undergoing tonsillectomy or adenoidectomy.
Caution should be used when tramadol is given in conjunction 
with other drugs that can cause CNS or respiratory depression. Be-
cause tramadol has caused seizures in humans, it should be used 
with caution in animals with pre-existing seizure disorders, at in-
creased risk for seizures (eg, head trauma, CNS infections), or re-
ceiving other drugs that may reduce the seizure threshold. Similar to 
other opioidlike compounds, tramadol should be used with caution 
in geriatric or severely debilitated animals and in those with severe 
asthma. Animals with impaired renal or hepatic function may need 
dosage adjustments.
Although the risk for physical dependence is less than that of sev-
eral other opioids, it has been reported in humans. The drug should 
be withdrawn gradually in animals that receive it chronically. Hu-
mans can potentially abuse tramadol, and significant diversion of 
the drug reportedly occurs. Clinicians should be alert to pet owners 
seeking tramadol.
Extended-release tablets, which are not currently recommended 
or used in veterinary patients, should not be broken, crushed, or 
chewed because toxicity could occur.
Care should be taken not to confuse traMADol with traZODone.
Adverse Effects
Tramadol appears to be well tolerated in dogs and appears to have 
fewer adverse effects than methadone or morphine.53 Tramadol has 
the potential to cause a variety of adverse effects associated with its 
pharmacologic actions, including CNS effects (eg, excessive seda-
tion, agitation, anxiety, tremor, dizziness) or GI effects (inappetence, 
vomiting, constipation, diarrhea). 
Limited information is available on the adverse effects in cats. 
Vomiting, sedation, mydriasis, dysphoria or euphoria, and constipa-
tion have been reported. In a study, neurologic effects (eg, mydriasis, 
dysphoria) were seen in 25% of cats, and the drug was observed to 
be unpalatable to cats.54 Unpalatability may lead to dose avoidance.
In horses, tramadol 5 mg/kg IV caused excitement20; ataxia and 
muscle spasms were more frequently seen in donkeys after 4 mg/kg 
IV administration.46
In humans receiving tramadol, ≈10% develop pruritus. Injectable 
tramadol may cause respiratory and cardiac depression.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Laboratory animals have experienced embryotoxicity and fetotoxici-
