70      Amoxicillin/Clavulanate
a) 125 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. Mix oral solution to double 
strength to a final concentration of 125 mg/mL21  
b) 100 mg/kg IM, SC, PO every 8 hours22 
FERRETS: 
Helicobacter spp gastritis infections using triple therapy (extra- 
label): 
a)	Amoxicillin 20 mg/kg PO every 12 hours, with metronida-
zole 20 mg/kg PO every 12 hours and bismuth subsalicylate 
17.5 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for 21 days. Sucralfate 25 mg/kg 
PO every 8 hours and famotidine 0.5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours 
may also be used. Fluids and assisted feeding should be contin-
ued while the primary cause of disease is investigated.23 
b)	Amoxicillin 10 mg/kg, metronidazole 20 mg/kg, and bismuth 
subsalicylate 17.5 mg/kg, all given PO 3 times daily for 3 to 4 
weeks24
c)	Amoxicillin 30 mg/kg, metronidazole 20 mg/kg, and bismuth 
subsalicylate 17.5 mg/kg, all given PO 3 times daily for 3 to 4 
weeks25
RABBITS/RODENTS/SMALL MAMMALS:
See Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings.
Hedgehogs (extra-label): 15 mg/kg IM, SC, or PO every 12 hours26 
REPTILES:
Susceptible infections for all species (extra-label): 22 mg/kg PO 
every 12 to 24 hours; not useful unless used in combination with 
aminoglycosides.27
Monitoring
	■Efficacy: resolution of clinical signs
	■Culture and susceptibility as indicated for clinical condition being 
treated
	■Urine culture may be considered after 5 to 7 days when treating 
bacterial cystitis for longer periods of time.14  It is important to 
note that positive cultures taken at this time should prompt ques-
tioning the owner about compliance and further investigation as 
to why the infection has not been eliminated (eg, underlying path- 
ology [eg, cystic calculi, neoplasia]); a positive culture at this time 
should not simply prompt a change in antibiotic choice. A nega-
tive culture during this time frame does not necessarily guarantee 
resolution of the infection.
Client Information
	■It is preferred that the oral suspension be refrigerated but this is 
not absolutely necessary. Any unused oral suspension should be 
discarded after 14 days.
	■This medicine can be given with or without food, but gastrointes-
tinal side effects (eg, poor appetite, nausea, vomiting) might be 
prevented if this medicine is given with food.
	■The most common side effects are diarrhea, vomiting, and loss of 
appetite.
	■It is important to give this medication exactly as prescribed and to 
complete the full course of treatment, even if your animal seems 
better. Missing doses or stopping treatment early may result in 
treatment failure.
	■Amoxicillin should not be given to rabbits, guinea pigs, chinchil-
las, hamsters, rodents, or other “pocket pets”, as life-threatening 
diarrhea may occur. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Commercially available dosage forms contain amoxicillin trihydrate, 
which occurs as a practically odorless, white, crystalline powder that 
is sparingly soluble in water. Amoxicillin differs structurally from am-
picillin only by having an additional hydroxyl group on the phenyl 
ring.
Amoxicillin may also be known as amoxycillin, p-hydroxyampi-
cillin, or BRL 2333; many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Amoxicillin capsules, tablets, and powder for oral suspension should 
be stored at room temperature (15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]) in tight 
containers. After reconstitution, the oral suspension can be stored 
at room temperature or refrigerated (refrigeration preferred); any 
unused product should be discarded after 14 days. Intramammary 
syringes should be stored at or below 24°C (75°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information is noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Amoxicillin Oral Tablets: 50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg, 200 mg, and 
400 mg; Amoxi-Tabs®,  Bimox®; generic; (Rx). FDA-approved for use 
in dogs and cats.
Amoxicillin Powder for Oral Suspension: 50 mg/mL (after reconsti-
tution) in 15 mL or 30 mL bottles; Amoxi-Drops®, Bimox®, generic; 
(Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs and cats.
Amoxicillin Intramammary Infusion: 62.5 mg in 10 mL syringes; 
Amoxi-Mast®; (Rx). FDA-approved to treat subclinical infectious 
mastitis in lactating cows. NADA 55-100. (Rx). Withdrawal times: 
milk— 60 hours after last treatment; slaughter—12 days
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Amoxicillin Oral Tablets (chewable): 125 mg, 200 mg, 250 mg, and 
400 mg; Amoxil®, generic; (Rx)
Amoxicillin Oral Tablets: 500 mg and 875 mg; Amoxil®, generic; (Rx)
Amoxicillin Oral Capsules: 250 mg and 500 mg; Amoxil®, generic; 
(Rx)
Amoxicillin Powder for Oral Suspension: 125 mg/5 mL (25 mg/mL) 
in 80 mL, 100 mL, and 150 mL; 200 mg/5 mL (40 mg/mL) in 50 mL, 
75 mL, and 100 mL; 250 mg/5 mL (50 mg/mL) in 80 mL, 100 mL, 
and 150 mL; 400 mg/5 mL (80 mg/mL) in 50 mL, 75 mL, and 
100 mL; Amoxil®, Trimox®, generic; (Rx)
Amoxicillin Oral Extended-Release Tablets: 775 mg in 30s and UD 
10s; Moxatag®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Amoxicillin/Clavulanate
Amoxicillin/Clavulanic Acid
(a-mox-i-sill-in clav-yue-lan-ate)  Clavamox®, Augmentin®
Potentiated Aminopenicillin
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Bactericidal aminopenicillin with beta-lactamase inhibitor that 
expands its spectrum, increasing susceptibility of bacteria that 
are resistant to amoxicillin via beta-lactamase production.
	
▶Most common adverse effects are GI-related; hypersensitivity 
and other adverse effects may occur but are rare.
	
▶As compared with veterinary-labeled products, human-labeled 
products contain different ratios of amoxicillin:clavulanate and 
product strengths are expressed in terms of amoxicillin (only), 
whereas veterinary products are expressed as the sum of both 
compounds.
Uses/Indications
Amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium tablets and oral suspension prod-

Amoxicillin/Clavulanate      71
ucts are used in dogs and cats for the treatment of urinary tract, skin 
(eg, wounds, pyoderma), canine periodontal disease, and soft tissue 
(eg, abscesses) infections caused by susceptible organisms, particu-
larly gram-positive bacteria and anaerobes. It is also indicated for 
respiratory tract infections, although it is ineffective against Myco-
plasma spp, and resistance to Bordetella spp is an increasing problem 
in some regions. 
The World Health Organization has designated amoxicillin/
clavulanate as a Critically Important antimicrobial for human med-
icine.1  The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) has designated 
amoxicillin/clavulanate as a Veterinary Critically Important Antimi-
crobial (VCIA) Agent in avian, bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, and 
swine species.2 
Pharmacology/Actions
Amoxicillin is a time-dependent, bactericidal agent that acts by in-
hibiting cell wall synthesis. Amoxicillin generally shares the same 
spectrum of activity and uses as ampicillin but is better absorbed 
orally (in nonruminants) and attains higher serum levels. Separate 
serum and urinary clinical breakpoints are available.
Penicillins are bactericidal against susceptible bacteria and act by 
inhibiting mucopeptide synthesis in the cell wall, which results in a 
defective barrier and an osmotically unstable spheroplast. The exact 
mechanism for this effect has not been definitively determined, but 
beta-lactam antibiotics have been shown to bind to several enzymes 
(eg, carboxypeptidases, transpeptidases, endopeptidases) within 
the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane that are involved with cell wall 
synthesis. The different affinities that various beta-lactam antibiotics 
have for these enzymes (also known as penicillin-binding proteins 
[PBPs]) help explain the differences in the drugs’ spectrums of ac-
tivity that are not explained by the influence of beta-lactamases. Like 
other beta-lactam antibiotics, penicillins are generally considered to 
be more effective against actively growing bacteria.
Aminopenicillins (ie, broad-spectrum or ampicillin penicillins) 
have increased activity against many strains of gram-negative aerobes 
not covered by either the natural penicillins or penicillinase-resistant 
penicillins, including some strains of Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp, 
and Haemophilus spp. Like the natural penicillins, aminopenicillins 
are susceptible to inactivation by beta-lactamase–producing bacte-
ria (eg, Staphylococcus spp, E coli). Although not as active as natural 
penicillins, aminopenicillins have activity against many anaerobic 
bacteria, including clostridial organisms. Organisms that are gener-
ally not susceptible include Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Serratia spp, 
indole-positive Proteus spp (Proteus mirabilis is susceptible), Entero-
bacter spp, Citrobacter spp, and Acinetobacter spp. Aminopenicillins 
are ineffective against methicillin-resistant staphylococci and are in-
active against mycobacteria, Mycoplasma spp, Rickettsia spp, fungi, 
protozoa, and viruses. 
Clavulanic acid has only weak antibacterial activity when used 
alone and is only available in fixed-dose oral combinations with 
amoxicillin. Clavulanic acid acts by competitively and irrevers-
ibly binding to beta-lactamases (including types II, III, IV, and V) 
and penicillinases produced by staphylococci. Staphylococci that 
are resistant to penicillinase-resistant penicillins (eg, oxacillin) are 
considered resistant to amoxicillin/potassium clavulanate, despite 
susceptibility testing that may indicate otherwise. Amoxicillin with 
potassium clavulanate is usually ineffective against type I cephalo-
sporinases. Members of the family Enterobacteriaceae, particularly 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, often produce these plasmid-mediated 
cephalosporinases. When clavulanic acid is combined with amox-
icillin, there is little, if any, synergistic activity against organisms 
already susceptible to amoxicillin, but amoxicillin-resistant strains 
(due to beta-lactamase inactivation) may be covered.
When Kirby-Bauer susceptibility testing is performed, the Aug-
mentin® disk (human-product trade name) is often used. Because the 
amoxicillin:clavulanic acid ratio of 2:1 in the susceptibility tests may 
not correspond to in vivo drug levels, susceptibility testing may not 
always accurately predict efficacy for this combination. A urinary 
tract-specific breakpoint in dogs and cats for amoxicillin/clavulanate 
is reported as less than 8/4 μg/mL because of the greater drug levels 
that are achieved in urine. This breakpoint should only be used for 
cystitis—not pyelonephritis, for which serum breakpoints should be 
applied.
Pharmacokinetics
Amoxicillin trihydrate is stable in the presence of gastric acid. Af-
ter oral administration, amoxicillin bioavailability is highly variable 
between species. Food will decrease the rate but not the extent of 
oral absorption, and many clinicians suggest giving the drug with food, 
particularly if there is concomitant GI distress. In dogs, amoxicillin 
bioavailability was 64% to 77% following oral administration.3  In 
cats, one study found the bioavailability to be ≈77%.4 Amoxicillin 
serum levels will generally be 1.5 to 3 times greater than those of 
ampicillin after equivalent oral doses. In dogs following oral admin-
istration, maximum plasma concentrations of 11 to 21 µg/mL were 
reached after ≈1.38 to 2 hours.3,5  In cats following a 10 mg/kg oral 
dose, maximum plasma concentrations of 5.89 µg/mL were reached 
in 1.69 hours.4 
After absorption, the volume of distribution for amoxicillin is 
≈0.28 to 0.71 L/kg in dogs3 and 0.86 L/kg in cats.4 The drug is widely 
distributed to most body tissues and fluids. When meninges are in-
flamed, amoxicillin will cross into the CSF in concentrations ranging 
from 10% to 60% of those found in serum. Very low levels of the 
drug are found in the aqueous humor, and low levels are found in 
tears, sweat, and saliva. Protein binding in dogs is ≈13%.
Amoxicillin is eliminated primarily unchanged via renal mecha-
nisms, principally by tubular secretion; however, some of the drug 
is metabolized by hydrolysis to penicilloic acids (inactive) and then 
excreted in the urine. Elimination half-lives of amoxicillin have been 
reported to be 0.91 to 1.52 hours in dogs6 and ≈1.25 hours in cats.4 
Clearance in cats is reportedly 0.45 L/hour/kg.
There is no evidence to suggest that the addition of clavulanic acid 
significantly alters amoxicillin pharmacokinetics.6 As a time-dependent 
antimicrobial, duration of time above the MIC is critical, so frequent 
dosing is necessary.
Clavulanate potassium is stable in the presence of gastric acid and 
is readily absorbed. In dogs following oral administration, maximum 
plasma concentrations of 2.06 to 2.3 µg/mL were reached after 0.95 
to 1.05 hours.5 In cats following oral administration, bioavailability 
of clavulanic acid was ≈98%, with maximum plasma concentrations 
of 1.41 µg/mL reached in 1.03 hours.4 
Clavulanic acid has an apparent volume of distribution of 
0.32 L/kg in dogs and 0.93 L/kg in cats.4 It is distributed (with amox-
icillin) into the lungs, pleural fluid, and peritoneal fluid. Low con-
centrations of both drugs are found in the saliva, sputum, and CSF 
(uninflamed meninges). Higher concentrations in the CSF are ex-
pected when meninges are inflamed,7 but it is questionable wheth-
er therapeutic concentrations are attainable. Clavulanic acid is 13% 
bound to proteins in dog serum. 
Clavulanic acid is apparently extensively metabolized in dogs and 
rats, primarily to 1-amino-4-hydroxybutan-2-one. It is unknown 
whether this compound possesses any beta-lactamase–inhibiting 
activity. The drug is also excreted unchanged in the urine via glom- 
erular filtration. In dogs, 34% to 52% of a dose is excreted in the 
urine as unchanged drug and metabolites, 25% to 27% is eliminated 
in the feces, and 17% into respired air. Urine levels of active drug are 
considered high but may be only ≈20% of those of amoxicillin. In 
cats with azotemic chronic kidney disease given amoxicillin\clavu-
lanic acid, amoxicillin concentration was significantly lower in the 
