150      Buprenorphine
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Bupivacaine Liposome Injectable Suspension 1.3% (13.3 mg/mL) in 
10 mL and 20 mL single-use vials; Exparel®; (Rx)6
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Buprenorphine
(byoo-pre-nor-feen)  Buprenex®, Simbadol®, Zorbium®
Opioid Partial Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Partial mu-opioid agonist used primarily as an injectable and 
buccal (ie, oral transmucosal [OTM]) analgesic, especially in 
cats
	
▶Often used as a component of short-term immobilization and 
anesthetic drug combinations 
	
▶Buccal/OTM administration is well tolerated and can be effec-
tive, but bioavailability is low by this route, as is standard  
(0.3 mg/mL) buprenorphine administered SC.
	
▶Longer onset of action and longer duration of action as com-
pared with most other opioids
	
▶Rarely, may cause respiratory depression
	
▶Because of tight buprenorphine receptor binding, standard 
doses of naloxone may not completely reverse drug effects.
	
▶DEA Schedule III (C-III) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Buprenorphine is most often used as an analgesic for mild to mod-
erate pain or in preanesthetic drug combinations in small animals. 
In most species, buprenorphine provides less analgesia than pure 
mu-opioid agonists (eg, morphine, hydromorphone) and it is less se-
dating than most other opioids (particularly butorphanol). For acute 
pain control, buprenorphine may have the disadvantage of a longer 
onset of action than other opioids.
In dogs, an isoflurane MAC-sparing effect occurs at IV dosages of 
0.01 mg/kg, 0.05 mg/kg, and 0.1 mg/kg1 but methadone (0.3 mg/kg) 
provided more effective presurgical analgesia than buprenorphine 
(0.02 mg/kg) in dogs sedated with acepromazine and medetomi-
dine prior to undergoing ovariohysterectomy (OHE).2 Use of the 
feline-labeled Simbadol® (0.02 mg/kg IM) prior to surgery in dogs 
(pretreated with acepromazine and carprofen and undergoing ovari-
ohysterectomy) provided similar postoperative analgesia as standard 
buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg IM) but more dogs in the standard bu-
prenorphine group (3/12) required postoperative rescue analgesia 
(vs 0/12 for Simbadol®).3 Oral transmucosal (OTM) administration 
can provide effective analgesia (0.02 and 0.12 mg/kg were studied)4 
but bioavailability is low and variable with this route.5 When used 
epidurally in combination with bupivacaine for stifle arthroplasty, 
buprenorphine produced sufficient analgesia for up to 24 hours.6 Bu-
prenorphine/bupivacaine combination for infraorbital nerve block 
had an isoflurane-sparing effect and extended the duration of anal-
gesia to 48 to 96 hours.7
In cats, one product (Simbadol®) is a high-concentration (1.8 mg/ 
mL), long-duration (72 hour) form of buprenorphine that is FDA- 
approved for SC administration for the control of postoperative pain 
associated with surgical procedures. A transdermal buprenorphine 
solution is FDA-approved for the control of postoperative pain. It is 
applied by veterinary staff in the clinic or hospital 1 to 2 hours prior 
to surgical procedures and provides analgesia for 4 days.8 
In one study, when combined with medetomidine (0.002 mg/kg), 
standard concentration buprenorphine (0.3 mg/mL; 0.002 mg/kg) 
given IM provided equivalent analgesia to that provided by butorph-
anol (0.4 mg/kg) or methadone (0.5 mg/kg).9 Combined with dex-
medetomidine (0.001 mg/kg), butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg) provided 
better sedation and less vomiting than buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg) 
when administered IM to cats.10 With standard buprenorphine, 
buccal/OTM administration can be a practical, effective method for 
controlling postoperative pain. However, IV or IM administration 
of buprenorphine provides better postoperative (OHE) analgesia as 
compared with SC or buccal/OTM administration, and the cats re-
ceiving buprenorphine by the OTM route experienced a high prev-
alence of treatment failure.11 Multidose injectable formulations may 
be less palatable to cats when given by the OTM route than the pre-
servative-free formulation.12 Combining opioids such as buprenor-
phine with short-term NSAIDs for postoperative pain control pro-
vides better analgesia than buprenorphine alone.13 
In the UK and Australia, there are licensed buprenorphine prod-
ucts that are labeled for postoperative analgesia in dogs, cats, and 
horses and potentiation of the sedative effects of centrally acting 
agents in dogs and horses.
Pharmacology/Actions
Buprenorphine has partial agonist activity at the mu receptor and is 
a kappa-receptor antagonist. Buprenorphine is considered 30 times 
more potent than morphine and exhibits many of the same actions as 
the pure opioid agonists. It produces a dose-related analgesia; how-
ever, at higher doses, analgesic effects may plateau. Buprenorphine 
has a high affinity for, and slow dissociation from, mu receptors in 
the CNS, which may explain its relatively long duration of action. 
In dogs, sedative effects are generally seen after 15 minutes, but an-
algesia may not develop fully until 30 minutes postadministration. 
Analgesia is unlikely to persist for 12 hours unless pain is mild. A 6- 
to 8-hour duration of analgesic effect is often reported but analgesia 
may be as short as 4 hours, with high variability between cats.13 Mul-
timodal analgesia with frequent pain assessment is recommended. 
The high-concentration, long duration buprenorphine product lasts 
72 hours when given SC to cats.
The cardiovascular effects of buprenorphine may cause a decrease 
in both blood pressure and cardiac rate. Rarely, human patients may 
exhibit increases in blood pressure and cardiac rate. Respiratory de-
pression is a possibility and decreased respiratory rates have been 
noted in horses treated with buprenorphine. GI effects appear to be 
minimal in cats treated with buprenorphine.
Pharmacokinetics
In cats, buprenorphine is rapidly and completely absorbed when 
given IM.14 Peak concentrations after SC injection can vary widely; 
blood concentrations are low and do not appear to correlate with an-
algesic effect. Buprenorphine has a volume of distribution at steady-
state (VDss) of ≈3 to 8 L/kg and a clearance of ≈8 to 20 mL/kg per 
minute. Elimination half-life is ≈6 to 7 hours. When administered 
by the buccal/OTM route, bioavailability is low and highly variable 
(≈20% to 30%).13,15 The human transdermal patch buprenorphine 
(Transtec®; UK) applied to cats has demonstrated widely variable 
blood concentrations and, without a loading dose, does not appear 
to provide adequate analgesia. Individual variability in response to 
buprenorphine administration by all administration routes, espe-
cially SC and OTM, has been reported. Some cats may not receive 
sufficient analgesia from buprenorphine.13 
In dogs, oral bioavailability is very low (5%), but buprenorphine 
administered via the buccal/OTM route is ≈35% to 50% absorbed.5 
Elimination half-life ranges from 4 to 9 hours,16 and wide interpa-
tient variability exists. In a small pilot study, application of topical 
buprenorphine patches showed that plasma concentrations in-
creased during the first 36 hours, then remained between 0.7 and 
1 ng/mL during the study period.17 In greyhounds, when buprenor-
phine was administered IV, the volume of distribution, plasma clear-

Buprenorphine      151
ance, and terminal half-life were 3.54 L/kg, 10.3 mL/minute/kg, and 
3.96 hours, respectively.18 A pharmacokinetic study in 6 mongrel 
dogs resulted in a volume of distribution, plasma clearance, and ter-
minal half-life of 4.68 L/kg, 23.3 mL/minute/kg, and 3.97 hours,19 
respectively, when buprenorphine was administered IV, and a termi-
nal half-life of 12.74 hours when the extended-release injection was 
administered SC.20
In horses, the onset of action is ≈15 minutes after IV dosing. 
Buprenorphine is variably absorbed after IM administration and 
bioavailability is ≈50% to 80%.21 Volume of distribution is ≈2.5 to 
3 L/kg.22,23 The peak effect occurs within 30 to 45 minutes and the du-
ration of action may last up to 8 hours. Elimination half-life after an 
IV or IM dose is ≈3.5 to 6 hours.22,23 Because acepromazine exhibits 
a similar onset and duration of action, many equine clinicians favor 
using acepromazine in combination with buprenorphine. One study 
found plasma buprenorphine concentrations between 0.34 and 
2.45 ng/mL after IV administration of 10 μg/kg.24 In foals younger 
than 21 days of age, buprenorphine 0.01 – 0.02 mg/kg IV had a VDss 
of 6.5 L/kg; clearance was 56 mL/kg/minute, and elimination half-life 
was ≈2 hours.25 The same dosage administered sublingually was only 
25% bioavailable, and plasma concentration reached the presumed 
therapeutic concentration briefly in only one foal; however, physio-
logic changes did occur, indicating absorption of the drug. The ther-
apeutic concentration could be lower in foals than in other species.
Elimination half-life was 1 to 2.7 hours after IV and SC adminis-
tration in alpacas, and SC bioavailability was 64%.26
The distribution of the drug has not been well studied. Data from 
work done in rats reflect that buprenorphine concentrates in the liv-
er but is also found in the brain, GI tract, and placenta. It is highly 
bound (96%) to plasma proteins (not albumin).
In most species, buprenorphine is metabolized in the intestinal 
wall and liver27,28 by N-dealkylation likely via CYP3A4 (forming nor-
buprenorphine, which is active). Buprenorphine and norbuprenor-
phine also undergo glucuronidation; metabolites are then eliminat-
ed by biliary excretion into the feces (≈70%) and urinary excretion 
(≈27%).
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
The drug is contraindicated in patients with a known hypersensitiv-
ity to it or other opioids.
Because of the potential for decreased clearance with subsequent 
exaggerated/prolonged effects, all opioids should be used with cau-
tion in patients that have hypothyroidism, impaired hepatic func-
tion, or adrenocortical insufficiency (Addison’s disease), and in pe-
diatric, geriatric, or severely debilitated patients.
Rarely, patients may develop respiratory depression from bu-
prenorphine; therefore, it should be used cautiously in patients with 
compromised pulmonary function. Like other opioids, buprenor-
phine must be used with caution in patients with head trauma, in-
creased CSF pressure, or other CNS dysfunction (eg, coma), as any 
degree of respiratory depression could result in excessive partial 
pressure of arterial carbon dioxide with a subsequent increase in in-
tracranial pressure.
Patients with severe hepatic dysfunction may eliminate the drug 
more slowly than normal patients. Buprenorphine may increase bile 
duct pressure and should be used cautiously in patients with biliary 
tract disease29; however, this appears to not have any clinical impact. 
As with all opioids, buprenorphine should also be used with caution 
in horses that show signs of diminished GI tract motility.
Opioid analgesics are contraindicated in patients stung by scor-
pions (eg, Centruroides spp), as these drugs may potentiate venom 
effects.30
Mild sedation can occur in both dogs and cats, making buprenor-
phine an important component of a preanesthetic protocol; howev-
er, excitement can occur in horses and, less commonly, in cats, as is 
true of other opioids. Mild postoperative hyperthermia can occur in 
cats.28
Because buprenorphine can cause excitement in horses, when it 
is used as a preoperative analgesic, an IV sedative should be admin-
istered prior to, or in conjunction with, the buprenorphine injec-
tion.22,23
The standard formulation of buprenorphine by the SC route is not 
recommended due to poor absorption. Buprenorphine should not 
be administered via the intrathecal or peridural routes. 
The transdermal solution requires ≈30 minutes to dry, and once 
dried the risk for human buprenorphine exposure following contact 
of the administration site is limited. Clinic staff should use personal 
protective equipment (impermeable gloves, eye protection, labora-
tory coat) when preparing or administering any of the concentrated 
buprenorphine products.8
Adverse Effects
Although rare, respiratory depression appears to be the major ad-
verse effect. Other adverse effects (eg, sedation, nausea, vomiting, 
bradycardia, excitement [primarily cats and horses]) may be noted 
but generally occur less frequently as compared with other opioids. 
In dogs, as with other opioids, salivation, bradycardia, hypother-
mia, agitation, dehydration, and miosis have been reported. Tachy-
cardia, vomiting, and high blood pressure rarely occur. Injection site 
reactions and skin lesions have been noted with the non-FDA-ap-
proved extended-release injectable formulation and are most likely 
due to a reaction to the vehicle.31 SC administration of high-concen-
tration buprenorphine to dogs resulted in varying degrees of seda-
tion, reduced appetite, panting, whining, and hyperptyalism.20  
In cats, as with other opioids, mydriasis and behavioral effects (eg, 
excessive purring, pacing, rubbing, hiding) can be seen. Vomiting, 
salivation, anorexia, and hyperthermia occur rarely; however, hyper-
thermia was observed in ≈28% of cats on the day after surgery; con-
stipation and mydriasis also were noted.32 Vomiting occurred in 55% 
of cats receiving buprenorphine/dexmedetomidine combination 
with only 5% vomiting in cats receiving dexmedetomidine/butorph-
anol.10 In a study, high doses of standard buprenorphine (0.24, 0.72, 
and 1.2 mg/kg/day SC) for 9 consecutive days were well tolerated in 
young cats. Adverse effects included hyperactivity, tachycardia, diffi-
culty in handling, disorientation, agitation, and mydriasis.33 
In horses, buprenorphine may cause ataxia, excitement, and dimin-
ished gut sounds, but colic has not been a major concern. All horses 
(n = 4) developed constipation after receiving a single SC or IM dose 
of an experimental sustained-release buprenorphine formulation.34 
Administration with a sedative (eg, acepromazine, detomidine) may 
help decrease excitement and cardiac and respiratory rates.
In rabbits, SC buprenorphine reduced food and water intake, GI 
transit, and fecal output.35,36 
The primary adverse effect seen in humans is sedation, with an 
incidence of ≈66%.29 Buprenorphine may cause urine retention or 
difficulty voiding, particularly with high IV doses or epidural ad-
ministration.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safe use of veterinary buprenorphine formulations in breeding, preg-
nant, or lactating animals has not been established. The drug crosses 
the placenta. Although no controlled studies have been performed 
in domestic animals or humans, the drug has exhibited no evidence 
of teratogenicity or causing impaired fertility in laboratory animals. 
Early fetal death and postimplantation loss have been noted in rats.27 
The Vetergesic® 0.3 mg/mL solution for injection for dogs and cats 
label (Canada) states that the drug is contraindicated preoperatively 
for cesarean section due to concerns for respiratory depression in 
offspring.27
