Chlorambucil      243
potassium chloride 35 mg/mL gel/paste in 80 mL and 300 mL; D-Tox-
Besc®, Activated Charcoal Gel with Electrolytes®; (OTC). Labeled for 
use in small and large animal species
Activated hardwood charcoal and thermally activated attapulgite 
clay (concentrations not labeled) in an aqueous gel suspension in 8 fl 
oz bottle, 60 mL tube, and 300 mL tube with easy dose syringe; UAA® 
(Universal Animal Antidote) Gel; (OTC). Labeled for use in dogs and 
cats and for grain overload in ruminants
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Activated charcoal oral powder: 15 g, 30 g, 40 g, 120 g, 240 g, and UD 
30 g; generic; (OTC)
Activated charcoal oral liquid/suspension with sorbitol: 25 g in 
120 mL and 50 g in 240 mL; Actidose® with Sorbitol, generic; (OTC)
Activated charcoal liquid/suspension without sorbitol: 208 mg/mL 
to 12.5 g in 60 mL, 15 g in 72 mL, 25 g in 120 mL, and 50 g in 240 
mL; Actidose-Aqua®, generic; (OTC)
Activated charcoal oral granules: 25 g; EZ Char®; (OTC)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Chlorambucil
(klor-am-byoo-sil)  Leukeran®
Antineoplastic, Immunosuppressant 
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Nitrogen mustard derivative antineoplastic and immunosup-
pressant in dogs, cats, and horses
	
▶Caution: Pre-existing bone marrow depression or infection
	
▶Adverse effects: Primarily myelosuppression and GI toxicity
	
▶Known teratogen; National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health (NIOSH) hazardous drug; use appropriate precau-
tions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Chlorambucil may be useful as part of multidrug protocols in a va-
riety of neoplastic diseases, including lymphocytic leukemia, T-cell 
lymphoma,1 GI lymphoma,2,3 multiple myeloma, lymphangiosarco-
ma,4 mast cell tumor,5 cutaneous plasmacytosis, polycythemia vera, 
macroglobulinemia, and ovarian adenocarcinoma. Chlorambucil 
may also be used as a solo metronomic agent for some neoplasias 
(eg, hemangiosarcoma, transitional cell carcinoma).6,7 It may also be 
useful as adjunctive therapy for some immune-mediated conditions 
(eg, inflammatory bowel disease, nonerosive arthritis, immune- 
mediated hemolytic anemia, immune-mediated skin disease).8,9
Pharmacology/Actions
Chlorambucil is an aromatic nitrogen mustard derivative and an al-
kylating antineoplastic agent. Its chemical reactivity is nonspecific, 
but the primary cytotoxic effect is due to alkylation of cancer cell 
DNA strands resulting in cross-linking and cellular apoptosis. Im-
munosuppressive effects may not be noted until 2 to 4 weeks after 
starting the drug.
Acquired resistance to chlorambucil has been reported and is 
thought to be caused by several mechanisms.10 
Pharmacokinetics
Chlorambucil is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral ad-
ministration, reaching Cmax in ≈1 hour. It is highly bound to plas-
ma proteins. Although it is unknown if chlorambucil crosses the 
blood–brain barrier, neurologic adverse effects have been reported. 
Chlorambucil is extensively metabolized in the liver primarily to the 
active metabolite phenylacetic acid mustard. Phenylacetic acid mus-
tard is further metabolized to other metabolites that are excreted in 
the urine. Terminal half-life is 1.5 hours in humans.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Chlorambucil is contraindicated in patients with a history of hyper-
sensitivity to it or other alkylating agents. It should be used with cau-
tion in patients with pre-existing bone marrow depression, patients 
susceptible to bone marrow depression (including patients receiving 
long-standing maximum-tolerated dose chemotherapy), or patients 
that have an active systemic infection. Because chlorambucil is he-
patically metabolized, use with caution in patients with hepatic im-
pairment.
Because chlorambucil is a chemotherapy agent with potential 
to cause teratogenic effects, proper and safe handling methods are 
recommended to reduce personal and occupational exposure.11 The 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) clas-
sifies chlorambucil as a hazardous drug.12 
Adverse Effects
The most common major adverse effect associated with chlorambu-
cil therapy is myelosuppression (eg, anemia, leukopenia, thrombo-
cytopenia). Myelosuppression may occur gradually, with nadirs oc-
curring within 7 to 14 days of the start of therapy. Recovery generally 
takes from 7 to 14 days. Severe bone marrow depression, an uncom-
mon adverse effect occurring more often with prolonged (months to 
years) therapy, can result in pancytopenia that may require months 
to years for recovery. GI toxicity (eg, vomiting, diarrhea) is more 
common with higher (20 mg in humans) pulse doses. Hepatotoxici-
ty was noted in 23% of dogs in one study.5 Alopecia and delayed re-
growth of shaven hair have been reported in dogs; breeds with a con-
tinuously growing hair coat (eg, poodles, terriers, Afghan hounds, 
old English sheepdogs) are more likely to experience significant hair 
loss. Lower-dose metronomic therapy (4 mg/m2 [NOT mg/kg] once 
daily) in dogs is associated with a lower incidence of adverse effects. 
One study that evaluated several metronomic dose schedules found 
that dogs receiving 6 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) once daily and 8 mg/m2 
(NOT mg/kg) once daily were at higher risk for adverse effects (GI 
and hematologic) as compared with dogs that received 4 mg/m2 
(NOT mg/kg) once daily. In addition, higher dosages of metronomic 
chlorambucil did not improve tumor response.13
One case report of neurotoxicity (eg, facial twitching, myoclonus, 
agitation, seizures) in a cat has been reported.14 In addition, acquired 
Fanconi syndrome has been reported in 4 cats receiving chloram-
bucil and corticosteroids. Partial or complete resolution of Fanconi 
syndrome was seen in 3 of 4 cats within 3 months of discontinuing 
chlorambucil therapy.15 In another report, chlorambucil was sus-
pected of causing seizures in a dog.16
In humans, skin reactions that may progress to erythema multi-
forme or toxic epidermal necrolysis have been reported rarely. Bron-
chopulmonary dysplasia with pulmonary fibrosis, neurotoxicity, uric 
acid nephropathy, and hepatotoxicity have also been reported. Sec-
ondary malignancies may occur.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Chlorambucil has been documented to cause teratogenic effects in 
laboratory animals. Use during pregnancy only when the benefits to 
the dam outweigh the potential risks. In humans, chlorambucil has 
caused prolonged or permanent azoospermia in men, amenorrhea 
in women, and both reversible and irreversible infertility, particular-
ly when given during pre-puberty and puberty. 
It is unknown whether chlorambucil enters maternal milk. In 
humans, it is recommended to discontinue nursing if the mother is 
receiving the drug.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 

244      Chlorambucil
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The oral LD50 of chlorambucil in rats and mice is 76 mg/kg and 80 
mg/kg, respectively. Experiences with acute overdoses in humans 
have been limited, but doses of up to 5 mg/kg resulted in neuro-
logic (seizures) toxicity and pancytopenia (nadirs at 1 to 6 weeks 
postingestion). All patients recovered without long-term sequelae. 
Supportive treatment and gut emptying protocols are recommend-
ed following an overdose but beware of rapidly changing neurologic 
status if inducing vomiting. CBC should be monitored for several 
weeks following an overdose, and blood component therapy may be 
necessary. Chlorambucil is not dialyzable.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison center 
specializing in providing veterinary-specific information is recom-
mended. For general information related to overdose and toxin ex-
posures, as well as contact information for poison control centers, 
refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving chlorambucil and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
	■Myelosuppressive Agents (eg, antineoplastics, immuno-
suppressants, iron chelators): Concurrent use with other bone 
marrow depressant medications may result in additive myelosup-
pression; avoid combination when possible.
	■Vaccines (live and inactivated): Chlorambucil may diminish 
vaccine efficacy and enhance adverse effects of vaccines.
Laboratory Considerations
	■Chlorambucil may raise serum uric acid concentrations. Drugs 
such as allopurinol may be required to control hyperuricemia in 
some patients.
Dosages
NOTE: Because of the potential toxicity of this drug to patients, 
veterinary personnel, and clients, and because chemotherapy indi-
cations, treatment protocols, monitoring, and safety guidelines often 
change, the following dosages should be used only as a general guide. 
Consultation with a veterinary oncologist and referral to current vet-
erinary oncology references17-21 are strongly recommended.
WARNINGS: 
1.	 Chlorambucil dosages are commonly based on surface area 
(mg/m2). Do not confuse with citations that list dosages in 
mg/kg. Commercial tablet size (2 mg) may make precise dos-
ing difficult without compounding. 
2.	 Tablets should not be crushed, split, or formulated into a 
liquid, unless adequate environmental, personal, and occu-
pational exposure can be safeguarded.
 DOGS:
Immunosuppressive agent (extra-label): Commonly dosed at 
1.95 – 4.5 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) once daily. Dosages are generally 
rounded to the nearest 2 mg. Following remission, chlorambucil 
has been dosed every other day for maintenance.8 Use lowest dos-
age that will control condition. Often used in conjunction with 
prednisolone
Inflammatory colorectal polyps (extra-label): Consider in dogs 
with inflammatory colorectal polyps that do not respond well to 
traditional therapies (based on a retrospective study of 6 dachs-
hunds): average chlorambucil initial dose: 2 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) 
PO once daily used in combination with EITHER prednisolone 
0.47 mg/kg PO once daily OR firocoxib 6.2 mg/kg PO daily (aver-
age). A positive response was seen in 5 of 6 dogs.22
Antineoplastic agent (metronomic) (all are extra-label):
a)	Chronic lymphocytic leukemia: 3 – 6 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) 
PO every day for 1 to 2 weeks, then decrease to 3 – 6 mg/m2 
(NOT mg/kg) PO every other day as determined by routine 
hematologic screening and cancer response.23 Concurrently 
with chlorambucil, prednis(ol)one can be used at a dosage of 
1 mg/kg PO every day for 1 to 2 weeks, then 0.5 mg/kg PO 
every other day thereafter.
b)	Mast cell tumor: 4 – 6 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) PO every 48 
hours for 8 weeks. Chlorambucil treatment followed 3 or 4 
sessions of lomustine 60 – 90 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) every 21 
days.5
c)	Lymphoma and other lymphoreticular neoplasia OR as 
a substitute for cyclophosphamide in the COP or CHOP 
protocol if sterile hemorrhagic cystitis occurs: 1.4 mg/kg 
PO once on the same schedule as cyclophosphamide, in sub-
stitute of cyclophosphamide23
d)	Metronomic chemotherapeutic agent (eg, hemangiosar-
coma, transitional cell carcinoma) (extra-label): 4 mg/m2 
(NOT mg/kg) PO once daily. For dogs weighing more than 
8 kg (17.6 lb), the dose is rounded to the nearest 2 mg; for 
dogs weighing less than or equal to 8 kg (17.6 lb), the dose is 
compounded to 4 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg).6,7 
CATS:
Immunosuppressive agent (extra-label): Chlorambucil is gener-
ally considered a second-line immunosuppressant (after gluco-
corticoids) in cats and often used in conjunction with prednis-
olone. Anecdotal chlorambucil dosing recommendations vary 
and the commercial tablet size (2 mg) may make precise dosing 
difficult without compounding. For immune-mediated condi-
tions, chlorambucil is commonly dosed initially at 0.1 – 0.2 mg/kg 
(≈1.5 – 4 mg/m2 PO once daily). If using the entire 2 mg tablet, 
chlorambucil is dosed in a practical manner every 48 hours for 
cats weighing more than 4 kg (8.8 lb) and every 72 hours for cats 
weighing less than 4 kg (8.8 lb). Once remission occurs, the dose 
is reduced or the dosing interval (often every 3 to 4 days) is ex-
tended to an interval that still controls the condition.
Low-grade GI lymphoma; chronic lymphocytic leukemia (ex-
tra-label): Several protocols using chlorambucil with predniso-
lone have had a relatively high degree of efficacy, including:
a)	 Chlorambucil 15 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) PO once daily for 
4 days repeated every 3 weeks, and prednisolone initially at 
3 mg/kg PO once daily24
b)	 Chlorambucil 20 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) (rounded to nearest 
2 mg) PO once every 2 weeks and prednisolone 2 mg/kg PO 
once daily25
c)	 Chlorambucil 2 mg/cat (NOT mg/m2 or mg/kg) PO every 2 to 
3 days (48-72 hours) and prednisolone 5 – 10 mg PO every 12 
to 24 hours26
HORSES:
Adjunctive therapy in treating lymphoma using the LAP pro-
tocol (extra-label): Cytarabine 200 – 300 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) 
SC or IM once every 1 to 2 weeks; chlorambucil 20 mg/m2 (NOT 
mg/kg) PO every 2 weeks (alternating with cytarabine) and 
prednisone 1.1 – 2.2 mg/kg PO every other day. If this protocol 
is ineffective (no response seen in 2-4 weeks), add vincristine at 
0.5 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) IV once weekly.27 
FERRETS:
Adjunctive therapy in treating lymphoma (extra-label): As part 
of a multiagent protocol, 2 mg total dose (NOT mg/kg) PO in 
weeks 11 and 20 of a 20-week protocol
