1058      PrednisoLONE/Prednisone/ PrednisoLONE Sodium Succinate
is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks should be 
weighed and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
	■Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors (ACEIs; eg, 
benazepril, enalapril): May increase risk for hypotension
	■Amlodipine: May increase risk for hypotension
	■Beta-Blocking Agents (eg, propranolol): May enhance the 
postural hypotensive effects seen after the first dose of prazosin
	■Clonidine: May decrease prazosin antihypertensive effects
	■Pentoxifylline: May increase risk for hypotension
	■Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors (eg, sildenafil): May increase 
risk for hypotension
	■Telmisartan: May increase risk for hypotension
	■Vasopressors (eg, dopamine, norepinephrine): Prazosin may 
reduce dopamine pressor effect.
	■Verapamil: May cause synergistic hypotensive effects when 
used concomitantly with prazosin
Laboratory Considerations
None noted
Dosages
DOGS:
Decrease urethral resistance in idiopathic vesico-urethral re-
flex dyssynergia (VURD; extra-label): 
a)	0.5 mg/kg PO twice daily. If adverse effects develop, decrease 
the dose by 50%. Moderate to good effect was noted in 60% of 
the dogs treated.13 
b)	Anecdotally, 1 mg/15 kg (33 lb) PO 2 to 3 times daily
Dysuria in patients with prostatic carcinoma (extra-label): 
From a case report, 0.1 – 0.4 mg/kg PO daily was helpful in man-
aging dysuria associated with prostatic carcinoma.1
Systemic hypertension (extra-label): 
a)	Weight-based dosage: 0.5 – 2 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours7
b)	Dosage per dog: 0.5 – 2 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO every 8 to 
12 hours14,15
Adjunctive treatment of heart failure (extra-label): 1 mg/dog 
(NOT mg/kg) PO 3 times daily for dogs weighing less than 15 kg 
(33 lb); 2 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) 3 times daily PO for dogs weigh-
ing more than 15 kg (33 lb)16,17
CATS:
Decreasing urethral resistance with functional urethral ob-
struction (extra-label): Use is controversial, and efficacy has been 
questioned.2,6 Several dosages have been suggested, but most 
commonly 0.25 – 1 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 12 hours for 
1 to 2 weeks4–6
Hypertension (extra-label): 0.25 – 0.5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO 
once daily7
Monitoring
	■Clinical efficacy
	■Baseline and periodic blood pressure
	■Mucous membrane color, capillary refill time (CRT), pulse 
­oximetry
Client Information
	■This medicine may be given with or without food. If your animal 
vomits, stops eating, or acts sick after getting prazosin on an emp-
ty stomach, give the medicine with food or a small treat to see if 
this helps. If vomiting continues, contact your veterinarian.
	■The most common side effect with this medicine is lethargy 
(tiredness/lack of energy).
Chemistry/Synonyms
Prazosin HCl, a quinazoline-derivative postsynaptic alpha-1-adren-
ergic blocker, occurs as a white to tan powder. It is slightly soluble 
in water and very slightly soluble in alcohol. Dosage forms contain 
prazosin HCl, but potency and dosage are expressed (and calculated) 
as prazosin base.
Prazosin may also be known as CP-12299-1, furazosin hydrochlo-
ride, prazosini hydrochloridum; many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Prazosin capsules should be stored in well-closed containers and 
protected from light and moisture at room temperature (20°C-25°C 
[68°F-77°F]).
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula-
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Prazosin Capsules: 1 mg, 2 mg, and 5 mg (as base); Minipress®, 
generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
PrednisoLONE/Prednisone/ 
PrednisoLONE Sodium Succinate
(pred-niss-oh-lone; pred-ni-zone)
Glucocorticoid
For more information, see Glucocorticoid Agents, General Infor-
mation and Trimeprazine/Prednisolone
NOTE: Prednisone and prednisoLONE are distinct drugs. This 
monograph uses TALL man letters to differentiate prednisoLONE 
from prednisone. They are often considered bioequivalent as most 
species rapidly convert prednisone to its active form, prednisolone, in 
the liver; however, horses, cats, and animals that have severe hepatic 
failure may not efficiently absorb or convert prednisone to prednis-
oLONE. PrednisoLONE or an alternative glucocorticoid should be 
used for these animals when possible. 
Prescriber Highlights
	
▶Used to treat many conditions in a variety of species.  
	
▶Prednisone’s anti-inflammatory activity is 4 times more po-
tent than hydrocortisone and it has some mineralocorticoid 
­activity.
	
▶Contraindications (relative) include systemic fungal infections. 
Increased risk of GI ulceration when used concurrently with 
NSAIDS or aspirin.     
	
▶Caution is advised for use in animals with an active bacterial 
infection, corneal ulcer, hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes melli-
tus, osteoporosis, chronic psychotic reactions, predisposition 
to thrombophlebitis, hypertension, congestive heart failure, 
and renal insufficiency.
	
▶Goal of therapy should be to use the lowest dose possible 
for the least amount of time to treat and control patient’s 
­condition.
	
▶PrednisoLONE is recommended for use in cats and horses 
because of the poor bioavailability of prednisone.
	
▶Primary adverse effects are related to iatrogenic hyperadreno-
corticism with sustained use.
	
▶Many potential drug and laboratory interactions

PrednisoLONE/Prednisone/PrednisoLONE Sodium Succinate       1059
Uses/Indications
Although glucocorticoids have been used to treat many conditions 
in humans and animals, prednisoLONE and prednisone have 4 pri-
mary uses with accompanying dosage ranges: 1) replacement or 
supplementation (eg, relative adrenal insufficiency associated with 
septic shock) for glucocorticoid deficiency secondary to hypoadre-
nocorticism, 2) anti-inflammatory agent, 3) immunosuppression, 
and 4) antineoplastic agent. 
Glucocorticoids are used in the treatment of endocrine condi-
tions (eg, adrenal insufficiency), autoimmune and immune-medi-
ated diseases (eg, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus, masticatory 
myositis), severe allergic conditions, anaphylaxis, envenomation, re-
spiratory diseases (eg, asthma), dermatologic diseases (eg, pemphi-
gus, allergic dermatoses), hematologic disorders (eg, thrombocyto-
penia, autoimmune hemolytic anemia), neoplasias, nervous system 
disorders (eg, increased CSF pressure), GI diseases (eg, ulcerative 
colitis exacerbations, inflammatory bowel disease), renal diseases 
(eg, nephrotic syndrome), and induction of fetal maturation. Some 
glucocorticoids are used topically on the eye and skin or are injected 
intra-articularly or intralesionally. This list is not exhaustive. High-
dose use is not supported for hemorrhagic or hypovolemic shock, 
head trauma, spinal cord trauma,1 or sepsis.
In general, when administering glucocorticoids, the following 
principles should be followed:
	■A specific diagnosis is ideally obtained before glucocorticoids are 
administered as they can mask disease.
	■A course of treatment should be determined prior to treatment.
	■A therapeutic endpoint should be determined prior to treatment.
	■The least potent glucocorticoid should be used at the lowest dose 
for a minimal amount of time.
	■It is important to understand when glucocorticoid use is inappro-
priate (eg, acute infection, diabetes).2
Pharmacology/Actions
PrednisoLONE and prednisone are intermediate-acting corticoste-
roids with biologic half-lives of 12 to 36 hours. Glucocorticoids have 
effects on almost every cell type and system in mammals. 
Cardiovascular system: Glucocorticoids can reduce capillary per-
meability and enhance vasoconstriction. A clinically insignificant 
positive inotropic effect can occur after glucocorticoid administra-
tion. This drug’s vasoconstrictive properties and increased blood 
volume can result in increased blood pressure.
Cells: Glucocorticoids can inhibit fibroblast proliferation, macro-
phage response to migration inhibiting factor, sensitization of lym-
phocytes, and the cellular response to mediators of inflammation; 
they can also stabilize lysosomal membranes.
CNS/autonomic nervous system: Glucocorticoids can lower the 
seizure threshold, alter mood and behavior, diminish response to 
pyrogens, stimulate appetite, and maintain alpha rhythm. Glucocor-
ticoids are necessary for normal adrenergic receptor sensitivity.
Endocrine system: When an animal is not stressed, glucocorticoids 
suppress the release of corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic hormone 
[ACTH]) from the anterior pituitary, which reduces or prevents the 
release of endogenous corticosteroids. Stress factors (eg, renal dis-
ease, liver disease, diabetes) may occasionally nullify the suppress-
ing aspects of exogenously administered steroids. The release of 
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH), prolactin, and luteinizing hormone may be reduced when 
glucocorticoids are administered at pharmacologic doses. Conver-
sion of thyroxine (T4) to triiodothyronine (T3) may be reduced by 
glucocorticoids, and plasma levels of parathyroid hormone may be 
increased. Glucocorticoids may inhibit osteoblast function. Vaso-
pressin (antidiuretic hormone [ADH]) activity is reduced at the re-
nal tubules and diuresis may occur. Glucocorticoids inhibit insulin 
binding to insulin-receptors and the post-receptor effects of insulin.
Fluid and electrolyte balance: Glucocorticoids can increase renal 
potassium and calcium excretion, sodium and chloride reabsorp-
tion, and extracellular fluid volume. Hypokalemia and/or hypocal-
cemia rarely occur. Diuresis may develop following glucocorticoid 
administration.
GI tract and hepatic system: Glucocorticoids increase the secretion 
of gastric acid, pepsin, and trypsin. They alter the structure of mucin 
and decrease mucosal cell proliferation. Iron salts and calcium ab-
sorption are decreased, whereas fat absorption is increased. Hepatic 
changes can include increased fat and glycogen deposits in hepato-
cytes and increased serum levels of ALT and gamma-glutamyl tran-
speptidase (GGT). Significant increases can be seen in serum ALP 
levels. Glucocorticoids can cause minor increases in bromosulfoph-
thalein (BSP) retention time.
Hematopoietic system: Glucocorticoids can increase the number of 
circulating platelets, neutrophils, and RBCs, but platelet aggregation 
is inhibited. Decreased amounts of lymphocytes (peripheral), mono-
cytes, and eosinophils are seen because glucocorticoids can seques-
ter these cells into the lungs and spleen and can prompt decreased re-
lease from bone marrow; removal of old RBCs becomes diminished. 
Glucocorticoids can cause involution of lymphoid tissue.
Immune system (also see Cells and Hematopoietic system): Gluco-
corticoids can decrease circulating levels of T-lymphocytes; inhibit 
lymphokines; inhibit neutrophil, macrophage, and monocyte mi-
gration; reduce production of interferon; and inhibit phagocytosis, 
chemotaxis, antigen processing, and intracellular killing. Specific ac-
quired immunity is affected less than nonspecific immune respons-
es. Glucocorticoids can also antagonize the complement cascade and 
mask the clinical signs of infection. Mast cells are decreased in num-
ber and histamine synthesis is suppressed. Many of these effects only 
occur at high doses and species have different responses.
Metabolic effects: Glucocorticoids stimulate gluconeogenesis. Lipo-
genesis is enhanced in certain areas of the body (eg, abdomen), and 
adipose tissue can be redistributed away from the extremities to the 
trunk. Fatty acids are mobilized from tissues and their oxidation is 
increased. Plasma levels of triglycerides, cholesterol, and glycerol are 
increased. Protein is mobilized from most areas of the body (not the 
liver).
Musculoskeletal: Glucocorticoids may cause muscular weakness, 
atrophy, and osteoporosis. Bone growth can be inhibited via growth 
hormone and somatomedin inhibition, increased calcium excretion, 
and inhibition of vitamin D activation. Resorption of bone can be 
enhanced. Fibrocartilage growth is also inhibited.
Ophthalmic: Prolonged corticosteroid use (both systemic or topi-
cally to the eye) can cause increased intraocular pressure and glau-
coma, cataracts, and exophthalmos.
Skin: Thinning of dermal tissue and skin atrophy can be seen with 
glucocorticoid therapy. Hair follicles can become distended and al-
opecia may occur.
Pharmacokinetics
Prednisone is a prodrug and requires hepatic bioactivation.
In cats, prednisoLONE has a higher bioavailability when adminis-
tered orally as compared with prednisone.3 Reported bioavailabilities 
(of active prednisoLONE) are 100% and 21%, respectively. Although 
it is not clear if this is due to decreased GI absorption or decreased 
hepatic conversion of prednisone to prednisoLONE, oral predniso-
LONE is the superior choice in cats.3,4 In a study, overconditioned 
cats had significantly higher plasma prednisoLONE concentrations 
(2 times) as compared with normal-conditioned cats.5
