450      Enrofloxacin
target anti-Xa peak range of 0.5 to 1 IU/mL, extrapolated from hu-
man literature, has been suggested for use in dogs and cats. The sug-
gested thromboprophylactic range for horses is 0.1 – 0.2 IU/mL.15
NOTE: To measure peak anti-Xa activity, sample at 2 hours post-
dose for cats, 3 hours postdose for dogs, and 3 to 4 hours postdose 
for horses.16 If an anti-Xa assay is not available, consider activated 
clotting time, aPTT, thrombin generation, or viscoelastic tests to 
monitor anticoagulant treatment.1,17
Client Information 
	■This medicine must be injected subcutaneously (under the skin). 
Be sure you understand how to correctly give the injections. Sev-
eral injections a day may be required, and treatment can be very 
expensive. Administration of the injections may be painful for 
your animal.
	■Bleeding is not likely, but if it does occur, contact your veterinar-
ian immediately.
	■If your animal is very listless (lacking energy), appears to be hav-
ing trouble breathing, trouble walking, or loses the use of its rear 
legs, contact your veterinarian immediately, as it may mean blood 
clots have formed.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), enoxaparin sodium is 
obtained by alkaline depolymerization of heparin derived from pork 
intestinal mucosa. The average molecular weight is ≈4500 and rang-
es from 3500 to 5500 (heparin sodium has a molecular weight of 
≈12,000); 1 mg of enoxaparin is equivalent to 100 units of anti-factor 
Xa.
Enoxaparin sodium may also be known as Enoxaparinum natri-
cum, PK-10169, RP-54563, Clexane®, Decipar®, Klexane®, Lovenox®, 
Plaucina®, and Trombenox®.
Storage/Stability 
The commercially available injection should be stored at room 
temperature (25°C [77°F]); excursions permitted to 15°C to 30°C 
(59°F-86°F).
One study showed that diluting the 100 mg/mL commercially 
available solution with sterile water to 20 mg/mL resulted in a prod-
uct that was stable for 4 weeks when stored in a glass vial or in plastic 
syringes at room temperature or refrigerated.18
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations 
Do not mix or coadminister enoxaparin with other medications.4
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status 
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE 
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Enoxaparin Sodium for Injection: 30 mg/0.3 mL, 40 mg/0.4 mL, 
60 mg/0.6 mL, 80 mg/0.8 mL, 100 mg/1 mL, 120 mg/0.8 mL, and 
150 mg/1 mL preservative-free in single-dose prefilled syringes; 
300 mg/3 mL containing 15 mg/mL benzyl alcohol in 3 mL multi-
dose vials; Lovenox®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
 
Enrofloxacin
(en-roe-flox-a-sin)  Baytril®, Zobuxa®
Fluoroquinolone Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights 
	
▶Effective against a variety of pathogens except for anaerobes 
	
▶In dogs, oral bioavailability is greater and more predictable 
than with ciprofloxacin.
	
▶When possible, use should be avoided in young, growing 
animals because of the potential negative impact on cartilage 
development. 
	
▶Caution is advised in patients with hepatic or renal insufficien-
cy or dehydration. 
	
▶Higher doses (greater than 5 mg/kg/day) not recommended in 
cats; may cause blindness
	
▶Adverse effects include GI distress, CNS stimulation, crystal-
luria, or hypersensitivity. 
	
▶Oral administration to dogs and cats ideally should be on an 
empty stomach (unless vomiting occurs).
	
▶Many potential drug interactions
	
▶FDA prohibits extra-label use in food animals.
Uses/Indications 
Enrofloxacin is FDA-approved for use in dogs (by oral1 and IM2 
routes) and cats (oral2 only) for the management of bacterial infec-
tions susceptible to enrofloxacin. Because of the feline dose restric-
tion (5 mg/kg/day) and because better options are usually available 
for cats, enrofloxacin is generally used in this species to treat only the 
most susceptible bacterial infections or if an injectable fluoroquino-
lone is needed and where enrofloxacin is the only injectable option.
Enrofloxacin is FDA-approved for use in beef and nonlactating 
dairy cattle for the treatment and control of bovine respiratory dis-
ease (BRD).3 It is conditionally approved for the treatment of clinical 
anaplasmosis associated with Anaplasma marginale in replacement 
dairy heifers under 20 months of age, in all classes of beef cattle ex-
cept beef calves less than 2 months of age, and in beef bulls of any age 
that are intended for breeding.4 Enrofloxacin is also FDA-approved 
for use in pigs for the treatment and control of swine respiratory dis-
ease (SRD) and as second-line therapy for the control of colibacillo-
sis in groups or pens of weaned pigs.3
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated fluoro-
quinolones as Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobials 
for human medicine.5 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) 
has designated enrofloxacin as a Veterinary Critically Important An-
timicrobial (VCIA) Agent in veterinary species.6
Pharmacology/Actions 
Enrofloxacin has broad-spectrum coverage. Enrofloxacin has good 
activity against many gram-negative bacilli and cocci, including most 
species and strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella spp, Esch-
erichia coli, Enterobacter spp, Campylobacter spp, Shigella spp, Sal-
monella spp, Aeromonas spp, Haemophilus spp, Proteus spp, Yersinia 
spp, Serratia spp, and Vibrio spp. Other organisms that are generally 
susceptible include Brucella spp, Chlamydia trachomatis, staphylo-
cocci (including penicillinase-producing and methicillin-resistant 
strains), Mycoplasma spp, and some Mycobacterium spp (but not the 
etiologic agent for Johne’s disease). 
Fluoroquinolones have variable activity against most streptococci 
and are not usually recommended for use in these infections. En-
rofloxacin is contraindicated with Streptococcus canis infections (or 
when it has not been ruled out) because of the potential for drug-in-
duced necrotizing fasciitis.7 This adverse effect does not appear to 
be a problem with other fluoroquinolones. Enrofloxacin has weak 
activity against enterococci and is not recommended in the treat-

Enrofloxacin      451
ment of enterococcal infections. Enrofloxacin is generally ineffective 
in treating anaerobic infections.
Development of bacterial resistance is an ongoing concern with 
many different bacteria, particularly staphylococci, Enterobacterales 
(eg, E coli), and Pseudomonas spp. Resistance occurs by mutation, 
particularly with P aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter 
spp, and enterococci, but plasmid-mediated resistance is not thought 
to commonly occur. E coli resistance was demonstrated in enrofloxa-
cin-treated weaner pigs as well as untreated pigs housed with treated 
animals.8
The bactericidal activity of enrofloxacin is concentration-depen-
dent (antibacterial activity improves with high peak concentrations), 
and susceptible bacteria cell death occurs within 20 to 30 minutes of 
exposure. Enrofloxacin’s mechanism of action is believed to be in-
hibition of bacterial DNA gyrase (a type II topoisomerase), thereby 
preventing DNA supercoiling and DNA synthesis.
Enrofloxacin has demonstrated a significant postantibiotic effect 
for both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria and is active in 
stationary and growth phases of bacterial replication. In vitro kill 
assays for enrofloxacin and its active metabolite, ciprofloxacin, have 
demonstrated an additive response (effect equal to the combined ac-
tion of each of the drugs used separately) in dog and cat isolates of 
E coli, Staphylococcus pseudintermedius, and P aeruginosa.9 Methicil-
lin-resistant S pseudintermedius present within biofilm have higher 
MICs, indicating reduced susceptibility to enrofloxacin.10
In vitro synergic antibacterial effects were not observed when en-
rofloxacin was combined with amikacin.11
Pharmacokinetics 
Enrofloxacin is well absorbed after oral administration in most spe-
cies. In dogs, enrofloxacin’s bioavailability (≈80%) is approximately 
twice that of ciprofloxacin after oral administration. Oral bioavail-
ability in horses is between 60% and 80%.12,13 Fifty percent of peak 
plasma concentration (Cmax) is reportedly attained within 15 minutes 
of administration and Cmax occurs within 1 hour of administration. 
In sheep, oral enrofloxacin bioavailability is ≈90% or higher14 and 
83% after IM administration.15 Presence of food in the stomach gen-
erally delays the rate but not the extent of absorption; however, foods 
with increased divalent or trivalent cation concentrations (eg, milk) 
can reduce bioavailability. Enrofloxacin is rapidly absorbed after IM 
administration in dogs (peak concentrations in ≈30 minutes).2
Enrofloxacin is widely distributed throughout the body. Volume 
of distribution in dogs is ≈3 to 4 L/kg. Only ≈27% is bound to canine 
plasma proteins. Highest concentrations are found in the bile, kid-
ney, liver, lungs, and reproductive system (including prostatic fluid 
and tissue). Enrofloxacin reportedly concentrates in macrophages. 
Therapeutic concentrations are also attained in bone, synovial fluid, 
skin, muscle, aqueous humor, and pleural fluid. Low concentrations 
are found in the CSF; concentrations may only reach 6% to 10% of 
those found in serum. In hospitalized horses, volume of distribution 
was ≈1.25 L/kg. After mechanical disruption of the blood–aqueous 
humor barrier in horses, enrofloxacin (7.5 mg/kg IV) produced con-
centrations in the aqueous humor sufficient to treat Leptospira pomo-
na.16 Enrofloxacin concentration in bronchoalveolar fluid of calves 
was higher than plasma 1 hour and 2 hours after SC injection.17 After 
SC administration to steers, enrofloxacin penetrated GI tissue better 
than ciprofloxacin.18 The volume of distribution was 1.5 to 2.3 L/kg 
in sheep15 and ≈1.5 L/kg in cattle. 
Enrofloxacin is eliminated via renal and hepatic mechanisms. Ap-
proximately 15% to 50% of the drug is eliminated unchanged into 
the urine by tubular secretion and glomerular filtration. Enroflox-
acin is metabolized to various metabolites, most of which are less 
active than the parent compounds. Approximately 10% to 40% of 
circulating enrofloxacin is metabolized to ciprofloxacin in most spe-
cies, including, dogs, cats, adult horses, cattle, turtles, snakes, and 
humans. Foals, pigs, and some lizards convert little, if any, enroflox-
acin to ciprofloxacin. Enrofloxacin metabolites are eliminated in the 
urine and feces. Because of the dual elimination routes (renal and 
hepatic), dogs with moderately impaired renal function may have 
slightly prolonged half-lives and higher serum concentrations but 
may not require any dosage adjustment. Approximate elimination 
half-lives in various species are in dogs, 2 to 5 hours19,20; cats, 6 hours; 
calves, 9 hours18; sheep and goats, 1.5 to 4.5 hours15,21; horses, 5 to 10 
hours12,22; turtles, 18 hours; and alligators, 55 hours. After SC admin-
istration to calves, fecal enrofloxacin and ciprofloxacin concentra-
tions were ≈ 115 and ≈50 times higher than their respective plasma 
concentrations.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Enrofloxacin is labeled as contraindicated in patients that are hyper-
sensitive to it as well as in small- and medium-breed dogs aged 2 to 
8 months. Bubble-like changes in articular cartilage have been noted 
when the drug was given at 2 to 5 times the recommended dosage 
for 30 days, although clinical signs have only been seen at 5 times 
the recommended dosage. To avoid cartilage damage, treatment for 
large- and giant-breed dogs may need to wait until 12 and 18 months 
of age, respectively. Enrofloxacin at concentrations greater than 1 
mg/mL was toxic to equine chondrocytes.23 Enrofloxacin is not rec-
ommended in cats with impaired renal function or at doses above 5 
mg/kg/day due to increased risk for retinal degeneration.24
Because ciprofloxacin has occasionally been reported to cause 
crystalluria in humans, animals should not be allowed to become 
dehydrated during fluoroquinolone therapy. Enrofloxacin may cause 
CNS stimulation and should be used with caution in patients with 
seizure disorders. Patients with severe renal or hepatic impairment 
may require dosage interval adjustments to prevent drug accumu-
lation. 
Use of the canine injectable products in cats or dogs via non-FDA–
approved parenteral routes (eg, IV, SC) is controversial and may re-
sult in significant adverse effects. Because of the high pH (≈11) of the 
solution, SC administration in any species may cause pain and tissue 
damage. Rapid or undiluted IV administration to dogs increases risk 
for cardiac arrhythmias, hypotension, vomiting, and mast cell de-
granulation (ie, release of histamine and other inflammatory media-
tors). See Compatibility/Compounding Considerations.
Dilution and extra-label use of the large animal product 
(100 mg/mL; 10%) in small animal species via any route is strongly 
­discouraged. 
Enrofloxacin should not be used in foals, as they appear to be 
highly susceptible to the fluoroquinolone’s arthropathic effects. Al-
though there has been much discussion regarding the potential for 
cartilage abnormalities or other arthropathies in horses, objective 
data are lacking. In horses, IV administration should be slow as atax-
ia and other neurologic effects may occur when given rapidly. Intra-
uterine infusion and IM injections are not recommended in horses, 
as localized tissue reactions (eg, endometrial ulceration, necrosis, 
fibrosis, inflammation, hemorrhage) can occur.25 
Extra-label use of fluoroquinolones is prohibited in food animals.
Enrofloxacin and ciprofloxacin cannot be considered equivalent 
due to pharmacokinetic differences (see Pharmacokinetics).
Enrofloxacin should not be used in humans; it may cause halluci-
nations, vivid dreams, and/or headaches.
Adverse Effects 
When enrofloxacin is used as labeled, its adverse effect profile is usu-
ally limited to GI distress (eg, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia). In dogs, 
rare incidences of elevated hepatic enzymes, ataxia, seizures, depres-
sion, lethargy, and nervousness have also been reported1,2; dogs may 
vomit after IV administration. Hypersensitivity reactions or crystal-
