
===== Plumb PDF 39 =====
12    Acetylcysteine
cosis. It is also used as a potential adjunctive treatment to prevent 
enterolith formation in horses by reducing colonic pH.
Pharmacology/Actions
Acetic acid in the rumen lowers pH by shifting ammonia (NH 3) to 
ammonium ions (NH4
+) to reduce ammonia absorption; it may also 
slow the hydrolysis of urea.
Pharmacokinetics
No information is noted.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Acetic acid should not be administered to ruminants until lactic aci-
dosis (eg, grain overload, rumen acidosis) is ruled out.
Do NOT use concentrated forms of acetic acid; use only vinegar 
(3%-5% acetic acid).
Adverse Effects
Because of the unpleasant taste and potential for causing mucous 
membrane irritation, it is generally recommended to administer ace-
tic acid via stomach tube.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
When acetic acid is used for appropriate indications, there is little 
likelihood of serious toxicity occurring after minor overdoses. Be -
cause of its potential corrosiveness, the greatest concern is when a 
concentrated form of acetic acid is mistakenly used.
Drug Interactions
There are no documented drug interactions with oral acetic acid. 
Because of its acidic qualities, acetic acid could theoretically affect 
the pharmacokinetics of several drugs, which may have clinical sig -
nificance in veterinary species. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks should be 
weighed and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
 ■ Aspirin : Acidified urine can decrease the excretion of salicylates.
 ■ Azole Antifungals (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole): Acetic 
acid may increase absorption of azole antifungal agents.
 ■ Iron : Acetic acid may increase iron absorption.
 ■ Phenobarbital : Acidified urine can decrease the excretion of 
phenobarbital.
 ■ Quinidine : Acidified urine can decrease the excretion of quini -
dine.
Dosages
CATTLE/RUMINANTS:
Urea poisoning/nonprotein nitrogen-induced ammonia tox -
icosis (extra-label): Using 5% acetic acid (ie, vinegar), infuse  
4 – 10 L (for cattle) or 250 mL – 1 L (sheep/goats) into the rumen.1 
Follow with cold water (up to 30 L in cattle; 2 – 8 L in sheep/goats) 
to reduce rumen temperature and reduce formation of urea. Re -
peat treatment as required if clinical signs reoccur.
HORSES:
Adjunctive treatment for enterolith prevention  (extra-  
label): Using 5% acetic acid (ie, vinegar), add 250 mL/450 kg  
(250 mL/990 lb) body weight to food once daily.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Glacial acetic acid is C2H4O2. Acetic acid has a distinctive odor and a 
sharp acid taste. It is miscible with water, alcohol, or glycerin. Much 
confusion can occur with the percentages of C 2H4O2 contained in 
various acetic acid solutions. Acetic Acid USP is defined as having a 
concentration of 36% to 37% C 2H4O2. Diluted Acetic Acid NF con -
tains 5.7% to 6.3% w/v of C 2H4O2. Solutions containing ≈3% to 5% 
w/v of C 2H4O2 are commonly known as vinegar. Be certain of the 
concentration of the product you are using and your dilutions.
Acetic acid may also be known as E260, eisessig (glacial acetic 
acid), essigsäure, etanoico, or ethanoic acid.
Storage/Stability
Acetic acid solutions should be stored in airtight containers.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
If diluting more concentrated forms of acetic acid to concentrations 
equivalent to vinegar (3% to 5%), use safety precautions to protect 
eyes and skin. It is strongly recommended to have someone check 
your calculations to prevent potentially serious consequences.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
No systemic products are commercially available. Acetic acid (in 
various concentrations) may be purchased from chemical supply 
houses. Distilled white vinegar is available in gallon sizes from gro -
cery stores or mass merchandisers.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Acetylcysteine
N-Acetylcysteine
NAC, ACC
(assah-teel-sis-tay-een) Mucomyst®
Antidote; Mucolytic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used primarily as a treatment for acetaminophen toxicity or 
other hepatotoxic conditions in which glutathione synthesis is 
inhibited or oxidative stress occurs
 ▶ When using as an antidote, if possible, give first dose IV; oral 
doses should be given on an empty stomach and via gastric 
tube.
 ▶ Has also been used as an inhaled solution for its mucolytic 
effect and, anecdotally, orally for treating degenerative my-
elopathy
 ▶ Administration via nebulization has caused hypersensitivity 
and bronchospasm. 
 ▶ Dilute prior to IV administration; use a 0.2 micron in-line filter if 
administering inhalation solution IV
Uses/Indications
Acetylcysteine (N-acetylcysteine, NAC) is used in veterinary medi -
cine as both a mucolytic agent in the pulmonary tree and as a treat -
ment for acetaminophen, xylitol, or phenol toxicity in small animals. 
It potentially could be useful in the adjunctive treatment of sulfon -
amide hypersensitivity, sago palm hepatotoxicity, mushroom hepa -
totoxicity, doxorubicin-induced hepatotoxicity, cadmium toxicity, or 
phenazopyridine toxicity.1-4 Acetylcysteine may also be used topical-
ly in the eye to halt the melting effect of collagenases and proteinases 
on the cornea (see Acetylcysteine Ophthalmic).
Acetylcysteine has been used anecdotally with aminocaproic acid 
to treat degenerative myelopathy in dogs, but efficacy data are lack -
ing. 
In horses with strangles (ie, Streptococcus equi subsp equi infec-
tion), acetylcysteine instilled into the guttural pouch has been used 
to help break up chondroids and avoid the need for surgical remov-
al.5 Acetylcysteine enemas have been used in neonatal foals to break 
up meconium refractory to repeated enemas. In mares in estrus, 
intrauterine acetylcysteine instillation could potentially be useful as 
an adjunctive treatment of endometritis, as acetylcysteine appears 
to have anti-inflammatory effects on equine endometrial cells and 
improves pregnancy rates.6,7


===== Plumb PDF 40 =====
Acetylcysteine   13
Pharmacology/Actions
When administered into the pulmonary tree, acetylcysteine reduc -
es the viscosity of both purulent and nonpurulent secretions and 
expedites the removal of these secretions via coughing, suction, or 
postural drainage. The free sulfhydryl group on the drug is believed 
to reduce disulfide linkages in mucoproteins; this effect is most pro-
nounced at a pH from 7 to 9. The drug has no effect on living tissue 
or fibrin.
In the management of toxicity, acetylcysteine acts as a thiol donor, 
stimulating glutathione synthesis, and is a free radical scavenger. It 
also improves hepatic blood flow through increased production of 
nitric oxide. In acetaminophen hepatotoxicity, glutathione stores are 
maintained allowing elimination via nontoxic metabolites.
When administered to sick dogs (n = 30) during the first 48 hours 
of hospitalization, acetylcysteine stabilized erythrocyte glutathione 
concentrations, but when compared with the placebo group, illness 
severity scores and survival rates were unchanged.8
Pharmacokinetics
When given orally, some acetylcysteine is absorbed from the GI 
tract. Oral bioavailability in healthy cats has been reported as ≈20%.9 
When administered via nebulization or intratracheally into the pul-
monary tract, most of the drug is involved in the sulfhydryl-disulfide 
reaction and the remainder is absorbed. Absorbed drug is converted 
(deacetylated) into cysteine in the liver and then further metabo -
lized. Elimination half-life in cats is ≈0.8 hours (IV) and ≈1.3 hours 
(PO). The authors postulated that oral doses of 100 mg/kg may be ef-
fective in cats when treating chronic diseases, but additional studies 
are required to confirm safety and efficacy.9
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Acetylcysteine is contraindicated (for pulmonary indications) in 
animals hypersensitive to it. Use as an antidote has no contraindi -
cations.
Acetylcysteine administration via inhalation (nebulization) may 
cause bronchospasm, and this drug should be used very cautious -
ly, if at all, in animals with bronchospastic conditions (eg, asthma, 
bronchitis). 
Oral or IV administration requires dilution to a 5% (50 mg/mL) 
solution. Although acetylcysteine is not labeled for injection, this 
route is used anecdotally; a 0.2 micron in-line filter must be used 
when giving IV . The taste and smell of the solution is unpleasant (sul-
furous), and taste-masking agents (eg, colas, juices) have been used 
in humans. Because oral dosing of these drugs may be difficult in 
animals, gastric tubes may be necessary.
Adverse Effects
When given orally for acetaminophen toxicity, acetylcysteine can 
cause GI effects (eg, nausea, vomiting) and rarely, urticaria. 
IV administration appears to be well-tolerated in veterinary pa -
tients. IV boluses in humans have caused changes in blood pressure 
(ie, hyper- or hypotension), GI effects, erythema and flushing 30 to 
60 minutes after infusion, and hypersensitivity reactions (eg, in hu -
mans, rash, hypotension, wheezing).
Adverse effects reported when acetylcysteine is administered 
into the pulmonary tract include hypersensitivity, stomatitis, chest 
tightness, bronchoconstriction, and bronchial or tracheal irritation. 
A sticky residue may be noted on the face following nebulization 
with a mask. A study in cats with experimentally induced asthma 
demonstrated that endotracheal nebulization with acetylcysteine in-
creased airway resistance and caused other adverse effects in some 
cats, including increased airway secretions, cough, and unilateral 
strabismus.10
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Acetylcysteine crosses the placenta. Reproduction studies in rabbits 
and rats have not demonstrated any evidence of teratogenic or em -
bryotoxic effects when used in doses up to 3 times normal. Studies in 
laboratory animals have not demonstrated impaired fertility.
It is unknown whether acetylcysteine enters milk. Because safety 
has not been established, this drug should only be used when the 
maternal benefits outweigh the potential fetal risks. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The LD50 of acetylcysteine in dogs is 1 g/kg (PO) and 700 mg/kg (IV). 
It is believed that acetylcysteine is quite safe (with the exception of 
the adverse effects listed above) in most overdose situations.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
 ■ Activ ated Charcoal : The use of activated charcoal as a gut 
adsorbent of acetaminophen is controversial, as charcoal may also 
adsorb orally-administered acetylcysteine.  
 ■ Nitroglycerin : May enhance hypotension when given IV con-
comitantly with acetylcysteine
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Maintain or restore glutathione levels for the adjunctive treat-
ment of hepatotoxicity associated with oxidative damage (ex-
tra-label): Initial dose 140 – 180 mg/kg IV (dilute to 5% and give 
via slow IV using a 0.2 micron filter over 15 to 20 minutes) or  
280 mg/kg PO (via gastric tube), followed by 70 mg/kg PO or IV 
every 6 hours for a minimum of 7 treatments.2,11-13 Large overdos-
es may require up to 17 doses. IV administration is preferred in 
serious intoxications or in animals with uncontrolled vomiting.
Canine degenerative myelopathy (extra-label): 25 mg/kg PO 
every 8 hours for 2 weeks, then every 8 hours every other day. 
The 20% solution should be diluted to 5% with chicken broth 
or suitable diluent. Used in conjunction with aminocaproic acid 
at a dosage of 500 mg per dog (NOT mg/kg) PO every 8 hours 
indefinitely. Adjunctive treatments may include prednisone  
(0.25 – 0.5 mg/kg PO daily for 10 days, then every other day), Vi-
tamin C (1000 mg PO every 12 hours), and Vitamin E (1000 units 
PO every 12 hours). NOTE: No treatment has been shown to be 
effective in published trials.14
Adjunctive treatment of hepatic lipidosis  (extra-label): Iden -
tify underlying cause of anorexia and provide a protein replete 
feline diet, give acetylcysteine at 140 mg/kg IV over 20 minutes, 
then 70 mg/kg IV every 12 hours; dilute 10% acetylcysteine with 
saline 1:4 and administer IV using a 0.2 micron filter. 15 See also 
 Carnitine.
HORSES:
To help break up chondroids in the guttural pouch  (extra-  
label): Instill 20% solution.5
In neonatal foals to break up meconium refractory to repeated 
enemas (extra-label): 8 g in 20 g sodium bicarbonate in 200 mL 
water (pH of 7.6), give as enema as needed to effect16 or with foal 
in lateral recumbency, insert a 30 Fr Foley catheter with a 30-
cc bulb for a retention enema. Using gravity flow, slowly infuse  
100 – 200 mL of 4% acetylcysteine solution and retain for 30 to 
45 minutes. IV fluids and pain medication should be considered. 
Monitor for possible bladder distention.17 
Monitoring
 ■ When used for inhalational therapy (ie, nebulization), monitor 


===== Plumb PDF 41 =====
14   Acyclovir
for bronchoconstriction (eg, coughing, wheezing, dyspnea)
 ■ When used for applicable toxicities, monitoring will depend on 
inciting cause. Some examples include:
• CBC with methemoglobin value when applicable (eg, acet -
aminophen toxicity)
• Serum chemistry profile with electrolytes
• Hydration status
Client Information
 ■ This agent should be used only in a clinically supervised setting.
Chemistry/Synonyms
The N-acetyl derivative of L-cysteine, acetylcysteine occurs as a 
white, crystalline powder with a slight acetic odor. It is freely soluble 
in water or alcohol.
Acetylcysteine may also be known as N-acetylcysteine or N-ace-
tyl-L-cysteine, NAC, 5052 acetylcysteinum, NSC-111180, Acetad-
ote®, Mucomyst®, Cetylev®, or ACC®.
Storage/Stability
When unopened, vials of acetylcysteine should be stored at room 
temperature, 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F). The product labeled for IV 
use states that it should be used within 24 hours of first use, and 
that unused portions should be discarded. However, when stored 
at room temperature (under fluorescent lighting) or under refrig -
eration, 20% injection repackaged in 3 mL oral syringes (600 mg/  
3 mL; for oral use) is physically and chemically stable for 6 months.18 
Unopened vials of acetylcysteine solution for inhalation should be 
stored at 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F) with excursions permitted to 
15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F). Opened vials should be kept refrigerated 
and used within 96 hours.
The color of acetylcysteine solutions may turn from essentially 
colorless to a slight pink or purple once the vial is opened or the 
stopper is punctured, but color change does not affect quality or con-
centration.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Acetylcysteine injection (20%) is hyperosmolar and must be diluted 
before IV administration. It is compatible with dextrose 5% (D5W), 
sodium chloride 0.45% injection (half-normal saline), and water 
for injection. Acetylcysteine is incompatible with oxidizing agents; 
solutions can become discolored and liberate hydrogen sulfide when 
exposed to rubber, copper, and iron, and during autoclaving. It does 
not react to aluminum, stainless steel, glass, or plastic. If the solution 
becomes light purple in color, potency is not appreciably affected, 
but it is best to use nonreactive materials when giving the drug via 
nebulization. Acetylcysteine solutions are incompatible with am -
photericin B, ampicillin sodium, erythromycin lactobionate, tetra -
cycline, oxytetracycline, iodized oil, hydrogen peroxide, and trypsin.
In veterinary medicine, acetylcysteine 20% is usually diluted with 
a compatible solution (see above) to a concentration of 5% (final 
concentration of 50 mg/mL). This concentration can be obtained by 
adding 1 part injection (20%) to 3 parts of diluent. 
One study reports anacetylcysteine 1.25% solution (12.5 mg/mL) 
that was created using 0.05 mL of acetylcysteine 20% solution and 
0.75 mL of Ciprodex® (ciprofloxacin 0.3% and dexamethasone 0.1%). 
This study found the solution to be stable for 15 days when refriger-
ated at 4°C (39°F).19
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Acetylcysteine Injection: 20% (200 mg/mL) in 30 mL single-dose vi-
als, preservative free; Acetadote® , generic; (Rx). Contains EDTA
Acetylcysteine Oral Capsules: 500 mg and 600 mg; (Rx and OTC). 
May be labeled as a nutritional product
Acetylcysteine Inhalation or Oral Solution: 10% and 20% (as sodi -
um) in 4 mL, 10 mL, and 30 mL vials; generic; (Rx) NOTE: If using 
this product for dilution and then intravenous dosing, it is preferable 
to use a 0.2 micron in-line filter. Contains EDTA
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Acyclovir
Acycloguanosine, ACV
(ay-sye-kloe-vir) Zovirax®
Antiviral, Nucleoside 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used primarily in birds for psittacid alphaherpesvirus-1 (PsHV-1; 
Pacheco’s Disease)
 ▶ May be nephrotoxic when given rapidly IV and cause tissue 
necrosis in birds when given IM
 ▶ Do not use in cats because of the risk for myelosuppression 
and significant renal and hepatic toxicity.
 ▶ Oral use may cause GI distress.
 ▶ Adjust dosage in patients with renal insufficiency.
Uses/Indications
Acyclovir may be useful in the treatment of herpes infections in a 
variety of avian species. Specifically, this drug may be effective in the 
treatment of psittacid alphaherpesvirus-1 (PsHV-1; formerly known 
as Pacheco’s Disease) when administered early in the course of dis-
ease (ie, before clinical signs occur). 
In horses, acyclovir was investigated as a treatment for equine 
herpesvirus type 5 (EHV-5)1,2 and equine herpesvirus type 1 (EHV-
1) myeloencephalopathy,3 but clinical efficacy was not proven. Bio -
availability of oral acyclovir is poor, 4,5 but IV acyclovir may be an 
option in neonatal foals. Valacyclovir has better bioavailability and 
has demonstrated clinical efficacy.6-8 
Despite mild efficacy against feline herpesvirus type 1 (FHV-1), 
acyclovir should not be used in cats due to a high potential for tox -
icity and low bioavailability. Other, less toxic, antiviral agents in the 
same class (eg, famciclovir) can be considered for this indication.
Acyclovir has been used as adjunctive treatment for canine her -
pesvirus in puppies.9 Acyclovir may be of benefit in the prophylactic 
treatment of canine parvovirus in dogs.10
Pharmacology/Actions
Acyclovir is a purine (guanine) analogue with antiviral activity 
against a variety of viruses, including herpes simplex (types I and 
II), cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr, and varicella-zoster. It is prefer-
entially converted by viral thymidine kinase into the active triphos -
phate form, which is incorporated into viral DNA where it inhibits 
viral DNA replication.
Pharmacokinetics
After a single IV or IM acyclovir dose in Quaker parakeets, elimi -
nation half-life was ≈40 minutes, and IM bioavailability was 90%.11
Bioavailability in horses after oral administration is low (ie, less 
than 4%).4-6 Oral doses of up to 20 mg/kg may not yield sufficient 
concentrations to treat equine herpes virus, but some accumulation 
may occur with prolonged oral administration. Elimination half-
lives in dogs12 and cats13 is ≈3 hours. In horses, the elimination half-
life is ≈2 hours for total plasma concentration of acyclovir and ≈12 
hours for unbound (free) plasma concentration of acyclovir.6
In dogs, acyclovir bioavailability varies according to the dose. At 
doses of 20 mg/kg and below, bioavailability is ≈80% but declines 


===== Plumb PDF 42 =====
Acyclovir   15
to ≈50% at 50 mg/kg. Sustained-release tablets (not commercially 
available in the United States) have better bioavailability than stan -
dard tablets.12
In humans, acyclovir is poorly absorbed after oral administration 
(ie, ≈20%), and absorption is not significantly affected by the pres -
ence of food. Acyclovir is widely distributed throughout body tissues 
and fluids, including the brain, semen, and CSF . It has low protein 
binding and crosses the placenta. Acyclovir is primarily metabolized 
in the liver and has a half-life of ≈3 hours in humans. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Acyclovir is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it or relat-
ed antiviral drugs. Use with caution in patients with dehydration, 
pre-existing renal or hepatic impairment, hypoxia, neurologic defi -
cits, or electrolyte abnormalities. Dosage reduction is recommended 
in humans with significant renal impairment.
Acyclovir for injection has a pH of ≈11 and should be admin -
istered by slow IV infusion (1 hour for humans) after dilution to a 
drug concentration less than or equal to 7 mg/mL.
Do not use in cats because of the risk for myelosuppression, he -
patic necrosis, and renal tubular necrosis.14
Adverse Effects
With parenteral therapy, potential adverse effects include thrombo-
phlebitis, acute renal failure, and encephalopathic changes (rare). IV 
administration of acyclovir over 15 minutes in a horse resulted in 
tremors, sweating, and colic.5
GI disturbances may occur with either oral or parenteral therapy.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Acyclovir crosses the placenta, but rodent studies have not demon -
strated any teratogenic effects.15 
Acyclovir crosses into maternal milk, but associated adverse ef -
fects have not been noted. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Acute oral overdose is unlikely to cause significant toxicity. GI signs 
(eg, vomiting, diarrhea) and lethargy predominate with overdoses 
less than 150 mg/kg. Acute kidney injury is possible with higher 
dosages; consider GI decontamination with acyclovir overdoses of 
150  mg/kg or higher. 16 Crystalluria and increased renal values oc -
curred with acyclovir 188.7 mg/kg in a dog. 
Acyclovir is removed by hemodialysis but not by peritoneal dial-
ysis. Precipitation of the drug in renal tubules and acute renal failure 
have been noted in humans.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions with acyclovir have either been re -
ported or are theoretical in humans or animals and may be of signif-
icance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Aminophylline/Theophylline : Concurrent use may in -
crease theophylline concentrations. Monitor theophylline con -
centrations.
 ■ Meperidine : Concurrent use may increase concentrations of 
meperidine and normeperidine, increasing the risk for lethargy, 
agitation, and seizures. Avoid combination
 ■ Mycophenolate:  Concurrent oral administration may increase 
concentrations of both acyclovir and mycophenolate. Greatest 
risk may be in patients with impaired renal function. Use this 
combination cautiously. Monitor mycophenolate concentrations 
and signs of toxicity from both medications.
 ■ Nephrotoxic Medications  (eg, aminoglycosides [eg, amik-
acin, gentamicin], amphotericin B, cyclosporine ): Concurrent 
administration of IV acyclovir with nephrotoxic medications may 
increase the potential for nephrotoxicity. Amphotericin B may 
potentiate the antiviral effects of acyclovir, but it also increases 
the chances for development of nephrotoxicity. 
 ■ Probenecid : Concurrent use may increase acyclovir exposure 
by inhibiting renal clearance. 
 ■ Zidovudine : Concurrent use with zidovudine may cause addi -
tional CNS depression. 
Dosages
BIRDS:
Treatment and prophylaxis of psittacid alphaherpesvirus -1 
(PsHV-1, Pacheco’s Disease; extra-label): 
Treatment: 80 mg/kg PO (oral gavage) or IM (once; can cause tis-
sue necrosis) every 8 hours for 7 to 14 days 
Prophylaxis: After an initial dose of 25 mg/kg IM, acyclovir may 
be added to drinking water at 1 mg/mL or to food at 400 mg/quart 
of seed for at least 7 days.
Herpesvirus:
1. 80 mg/kg PO (oral gavage) every 8 hours17
2. 240 mg/kg applied to feed17
3. Quaker parakeets: 80 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for 7 days11,18
4. Raptors: 330 mg/kg PO every 12 hours19,20
HORSES:
Equine herpes infections  (extra-label):  10 mg/kg IV (over 1 
hour) every 12 hours4,5,21
DOGS:
Adjunctive treatment of neonatal canine herpesvirus infection 
(extra-label): 10 mg/kg PO every 6 hours for 5 days9
Prophylaxis for canine parvovirus (CPV) infections in puppies 
(extra-label): In a small, experimentally induced CPV-2 infection 
study, acyclovir 20 mg/kg IV every 8 hours for 5 days prevented 
clinical signs and virus replication.10
Monitoring
 ■ Renal function tests (BUN, serum creatinine) with prolonged or 
IV therapy
Client Information
 ■ Side effects are usually limited to gastrointestinal problems (eg, 
diarrhea, vomiting, lack of appetite).
 ■ For birds, acyclovir is usually given in water or mixed with seed 
or peanut butter.
 ■ Y our animal will need ongoing laboratory tests while taking this 
medication. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Acyclovir, an antiviral agent, occurs as a white, crystalline powder; 
1.3 mg is soluble in 1 mL of water. Acyclovir sodium has a solu -
bility greater than 100 mg/mL in water; however, at a pH of 7.4 
at 37°C (98.6°F), it is practically all unionized with a solubility of 
only 2.5 mg/mL in water. Each gram of acyclovir sodium contains 
4.2 mEq of sodium.
Acyclovir may be known as ACV , aciclovirum, acycloguanosine, 
acyclovir, BW-248U, Acic®, Aciclobene®, Aciclotyrol®, Acivir®, Acyrax®, 
Cicloviral®, Geavir®, Herpotern®, Isavir®, Nycovir®, Supraviran®, Viclo-
vir®, Virherpes®, Viroxy®,  Xorox®, or Zovirax®.


===== Plumb PDF 43 =====
16    Afoxolaner
Storage/Stability
Acyclovir capsules and tablets should be stored in tight, light-re -
sistant containers at room temperature (15°C-25°C [59°F-77°F]). 
Acyclovir suspension and sodium sterile powder should be stored 
at room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]); do not refrigerate. 
Reconstituted solution should be used within 12 hours. Unused por-
tions of acyclovir injection should be discarded.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
When reconstituting acyclovir sodium, do not use bacteriostatic 
water with parabens, as precipitation may occur. The manufacturer 
does not recommend using bacteriostatic water for injection with 
benzyl alcohol because of the potential toxicity in neonates. After 
further dilution to a concentration less than or equal to 7 mg/mL 
with a standard electrolyte or dextrose solution, the resulting solu -
tion is stable at 25°C (77°F) for 24 hours. 
Acyclovir is reportedly incompatible with biologic or colloidal 
products (eg, blood products or protein-containing solutions), do -
pamine, dobutamine, foscarnet, meperidine, and morphine. Many 
other drugs have been shown to be compatible in specific situations. 
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Acyclovir Oral Tablets: 400 mg and 800 mg; Zovirax® ,   generic; (Rx)
Acyclovir Oral Capsules: 200 mg; Zovirax® , generic; (Rx)
Acyclovir Oral Suspension: 40 mg/mL in 473 mL bottles; Zovirax®,  
generic; (Rx)
Acyclovir Injection (for IV infusion only): 50 mg/mL (as sodium) 
in 10 mL vials or as 500 mg lyophilized powder for reconstitution; 
generic; (Rx)
Acyclovir Buccal Tablets: 50 mg; Sitavig®; (Rx). Tablet remains in 
contact with oral mucosa for ≈14 hours; veterinary use is doubtful.
Topical 5% creams and ointments are also available.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Afoxolaner
(ah-fox-ah-lan-er) NexGard®
Isoxazoline Ectoparasiticide
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Chewable oral tablet for use in dogs and puppies 8 weeks of 
age and older and weighing at least 1.8 kg (4 lb)
 ▶ Labeled for monthly treatment and prevention of flea infes-
tations and for monthly treatment and control of American 
dog tick, black-legged tick, lone star tick, and brown dog tick 
infestations
 ▶ Indicated for the prevention of Borrelia burgdorferi infections 
as a direct result of killing Ixodes scapularis vector ticks before 
disease transmission occurs
 ▶ Used for extra-label treatment of generalized demodicosis and 
Sarcoptes scabiei var canis 
 ▶ Appears to be well-tolerated when administered at the label 
dosage 
 ▶ FDA has warned that drugs in the isoxazoline class have the 
potential to cause neurologic adverse effects (eg, muscle trem-
ors, ataxia, seizures) in dogs and cats.
Uses/Indications
Afoxolaner chewable tablets are approved by the FDA for monthly 
treatment and prevention of flea infestations ( Ctenocephalides felis) 
and for the monthly treatment and control of American dog tick 
(Dermacentor variabilis, also called wood tick), black-legged tick 
(Ixodes scapularis, also called deer tick), lone star tick ( Amblyomma 
americanum), and brown dog tick (Rhipicephalus sanguineus) infes-
tations in dogs and puppies 8 weeks of age and older with a body 
weight of 1.8 kg (4 lb) or greater. The drug is also indicated for the 
prevention of Borrelia burgdorferi infections via killing Ixodes scapu-
laris vector ticks before disease transmission occurs. 
Afoxolaner has demonstrated efficacy in dogs for the treatment of 
generalized demodicosis,1–3 sarcoptic mange, 4,5 cutaneous myiasis, 6 
bedbugs,7 and ear mite ( Otodectes cynotis) infestations,8,9 as well as 
against sand fly (Phlebotomus perniciosus; vector for canine leishma-
niosis) and dog flea (Ctenocephalides canis) infestations.10–13 Afoxol-
aner has also been shown to be effective in the treatment of other tick 
infestations (eg, Dermacentor reticulatus, Haemaphysalis longicornis, 
Ixodes hexagonus, Ixodes holocyclus, Ixodes ricinus) in dogs.12,13
Afoxolaner’s effectiveness with flea control has been shown to be 
effective in preventing infestations by Dipylidium caninum (flea tape-
worm).13 Under experimental conditions, an afoxolaner and milbe -
mycin combination product (not available in the US) also effectively 
reduced flea exposure and thus reduced infections by Dipylidium 
caninum in dogs. 14 Monthly administration of the combination 
product was 100% effective against canine thelaziosis (Thelazia calli-
paeda) in a European field study.15
Afoxolaner was successfully used to treat otodectic mange in nat-
urally infested cats, eradicating mites within 48 hours of treatment 
and maintaining efficacy for 65 days.16 The drug controlled flea pop-
ulations in cats under experimental conditions.17
Afoxolaner has demonstrated efficacy against Sarcoptes scabiei in 
pigs18,19 and Goniodes Pavonis in peacocks and pheasants.20
Pharmacology/Actions
Afoxolaner is in the isoxazoline family of insecticides and acaracides. 
In the parasite CNS, isoxazolines block pre- and postsynaptic trans-
fer of chloride ions across cell membranes by inhibiting gamma-am-
inobutyric acid (GABA)-mediated ligand-gated chloride channels. 
Prolonged neuronal hyperexcitation results in paralysis and death of 
susceptible insects and ticks. The difference between GABA receptor 
sensitivities of insects/acarines as compared with mammals is be -
lieved to be the reason for differential toxicity. Insects and acarines 
must feed on dogs to ingest afoxolaner. Onset of action against fleas 
is within 4 hours of administration, with 99% effectiveness at 8 hours 
(ie, before fleas can lay eggs). Against ticks, the onset of action is 
within 48 hours, and may be as fast as 8 to 12 hours after infestation 
for some tick species. 21,22 Afoxolaner kills adult fleas and ticks only 
after they have bitten and fed.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, afoxolaner is reported to be rapidly absorbed, with a bio -
availability of ≈75% and peak concentrations occurring between 2 
to 6 hours. Food does not impair absorption. Protein binding is very 
high (more than 99%). Elimination is via biliary excretion of free 
afoxolaner and renal excretion of hepatically biotransformed metab-
olites. Terminal elimination half-life is ≈15 days.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
There are no contraindications when afoxolaner is used as directed on 
the product label. The drug is labeled for use in puppies 8 weeks of age 
and older and weighing more than 1.8 kg (4 lb). Use with caution in 
dogs with a history of seizures or epilepsy. Drugs in the isoxazoline 
class have the potential to cause neurologic adverse effects, including 
muscle tremors, ataxia, and seizures.23 These effects have been noted in 
patients with and without a history of neurologic disorders.
Acetylcysteine


===== BSAVA PDF 19 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
3
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Acetylcysteine
(Ilube*, Parvolex*) POM
Formulations: Injectable: 200 mg/ml solution. Topical: 5% 
ophthalmic solution in combination with 0.35% hypromellose 
ophthalmic drops in 10 ml bottle.
Action: Decreases the viscosity of bronchial secretions, maintains 
glutathione levels in the liver and has some anticollagenase activity.
Use: Reduces the extent of liver injury in cases of paracetamol 
poisoning and other forms of liver toxicity involving oxidative 
damage or impaired glutathione synthesis (e.g. xylitol poisoning).
• Has been used in non-specific acute hepatopathies of suspected 
toxic origin.
• Can also be used as a mucolytic in respiratory disease.
• Acetylcysteine may be useful in the treatment of 
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) (dry eye), or in ‘melting’ corneal 
ulcers although there is limited in vivo  work to confirm this.
Oral solution should be diluted to a 5% solution and given via a 
stomach tube as it tastes unpleasant. In the eye it may be used in 
conjunction with hypromellose.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Acetylcysteine has caused hypersensitivity 
and bronchospasm when used in the pulmonary tree (use with care 
in bronchospastic respiratory disease, e.g. feline asthma). When 
given orally for paracetamol poisoning it may cause GI effects 
(nausea, vomiting) and, rarely, urticaria.
Drug interactions: In cases of paracetamol poisoning, the 
concurrent administration of activated charcoal is controversial as it 
may also reduce acetylcysteine absorption.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats:
• Mucolytic: either nebulize 50 mg as a 2% (dilute with saline) 
solution over 30–60 min or instil directly into the trachea  
1–2 ml of a 20% solution.
• Paracetamol poisoning:  (after inducing emesis if appropriate, 
i.e. presented within 2 hours of ingestion) give 140–280 mg/kg 
diluted to a 5% solution using 5% dextrose by slow i.v. infusion 
over 15–20 min, followed by further slow infusions of 70 mg/kg 
(similarly diluted) every 6 hours for at least 7 doses, depending 
on dose of paracetamol consumed (seek advice from a poisons 
information service). The intravenous solution can be 
administered orally but should be diluted to improve palatability; 
however, i.v. administration is preferred for serious intoxications 
as bioavailability is reduced with oral administration in cats.
• KCS: 1 drop of the ophthalmic solution topically to the eye 
q6–8h. Rarely used now for this indication.


===== BSAVA PDF 20 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
4
• Melting corneal ulcers: 1 drop of the ophthalmic solution q1–4h 
in the affected eye for 24–48 hours. Topical autologous serum 
is more effective for the treatment of a melting corneal ulcer 
and is preferred. 
References
Dunayer EK (2006) New Findings on the effects of xylitol ingestion in dogs. Veterinary 
Medicine 101, 791–796
Richardson JA (2000) Management of acetaminophen and ibuprofen toxicoses in dogs 
and cats. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care  10, 285–291
Acetylsalicyclic acid see Aspirin
Aciclovir
(Zovirax*) POM
Formulations: Ophthalmic: 3% ointment in 4.5 g tubes. 
Action: Inhibits viral replication (viral DNA polymerase); depends 
on viral thymidine kinase for phosphorylation.
Use:
• Management of ocular feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) infections.
The clinical efficacy of aciclovir is questionable but frequent 
application (0.5% ointment 5 times daily) may achieve corneal 
concentrations. Aciclovir is virostatic and is unable to eradicate 
latent viral infection. Consider ganciclovir and famciclovir before 
aciclovir. In refractory and severe cases of FHV-1 ulceration, 
combined therapy including antiviral medication can be used.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available for the ophthalmic 
preparation. Systemic aciclovir is toxic in cats.
Adverse reactions: Ocular irritation may occur and the frequency 
of application should be reduced if this develops. Treatment should 
not be continued for >3 weeks.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs: Not applicable.
Cats: Apply a small amount to affected eye 5 times daily for a 
maximum of 3 weeks.
References
Thomasy SM and Maggs DJ (2016) A review of antiviral drugs and other compounds with 
activity against feline herpesvirus type 1. Veterinary Ophthalmology  19, 119–130
ACP see Acepromazine
ACTH see Tetracosactide
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 21 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
5
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Actinomycin-D see Dactinomycin
Activated charcoal see Charcoal
ADH see Desmopressin
Adrenaline (Epinephrine)
(Adrenaline*, Epinephrine*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: Range of concentrations for injection: 
0.1–10 mg/ml, equivalent to 1:10,000 to 1:100.
Action: Adrenaline exerts its effects via alpha-1, -2 and beta-1 and 
-2 adrenoreceptors.
Use:
• Cardiac resuscitation, status asthmaticus and to offset the effects 
of histamine release in severe anaphylactoid reactions.
• The ophthalmic preparation is used in open-angle glaucoma. 
The effects of adrenaline vary according to dose. Infusions of low 
doses mainly result in beta-adrenergic effects (increases in cardiac 
output, myocardial oxygen consumption, and a reduced threshold for 
arrhythmias with peripheral vasodilation and a fall in diastolic blood 
pressure). At high doses alpha-1 effects predominate, causing a rise in 
systemic vascular resistance, diverting blood to the central organs; 
however, this may improve cardiac output and blood flow. Adrenaline 
is not a substitute for fluid replacement therapy. Respiratory effects 
include bronchodilation and an increase in pulmonary vascular 
resistance. Renal blood flow is moderately decreased. The duration of 
action of adrenaline is short (2–5 min). Beware of using in animals 
with diabetes mellitus (monitor blood glucose concentration), 
hypertension or hyperthyroidism. Use with caution in hypovolaemic 
animals. Overdosage can be fatal so check dose, particularly in small 
patients. Intracardiac injection is not recommended.
Safety and handling: Do not confuse adrenaline vials of different 
concentrations. Adrenaline is sensitive to light and air: do not use if it 
is pink, brown or contains a precipitate. It is unstable in 5% dextrose.
Contraindications: The use of human adrenaline pen injections 
is not recommended for the treatment of suspected anaphylaxis. 
The doses in such pens are usually too small to be effective in most 
normal animals and by the time the dog has collapsed would be 
unlikely to have any effect on outcome. If such pen injections are 
administered by owners, then, in common with medical practice, 
patients must be carefully monitored for at least 6 hours. Do not 
administer adrenaline directly into the myocardium because of the 
risk of arrhythmias.
Adverse reactions: Increases myocardial oxygen demand and 
produces arrhythmias including ventricular fibrillation. These may be 
ameliorated by administering oxygen and slowing the heart rate with 
beta-2 antagonists. Other adverse effects include tachycardia, 
