
===== Plumb PDF 64 =====
Allopurinol   37
Alfentanil may also be known as alfentanyl, Alfenta®, Alfast®, Fa-
naxal®, Fentalim®, Limifen®, or Rapifen®.
Storage/Stability
Alfentanil injection should be stored protected from light at con -
trolled room temperature (20°C-25°C; 68°F-77°F).
Alfentanil is a DEA schedule II controlled substance that should 
be stored in an area that is substantially constructed and securely 
locked. Follow applicable local, state, and federal rules regarding dis-
posal of unused or wasted controlled drugs.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
In concentrations up to 80 µg/mL, alfentanil injection has been 
shown to be compatible with sodium chloride 0.9%, dextrose 5%, 
dextrose 5% in sodium chloride 0.9%, and lactated Ringer’s solution.9
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE.
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) 
has designated this drug as a class 1 substance. See the Appendix for 
more information. Use of this drug may not be allowed in certain 
animal competitions. Check rules and regulations before entering in 
a competition while this medication is being administered. Contact 
local racing authorities for further guidance.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Alfentanil HCl for injection: 500 µg (as base)/mL in 2 mL, 5 mL, 
10 mL, and 20 mL ampules; preservative-free; Alfenta®, generic; (Rx, 
C-II)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Allopurinol
(al-oh-pyoor-i-nol) Zyloprim®
Xanthine Oxidase Inhibitor; Purine Analogue
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to reduce uric acid in dogs, cats, reptiles, and birds; ad-
junctive treatment for leishmaniasis in dogs and cats
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with renal or hepatic dysfunction.
 ▶ Contraindicated in red-tailed hawks and should be used with 
caution, if at all, in other raptors
 ▶ A low purine diet is recommended with long-term treatment.
 ▶ Most common adverse effects are GI-related, but hypersensi-
tivity reactions, increased liver enzymes, or renal events (eg, 
mineralization, uroliths) can occur.
 ▶ Many potential drug interactions
Uses/Indications
The primary veterinary uses for allopurinol are for the treatment and 
prevention of recurrent uric acid and hyperuricosuric calcium oxa -
late uroliths in dogs, particularly Dalmatians. It has also been used to 
treat gout in pet birds and reptiles.1
Allopurinol has been used as an alternative treatment for canine 
and feline leishmaniasis. Although it appears to have moderate clini-
cal efficacy, treatment duration is several months and does not result 
in a full cure.2
There are also minimal data to support its use to treat trypanoso-
miasis infections.3 
Pharmacology/Actions
Allopurinol and its metabolite, oxypurinol, inhibit the enzyme xan-
thine oxidase, which is responsible for the conversion of oxypurines 
(eg, hypoxanthine, xanthine) to uric acid. Allopurinol does not in -
crease the renal excretion of uric acid, nor does it possess any an -
ti-inflammatory or analgesic activity.
Allopurinol inhibits Leishmania spp activity by limiting available 
purines in the host that are required for protozoal survival. Allopu -
rinol is taken up by the protozoa and metabolized into a toxic com -
pound (4-amino-pyrazole-pyrimidine), which incorporates into the 
parasite’s RNA, causing death.4,5
Allopurinol, by inhibiting xanthine oxidase, can inhibit the for -
mation of superoxide anion radicals and provide protection against 
hemorrhagic shock and myocardial ischemia in laboratory condi -
tions. However, the clinical use of the drug in cardiovascular diseases 
requires further study.6
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, oral bioavailability was similar to that in humans (≈90%) with 
a serum half-life of ≈2 and 4 hours for allopurinol and oxypurinol, 
respectively. Food does not appear to alter absorption. Absorption is 
non-linear with oral and intravenous administration and therefore 
high doses are not recommended. 7 In Dalmatians, absorption rates 
were variable between subjects, with peak levels occurring within 1 to 
3 hours after oral dosing. Elimination half-life is ≈2.7 hours.8 The drug 
exhibits good systemic absorption, but CNS penetration is limited.
In horses, oral bioavailability of allopurinol is ≈15% and the drug 
is rapidly converted to oxypurinol. 9 Elimination half-life is ≈5 to 6 
minutes for allopurinol and ≈1.1 hours for oxypurinol.
Neither allopurinol nor oxypurinol are bound to plasma proteins, 
but both drugs are excreted into milk.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Allopurinol is contraindicated in patients with previous hypersen -
sitivity reactions and should be used with caution in patients with 
hepatic or renal dysfunction. Dosage reductions and increased mon-
itoring are warranted in these cases.
Allopurinol does not appear to be effective in dissolving urate 
uroliths in dogs with portovascular anomalies.10,11
This drug is not recommended for use in red-tailed hawks. Dos -
ages of 50 mg/kg PO once daily caused clinical signs of vomiting 
and hyperuricemia with renal dysfunction. Dosages of 25 mg/kg PO 
once daily were safe but not effective in reducing plasma uric acid.12 
Use with caution in other raptors.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects in dogs are uncommon with allopurinol when fed 
low purine diets. Xanthine coatings have formed around ammoni -
um urate uroliths in dogs consuming purines. Xanthinuria has been 
noted in dogs receiving allopurinol for the treatment of leishmani -
asis.13,14 Renal mineralization and urolithiasis were also noted in 6% 
of dogs.14 Prolonged allopurinol at doses greater than 30 mg/kg/day 
may result in xanthine urolithiasis. 10 Consider a low purine diet if 
allopurinol is required for chronic therapy.15 Adverse GI effects may 
include nausea, vomiting, anorexia, or diarrhea.  
In humans, the most common adverse effects include rash, diar -
rhea, nausea, acute gout attacks, and ALT/AST elevations. Other less 
common adverse effects include bone marrow suppression, severe 
dermatologic reactions, hepatitis, and vasculitis. Humans with renal 
dysfunction are at risk for further decreases in renal function and 
other severe adverse effects unless dosages are reduced. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Although the safe use of allopurinol during pregnancy has not been 
established, dosages up to 20 times normal in rats and rabbits have 
not demonstrated decreases in fertility or evidence of fetal harm. In-
traperitoneal administration to pregnant mice was associated with 
increased fetal death and malformations. 


===== Plumb PDF 65 =====
38    Allopurinol
Allopurinol and oxypurinol are excreted into milk; use caution 
when allopurinol is administered to a nursing dam.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
One source lists the allopurinol oral LD 50 in mice as 78 mg/kg, 16-18 
whereas other sources list 500 – 700 mg/kg. Clinical signs associated 
with overdose can include vomiting (seen in dogs at doses of more 
than 44 mg/kg) and trembling. There is no known antidote for allo-
purinol, but it is dialyzable.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have ex -
perienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged to consult with a 
24-hour poison consultation center that specialize in providing in -
formation specific for veterinary patients. For general information 
related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact informa-
tion for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions with allopurinol have either been 
reported or are theoretical in humans or animals and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Aluminum Hydroxide : May decrease absorption of allopuri -
nol
 ■ Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors  (ACEIs; 
eg, benazepril, enalapril): In humans, this combination may in-
crease risk for hypersensitivity reactions to allopurinol. The veter-
inary significance of this interaction is unknown.
 ■ Aminopenicillins (eg, amoxicillin,  ampicillin): In humans, 
this combination may increase risk for hypersensitivity reactions 
to allopurinol. The veterinary significance of this interaction is 
unknown.
 ■ Azathioprine or Mercaptopurine : Allopurinol may in -
crease the serum concentration of mercaptopurine (azathioprine’s 
active metabolite) and promote formation of active thioguanine 
nucleotides. Consider therapy modification or reduce the dose of 
immunosuppressive agent by 25% to 33% initially.
 ■ Cyclophosphamide : Increased risk for bone marrow suppres-
sion
 ■ Cyclosporine : Increased cyclosporine concentration may oc -
cur.
 ■ Diuretics (eg, chlorothiazide, furosemide, hydrochlorothia-
zide): May increase serum concentration of allopurinol
 ■ Theophylline/Aminophylline : Allopurinol may decrease 
metabolism, thereby increasing their serum levels.
 ■ Uricosuric Agents  (eg, probenecid, sulfinpyrazone ): May 
increase the renal excretion of oxypurinol and thereby reduce 
xanthine oxidase inhibition; in treatment of hyperuricemia, the 
additive effects on blood uric acid may be beneficial.
 ■ Urinary Acidifiers  (eg, ammonium chloride, methionine ): 
May reduce the solubility of uric acid in the urine and induce uro-
lithiasis
Dosages
DOGS:
Dissolution of urate uroliths  (extra-label): 15 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours for up to 4 weeks.11 Use in conjunction with low-purine, 
alkalinizing, diuretic diets. 
Prevention of urate uroliths (extra-label): 5 – 7 mg/kg PO every 
12 to 24 hours.11 NOTE: Prolonged high doses of allopurinol may 
result in xanthine uroliths; use in conjunction with increased wa-
ter intake and low-purine, alkalinizing, diuretic diets to reduce 
recurrences and lessen need to use intermittent higher dose dis -
solution protocols.
Leishmaniasis (extra-label): Improved efficacy when used in 
combination with an antimonial drug 
a) Allopurinol 10 – 15 mg/kg PO twice daily for 6 to 12 months 
plus meglumine antimoniate (N-methylglucamine antimo -
niate) 75 – 100 mg/kg SC once daily for 1 to 2 months.19
b) Alternatively, allopurinol 10 – 15 mg/kg PO twice daily for 
6 to 12 months plus miltefosine 2 mg/kg PO once daily for 
4 weeks20,21
c) As monotherapy, dosages range from 5 – 20 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours for 2 to 24 months. 4 NOTE: Initiate allopurinol at  
5 mg/kg PO twice daily in dogs with renal dysfunction.
CATS:
Leishmaniasis (extra-label): 10 – 20 mg/kg PO every 12 or 24 
hours long-term22
 BIRDS:
Gout (extra-label): 
 a)  Highly variable dosages (300 – 830 mg/L) for drinking water 
administration have been reported.23
 b)  In budgies and cockatiels : Crush one 100 mg tablet into  
10 mL of water. Add 20 drops of this solution to 30 mL (1 oz) 
of drinking water.24
 c)  In parakeets : As above for budgies and cockatiels or give  
1 drop 4 times daily.25 
REPTILES:
Gout in lizards or iguanas (extra-label): 20 – 25 mg/kg PO once 
daily.1 Reported dosages in reptiles range from 10 to 50 mg/kg.23 
Monitoring
 ■ Hydration status
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC and serum chemistry profile
 ■ Baseline and periodic urinalysis (including pH) to check if urine 
pH is greater than or equal to 7
 ■ Periodic urinary tract imaging (eg, ultrasound) to monitor for re-
currence of calculi
 ■ In dogs with leishmaniasis, monitor clinical response, reduction 
in UPPC,26-28 saliva IgG2 and IgA antibodies,29 and normalization 
of acute-phase proteins (eg, C-reactive protein, haptoglobin, fer -
ritin, paraoxanase).30
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ None
Client Information
 ■ May be given with food if vomiting occurs
 ■ Always provide access to fresh clean water while your animal is 
taking this medicine.
 ■ When this drug is used long-term in dogs, low-purine diets are 
recommended.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian immediately if you observe a rash, un-
usual tiredness, or yellowing of the whites of the eyes.
 ■ If using in drinking water for birds or reptiles, make a fresh solu-
tion every day.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A xanthine oxidase inhibitor, allopurinol occurs as a tasteless, fluffy 
white to off-white powder with a slight odor. Its melting point is 
more than 350°C (662°F) and it has a pKa of 9.4. Oxypurinol, its ac-
tive metabolite, has a pKa of 7.7. Allopurinol is very slightly soluble 
in water and alcohol and insoluble in diethyl ether.
Allopurinol may also be known as allopurinolum, BW-56-158, 
HPP , or NSC-1390; many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Allopurinol tablets should be stored between 20°C to 25°C (68°F to 
77°F) in tightly closed containers and protected from light.31


===== Plumb PDF 66 =====
Alprazolam   39
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compounded preparation stability: An extemporaneous suspen -
sion for oral use can be prepared from the commercially available 
tablets. Triturate eight 300 mg tablets of allopurinol with 60 mL of 
Ora-Plus® and qs ad to 120 mL with Ora-Sweet® (or Ora-Sweet® SF). 
This formulation yields a 20 mg/mL suspension that retains more 
than 95% potency for at least 60 days stored at both 5°C (41°F) and 
25°C (77°F). Compounded preparations of allopurinol should be 
protected from light.32
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
The FEI (International Federation for Equestrian Sports) lists this 
drug as a “prohibited substance - banned. ”33
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Allopurinol Oral Tablets: 100 and 300 mg; Zyloprim®  generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Alprazolam
(al-prah-zoe-lam) Xanax®
Benzodiazepine
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Oral benzodiazepine that may be useful for adjunctive behav-
ioral treatment in dogs and cats
 ▶ Contraindicated in aggressive animals (controversial) and 
animals with benzodiazepine hypersensitivity
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with hepatic or renal disease
 ▶ Adverse effects include sedation, unintended negative be-
havior changes, and paradoxical responses. Physical depen-
dence is a possibility. May impede training or performance of 
working animals
 ▶ Many drug interactions are possible.
 ▶ DEA Schedule IV (C-IV) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Alprazolam may be useful for adjunctive therapy in anxious and/
or aggressive dogs or in dogs that demonstrate panic reactions and 
for managing anxiety while a long-term drug (eg, selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor [SSRI], other serotonin-enhancing drug) reach -
es therapeutic concentrations. 1,2 When alprazolam is used to treat 
anxiety related to a triggering event (eg, storm, fireworks), it is most 
effective when administered 30 to 60 minutes prior to the event. Al-
prazolam may be useful in cats for adjunctive treatment of anxiety 
disorders and inappropriate elimination, and, unlike oral diazepam, 
alprazolam has not been implicated in causing liver failure in cats. 
A case report described the successful use of alprazolam to facilitate 
bonding in a mare that was aggressive when her foal attempted to 
nurse.3
At low doses, alprazolam may have less of an effect on motor 
function than diazepam.
Pharmacology/Actions
Alprazolam exhibits similar pharmacologic actions as other benzo -
diazepines; subcortical levels (primarily limbic, thalamic, and hy -
pothalamic) of the CNS are depressed, which produces anxiolytic, 
sedative, skeletal muscle relaxant, and anticonvulsant effects. The 
exact mechanism of action is unknown, but postulated mechanisms 
include antagonism of serotonin, increased release of and/or facilita-
tion of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) activity, and diminished 
release or turnover of acetylcholine in the CNS.
Benzodiazepine-specific receptors have been located in the mam-
malian brain, kidney, liver, lungs, and heart. In all species studied, 
receptors are lacking in the white matter.
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of alprazolam have not been described for 
dogs or cats. 
In adult horses, alprazolam was detected in serum 30 minutes af-
ter administration of a single oral dose (0.04 mg/kg), and peak plas-
ma levels occurred in a median of 3 hours. Elimination half-life was 
≈16 hours.4
In humans, alprazolam is well absorbed with peak plasma con -
centrations occurring in 1 to 2 hours. Alprazolam is widely distribut-
ed throughout the body and readily crosses the blood-brain barrier; 
it is 80% bound to plasma proteins. It is metabolized in the liver pri-
marily by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) to at least 2 metabolites, 
including alpha-hydroxy-alprazolam, which is pharmacologically 
active.5 Elimination half-lives range from 6 to 27 hours; half-life is 
extended in cases of hepatic disfunction and obesity. Alprazolam is 
primarily excreted in the urine as unchanged drug and metabolites. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Alprazolam is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensi -
tivity to the drug. Some clinicians also believe that benzodiazepines 
are contraindicated in aggressive dogs, as anxiety may restrain the 
animal from aggressive tendencies; however, this remains contro -
versial.6 Some clinicians recommend administering alprazolam for 
the first time at the clinic with the owner present to monitor for ad-
verse effects (eg, excessive sedation) or for a paradoxical reaction (ie, 
worsening of clinical signs [eg, CNS excitement, including increased 
excitability, aggression, and anxiety]) to the drug. If unacceptable se-
dation occurs, the dosage can be lowered. If a paradoxical response 
occurs, alprazolam may not be an acceptable treatment for that ani-
mal; however, it has been suggested that higher dosages may alleviate 
the paradoxical reaction.6 Caution is advised in debilitated or geriat-
ric patients and patients with hepatic or renal disease or narrow-an-
gle glaucoma. Benzodiazepines may impair the abilities of working 
animals.
Chronic use of alprazolam may induce physical dependence,7 and 
if the drug is to be discontinued, the dosage must be gradually de -
creased (tapered) over several weeks.
Alprazolam, like other benzodiazepines, has the potential for 
drug abuse and drug diversion in humans; caution is advised when 
prescribing this drug.
Adverse Effects
Benzodiazepines can cause sedation, increased appetite, and transient 
ataxia. Animals may rarely exhibit a paradoxical response following 
administration. See Contraindications/Precautions/ Warnings.
There have been sporadic reports of cats developing idiosyncratic 
hepatic failure after receiving oral, but not injectable, diazepam (not 
dose-dependent) for several days.8  See Diazepam for more informa-
tion related to hepatic changes that may occur. Although this adverse 
effect has not been reported for alprazolam, oral benzodiazepines 
should be used with caution in cats. See Monitoring. 
Benzodiazepines have an amnestic effect which may impede the 
ability of the animal to learn and may delay training.5,6
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Diazepam and other benzodiazepines have been implicated in caus-
ing congenital abnormalities in humans when they are administered 
during the first trimester of pregnancy. Infants born to mothers that 
received large doses of benzodiazepines shortly before delivery have 
been reported to suffer from apnea, impaired metabolic response to 
cold stress, difficulty in feeding, hyperbilirubinemia, and hypotonia.5 
Withdrawal symptoms have occurred in infants whose mothers took 


===== Plumb PDF 67 =====
40   Alprazolam
benzodiazepines chronically during pregnancy. The veterinary sig -
nificance of these effects is unclear, but the use of these agents during 
the first trimester of pregnancy should only occur when the benefits 
clearly outweigh the risks associated with their use. 
Alprazolam enters human breast milk. Case reports have noted 
drowsiness, depression, and withdrawal symptoms in infants ex -
posed to alprazolam while breastfeeding.5 In humans, alprazolam is 
not recommended while breastfeeding.9 
Because safety of alprazolam has not been established in animals, 
this drug should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh 
the potential risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdoses of alprazolam are generally limited to CNS signs. CNS 
depression can be seen, and the severity is generally dose-dependent. 
Hypotension, respiratory depression, and cardiac arrest have been 
reported in humans but apparently are rare. The acute LD 50 in rats 
for alprazolam is greater than 330 mg/kg.10 Life-threatening signs in 
small animals are rare. Some animals may be presented with a para-
doxical-type reaction (eg, disorientation, vocalization, agitation). At 
times, those signs may be followed by CNS depression.
Common clinical signs seen in dogs with alprazolam overdose 
include ataxia, hyperactivity/agitation, lethargy/sedation, and vom -
iting; in cats, the common clinical signs include ataxia, vocalization, 
agitation, polyphagia, and lethargy.
Massive overdoses can lead to CNS and respiratory depression or 
hypotension. Gastric decontamination can be considered. The de -
cision to give activated charcoal should be weighed carefully, as, in 
some cases, there is a risk for aspiration pneumonia in an obtunded 
patient, which may outweigh the benefit. Use of analeptic agents (eg, 
caffeine, doxapram) is generally not recommended. Flumazenil can 
be used to reverse respiratory depression or severe CNS depression. 
The half-life of flumazenil is short, and the animal may require mul-
tiple doses of the drug. See Flumazenil. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions with alprazolam have either been 
reported or are theoretical in humans or animals and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use togeth-
er is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risk must be 
weighed and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
 ■ Amiodarone : Concurrent use may increase bioavailability and 
pharmacologic effects of benzodiazepines. Sedation levels should 
be monitored, and benzodiazepine doses adjusted accordingly.
 ■ Antacids, Aluminum-, Calcium- and Magnesium-Con -
taining : May slow the rate but not the extent of oral absorption; 
administering antacids 2 hours apart from alprazolam may help 
avoid this potential interaction
 ■ Antihypertensive Agents (eg, amlodipine, enalapril, tel -
misartan): May increase risk for hypotension and orthostasis. 
Blood pressure monitoring is needed.
 ■ Azole Antifungals (eg, fluconazole, itraconazole, keto -
conazole): Metabolism of alprazolam may be decreased, and ex -
cessive sedation may occur. This combination is contraindicated 
in humans. 
 ■ Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors (CAIs) (eg, acetazol-
amide, methazolamide): Benzodiazepines may interfere with the 
beneficial effects of CAIs by inhibiting respiratory responses to 
hypoxia; combination should be avoided.
 ■ CNS Depressant Agents  (eg, anesthetic agents, antihista -
mines (first generation), barbiturates, cannabidiol, narcotics ): 
Combination may increase the risk for CNS and/or respiratory 
depression. Sedation levels should be monitored and doses ad -
justed accordingly.
 ■ Digoxin : Serum digoxin concentrations may be increased; mon-
itor serum digoxin concentrations and for clinical signs associ -
ated with digoxin toxicity (eg, arrhythmias, vomiting, diarrhea, 
inappetence).
 ■ Fluoxetine, Fluvoxamine : Metabolism of alprazolam may be 
decreased and cause excessive sedation.
 ■ Hepatic Enzyme Inducers (eg, dexamethasone, mitotane): 
Concurrent use may decrease benzodiazepine concentrations. 
Clinical response should be monitored and doses adjusted ac -
cordingly.
 ■ Hepatic Enzyme Inhibitors  (eg, cimetidine, diltiazem, 
grapefruit juice, isoniazid ): Metabolism of alprazolam may be 
decreased and cause excessive sedation.
 ■ Ifosfamide: Concurrent use may increase the risk for ifosfa -
mide-induced neurotoxic effects. Careful monitoring of the level 
of sedation is recommended, and both drugs should be discontin-
ued if signs of encephalopathy occur.
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics  (eg, clarithromycin, erythromycin): 
Metabolism of alprazolam may be decreased, and excessive seda-
tion may occur.
 ■ Macrocyclic Lactones  (eg, ivermectin, milbemycin oxime): 
Benzodiazepine effects may be potentiated by concurrent macro-
cyclic lactone use.
 ■ Maropitant: Concurrent benzodiazepine administration with 
the human drug aprepitant may increase benzodiazepine expo -
sure via inhibition of CYP3A4. Interaction may apply to maro -
pitant.
 ■ Non-Depolarizing Neuromuscular Blockers (eg, atra-
curium, pancuronium): Concurrent use may potentiate, atten -
uate, or have no effect. Respiratory status should be monitored.
 ■ Opioids (eg, buprenorphine, hydromorphone, tramadol): May 
increase the risk for cardiorespiratory and CNS depression 
 ■ Phenobarbital: Concurrent use of phenobarbital and benzo -
diazepines may increase the risk for respiratory depression.
 ■ Propofol:  May increase the risk for cardiorespiratory depres -
sion
 ■ Rifampin:  May induce hepatic microsomal enzymes and de -
crease the pharmacologic effects of benzodiazepines
 ■ Theophylline/Aminophylline: Concurrent use may de -
crease the levels and effectiveness of benzodiazepines. Withdraw-
ing theophylline from a stable patient may increase the risk for 
benzodiazepine toxicity. Sedation levels should be monitored and 
doses adjusted accordingly.
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants  (eg , amitriptyline, clomip -
ramine, imipramine): Alprazolam may increase concentrations 
of these drugs; clinical significance is not known, and clomip -
ramine and alprazolam have been used together anecdotally to 
manage phobias (eg, thunderstorm phobia). However, concurrent 
use may increase the risk for CNS and/or respiratory depression. 
Anticholinergic effects may be additive.
 ■ Yohimbine: Limited data indicate that yohimbine may decrease 
therapeutic effects of anxiolytic drugs.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Benzodiazepines may decrease the thyroidal uptake of I123 or I131.


===== Plumb PDF 68 =====
Altrenogest   41
Dosages
DOGS:
Adjunctive treatment of canine anxiety disorders or phobias  
(extra-label): 0.02 – 0.1 mg/kg (usually 0.02 – 0.05 mg/kg initial -
ly) PO every 6 to 12 hours as needed. If used for acute phobias 
(eg, fireworks, thunderstorms), the drug should be given 30 to 60 
minutes before the expected trigger.
CATS:
Adjunctive treatment of feline anxiety disorders, phobias, or 
house soiling/marking (extra-label): 0.125 – 0.25 mg/cat (NOT 
mg/kg) PO every 8 to 24 hours. If used for phobias, the drug 
should be given 30 to 60 minutes before the expected trigger.
Adjunctive treatment of highly aroused felines before 
transport to a veterinary visit (extra-label): 0.5 – 1 mg/cat  
(NOT mg/kg) 1 hour prior to leaving for veterinary visit11
HORSES:
Facilitating mare-foal bonding (extra-label): One case study re-
ported 0.035 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours for facilitating healthy 
mare–foal bonding and behavior in an aggressive mare.3 
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ Monitoring hepatic enzymes should be considered, particularly 
with chronic therapy.
Client Information
 ■ Alprazolam is often used to help treat or prevent fears and anxiety 
in dogs and cats.
 ■ When alprazolam is used for thunderstorm phobias or other trig-
gers (eg, separation anxiety) that upset your animal, try to give 
your animal the drug about 30 to 60 minutes before the triggering 
event.
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. If your animal 
vomits or acts sick after receiving the drug on an empty stomach, 
try giving the next dose with food or a small treat. If vomiting 
continues, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian immediately if you see yellowing of the 
whites of the eyes of your animal or if your animal’s gums have a 
yellowish tint.
 ■ Sleepiness is the most common side effect, but sometimes the 
drug can change behavior or work in the opposite way (ie, cause 
hyperactive behavior) from what is expected.
 ■ This drug may increase appetite, especially in cats.
 ■ Alprazolam is classified as a schedule IV (C-IV) controlled drug 
by the federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA). Use of this med-
ication in animals or humans other than those for whom it is pre-
scribed is illegal.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Alprazolam is a benzodiazepine. It occurs as a white to off-white 
crystalline powder and is soluble in alcohol and insoluble in water.
Alprazolam may also be known as D65 MT, U 31889, or alprazol-
amum; many trade names are available internationally.
Storage/Stability
Alprazolam tablets should be stored at room temperature in tight, 
light-resistant containers. The orally disintegrating tablets should be 
stored at room temperature and protected from moisture. The oral solu-
tion should be stored at room temperature, protected from light, and 
discarded 90 days after opening. Alprazolam is a DEA Schedule IV (C-
IV) controlled substance that should be stored in an area that is substan-
tially constructed and securely locked. Follow applicable local, state, and 
federal rules regarding disposal of unused or wasted controlled drugs.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compounded preparation stability: An alprazolam oral suspen -
sion compounded from commercially available tablets has been 
published.12 Triturating sixty (60) alprazolam 2 mg tablets with  
60 mL of Ora-Plus® and qs ad to 120 mL with Ora-Sweet® (or Ora-Sweet® 
SF) yields a 1 mg/mL oral suspension that retains more than 90% poten-
cy for 60 days when stored at 5°C (41°F) and 25°C (77°F). Compounded 
preparations of alprazolam should be protected from light.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information. 
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Alprazolam Oral Tablets: 0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, 1 mg, and 2 mg; Xanax®,  
generic; (Rx; C-IV)
Alprazolam Extended-release Oral Tablets: 0.5 mg, 1 mg, 2 mg, and 
3 mg; Xanax XR®, generic; (Rx; C-IV)
Alprazolam Orally Disintegrating Tablets: 0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, 1 mg, 
and 2 mg; Niravam®, generic; (Rx; C-IV)
Alprazolam Oral Solution: 1 mg/mL in 30 mL; Alprazolam Intensol®; 
(Rx; C-IV)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Altrenogest
(al-tre-noe-jest) Regu-Mate®, Matrix®
Oral Progestin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used in mares to suppress estrus or maintain pregnancy in 
those that are progestin deficient
 ▶ Used in swine to synchronize estrus
 ▶ Contraindicated in mares or gilts with previous or current 
uterine inflammation
 ▶ May be used in dogs for luteal deficiency or to prevent prema-
ture delivery
 ▶ Readily absorbed by the skin; wear protective gloves (not 
latex) when handling
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies progestins as hazardous drugs; use appropri-
ate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Altrenogest is FDA-approved for use in mares to suppress estrus and al-
low a more predictable occurrence of estrus following withdrawal of the 
drug.1 It is used clinically to establish normal estrous cycles at the end 
of the transitional period from anestrus to the normal breeding season, 
to facilitate management of prolonged estrus conditions, or to facilitate 
scheduled breeding; it also helps maintain high-risk pregnancies (eg, 
placentitis, history of early embryonic loss, embryo transfer recipients). 
Mares with considerable follicular activity (mares with 1 or more folli-
cles that are 20 mm or greater in size) are more likely to respond to al-
trenogest than are mares with inactive ovaries and small follicles.1 Mares 
that have been in estrus for 10 days or more and have active ovaries are 
also considered excellent candidates for progestin treatment.


===== BSAVA PDF 415 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
399
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
fluoroquinolones and allopurinol. Phenobarbital may decrease the 
serum concentration of theophylline. Theophylline may decrease 
the effects of pancuronium. Theophylline and beta-adrenergic 
blockers (e.g. propranolol) may antagonize each other’s effects. 
Theophylline administration with halothane may cause an increased 
incidence of cardiac dysrhythmias and with ketamine an increased 
incidence of seizures.
DOSES
Dogs: Bronchodilation: 20 mg/kg p.o. q24h or 10 mg/kg p.o. q12h 
which may be increased to 15 mg/kg p.o. q12h if no side effects on 
lower dose (NB: manufacturer only recommends q24h dosing). 
Some texts indicate q12h dosing of the sustained-release 
preparation is required to maintain therapeutic serum levels.
Cats: Bronchodilation: 15–19 mg/kg p.o. q24h (sustained-release 
preparation). 
References
Bach JF, Kukanich B, Papich MG et al . (2004) Evaluation of the bioavailability and 
pharmacokinetics of two extended-release theophylline formulations in dogs. Journal 
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 224 , 1113–1119
Guenther-Yenke CL, McKiernan BC, Papich MG et al . (2007) Pharmacokinetics of an 
extended-release theophylline product in cats. Journal of the American Veterinary 
Medical Association  231, 900–906
Thiamazole (Methimazole)
(Felimazole, Thiafeline, Thyronorm) POM-V 
Formulations: Oral: 1.25 mg, 2.5 mg, 5 mg tablets. Oral: 5 mg/ml 
solution. Also available as a transdermal formulation on a named 
patient basis.
Action: Interferes with the synthesis of thyroid hormones by 
inhibiting peroxidase-catalysed reactions (blocks oxidation of 
iodide), the iodination of tyrosyl residues of thyroglobulin, and the 
coupling of mono- or di-iodotyrosines to form T3 and T4. Has no 
effect on iodine uptake, peripheral de-iodination of T4 to T3 or 
release of stored hormone.
Use: Control of thyroid hormone levels in cats with 
hyperthyroidism. 2 to 3 weeks of treatment are generally needed to 
establish euthyroidism. Monitor therapy on the basis of serum 
thyroxine concentrations (4–6 hours after dosing) and adjust dose 
accordingly for long-term medical management. Assess 
haematology, biochemistry and serum total T4 after 3, 6, 10 and 20 
weeks and thereafter every 3 months, adjusting dosage as 
necessary. Transdermal thiamazole gels are also used in 
hyperthyroid cats, particularly in fractious cats or in those that 
develop GI side effects from the oral formulations. However, this 
route is not as reliable as oral medication or as safe for humans who 
apply the gel.


===== BSAVA PDF 416 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
400
Safety and handling: Oral: normal precautions should be 
observed. Transdermal formulation: wear gloves when administering 
or handling the product. Do not touch area of application for at least 
a couple of hours. Thiamazole is a human teratogen and crosses the 
placenta concentrating in the fetal thyroid gland.
Contraindications: Do not use in pregnant or lactating queens.
Adverse reactions: Vomiting and inappetence/anorexia may be 
seen but are often transient. Jaundice, cytopenias, immune-mediated 
diseases (including myasthenia gravis) and dermatological changes 
(pruritus, alopecia and self-induced trauma) are reported, but rare; 
withdrawal of treatment may be necessary. Treatment of hyper-
thyroidism can decrease glomerular filtration rate, thereby raising 
serum urea and creatinine values, and can occasionally unmask 
occult renal failure. Animals that have an adverse reaction to carbi-
mazole are likely also to have an adverse reaction to thiamazole.
Drug interactions: Phenobarbital may reduce clinical efficacy. 
Benzimidazole drugs reduce hepatic oxidation and may lead to 
increased circulating drug concentrations. Thiamazole should be 
discontinued before iodine-131 treatment. Do not use with low-
iodine prescription diets.
DOSES
Dogs: Hyperthyroidism: 2.5–5 mg/dog p.o. q12h depending on size.
Cats: Hyperthyroidism: 2.5 mg/cat p.o. q12h. Apply transdermal gel 
to pinna. 
References
Daminet S, Kooistra HS, Fracassi F et al . (2014) Best practice for the pharmacological 
management of hyperthyroid cats with antithyroid drugs. Journal of Small Animal 
Practice 55, 4–13
Thiamine see Vitamin B1
Thyroid stimulating hormone 
(Thyrotropin alfa, TSH)
(Thyrogen*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 1.1 mg vial; after reconstitution with  
1.2 ml sterile water the TSH concentration is 0.9 mg/ml.
Action: Binds to specific receptors on thyroid follicular cell 
membranes and in so doing stimulates the proteolytic degradation 
of thyroglobulin and the release of thyroxine (T4) and smaller 
quantities of tri-iodothyronine (T3).
Use: Stimulation of thyroid hormone production in the diagnosis of 
canine hypothyroidism (not suitable for evaluation of thyroid 
function in patients receiving levothyroxine). The diagnostic value in 
cats has not been fully assessed.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 417 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
401
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Repeated administration is not advisable.
Adverse reactions: Chemical grade TSH may be associated with 
anaphylactic responses; do not use.
Drug interactions: Anabolic or androgenic steroids, carbimazole, 
barbiturates, corticosteroids, diazepam, heparin, mitotane (o, p'-DDD), 
phenylbutazone, phenytoin and salicylates may all decrease serum T4 
levels. Fluorouracil, insulin, oestrogens, propranolol and 
prostaglandins may cause T4 levels to be increased. All these drugs 
will make the TSH stimulation test hard to interpret.
DOSES
Dogs: TSH stimulation test: 50–150 μ g (micrograms)/dog. Higher 
doses offer increased discriminatory power in dogs with 
comorbidities or those receiving thyroid-suppressing drugs.
Cats: TSH stimulation test: 25 μg (micrograms)/cat.
References
Campos M, van Hoek I, Peremans K et al . (2012) Recombinant human thyrotropin in 
veterinary medicine: current use and future perspectives. Journal of Veterinary Internal 
Medicine  26, 853–862
l-Thyroxine (T4, Levothyroxine)
(Leventa, Soloxine, Thyforon) POM-V 
Formulations: Oral: 0.1 mg, 0.2 mg, 0.3 mg, 0.5 mg, 0.8 mg 
tablets; 1 mg/ml solution.
Action: Binds to specific intracellular receptors and alters gene 
expression.
Use: Treatment of hypothyroidism. Cases with pre-existing cardiac 
disorders require lower doses initially.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Uncorrected adrenal insufficiency.
Adverse reactions: Clinical signs of overdosage include 
tachycardia, excitability, nervousness and excessive panting. Can 
unmask Addison’s disease in patients with autoimmune 
polyglandular syndrome.
Drug interactions: The actions of catecholamines and 
sympathomimetics are enhanced by thyroxine. Diabetic patients 
receiving thyroid hormones may have altered insulin requirements; 
monitor carefully during the initiation of therapy. Oestrogens may 
increase thyroid requirements by increasing thyroxine-binding 
globulin. The therapeutic effect of ciclosporin, digoxin and digitoxin 
may be reduced by thyroid hormones. Tachycardia and 
hypertension may develop when ketamine is given to patients 
receiving thyroid hormones. In addition, many drugs may affect 
thyroid function tests and therefore monitoring of therapy.
