
===== Plumb PDF 73 =====
46    Amantadine
neuropathic1 or chronic pain,2 often in those in which opioids do not 
provide adequate analgesia or who are intolerant of higher opioid 
doses. It is generally considered ineffective when used alone 3; use 
in combination with an NSAID, opioid, or gabapentin/pregabalin is 
typical.1,4 Several weeks may be required to break a pain cycle. 5,6 It 
has been suggested for use as an early intervention in the treatment 
of pain associated with osteosarcomas.7
Amantadine has also been investigated for treatment of equine-2 
influenza virus in a horse8; however, because of expense, interpatient 
variability in oral absorption and other pharmacokinetic parame -
ters, and the potential for causing seizures after IV dosing, it is not 
commonly used for treatment.
In humans, amantadine is used for parkinsonian syndrome and 
drug-induced extrapyramidal effects; its use for the treatment and 
prophylaxis of influenza A is no longer recommended. 9 As in vet -
erinary medicine, the effect of amantadine on NMDA receptors in 
humans is of active interest, particularly its use as a coanalgesic with 
opioids and in the reduction of opioid tolerance development.
Pharmacology/Actions
Like ketamine, dextromethorphan, and memantine, amantadine in-
hibits the NMDA receptor by stabilizing it in the closed state.10 With-
in the CNS, chronic pain can be maintained or exacerbated when 
glutamate or aspartate bind to this receptor. It is believed that this 
receptor is particularly important in allodynia (ie, sensation of pain 
resulting from a normally non-noxious stimulus). Amantadine is ex-
pected to produce analgesic effects when pain or CNS sensitization 
is already present. Although there is limited evidence that amanta -
dine alone provides analgesia,2 it is thought that it may help alleviate 
chronic pain when used in combination with other analgesics (eg, 
opioids, NSAIDs).3
Amantadine’s antiviral activity is limited to strains of influenza A. 
Although its complete mechanism of action is unknown, it inhibits 
viral replication by interfering with influenza A virus M2 protein, 
preventing release of viral RNA into the host cell, and possibly in -
hibiting viral replication. Influenza A variants have demonstrated 
resistance to amantadine’s antiviral action, and it is currently not 
recommended for the treatment or prophylaxis of influenza A.9
Amantadine’s antiparkinsonian activity is not well understood, 
but it apparently increases dopamine concentrations in the brain. 
The drug appears to have potentiating effects on dopaminergic neu-
rotransmission in the CNS, is an NMDA antagonist, and has anti -
cholinergic activity.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, oral bioavailability of amantadine is reportedly very high. 11 
A study in nonfasted greyhounds showed an oral dose of 2.8 mg/kg 
was well tolerated, and maximum concentration, time to maximum 
concentration, and terminal half-life were 271 ng/mL, 1 to 4 hours, 
and 4.9 hours respectively. This study also suggested that the “every 
24-hour dose interval” should be re-evaluated.12 The drug is renally 
eliminated.11
In cats, bioavailability was very high after oral administration, and 
peak levels occurred ≈2 hours after dosing. After IV administration, 
the steady-state volume of distribution was ≈4.3 L/kg and clearance 
(mean) was 8.2 mL/minute/kg. 13 Elimination half-life was 5.5 to 6 
hours.
In horses, amantadine had a very wide interpatient variability of 
absorption after oral dosing (10 – 20 mg/kg); bioavailability ranged 
from 40% to 60% and was not affected by feed.8 The elimination half-
life in horses was ≈3.5 hours, and the steady-state volume of distri -
bution was ≈5 L/kg.
In Amazon parrots, the time to maximum concentration was ≈3 
to 4 hours, and half-life was 21 to 23 hours.14
In humans, amantadine was well absorbed after oral adminis -
tration with peak plasma concentrations occurring ≈3 hours after 
dosing.15 Volume of distribution was 3 to 8 L/kg, and protein bind -
ing was ≈67%. Amantadine is primarily eliminated via renal mech -
anisms. Oral clearance was ≈0.28 L/hour/kg and half-life was ≈16 
hours. Clearance is reduced in patients with renal impairment, and 
half-life may double.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
In humans, amantadine is contraindicated in patients with known 
hypersensitivity to it 15 or to rimantadine, and in those with end-
stage renal disease. It should be used with caution in patients with 
hepatic disease, renal disease (dosage adjustment may be required), 
congestive heart failure, active psychoses, eczematoid dermatitis, sei-
zure disorders, or untreated angle-closure glaucoma. The drug is no 
longer recommended for the treatment or prevention of influenza A 
in humans due to high levels of amantadine resistance among circu-
lating influenza strains.9 In 2006, the FDA banned the use of aman -
tadine and other influenza antivirals in chickens, turkeys, and ducks.
The human liquid dosage form has an unpleasant taste.
Do not confuse AMANTadine with RIMantadine, AMIOdarone, 
or RANITidine.
Adverse Effects
Experience with amantadine in domestic animals is limited, and its 
adverse effect profile is not well described. It has been reported that 
dogs given amantadine occasionally develop agitation, flatulence, 
loose stools, or diarrhea, particularly early in treatment. Experience 
in cats is limited, and an adverse effect profile has yet to be fully elu-
cidated, but some clinicians report that GI effects are more likely 
than in dogs. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
In rats, amantadine 50 – 100 mg/kg/day PO (ie, ≈1.5 to 3 times 
the maximum recommended human dose) throughout pregnancy 
was embryotoxic and caused fetal malformations and reduced fe -
tal weight. 15 Fertility was slightly impaired in rats that were given  
32 mg/kg/day.
Amantadine is excreted into maternal milk; its use is not recom -
mended in nursing women.16 Veterinary significance is unclear.
Because safety has not been established, this drug should only be 
used when the maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to off-
spring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The oral LD 50 in mice and rats is 700 to 800 mg/kg and 25 to  
50 mg/kg in humans.17 The toxic amantadine dose reported for cats 
is 30 mg/kg 18; behavioral effects may be noted at 15 mg/kg in dogs 
and cats.
Clinical signs associated with overdose in dogs include tremors, 
anxiety, ataxia, hypersalivation, and/or vomiting.
In humans, overdoses as low as 1 gram (total dose) have been as-
sociated with fatalities. Cardiac dysfunction (eg, arrhythmias, hyper-
tension, tachycardia), pulmonary edema, CNS toxicity (eg, tremors, 
seizures, psychosis, agitation, coma), hyperthermia, renal dysfunc -
tion, and respiratory distress syndrome have all been document -
ed. There is no known specific antidote for amantadine overdose. 
Treatment should consist of GI decontamination when appropriate, 
intensive monitoring (including ECG), and supportive therapy. Hy-
dration and urinary acidification, with or without diuresis, may in -
crease renal amantadine excretion. The drug is poorly removed by 
hemodialysis. Physostigmine has been suggested for cautious use in 
treating CNS effects.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 


===== Plumb PDF 74 =====
Amikacin, Systemic   47
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions with amantadine have either been 
reported or are theoretical in humans or animals and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Anticholinergic Drugs (eg, atropine, glycopyrrolate, oxy-
butynin): Amantadine may enhance anticholinergic effects. 
 ■ Antihistamines (eg, diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine): Aman-
tadine may enhance anticholinergic effects. 
 ■ Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors (eg, acetazolamide): May 
increase amantadine concentration
 ■ CNS Stimulants  (eg, caffeine, methylphenidate, selegiline ): 
Concomitant use with amantadine may increase the drug’s CNS 
stimulatory effects.
 ■ Glucagon: Amantadine’s anticholinergic effects may increase 
GI adverse effects of glucagon.
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine ): Amantadine may en -
hance anticholinergic effects. 
 ■ Quinidine, Quinine: Renal clearance of amantadine may be 
reduced. 
 ■ QT Prolonging Drugs (eg, amiodarone, cisapride, procain-
amide, sotalol): May increase the risk for arrhythmias
 ■ Sulfa-/Trimethoprim: May decrease the excretion of amanta-
dine, yielding higher blood concentrations of amantadine
 ■ Tramadol:  Concomitant use with amantadine may increase the 
risk for seizures because tramadol at high doses has caused sei -
zures in humans19 and amantadine can lower the seizure thresh -
old15; however, an increased risk for seizures with this drug com-
bination appears unlikely in a clinical setting at recommended 
dosages. Monitor for sedation or other neurologic adverse effects 
if using this combination.
 ■ Triamterene:  May decrease the excretion of amantadine, yield-
ing higher blood concentrations of amantadine
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline, clomip -
ramine): May enhance the anticholinergic effects of amantadine
 ■ Urinary Acidifiers  (eg, methionine, ammonium chloride, 
ascorbic acid): May increase the excretion of amantadine
 ■ Urinary Alkalinizers (eg, sodium bicarbonate, potassium 
citrate): May decrease the excretion of amantadine
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No laboratory interactions identified
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Adjunctive analgesia, including neuropathic pain and to pre -
vent “wind-up” pain (extra-label): 3 – 5 mg/kg PO once daily. 1,4 
Anecdotally, it is suggested to start at the lower end of the dos -
ing range and increase slowly, if needed. Pharmacokinetic studies 
suggest administration every 12 hours may be needed.3,12,13
Monitoring
 ■ Adverse effects (ie, GI effects, anxiety, restlessness, dry mouth)
 ■ Efficacy
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine as directed by your veterinarian. The benefits 
of this medicine may take a week or more to be seen.
 ■ Gastrointestinal effects (eg, loose stools, gas, diarrhea) or some 
agitation may occur, particularly early in treatment. Contact your 
veterinarian if these become serious or persist.
 ■ Overdoses with this medication can be serious. Be sure to keep 
this medicine out of reach of other pets and children.
Chemistry/Synonyms
An adamantane class antiviral agent with NMDA antagonist prop -
erties, amantadine HCl occurs as a white to off-white, bitter crys -
talline powder that is freely soluble in water and soluble in alcohol. 
Commercial dosage forms contain amantadine HCl, and strength is 
expressed and calculated as amantadine base. 1.24 mg amantadine 
HCl contains 1 mg amantadine.
Amantadine HCl may also be known as adamantanamine HCl, 
Endantadine®, GOCOVRI®, Osmolex®, and Symmetrel®.
Storage/Stability
Tablets, capsules, and the oral solution should be stored in tight, 
light-resistant containers at room temperature 20°C to 25°C 
(68°F-77°F), with excursions permitted to 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F). 
Avoid freezing the liquid.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information is noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
The International Federation for Equestrian Sports lists this drug as 
a “prohibited substance – controlled medication. ”20 Use of this drug 
may not be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and 
regulations before entering in a competition while this medication 
is being administered. Contact local racing authorities for further 
guidance.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Amantadine HCl Oral Tablets and Capsules: 100 mg; generic; (Rx)
Amantadine HCl Oral Solution/Syrup: 50 mg/5mL (10 mg/mL) in 
480 mL; generic; (Rx). NOTE: It is reported that the oral liquid has a 
bad taste and may not be accepted by veterinary patients.
Amantadine HCl extended-release oral tablets and capsules ( Os-
molex® ER, GOCOVRI®) are available. They are not directly equivalent 
to immediate-release amantadine capsules and have not been studied 
in veterinary patients.
In 2006, the FDA banned the extra-label use of amantadine and oth-
er influenza antivirals in chickens, turkeys, and ducks.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Amikacin, Systemic
(am-i-kay-sin) Amikin®, Amiglyde-V®
Aminoglycoside Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Parenteral aminoglycoside antibiotic that has good activity 
against a variety of bacteria, predominantly gram-negative 
aerobic bacilli and staphylococci; ineffective against anaerobic 
bacteria
 ▶ Adverse effects include nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity, and neuro-
muscular blockade.
 ▶ Cats may be more sensitive to toxic effects.
 ▶ Risk factors for toxicity include pre-existing renal disease, age 
(both neonatal and geriatric), fever, sepsis, and dehydration.
Uses/Indications
Although parenteral use of amikacin is only FDA approved in dogs, it is 
often used in most species for treatment of serious gram-negative and 


===== Plumb PDF 75 =====
48    Amikacin, Systemic
staphylococcal infections when the adverse effects of other amino -
glycosides are a concern. Because aminoglycosides have an inherent 
toxicity and should be administered parenterally, use should be lim-
ited to treatment of serious infections with either a documented lack 
of susceptibility to other, less toxic antibiotics or in cases in which 
the clinical situation dictates immediate treatment of a presumed 
gram-negative infection before culture and susceptibility results are 
reported.
It is widely accepted that aminoglycosides should be given once a 
day in most patients (mammals). This dosing regimen yields high -
er peak concentrations with resultant greater bacterial kill. Because 
aminoglycosides exhibit a postantibiotic effect, surviving susceptible 
bacteria generally do not replicate as rapidly, even when antibiotic 
concentrations are below the MIC. Periods in which antibiotic con-
centrations are low may also decrease the “adaptive resistance” (ie, 
bacteria take up less drug in the presence of continuous exposure) 
that can occur.
Amikacin is also FDA-approved for intrauterine infusion in mares 
and is used via intraarticular injection (extra-label) in foals to treat 
gram-negative septic arthritis. In horses with septic arthritis, intra -
venous regional limb perfusion (IVRLP) using amikacin is actively 
being researched.1-3 
Amikacin is also used topically for treatment of otitis externa in 
dogs—often in combination with EDTA-Triz 4—and may be impreg -
nated in materials (eg, PMMA beads, gels) for local treatment of in-
fections, particularly implant-associated surgical site infections.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated amika -
cin as a Critically Important, High Priority antimicrobial for human 
medicine.5
Pharmacology/Actions
Similar to other aminoglycoside antibiotics, amikacin acts on sus -
ceptible bacteria by irreversibly binding to the 30S ribosomal sub -
unit, thereby, inhibiting protein synthesis.6 Amikacin is considered a 
bactericidal, concentration-dependent antibiotic. 
Amikacin’s spectrum of activity includes coverage against many 
aerobic gram-negative and some aerobic gram-positive bacteria, in-
cluding Escherichia coli and most species of Klebsiella spp, Proteus 
spp, Pseudomonas spp, Salmonella spp, Enterobacter spp, Serratia 
spp, Shigella spp, Mycoplasma spp, and Staphylococcus spp. Several 
strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus spp, and Serratia spp that 
are resistant to gentamicin will be killed by amikacin. Amikacin is 
ineffective against anaerobic bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa.
In an in vitro study with canine E coli isolates, amikacin demon-
strated additive or synergistic antimicrobial activity when given in 
combination with ceftazidime and amoxicillin/clavulanate but not in 
combination with enrofloxacin or marbofloxacin.7 
Antimicrobial activity of aminoglycosides is enhanced in an al -
kaline environment but inhibited by the presence of pus or organic 
debris.
Pharmacokinetics
Amikacin, like the other aminoglycosides, is not appreciably ab -
sorbed after oral, dermal, or intrauterine administration or urinary 
bladder irrigations but is absorbed when used in irrigations during 
surgical procedures or in regional limb perfusion. Systemic absorp -
tion of amikacin from impregnated beads is not described; plasma 
amikacin concentration was undetectable 24 hours after SC place -
ment of an amikacin-impregnated dextrose cross-linked gel 8 but is 
minimal for gentamicin in PMMA beads on dogs 9 and in calcium 
sulfate beads in goats. 10 With IM administration in dogs and cats, 
peak concentrations occur after 30 to 60 minutes. SC injection re -
sults in slightly delayed peak concentrations and more variability 
than after IM injection. Bioavailability from extravascular injection 
(IM or SC) is greater than 90%. 
After absorption, aminoglycosides are distributed primarily in the 
extracellular fluid and are found in ascitic, pleural, pericardial, peri-
toneal, synovial, and abscess fluids; high levels are found in sputum, 
bronchial secretions, and bile. Aminoglycosides are minimally pro -
tein bound (ie, less than 20%) to plasma proteins.11 Aminoglycosides 
do not readily cross the blood-brain barrier and do not penetrate 
ocular tissue. CSF concentrations are unpredictable and range from 
0% to 50% of those found in the serum. Therapeutic concentrations 
are found in bone, heart, gallbladder, and lung tissues after parenter-
al administration. Prostate concentrations have not been adequate -
ly assessed in animals, but amikacin has been shown to be effective 
for the treatment of chronic bacterial prostatitis in humans when 
fluoroquinolones cannot be used.12 A maximum distal interphalan -
geal joint synovial fluid concentration of 600 µg/mL was reached 
15 minutes after intravenous regional limb perfusion (IVRLP) in 
healthy adult horses; however, significant interpatient variability 
was noted. A maximum serum amikacin concentration of 19 µg/mL 
was reached 25 minutes after IVRLP .13 Aminoglycosides tend to ac-
cumulate in certain tissues (eg, inner ear, kidneys), contributing to 
the toxicity seen in those tissues. Volumes of distribution have been 
reported to be 0.15 to 0.3 L/kg in adult cats and dogs, and 0.26 to  
0.58 L/kg in horses. Volumes of distribution may be significantly 
larger in neonates and juvenile animals due to their higher extra -
cellular fluid fractions. Aminoglycosides cross the placenta; fetal 
concentrations range from 15% to 50% of those found in maternal 
serum.
Elimination of aminoglycosides after parenteral administration 
occurs almost entirely by glomerular filtration. The approximate 
elimination half-life for amikacin has been reported to be 5 hours in 
foals, 1.14 to 2.3 hours in adult horses, 2.2 to 2.7 hours in calves, 1 
hour in cows, 1.5 hours in sheep, and 0.5 to 2 hours in dogs and cats. 
Patients with decreased renal function can have a significantly pro -
longed half-life. In humans with normal renal function, elimination 
rates can be highly variable with aminoglycoside antibiotics.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Aminoglycosides are contraindicated in animals that are hypersen -
sitive to them. Often, these drugs are the only effective agents in 
treating severe gram-negative or multidrug resistant staphylococcal 
infections; thus, there are no absolute contraindications to their use. 
However, these drugs should be used with extreme caution in ani -
mals with pre-existing renal disease; concomitant monitoring and 
dosage interval adjustments should be used as needed. Other risk 
factors for the development of toxicity include patient age (neonatal 
and geriatric patients), fever, sepsis, and dehydration.
Aminoglycosides can cause irreversible ototoxicity, so they 
should be used with caution, especially in working and guide dogs, 
and should be avoided when treating otitis if an intact tympanic 
membrane cannot be confirmed. Amikacin is considered less oto -
toxic than gentamicin or streptomycin.14
Aminoglycosides should be used with caution in animals with 
neuromuscular disorders (eg, myasthenia gravis) because of the 
drug’s neuromuscular blocking activity.
Sight hounds may require reduced dosages of aminoglycosides, as 
they have significantly lower volumes of distribution.
Aminoglycosides are eliminated primarily through renal mecha -
nisms and should be used cautiously in neonatal or geriatric animals; 
consider periodic therapeutic drug monitoring and serum chemistry 
profiles with dosage adjustments as needed.
Adverse Effects
Aminoglycosides can be nephrotoxic and ototoxic. The nephrotoxic 
(ie, tubular necrosis) mechanisms are not completely understood but 
are probably related to interference with phospholipid metabolism 
in the lysosomes of proximal renal tubular cells, resulting in leakage 


===== Plumb PDF 76 =====
Amikacin, Systemic   49
of proteolytic enzymes into the cytoplasm. The risk for nephrotoxici-
ty increases with prolonged therapy and is predominantly associated 
with accumulation of amikacin within tubular cells, which is more 
likely to occur with repeated lower doses as compared with higher 
doses with prolonged (ie, every 24 hour) dosing intervals. Nephro -
toxicity is usually manifested by nonoliguric renal failure, with in -
creases in serum BUN and creatinine and decreases in urine specific 
gravity and creatinine clearance. Proteinuria and abnormal urine 
sediment (eg, casts, renal tubular cells, glycosuria) may be seen. 
Nephrotoxicity is usually reversible after the drug is discontinued. 
Although amikacin is less nephrotoxic than other aminoglycosides, 
the incidence of nephrotoxicity is poorly described, and caution and 
monitoring are required.
Ototoxicity (ie, eighth cranial nerve toxicity) can manifest through 
hearing loss and/or vestibular clinical signs (eg, nystagmus, head tilt) 
and may be irreversible. Vestibular clinical signs are more frequent 
with use of streptomycin, gentamicin, or tobramycin. Hearing loss is 
more frequent with use of amikacin or neomycin. 15 However, hear-
ing loss or vestibular clinical signs can occur with use of any of these 
drugs. Cats are apparently more sensitive to the vestibular effects of 
aminoglycosides.16
Aminoglycosides can also cause neuromuscular blockade, facial 
edema, pain and inflammation at the injection site, peripheral neu -
ropathy, and hypersensitivity reactions. Rarely, GI clinical signs and 
hematologic and hepatic effects have been reported.
An in vitro study found that amikacin caused rapid, dose-depen-
dent cytotoxicity in equine joint cells17; additional in vivo studies are 
required to confirm these findings.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Aminoglycosides can cross the placenta and although rare, may cause 
eighth cranial nerve toxicity or nephrotoxicity in fetuses. Nephro -
toxicity has occurred in fetal rats. Because the drug should only be 
used in serious infections, the benefits of therapy may exceed the 
potential risks. There is no evidence that amikacin impairs fertility; 
amikacin does not appear to affect sperm quality,18 however, the pre-
servative in the intrauterine infusion may impair sperm viability.19
Aminoglycosides are excreted in milk. Although it is possible that 
amikacin ingested with milk could alter the GI microbiota and cause 
diarrhea, low levels of amikacin in milk are unlikely to be of signif -
icant concern. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Two treatments have been recommended in case of inadvertent 
overdose: 
1) Hemodialysis, which is effective in reducing serum drug con -
centrations but is not a viable option for most veterinary pa -
tients. 
2) Peritoneal dialysis, which also reduces serum drug concentra -
tions but is much less effective. Amikacin is less affected by this 
approach than are tobramycin or gentamicin, and it is assumed 
that reduction in serum concentrations will also be minimized. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe -
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving amikacin and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Anesthetics, General (eg isoflurane, ketamine, propofol ): 
Concomitant use with general anesthetics could potentiate neu -
romuscular blockade.
 ■ Cephalosporins : Concurrent use of aminoglycosides with 
cephalosporins is somewhat controversial. Potentially, cephalo -
sporins could cause additive nephrotoxicity when used with ami-
noglycosides, but this interaction has only been well-documented 
with cephaloridine and cephalothin (both of which are no longer 
marketed). The potential synergistic effect 7 may outweigh these 
unlikely risks; however, concurrent use of third- or fourth-gen -
eration cephalosporins with amikacin, results in abundant and 
typically unnecessary duplication of the gram-negative spectrum.
 ■ Diuretics, Loop  (eg, furosemide, torsemide): Concurrent use 
with loop diuretics may increase the nephrotoxic or ototoxic po -
tential of aminoglycosides.
 ■ Diuretics,  Osmotic  (eg, mannitol): Concurrent use with os -
motic diuretics may increase the nephrotoxic or ototoxic poten -
tial of the aminoglycosides.
 ■ Magnesium, Systemic (eg, magnesium sulfate): Concomitant 
use could increase the risk for neuromuscular blockade.
 ■ Nephrotoxic drugs, Other  (eg, amphotericin B, cisplatin, 
polymyxin B, vancomycin): Potential for increased risk for neph-
rotoxicity
 ■ Neuromuscular Blocking Agents (eg, atracurium, pancu-
ronium): Concomitant use with neuromuscular blocking agents 
could potentiate neuromuscular blockade.
 ■ NSAIDs (eg, carprofen, firocoxib, flunixin, meloxicam, phen -
ylbutazone, robenacoxib): Increased risk of nephrotoxicity
 ■ Penicillins : May have synergistic effects against some bacteria7; 
some potential for physical inactivation of aminoglycosides in vi-
tro (do not mix together) and in vivo (patients in renal failure)
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Amikacin serum concentrations may be falsely decreased if the 
patient is also receiving beta-lactam antibiotics and the serum 
is stored prior to analysis. It is recommended that if the assay is 
delayed, samples be frozen and, if possible, drawn at times when 
the beta-lactam antibiotic is at a trough.
Dosages
DOGS:
Susceptible infections and empirical therapy (extra-label):  
15 – 30 mg/kg IV , IM, SC once daily. Septic patients may be started 
at 20 – 30 mg/kg IV once daily. NOTE: Dosage should be adjust-
ed based on kidney function and serum amikacin concentrations 
when possible. When renal function is significantly decreased (eg, 
IRIS stage II or III) and less nephrotoxic drugs cannot be used, the 
dose amount remains the same but the dosing interval should be 
increased. See Monitoring.
CATS:
Susceptible infections and empirical therapy (extra-label):  
10 – 15 mg/kg IV , IM, SC once daily. Septic patients may be start-
ed at 20 mg/kg IV once daily. NOTE: Dosage should be adjusted 
based on renal function and serum levels when possible. When 
renal function is significantly decreased (eg, IRIS stage II or III) 
and less nephrotoxic drugs cannot be used, the dose amount re -
mains the same but the dosing interval should be increased. See 
Monitoring.
HORSES:
Uterine infections (endometritis, metritis, pyometra) caused 
by susceptible organisms  (label dosage; FDA approved): 2 g 
mixed with 200 mL sterile normal saline (0.9% sodium chloride 
for injection) and aseptically infused into the uterus daily for 3 
consecutive days19


===== Plumb PDF 77 =====
50    Amikacin, Systemic
Susceptible infections and empirical therapy (extra-label): 
Adults: 10 mg/kg IV or IM once daily
Neonatal foals: 20 – 25 mg/kg IV or IM once daily. It is strongly 
recommended to individualize the dose based on therapeutic 
drug monitoring.
Treatment of septic joints (extra-label): Intra-articular adminis-
tration: 125 – 250 mg/horse (NOT mg/kg) IA once daily20 
Intravenous regional limb perfusion (IVRLP) administration 
in standing adult horses (extra-label): 
a) 2 g (diluted to 30 – 60 mL with sterile saline) via cephalic 
vein, with 10 to 20 minute tourniquet time. 13,21,22 The addi-
tion of penicillin G sodium at 10 million units has resulted 
in variable retention time in the synovium.23,24
b) 1 g (diluted to 30 – 120 mL with sterile saline), with 30 min-
ute tourniquet time reached therapeutic concentration in 
the thoracic limb distal phalangeal joint but not in the ra -
diocarpal joint.25 
NOTE: Despite the procedure’s name (ie, IVRLP), amikacin 
is absorbed systemically and potentially reaches therapeutic 
 concentrations.13
NEW WORLD CAMELIDS:
Susceptible infections and empirical therapy : 18 mg/kg IV or 
IM every 24 hours (once daily)26
BIRDS:
Susceptible infections:
a) 15 mg/kg IM or SC every 12 hours27
b) Gram-negative infections resistant to gentamicin :  
Dilute commercial solution and administer 15 – 20 mg/kg  
(0.015 – 0.02 mg/g) IM once or twice daily.28
c) Intravenous regional limb perfusion (IVRLP) adminis -
tration in chickens: From a case report: Using the medial 
metatarsal vein, 5.3 mg/kg IV with flunixin 1.3 mg/kg were 
infused, with 15 minute tourniquet time.29
d) Mycobacterial infections in psittacines : 15 mg/kg twice 
daily (route not specified, assume IM)30
REPTILES:
Gram-negative respiratory disease : 3.5 mg/kg IM, SC, or via 
lung catheter every 3 to 10 days for 30 days31 
Snakes:
a) 5 mg/kg IM (forebody) loading dose, then 2.5 mg/kg IM 
every 72 hours for 7 to 9 treatments. Commonly used in 
respiratory infections. Use a lower dose for Python curtus.32 
b) Gopher snakes: In a study, 5 mg/kg IM loading dose, then  
2.5 mg/kg IM every 72 hours. House snakes were at the high 
end of their preferred optimum ambient temperature.33
TURTLES/TORTOISES: 
a) Bacterial shell diseases: 10 mg/kg (route not specified; as-
sume IM) daily in water turtles and every other day in land 
turtles and tortoises for 7 to 10 days. Used commonly with a 
beta-lactam antibiotic. It is recommended to begin therapy 
with 20 mL/kg fluid injection. Maintain hydration and mon-
itor uric acid levels when possible.34
b) Gopher tortoises : 5 mg/kg IM every 48 hours at 30°C 
(86°F)35
c) Crocodilians: 2.25 mg/kg IM every 72 to 96 hours36
FERRETS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label):
a) 8 – 16 mg/kg IM or IV once daily37
b) 8 – 16 mg/kg/day SC, IM, IV divided every 8 to 24 hours38
RABBITS/RODENTS/SMALL MAMMALS:
Rabbits (extra-label):
a) 8 – 16 mg/kg SC, IM, or IV daily dose (may be divided and 
given every 8-24 hours). Increased efficacy and decreased 
toxicity are possible if given once daily. If given IV , dilute 
product into 4 mL/kg of saline and administer over 20 min-
utes.39
b) 5 – 10 mg/kg SC, IM, or IV divided every 8 to 24 hours 
Guinea pigs (extra-label): 10 – 15 mg/kg SC, IM, or IV divided 
every 8 to 24 hours 
Chinchillas (extra-label): 
a) 10 – 15 mg/kg SC, IM, or IV divided every 8 to 24 hours 
b) 2 – 5 mg/kg SC, IM every 8 to 12 hours40
Hamsters, rats, mice (extra-label): 10 mg/kg SC or IM every 12 
hours (twice daily) 
Prairie dogs (extra-label): 5 mg/kg SC or IM every 12 hours 
(twice daily)38 
FISH:
Susceptible infections: 5 mg/kg IM loading dose, then 2.5 mg/kg 
every 72 hours for 5 treatments41
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy (eg, culture, clinical signs, WBC count, and clinical signs 
associated with infection). 
Therapeutic drug monitoring would be ideal but is rarely 
available. When available, collect plasma samples 30 minutes 
after administration and immediately before the next dose 
to measure peak and trough concentrations, respectively. 
Target concentrations in veterinary patients have not been 
well-established. In humans, peak levels of 20 – 25 µg/mL  
(25 – 40 µg/mL for sepsis) have been recommended, whereas 
in foals, a target peak of 40 µg/mL has been stated. 42 In hu -
mans, trough levels of less than 8 µg/mL are recommended.
 ■ Adverse effect monitoring is essential. Baseline serum renal 
chemistry testing (eg, creatinine) and urinalysis (including specif-
ic gravity and sediment evaluation) are recommended and should 
be repeated every 3 to 5 days during therapy. NOTE: A decrease 
in urine specific gravity is often the initial sign of impending 
nephrotoxicity; casts in the urine can be transient and a lack of 
casts does not rule out renal toxicity.
 ■ Gross monitoring of vestibular or auditory toxicity is recom -
mended.
Client Information
 ■ Y ou may give subcutaneous injections at home if you have re -
ceived appropriate training, but routine monitoring of therapy for 
efficacy and toxicity by a veterinarian is still required.
 ■ Permanent hearing loss and severe damage to the kidneys can 
occur with use of this medicine. Contact your veterinarian im -
mediately if your animal develops a head tilt, hearing loss (ie, not 
responding to noise), loss of balance, poor appetite, low energy 
level, and/or vomiting.
 ■ While taking this medicine, your animal will need to be closely 
monitored by your veterinarian. Do not miss these important fol-
low-up visits.
 ■ Use in food producing animals is controversial. Be sure to talk 
with your veterinarian about the long withdrawal periods associ-
ated with this medicine.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Amikacin, a semisynthetic aminoglycoside derived from kanamy -
cin, occurs as a white, crystalline powder that is sparingly soluble in 
water. The sulfate salt is formed during the manufacturing process. 
1.3 g of amikacin sulfate is equivalent to 1 g of amikacin. Amikacin 
may also be expressed in terms of units. 50,600 units are equal to 
50.9 mg of base. The commercial injection is a clear to straw-col -
ored solution, and the pH is adjusted to 3.5 to 5.5 with sulfuric acid.


===== BSAVA PDF 31 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
15
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Amantadine
(Lysovir*, Symmetrel*) POM 
Formulations: Oral: 100 mg capsule; 10 mg/ml syrup.
Action: Provides analgesia through NMDA antagonist action which 
may potentiate the effects of other analgesics.
Use:
• Adjunctive analgesic in animals that are unresponsive to opioids, 
or that require chronic pain relief in a home environment (e.g. 
osteoarthritis or cancer pain).
• In dogs with osteoarthritis that were refractory to an NSAID 
physical activity was improved, suggesting that amantadine 
might be a useful adjunct in the clinical management of canine 
osteoarthritic pain.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: In humans, minor GI and CNS effects have 
been reported, although these have not been reported in animals. 
Amantadine is renally excreted and is likely to accumulate in animals 
with renal dysfunction and therefore should be used cautiously in 
this patient population.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs: 3.0–5.0 mg/kg p.o. q24h.
Cats: 1.0–4.0 mg/kg p.o. q24h; start at the lowest dose and increase 
slowly. This dose recommendation is anecdotal and is not based on 
evidence from clinical research. 
References
Lascelles BD, Gaynor JS, Smith ES et al . (2008) Amantadine in a multimodal analgesic 
regimen for alleviation of refractory osteoarthritis pain in dogs. Journal of Veterinary 
Internal Medicine  22, 53–59
Amethocaine see Tetracaine
Amikacin
(Amikacin*, Amikin*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 50 mg/ml, 250 mg/ml solutions.
Action: Aminoglycosides inhibit bacterial protein synthesis with a 
concentration-dependent mechanism of killing, leading to a marked 
post-antibiotic effect, allowing prolonged dosing intervals (which 
may reduce toxicity).
Use: Active against many Gram-negative bacteria, Staphylococcus  
aureus and Nocardia spp., including some that may be resistant to 


===== BSAVA PDF 32 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
16
gentamicin. Streptococci and anaerobes are usually resistant. Its use 
is only indicated after sensitivity testing has been performed and the 
organism shown to be resistant to other aminoglycosides such as 
gentamicin. Activity at low oxygen sites may be limited. Movement 
across biological membranes may also be limited, hence systemic 
levels require parenteral administration, and access to sites such as 
the CNS and ocular fluids is very limited. Monitoring serum amikacin 
levels should be considered to ensure therapeutic levels and 
minimize toxicity, particularly in neonates, geriatric patients and 
those with reduced renal function. Monitoring renal function is also 
advisable during treatment of any animal. Intravenous doses should 
be given slowly, generally over 30–60 minutes. Concurrent fluid 
therapy is advised.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: If possible, avoid use in animals with reduced 
renal function.
Adverse reactions: Nephrotoxic and ototoxic.
Drug interactions: Synergism may occur in vivo when 
aminoglycosides are combined with beta-lactam antimicrobials. 
Avoid the concurrent use of other nephrotoxic, ototoxic or neurotoxic 
agents (e.g. amphotericin B, furosemide). Aminoglycosides may be 
inactivated in vitro by beta-lactam antibiotics (e.g. penicillins, 
cephalosporins) or heparin; do not give these drugs in the same 
syringe. Can potentiate neuromuscular blockade so avoid use in 
combination with neuromuscular blocking agents.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs: 15–30 mg/kg i.v, i.m., s.c. q24h. Due to a lower volume of 
distribution in Greyhounds a lower dose of 12 mg/kg is 
recommended in this breed and other sight hounds.
Cats: 10–15 mg/kg i.v, i.m., s.c. q24h.
Dogs, Cats: For both dogs and cats, higher doses are 
recommended by some authors for managing sepsis, although there 
is an increased risk of adverse effects with such high doses. Local 
use may be considered, especially if the site of infection is easily 
accessible for direct delivery of the drug and if the animal is showing 
signs of nephrotoxicity. Amikacin has been used locally in joints and 
the bladder as specific examples.
Amiloride
(Amiloride Hydrochloride*) POM 
Formulations: Oral: 5 mg tablets; 1 mg/ml solution (Amilamont). 
Also present in compound preparations with hydrochlorothiazide 
(Moduret, Moduretic, Co-amilozide) and furosemide (Co-amilofruse, 
Frumil, Frumil LS).
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 33 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
17
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Action: Potassium-sparing diuretic which inhibits sodium 
absorption in the cells of the distal tubule and collecting duct 
therefore leading to less available sodium for exchange with 
potassium. This leads to a failure of the normal renal concentration 
gradient and results in sodium loss and potassium retention. It is a 
weak diuretic when used alone, so is almost always used in 
combination with a thiazide or furosemide.
Use:
• Treatment of oedema or ascites due to liver or heart failure.
Often added to more potent diuretics such as furosemide or weaker 
diuretics such as hydrochlorothiazide in cases of refractory heart 
failure achieving sequential nephron blockade. Doses have not been 
widely reported in the veterinary literature. Monitor urea, creatinine, 
electrolytes and blood pressure before and after dose adjustments.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Hypotension, hyperkalaemia, acidosis and 
hyponatraemia may develop.
Drug interactions: Avoid the concomitant administration of 
potassium.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: 0.1 mg/kg p.o. q12h is used in humans and has been 
suggested for dogs and cats. In combination with 
hydrochlorothiazide dose range will vary from 0.05–0.4 mg/kg p.o. 
(dogs) to 0.1–0.4 mg/kg p.o. (cats). Start at low dose and titrate 
upwards cautiously.
Amino acid solutions
(Duphalyte, Aminoplasmal*, Aminoven*, 
Clinimix*, Glamin*, Hyperamine*, Intrafusin*, 
Kabiven*, Kabiven Peripheral*, Nutriflex*) POM, 
POM-V 
Formulations: Injectable: synthetic crystalline l-amino acid 
solutions for i.v. use only. Numerous human products are available, 
varying in concentrations of amino acids. Most products also 
contain electrolytes. Some products contain varying concentrations 
of glucose.
Action: Support protein anabolism, arrest protein and muscle 
wasting, and maintain intermediary metabolism.
Use:
• Used parenterally in patients requiring nutritional support but 
unable to receive enteral support, amino acid solutions supply 
essential and non-essential amino acids for protein production.
