
===== Plumb PDF 86 =====
Amitriptyline   59
Uses/Indications 
Amitriptyline is a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) that has been used 
for the treatment of behavior conditions (eg, separation anxiety, gen-
eralized anxiety) and pruritus 1 in dogs, as well as to treat excessive 
grooming, spraying, pica, and anxiety in cats. Clomipramine is an 
FDA-approved TCA for use in dogs and is therefore often chosen 
over amitriptyline in cases where a TCA is needed for the treatment 
of behavior-modifying indications. A retrospective study also sug -
gests clomipramine is more effective than amitriptyline.2 One study 
demonstrated that amitriptyline was not effective in the treatment of 
aggressive dogs that were concomitantly undergoing behavior modi-
fication; however, the dose may have been inadequate.3
Amitriptyline may be useful for adjunctive treatment of chron -
ic neuropathic pain in dogs 4 and cats. Although studies have ques -
tioned the drug’s use for adjunctive treatment of lower urinary tract 
disease in cats,5,6 amitriptyline appears to still be anecdotally used for 
analgesic and/or urethral antispasmodic effects.
Amitriptyline appears effective in reducing feather plucking in 
birds.7,8 
Pharmacology/Actions 
Amitriptyline (and its active metabolite, nortriptyline) is a tricyclic 
antidepressant (TCA) with a complicated pharmacologic profile that 
includes blockage of serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake pumps 
(thereby increasing neurotransmitter concentrations), sedation, and 
central and peripheral anticholinergic activity. Other pharmacologic 
effects include alpha-1 adrenergic antagonism, stabilizing mast cells 
via H1 receptor antagonism, and antagonism of glutamate receptors 
and sodium channels. TCAs act similar to phenothiazines in altering 
avoidance behaviors in animals.
Amitriptyline potentiated the minimum alveolar concentration 
(MAC)-sparing effects of remifentanil in rats.9 
Pharmacokinetics 
Amitriptyline is rapidly absorbed from both the GI tract and paren-
teral injection sites, but transdermal (PLO gel-based) absorption in 
cats is poor.10 Absolute bioavailability is low, with one study noting 
only 6% bioavailability after a single oral dose (4 mg/kg) was admin-
istered to greyhounds. 11 Absorption appears to be increased when 
amitriptyline is administered with food.12 Low oral bioavailability in 
dogs may reflect both incomplete absorption and first-pass metabo-
lism to inactive metabolites. Further investigation is necessary.11 
Peak concentrations occur 1 to 2 hours after oral administration 
in dogs11–13 and cats10 and within 2 to 12 hours in other species.  Am-
itriptyline is highly bound to plasma proteins and enters the CNS. 
The drug is metabolized in the liver to several metabolites, including 
nortriptyline, which is active. In a study of 12 crossbreed dogs, the 
elimination half-life of amitriptyline and nortriptyline was 4.5 hours 
and 12.3 hours, respectively. 13 In greyhounds, the mean terminal 
half-life was 4 to 10 hours, and the terminal half-life of nortriptyline 
was 6.2 to 9.6 hours.11  Because tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) are 
metabolized through glucuronidation, cats may be more sensitive to 
TCAs than dogs.14
Amitriptyline has been administered intrathecally and epidurally 
in sheep; the concentration-time profiles were highly variable, with a 
bioavailability of 55% and 1.3%, respectively.15 
One study in birds saw significantly varied absorption and elimi-
nation constants. Elimination half-life varied from 1.6 to 91.2 hours.16 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Amitriptyline is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive 
to it or other tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). Concomitant use 
with monoamine oxidase inhibitors is contraindicated in humans. 
Use amitriptyline with extreme caution in animals with seizure dis -
orders, as tricyclic agents may reduce seizure thresholds. In cats, 
at standard doses, epileptiform pathology was noted on EEG, and 
sustained discharges and generalized seizures occurred at higher  
(20 – 25 mg/kg IV) doses. 17 Use amitriptyline with caution in an -
imals with thyroid disorders, urinary retention, hepatic disorders, 
renal disorders, KCS, glaucoma, cardiac rhythm disorders, diabetes, 
or adrenal tumors. Although amitriptyline may prolong the QTc in-
terval in humans, ECG abnormalities did not occur in healthy dogs 
with behavioral conditions treated with standard doses of amitrip -
tyline.18,19  
Because data are lacking about the impact of amitriptyline on the 
QT interval in animals, this drug should be used with caution in 
patients that have pre-existing cardiac disease.
Amitriptyline should not be given on an as-needed basis; it needs 
to be given continuously and may require several weeks to see a pos-
itive response. If discontinuing amitriptyline, the dose should be 
slowly tapered over 2 to 3 weeks to minimize the risks for signs of 
withdrawal.
Adverse Effects 
The most predominant adverse effects seen with tricyclic antidepres-
sants (TCAs) are related to sedation and anticholinergic (eg, consti-
pation, urinary retention) properties. Occasionally, dogs exhibit hy-
perexcitability and, rarely, develop seizures; however, adverse effects 
can affect various systems, including cardiac (eg, dysrhythmias), 
hematologic (eg, bone marrow suppression), GI (eg, vomiting, diar-
rhea), and endocrine (eg, hyperglycemia, hyponatremia). After oral 
administration, vomiting may be more likely in fasted dogs.12 
Adverse effects seen in cats include sedation, hypersalivation, uri-
nary retention, anorexia, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, unkempt 
hair coat, vomiting/nausea, ataxia, disorientation, and cardiac con -
ductivity disturbances.5,20 
Reduced reverse triiodothyronine (rT3), total thyroxine (tT4), 
and free T4 (fT4) concentrations may occur in dogs and cats.21,22 
Dystonia and akathisia were described in a macaw that was given 
a single dose of amitriptyline.23 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety 
In humans, amitriptyline crosses the placenta, and isolated reports 
of limb reduction abnormalities in fetuses have been noted. Amitrip-
tyline enters maternal milk in levels similar to or greater than those 
found in maternal serum. In humans, amitriptyline is considered a 
drug for which the effect on nursing infants is unknown but may be 
of concern.24 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh potential 
risks.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 
Overdose with tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) can cause life-threat-
ening conditions (eg, arrhythmias, cardiorespiratory collapse). Un -
der experimental conditions, dogs receiving amitriptyline by IV in -
fusion developed cardiotoxicity after an average cumulative dose of  
36 mg/kg, and convulsions occurred in 42% of dogs.25  Other common 
clinical signs in dogs and cats include lethargy, ataxia, and vomiting. 
IV fat emulsion therapy (Intralipid®) is thought to trap amitriptyline 
in plasma during overdose and lower brain concentration; however, 
severe hypotension occurred in 10% of pigs, 26 and amitriptyline 
mortality rates were not affected in rats.27
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.


===== Plumb PDF 87 =====
60    Amitriptyline
Drug Interactions 
In humans, amitriptyline is a substrate of CYP3A4, 2C9, and 2D6. 
The following drug interactions with amitriptyline either have been 
reported or are theoretical in humans or animals and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Acetazolamide/Dichlorphenamide : Concurrent use may 
increase amitriptyline concentrations by alkalinizing urine.
 ■ Alpha-2 Adrenergic Agonists  (eg, clonidine, detomidine, 
dexmedetomidine, medetomidine ): Concurrent use may in -
crease the risk for CNS and respiratory depression, hypertension, 
and bradycardia. Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) may interfere 
with the antihypertensive effects of alpha-2 agonists. Use cau -
tiously in combination.
 ■ Amantadine : Concurrent use may increase the risk for urinary 
retention, constipation, ileus, hyperthermia, heat stroke, anticho-
linergic intoxication syndrome, and QT interval prolongation. 
Use cautiously in combination.
 ■ Ammonium Chloride : Concurrent use may decrease tricyclic 
antidepressant concentrations by acidifying urine.
 ■ Anesthetic Agents  (eg, isoflurane, ketamine): Concurrent 
use may increase the risk for hypotension, CNS depression, QT 
interval prolongation, torsade de pointes, and death.
 ■ Anthracyclines  (eg, doxorubicin): Concurrent use may cause 
additive effects on the QT interval.
 ■ Anticholinergic Agents  (eg, atropine, doxepin, glycopyr-
rolate, meclizine, oxybutynin): Concurrent use may increase the 
risk for constipation, ileus, urinary retention, CNS depression, 
and anticholinergic intoxication syndrome.
 ■ Antihistamines  (eg, cetirizine, chlorpheniramine, diphen-
hydramine, hydroxyzine): Concurrent use may increase the risk 
for constipation, ileus, urinary retention, CNS depression, and 
anticholinergic intoxication syndrome.
 ■ Antihypertensive Agents : Concurrent use may result in ad-
ditive hypotension and orthostasis.
 ■ Apomorphine : Concurrent use may increase the risk for QT in-
terval prolongation, torsade de pointes, and death.
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole): Con -
current use increases the risk for CNS toxicity, constipation, ileus, 
urinary retention, and QT interval prolongation.
 ■ Barbiturates  (eg, thiopental): Concurrent use may cause ad -
ditive respiratory depression. Amitriptyline concentrations may 
decrease.
 ■ Benzodiazepines  (eg, diazepam, midazolam): Concurrent use 
may increase the risk for CNS and/or respiratory depression. An-
ticholinergic effects may be additive.
 ■ Beta-2 Adrenergic Agonists  (eg, albuterol, clenbuterol): 
Concurrent use may increase the risk for arrhythmias, hyperten-
sion, hyperpyrexia, flattening of the T-wave, and QT interval pro-
longation. Use cautiously in combination.
 ■ Bethanechol : Amitriptyline may antagonize the cholinergic 
effects of bethanechol. Avoid combination.
 ■ Bromocriptine : Amitriptyline may enhance the CNS depres -
sion and respiratory depression effects of bromocriptine. Concur-
rent use may increase the risk for serotonin syndrome.
 ■ Buspirone : Concurrent use may increase the risk for CNS de -
pression and serotonin syndrome. Avoid combination.
 ■ Cannabidiol : Concurrent use may increase the risk for CNS 
depression.
 ■ Carbamazepine : Concurrent use may decrease concentrations 
of amitriptyline by induction of CYP450 enzymes, and carba -
mazepine concentrations may be increased by an undetermined 
mechanism. Amitriptyline may decrease anticonvulsant effects of 
carbamazepine.
 ■ Cimetidine : May inhibit amitriptyline hepatic metabolism and 
increase the risk for toxicity
 ■ Cyproheptadine : Concurrent use may decrease efficacy of am-
itriptyline by decreasing serotonin concentrations, may increase 
the risk for CNS depression, and anticholinergic effects may be 
additive.
 ■ Desmopressin : Concurrent use may increase the risk for water 
intoxication and/or hyponatremia, which can progress to seizure, 
coma, respiratory depression, and death. Electrolytes and renal 
function should be monitored.
 ■ Diazoxide : Concurrent use may increase the risk for hypoten -
sion and orthostasis, with greatest risk during initial treatment or 
dose escalation.
 ■ Diltiazem : May increase amitriptyline concentrations
 ■ Dobutamine/Dopamine : Concurrent use may increase the risk 
for hypertension, tremors, and cardiac dysrhythmias. Avoid con-
current use except in emergency cases.
 ■ Domperidone : Concurrent use may increase the risk for QT in-
terval prolongation, cardiac arrhythmias, torsade de pointes, and 
death. Efficacy of domperidone may be decreased. Avoid combi-
nation.
 ■ Erythromycin : Concurrent use may increase the risk for QT 
interval prolongation and cardiac arrhythmias.
 ■ Estrogens : May decrease effect and increase toxicity of amitrip-
tyline; mechanism and clinical significance are not established.
 ■ Fluconazole : Concurrent use may increase the risk for QT in-
terval prolongation.
 ■ Flumazenil : Flumazenil use in animals suspected of TCA over-
dose may increase the risk for seizures and arrhythmias.25 
 ■ Fluoroquinolones  (eg, ciprofloxacin, enrofloxacin): Con -
current use may increase the risk for QT interval prolongation, 
torsade de pointes, and death.
 ■ Hydroxychloroquine : Concurrent use may increase the risk 
for QT interval prolongation.
 ■ Ifosfamide : Concurrent use may increase neurotoxicity of ifos-
famide.
 ■ Iohexol : Concurrent use may increase the risk for seizures asso-
ciated with intrathecal administration of iohexol.
 ■ Leuprolide : Concurrent use may increase the risk for QT inter-
val prolongation, torsade de pointes, and death.
 ■ Levetiracetam : Concurrent use may increase the risk for CNS 
and respiratory depression.
 ■ Lithium : Concurrent use may increase the risk for neurotoxicity, 
including serotonin syndrome.
 ■ Macrolides  (eg, azithromycin, clarithromycin): Concurrent 
use may increase the risk for QT interval prolongation, torsade de 
pointes, and death.
 ■ Methylphenidate : Concurrent use may increase concentra -
tions of amitriptyline and increase the risk for hypertension, car-
diac effects, and CNS stimulation, including increased risk for 
serotonin syndrome.
 ■ Metoclopramide : Amitriptyline may reduce the prokinetic ef-
fect of metoclopramide. Combination may also result in additive se-
dation or CNS depression.
 ■ Metronidazole : Concurrent use may increase the risk for QT 
interval prolongation, cardiac arrhythmias, and torsade de pointes.
 ■ Mirtazapine : Concurrent use may increase the risk for con -
stipation, urinary retention, CNS depression, and serotonin syn -
drome.


===== Plumb PDF 88 =====
Amitriptyline   61
 ■ Mitotane : Mitotane may induce CYP3A4 and reduce amitripty-
line exposure and effectiveness.
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors  (eg, amitraz, furazolidone, 
linezolid, methylene blue , procarbazine, selegiline): There is a 
potential risk for life-threatening serotonin syndrome. Concur -
rent use is contraindicated. A 14-day washout period between the 
2 drugs should be observed.
 ■ Muscle Relaxants  (eg, baclofen, dantrolene, methocarba-
mol): Concurrent use may increase the risk for CNS and respi -
ratory depression. Loss of muscle tone and memory has been re -
ported with baclofen use in humans.
 ■ Nitroglycerin : Concurrent use may increase the risk for hypo-
tension and orthostasis. Amitriptyline may reduce topical nitro -
glycerin absorption.
 ■ Nitroprusside : Concurrent use may increase the risk for hypo-
tension and orthostasis.
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs  (NSAIDS; eg, car-
profen, meloxicam, robenacoxib): Concurrent use may increase the 
risk for bleeding. Use cautiously, especially in animals with other risk 
factors
 ■ Octreotide : Concurrent use may increase the risk for serotonin 
syndrome, QT interval prolongation, and torsade de pointes. 
Avoid combination.
 ■ Opioids  (eg, buprenorphine, butorphanol , fentanyl , metha -
done, morphine): Concurrent use may increase the risk for con-
stipation, urinary retention, CNS depression, respiratory depres-
sion, and serotonin syndrome.
 ■ Pergolide : Concurrent use may increase the risk for CNS de -
pression.
 ■ Phenothiazines  (eg, acepromazine, chlorpromazine): Con -
current use may increase concentrations of either drug, increas -
ing the risk for CNS depression, hypotension, prolongation of the 
QT interval, constipation, ileus, urinary retention, and anticholin-
ergic intoxication syndrome.
 ■ Phenoxybenzamine:  Concurrent use may increase the risk for 
hypotension and orthostasis.
 ■ Physostigmine:  Amitriptyline may negate the clinical effects of 
physostigmine
 ■ Potassium Chloride : Concurrent use of oral, solid dosage 
forms of potassium chloride may increase the risk for upper GI 
injury. Combination is contraindicated.
 ■ Pregabalin : Concurrent use may increase the risk for CNS de-
pression.
 ■ Primidone/Phenobarbital:  Concurrent use may antagonize 
the anticonvulsant effects of primidone. Primidone may decrease 
amitriptyline concentration by inducing hepatic metabolism. CNS 
and respiratory depressant effects may be additive.
 ■ Qt Prolonging Agents  (eg, cisapride, procainamide, quini-
dine, sotalol): Concurrent use may increase the risk for QT in -
terval prolongation, cardiac arrhythmias, torsade de pointes, and 
death. May potentiate anticholinergic effects of some agents (eg, 
quinidine). Avoid concurrent use.
 ■ Rifampin : Concurrent use may decrease amitriptyline concen -
trations by inducing hepatic metabolism.
 ■ Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors  (SSRIs; eg, flu-
oxetine, paroxetine, sertraline): Concurrent use may increase 
amitriptyline concentrations and increase the risk for serotonin 
syndrome. NOTE: SSRIs and TCAs (eg, amitriptyline) are of -
ten used together in veterinary behavior medicine, but enhanced 
monitoring for adverse effects is suggested.
 ■ Serotonin Receptor Antagonists  (eg, dolasetron, ondan-
setron): Concurrent use may increase the risk for serotonin syn -
drome, QT interval prolongation, and torsade de pointes.
 ■ Sulfamethoxazole/Trimethoprim:  Concurrent use may 
increase the risk for QT interval prolongation, torsade de pointes, 
and death.
 ■ Sulfonylureas  (eg, glimepiride, glipizide, glyburide): Con -
current use may increase hypoglycemia effects by an undeter -
mined mechanism.
 ■ Sympathomimetic Agents  (eg, phenylpropanolamine): Con-
current use may increase the risk for hypertension, arrhythmias, 
tachycardia, and fever.
 ■ Tamsulosin: Concurrent use may increase the risk for hypoten-
sion and orthostasis.
 ■ Terbinafine : Concurrent use may increase amitriptyline con -
centrations. Interaction may persist for weeks following discontin-
uation of terbinafine. Avoid combination.
 ■ Thyroid Agents  (eg, levothyroxine): Concurrent use may po-
tentiate effects of both drugs and may increase the risk for tachy-
cardia, hypothyroidism, and thyrotoxicosis.
 ■ Tramadol : Increased risk for serotonin syndrome; veterinary 
clinical significance is not known, but one source states that TCAs 
should not be administered concurrently with tramadol.27,28 
 ■ Trazodone : Concurrent use may increase the risk for constipa-
tion, ileus, urinary retention, CNS depression, serotonin syndrome, 
and anticholinergic intoxication syndrome. Avoid combination.
 ■ V asopressors  (eg, ephedrine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, 
vasopressin): Concurrent use may increase the risk for hyperten-
sion, tremors, QT prolongation, cardiac dysrhythmias, and death. 
Avoid concurrent use except in emergency cases.
 ■ W arfarin : Concurrent use may increase or decrease anticoagu-
lant effects of warfarin.
 ■ Yohimbine : Concurrent use may enhance the pressor effects of 
yohimbine by inhibiting reuptake of norepinephrine. Avoid com-
bination.
 ■ Zonisamide : Concurrent use may increase the risk for CNS de-
pression and drowsiness
Laboratory Considerations 
 ■ Metyrapone: The response to metyrapone may be decreased by 
amitriptyline.
 ■ Blood glucose: Tricyclics may alter (ie, increase or decrease) 
blood glucose levels.
Dosages
NOTE: Several weeks of therapy may be needed to see maximal 
effects. If discontinuing, taper the drug off slowly over 2 to 3 
weeks, although more rapid taper can be undertaken when signif-
icant TCA toxicity is present.
DOGS:
Adjunctive treatment (with behavior modification and anxi -
olytics if required) of anxiety disorders (extra-label): Initially, 
1 – 2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for 2 to 4 weeks. May gradually 
increase dose by 1 mg/kg as tolerated to a maximum of 4 mg/kg 
PO twice daily
Adjunctive treatment of pruritus (after other more convention-
al therapies have failed) (extra-label): 1 – 2.2 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours; ≈33% of dogs responded1,29  
Adjunctive treatment of chronic (especially neuropathic) 
pain (extra-label): 1 – 2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. 4  Doses up to  
3 – 4 mg/kg PO every 12 hours may be tried. 25 If discontinuing, 
taper the drug slowly over 2 to 3 weeks.
CATS:
Clinical signs related to idiopathic cystitis (extra-label):  
2.5 – 12.5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO once daily at night or  


===== Plumb PDF 89 =====
62    Amlodipine
0.5 – 1 mg/kg PO once daily at night.20,30 Neither 5 mg/cat5 (NOT 
mg/kg) nor 10 mg/cat 6 (NOT mg/kg) once daily for 7 days re -
duced short-term lower urinary tract disease signs (eg, hematu -
ria, pollakiuria).
Adjunctive treatment of behavior disorders amenable to tricy-
clics (anxiety, fear, adjunct in self-harm behaviors) (extra-label): 
0.5 – 1.5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours. 31 Start at the lower end of the 
dosing range and gradually increase as tolerated. If discontinuing, 
gradually taper off the dosage.
Adjunctive treatment of pruritus (after other more conventional 
therapies have failed) (extra-label): 2.5 – 12.5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) 
PO once daily or 2.5 – 7.5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) twice daily. 32 To  
minimize adverse effects, start at the low end of the dosing range 
(2.5 mg/cat [NOT mg/kg] once daily) and gradually increase as tol-
erated. The drug may need to be compounded to give an accurate 
dose and to improve palatability (fish or cod liver oil).
Adjunctive treatment of chronic pain, including neuropathic 
(extra-label): 2.5 – 12.5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO once daily or 
1 – 4 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours33 
BIRDS:
Adjunctive treatment of feather plucking (extra-label):  
1 – 2 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours.7 Anecdotal reports indicate 
some usefulness. Barring adverse effects, a more prolonged course 
of therapy may be necessary to determine efficacy. 34 A pharma -
cokinetic study suggested doses up to 9 mg/kg may be necessary, 
although adverse effects are possible in some birds.16 
Monitoring 
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ Baseline CBC, serum chemistry profile, urinalysis, and baseline 
thyroid testing 21,35 (eg, tT4, thyroid panel) prior to therapy, 1 
month after initial therapy, and yearly thereafter
 ■ Baseline ECG is recommended prior to therapy. Tricyclics can 
widen QRS complexes, prolong PR intervals, and invert or flatten 
T-waves on ECG; significance in animals is not fully understood.
Client Information 
 ■ This medication should be given with food.
 ■ It can take several days to weeks to determine if the drug is effec-
tive.
 ■ Consult your veterinarian before discontinuing this medication; 
do not stop suddenly.
 ■ The most common side effects are drowsiness (sleepiness), dry 
mouth, and constipation; be sure your animal has access to water.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian immediately if you see serious (rare) 
side effects like abnormal bleeding, fever, seizures, and/or very 
fast or irregular heart rate.
 ■ Overdoses can be very serious; keep this medicine out of reach of 
animals and children.
 ■ Tell your veterinarian if your animal has worn a flea and tick collar 
containing amitraz in the past 2 weeks.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Amitriptyline HCl, a tricyclic dibenzocycloheptene-derivative anti -
depressant, occurs as a white or practically white, odorless or prac -
tically odorless crystalline powder that is freely soluble in water or 
alcohol. It has a bitter, burning taste and a pKa of  9.4.
Pharmaceutical dosage forms contain amitriptyline hydrochlo -
ride and express potency as amitriptyline base.
Amitriptyline may also be known as amitriptylini hydrochlo -
ridum; many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability 
Amitriptyline tablets should be stored at room temperature.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations 
No specific information is noted. Transdermal (PLO-gel based) ab -
sorption is poor in cats.10 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status 
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See the Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Amitriptyline HCl Tablets: 10 mg, 25 mg, 50 mg, 75 mg, 100 mg, and 
150 mg; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Amlodipine
(am-loe-di-peen) Norvasc®, Amodip®
Calcium-Channel Blocker
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Dihydropyridine calcium-channel blocker often used for treat-
ment of systemic arterial hypertension
 ▶ Caution should be used in patients with heart disease and 
hepatic dysfunction
 ▶ Potential to cause anorexia and hypotension in cats, especially 
early in therapy
 ▶ Gingival hyperplasia has been reported as a long-term adverse 
effect in dogs; may occur rarely in cats.
Uses/Indications
Oral amlodipine is used to treat systemic hypertension in dogs and 
cats and is considered the drug of choice for managing hyperten -
sion.1–3 Hypertension in small animals is typically secondary to other 
diseases (eg, acute or chronic kidney disease, hyperthyroidism, hy -
peradrenocorticism) and is most often seen in middle-aged or geri -
atric cats and dogs. 
Systemic activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system 
(RAAS) does not appear to be a major contributor of hypertension in cats 
with chronic kidney disease.1 Cats are often presented with acute clinical 
signs (eg, blindness, seizures, collapse, disorientation, paresis/paralysis). 
Dogs and cats are considered hypertensive if repeated systolic blood 
pressure measurements exceed 160 mm Hg or if a single elevated blood 
pressure measurement is present in the setting of target organ damage 
(eg, eyes, heart, brain, kidneys). Antihypertensive therapy may improve 
ophthalmic lesions and restore vision in a minority of patients with 
blindness secondary to hypertension.4 Amlodipine has been shown to 
significantly increase plasma renin activity in cats that are azotemic and 
hypertensive, which is a similar response to that seen in human studies.5 
Target systolic blood pressure values of less than 140 to 150 mm Hg1,2 
are recommended to minimize target organ damage from hypertension. 
Amlodipine has not been shown to reduce mortality in hypertensive 
cats.2,5,6 In one study evaluating hypertensive cats treated with amlodipine  
0.125 – 0.5 mg/kg for 28 days, the mean decrease in systolic blood pres-
sure was 28 mm Hg,7 but even larger blood pressure reduction (49 mm 
Hg) has been reported.6 
In dogs, amlodipine therapy is typically initiated after a RAAS in-
hibitor (eg, ACE-inhibitor, angiotensin-receptor blocker) because of 


===== Plumb PDF 90 =====
Amlodipine   63
the high prevalence of chronic kidney disease in hypertensive dogs.2 In 
one study of hypertensive dogs, secondary to acute kidney injury, am-
lodipine therapy at a median dose of 0.38 mg/kg/day was associated 
with a decrease in systolic blood pressure of 24 mm Hg and correction 
of severe systemic hypertension in 10 of 11 dogs within 24 hours.8 In 
a retrospective review of dogs with severe hypertension, dogs treated 
with amlodipine for 1 week had a reduction in blood pressure of 18 
mm Hg, as compared with 29 mm Hg when treated with telmisartan 
and 46 mm Hg when treated with a combination of amlodipine and 
telmisartan.9 In a small case series (n = 5 dogs), dogs with an average 
pretreatment systolic arterial blood pressure (SBP) of 215 mm Hg had 
their SBP reduced to 180 mm Hg when treated with a combination of 
amlodipine and benazepril, but SBP was reduced to 142 mm Hg when 
treatment was changed to amlodipine and telmisartan.10 
Pharmacology/Actions
Amlodipine is a dihydropyridine L-type calcium-channel blocker, 
which inhibits voltage-gated calcium channels in cardiac and vas -
cular smooth muscle. Amlodipine has a higher affinity for L-type 
calcium channels and some affinity for T-type calcium channels. In 
the kidney, L-type calcium channels are found primarily in afferent 
(prerenal) arterioles. Amlodipine has a greater effect on vascular 
smooth muscle, where it acts as a peripheral arteriolar vasodilator 
and reduces afterload. Amlodipine slightly depresses impulse forma-
tion (automaticity) and conduction velocity in cardiac muscle. Am-
lodipine has mild diuretic activity after an initial dose in dogs. 11,12 
Amlodipine has been shown to activate the RAAS when used alone 
in healthy dogs at higher dosages (0.57 mg/kg twice daily). 13 Use of 
amlodipine with an ACE inhibitor partially blocks this effect.13,14
In client-owned cats with systemic hypertension treated with am-
lodipine as the sole antihypertensive agent (in combination with a 
phosphate-restricted diet if azotemic), a significant decline in UPC 
(urine protein:creatinine) was found in cats treated with amlodipine.15
Pharmacokinetics
In cats, amlodipine volume of distribution is ≈10 L/kg. In vitro protein 
binding in cat plasma is 97%. In healthy cats, plasma concentrations 
approach steady-state by 2 weeks at 0.125 mg/kg/day. Total plasma 
clearance is estimated to be 2.3 mL/minute/kg. Amlodipine is exten-
sively metabolized by the liver, and elimination half-life is 53 hours.16 
In cats, effects on systemic blood pressure are usually seen within 4 
hours of administration and may persist for an additional ≈30 hours.17
In dogs, amlodipine bioavailability is 88% after oral administration, 
with peak concentration occurring at 4 to 6 hours. Amlodipine is widely 
distributed (volume of distribution, 25 L/kg) and extensively metabol- 
ized. Reported elimination half-life ranges from 7 to 30 hours.18,19
In humans, amlodipine’s bioavailability does not appear to be al-
tered by the presence of food in the gut. The drug is slowly but almost 
completely absorbed after oral administration and is reported to be 
absorbed after rectal administration. In humans, peak plasma concen-
trations occur between 6 and 9 hours after administration and effects 
on blood pressure are correspondingly delayed. Amlodipine has high 
plasma protein-binding characteristics (≈93%). However, drug inter-
actions associated with potential displacement from these sites have 
not been elucidated. Amlodipine is slowly but extensively metabolized 
to inactive compounds in the liver. Terminal plasma half-life is ≈35 
hours in healthy humans but is prolonged in the elderly and in those 
patients with hypertension or hepatic dysfunction. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Amlodipine is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it, in shock, 
with documented hypotension, with severe aortic stenosis (due to an 
inability to increase stroke volume in response to peripheral vasodila-
tion), or with severe hepatic failure. It should also be used cautiously 
in patients that are at risk for developing hypotension or patients with 
hepatic disease. Amlodipine use for pulmonary hypertension in dogs 
is not recommended, as systemic hypotension can occur without sub-
stantive improvements in pulmonary arterial pressures.20
There is concern that using amlodipine alone for treating hyper -
tension with renal disease may expose glomeruli to higher pressures 
secondary to efferent arteriolar constriction, which is caused by lo -
calized increases in renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAAS) activity, 
allowing progressive damage to glomeruli. It is postulated that using 
an ACE inhibitor with amlodipine may help prevent this occurrence.21 
The concurrent use of ACE inhibitors with amlodipine in animals with 
chronic kidney disease and hypertension is routine, though evidence 
supporting this approach is lacking. Notably, treatment of hyperten-
sion in cats with amlodipine as a sole antihypertensive agent appeared 
to limit proteinuria, which led to improved survival.15
Adverse Effects
In a placebo-controlled study in hypertensive cats, the adverse effect 
profile for amlodipine-treated cats (eg, emesis, inappetence, diarrhea, 
lethargy, dehydration) was similar to placebo.7 Hypotension and bra-
dycardia are possible; however, because of amlodipine’s relatively slow 
onset of action, these effects are usually absent in cats. Cats may infre-
quently develop azotemia, hypokalemia, reflex tachycardia, and weight 
loss. Gingival hyperplasia is also possible but occurs only rarely.16 
Dogs may also experience inappetence, lethargy, and hypoten -
sion. Reversible gingival hyperplasia has been reported when am -
lodipine has been administered long term in dogs; incidence in the 
retrospective study was 8.5%. 22 Diffuse peripheral edema has been 
reported in dogs and this may or may not respond to medical treat-
ment and discontinuation of amlodipine.23
Headache and peripheral edema are common side effects in hu -
mans taking amlodipine.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
The UK-approved feline tablet product label states the safety of am-
lodipine has not been established during pregnancy or lactation in cats. 
Although no evidence of impaired fertility was noted in rats given  
8 times the maximum human daily dose, amlodipine has been shown 
to be fetotoxic (ie, intrauterine death rates increased five-fold) in lab-
oratory animals (eg, rats, rabbits) at very high doses. 24 No evidence 
of teratogenicity or mutagenicity was observed in laboratory animal 
studies. Amlodipine can prolong labor in rats. 
Amlodipine enters maternal milk in small amounts.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Limited experience with other calcium-channel blockers in humans 
has shown that an overdose of amlodipine may result in profound 
hypotension and reflex tachycardia.24 From 2009 to 2013, 578 dogs 
and 140 cats with single agent exposures to amlodipine were report-
ed to the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center; 19% of dogs and 
22% of cats showed clinical signs (see Table). 
DOGS CATS
Total number reported 578 140
Number showing  
 clinical signs
108 (19%) 31 (22%)
Hypotension 32% 23%
Tachycardia 39% 23%
Hypertension 13% 23%
Lethargy 26% 13%
Vomiting 18% not reported


===== BSAVA PDF 104 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
88
amiodarone, chloramphenicol). Drugs such as amiodarone, 
procainamide, sotalol, and tricyclic antidepressants (e.g. 
amitriptyline) may increase the QT interval and this risk may be 
increased by concurrent use of cisapride. Use with caution in 
animals with hepatic or renal dysfunction; may require reduced 
dosing due to decreased metabolism or clearance.
DOSES
Dogs: All uses: 0.1–0.5 mg/kg p.o. q8–12h; some recommend 
giving 30 minutes before feeding. Some sources state that gradually 
increasing doses up to 1 mg/kg p.o. q8h may be required (if 
tolerated).
Cats: All uses: Various doses have been suggested including 
2.5–5.0 mg per cat p.o. 2–3 times daily and 0.5 mg/kg 2–3 times 
daily. Dosages may be titrated upwards, if tolerated, to as high as  
7.5 mg per cat p.o. 3 times daily in large cats.
References
Burger DM, Wiestner T, Hubler M et al . (2006) Effect of anticholinergics (atropine, 
glycopyrrolate) and prokinetics (metoclopramide, cisapride) on gastric motility in 
Beagles and Labrador Retrievers. Journal of Veterinary Medicine Series A: Physiology 
Pathology and Clinical Medicine  53, 97–107
Kempf J, Lewis F, Reusch CE et al . (2014) High-resolution manometric evaluation of the 
effects of cisapride and metoclopramide hydrochloride administered orally on lower 
esophageal sphincter pressure in awake dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research  
75, 361–366
Cisatracurium
(Nimbex*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 2 mg/ml, 10 mg/ml solutions.
Action: Inhibits actions of acetylcholine at neuromuscular junction 
by binding competitively to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor on 
the post-junctional membrane.
Use:
• Provision of neuromuscular blockade during anaesthesia.
• To improve surgical access through muscle relaxation, to 
facilitate positive pressure ventilation or for intraocular surgery.
Cisatracurium is one of the isomers that comprise atracurium; it is 
3–5 times more potent than atracurium in dogs. This means that 
the plasma concentration of the epileptogenic by-product 
laudanosine is lower and there is less histamine release. Monitoring 
(using a nerve stimulator) and reversal of the neuromuscular 
blockade is recommended to ensure complete recovery before the 
end of anaesthesia. Hypothermia, acidosis and hypokalaemia will 
prolong the duration of action of neuromuscular blockade. There 
are no published clinical studies describing the use of cisatracurium 
in cats; limited experimental studies suggest that cisatracurium has 
similar characteristics in cats to those described for dogs.
Safety and handling: Store in refrigerator.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 105 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
89
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Contraindications: Do not administer unless the animal is 
adequately anaesthetized and facilities to provide positive pressure 
ventilation are available.
Adverse reactions: Can precipitate the release of histamine after 
rapid i.v. administration, resulting in bronchospasm and hypotension. 
Diluting the drug in normal saline and giving the drug slowly i.v. 
minimizes these effects.
Drug interactions: Neuromuscular blockade is more prolonged 
when given in combination with volatile anaesthetics, 
aminoglycosides, clindamycin and lincomycin.
DOSES
Dogs: 0.05–0.1 mg/kg i.v. followed by additional doses of 0.03 mg/
kg as required (based on monitoring of neuromuscular blockade).
Cats: No information available.
References
Adams WA, Senior JM, Jones RS et al . (2006) cis-Atracurium in dogs with and without 
porto-systemic shunts. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia  33, 17–23
Clarithromycin
(Klaricid*) POM 
Formulations: Oral: 250 mg, 500 mg tablets; 125 mg/5 ml 
suspension; 250 mg/5 ml suspension; 250 mg granules sachet (to be 
dissolved in water). Injectable: 500 mg vial for reconstitution.
Action: Derived from erythromycin and with greater activity. 
Time-dependent macrolide antibacterial that binds to the 50S 
ribosome, inhibiting peptide bond and therefore protein formation.
Use: Alternative to penicillin in penicillin-allergic humans as it has a 
similar, although not identical, antibacterial spectrum. Active 
against Gram-positive cocci (some Staphylococcus  spp. resistant), 
Gram-positive bacilli, some Gram-negative bacilli (e.g. Pasteurella ) 
and some spirochaetes (e.g. Helicobacter ). Some strains of 
Actinomyces, Nocardia, Chlamydia and Rickettsia also inhibited. 
Most strains of Enterobacteriaceae ( Pseudomonas , Escherichia coli, 
Klebsiella) are resistant. Highly lipid-soluble and useful against 
intracellular pathogens. Particularly useful in management of 
respiratory tract infections, mild to moderate skin and soft tissue 
infections, and non-tubercular mycobacterial infections. For the 
latter, used in combination with enrofloxacin and rifampin. Activity 
is enhanced in an alkaline pH; administer on an empty stomach. 
There is limited information regarding use in animals. Use with 
caution in animals with hepatic dysfunction. Reduce dose in 
animals with renal impairment.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.


===== BSAVA PDF 106 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
90
Adverse reactions: In humans, similar adverse effects to those of 
erythromycin are seen, i.e. vomiting, cholestatic hepatitis, stomatitis 
and glossitis.
Drug interactions: May increase serum levels of several drugs, 
including methylprednisolone, theophylline, omeprazole and 
itraconazole. The absorption of digoxin may be enhanced.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs: 4–12 mg/kg i.v. infusion, p.o. q12h. Doses of 15–25 mg/kg 
p.o. total daily dose divided q8–12h are recommended in the 
treatment of leproid granuloma syndrome combined with rifampin 
10–15 mg/kg p.o. q24h. These doses are empirical and are based on 
only a few reports.
Cats: 5–10 mg/kg i.v. infusion, p.o. q12h or 62.5 mg/cat p.o. These 
doses are empirical and are based on only a few reports. A variety of 
combination protocols have been used in the treatment of feline 
leprosy syndrome, e.g. combination of clarithromycin with a 
fluoroquinolone and either rifampin or clofazamine.
Clemastine (Meclastin)
(Tavegil*) GSL 
Formulations: Oral: 1 mg tablet.
Action: Binds to H1 histamine receptors and prevents histamine 
from binding.
Use:
• Management of allergic disease.
Specific doses for cats have not been determined by pharmokinetic 
studies and in dogs therapeutic levels are not usually achieved by 
oral administration. Use with caution in cases with urinary retention, 
angle-closure glaucoma and pyloroduodenal obstruction.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: May cause sedation or hyperexcitability in 
high doses. May reduce seizure threshold.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs: 0.05–0.1 mg/kg p.o. q12h.
Cats: 0.1 mg/kg p.o. q12h.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
