
===== Plumb PDF 97 =====
70    Amoxicillin/Clavulanate
a) 125 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. Mix oral solution to double 
strength to a final concentration of 125 mg/mL21  
b) 100 mg/kg IM, SC, PO every 8 hours22 
FERRETS: 
Helicobacter spp gastritis infections using triple therapy (extra- 
label): 
a) Amoxicillin 20 mg/kg PO every 12 hours, with metronida -
zole 20 mg/kg PO every 12 hours and bismuth subsalicylate  
17.5 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for 21 days. Sucralfate 25 mg/kg  
PO every 8 hours and famotidine 0.5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours 
may also be used. Fluids and assisted feeding should be contin-
ued while the primary cause of disease is investigated.23 
b) Amoxicillin 10 mg/kg, metronidazole 20 mg/kg, and bismuth 
subsalicylate 17.5 mg/kg, all given PO 3 times daily for 3 to 4 
weeks24
c) Amoxicillin 30 mg/kg, metronidazole 20 mg/kg, and bismuth 
subsalicylate 17.5 mg/kg, all given PO 3 times daily for 3 to 4 
weeks25
RABBITS/RODENTS/SMALL MAMMALS:
See Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings.
Hedgehogs (extra-label): 15 mg/kg IM, SC, or PO every 12 hours26 
REPTILES:
Susceptible infections for all species (extra-label): 22 mg/kg PO 
every 12 to 24 hours; not useful unless used in combination with 
aminoglycosides.27
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy: resolution of clinical signs
 ■ Culture and susceptibility as indicated for clinical condition being 
treated
 ■ Urine culture may be considered after 5 to 7 days when treating 
bacterial cystitis for longer periods of time. 14  It is important to 
note that positive cultures taken at this time should prompt ques-
tioning the owner about compliance and further investigation as 
to why the infection has not been eliminated (eg, underlying path- 
ology [eg, cystic calculi, neoplasia]); a positive culture at this time 
should not simply prompt a change in antibiotic choice. A nega -
tive culture during this time frame does not necessarily guarantee 
resolution of the infection.
Client Information
 ■ It is preferred that the oral suspension be refrigerated but this is 
not absolutely necessary. Any unused oral suspension should be 
discarded after 14 days.
 ■ This medicine can be given with or without food, but gastrointes-
tinal side effects (eg, poor appetite, nausea, vomiting) might be 
prevented if this medicine is given with food.
 ■ The most common side effects are diarrhea, vomiting, and loss of 
appetite.
 ■ It is important to give this medication exactly as prescribed and to 
complete the full course of treatment, even if your animal seems 
better. Missing doses or stopping treatment early may result in 
treatment failure.
 ■ Amoxicillin should not be given to rabbits, guinea pigs, chinchil-
las, hamsters, rodents, or other “pocket pets” , as life-threatening 
diarrhea may occur. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Commercially available dosage forms contain amoxicillin trihydrate, 
which occurs as a practically odorless, white, crystalline powder that 
is sparingly soluble in water. Amoxicillin differs structurally from am-
picillin only by having an additional hydroxyl group on the phenyl 
ring.
Amoxicillin may also be known as amoxycillin, p-hydroxyampi -
cillin, or BRL 2333; many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Amoxicillin capsules, tablets, and powder for oral suspension should 
be stored at room temperature (15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]) in tight 
containers. After reconstitution, the oral suspension can be stored 
at room temperature or refrigerated (refrigeration preferred); any 
unused product should be discarded after 14 days. Intramammary 
syringes should be stored at or below 24°C (75°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information is noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Amoxicillin Oral Tablets: 50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg, 200 mg, and  
400 mg; Amoxi-Tabs®,  Bimox®; generic; (Rx). FDA-approved for use 
in dogs and cats.
Amoxicillin Powder for Oral Suspension: 50 mg/mL (after reconsti-
tution) in 15 mL or 30 mL bottles; Amoxi-Drops®,  Bimox®, generic; 
(Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs and cats.
Amoxicillin Intramammary Infusion: 62.5 mg in 10 mL syringes; 
Amoxi-Mast®; (Rx). FDA-approved to treat subclinical infectious 
mastitis in lactating cows. NADA 55-100. (Rx). Withdrawal times: 
milk— 60 hours after last treatment; slaughter—12 days
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Amoxicillin Oral Tablets (chewable): 125 mg, 200 mg, 250 mg, and 
400 mg; Amoxil® , generic; (Rx)
Amoxicillin Oral Tablets: 500 mg and 875 mg; Amoxil® , generic; (Rx)
Amoxicillin Oral Capsules: 250 mg and 500 mg; Amoxil® , generic; 
(Rx)
Amoxicillin Powder for Oral Suspension: 125 mg/5 mL (25 mg/mL) 
in 80 mL, 100 mL, and 150 mL; 200 mg/5 mL (40 mg/mL) in 50 mL, 
75 mL, and 100 mL; 250 mg/5 mL (50 mg/mL) in 80 mL, 100 mL,  
and 150 mL; 400 mg/5 mL (80 mg/mL) in 50 mL, 75 mL, and  
100 mL; Amoxil®,  Trimox® ,  generic; (Rx)
Amoxicillin Oral Extended-Release Tablets: 775 mg in 30s and UD 
10s; Moxatag®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Amoxicillin/Clavulanate
Amoxicillin/Clavulanic Acid
(a-mox-i-sill-in clav-yue-lan-ate) Clavamox® , Augmentin®
Potentiated Aminopenicillin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Bactericidal aminopenicillin with beta-lactamase inhibitor that 
expands its spectrum, increasing susceptibility of bacteria that 
are resistant to amoxicillin via beta-lactamase production.
 ▶ Most common adverse effects are GI-related; hypersensitivity 
and other adverse effects may occur but are rare.
 ▶ As compared with veterinary-labeled products, human-labeled 
products contain different ratios of amoxicillin:clavulanate and 
product strengths are expressed in terms of amoxicillin (only), 
whereas veterinary products are expressed as the sum of both 
compounds.
Uses/Indications
Amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium tablets and oral suspension prod-


===== Plumb PDF 98 =====
Amoxicillin/Clavulanate   71
ucts are used in dogs and cats for the treatment of urinary tract, skin 
(eg, wounds, pyoderma), canine periodontal disease, and soft tissue 
(eg, abscesses) infections caused by susceptible organisms, particu -
larly gram-positive bacteria and anaerobes. It is also indicated for 
respiratory tract infections, although it is ineffective against Myco-
plasma spp, and resistance to Bordetella spp is an increasing problem 
in some regions. 
The World Health Organization has designated amoxicillin/
clavulanate as a Critically Important antimicrobial for human med-
icine.1  The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) has designated 
amoxicillin/clavulanate as a Veterinary Critically Important Antimi-
crobial (VCIA) Agent in avian, bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, and 
swine species.2 
Pharmacology/Actions
Amoxicillin is a time-dependent, bactericidal agent that acts by in -
hibiting cell wall synthesis. Amoxicillin generally shares the same 
spectrum of activity and uses as ampicillin but is better absorbed 
orally (in nonruminants) and attains higher serum levels. Separate 
serum and urinary clinical breakpoints are available.
Penicillins are bactericidal against susceptible bacteria and act by 
inhibiting mucopeptide synthesis in the cell wall, which results in a 
defective barrier and an osmotically unstable spheroplast. The exact 
mechanism for this effect has not been definitively determined, but 
beta-lactam antibiotics have been shown to bind to several enzymes 
(eg, carboxypeptidases, transpeptidases, endopeptidases) within 
the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane that are involved with cell wall 
synthesis. The different affinities that various beta-lactam antibiotics 
have for these enzymes (also known as penicillin-binding proteins 
[PBPs]) help explain the differences in the drugs’ spectrums of ac -
tivity that are not explained by the influence of beta-lactamases. Like 
other beta-lactam antibiotics, penicillins are generally considered to 
be more effective against actively growing bacteria.
Aminopenicillins (ie, broad-spectrum or ampicillin penicillins) 
have increased activity against many strains of gram-negative aerobes 
not covered by either the natural penicillins or penicillinase-resistant 
penicillins, including some strains of Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp, 
and Haemophilus spp. Like the natural penicillins, aminopenicillins 
are susceptible to inactivation by beta-lactamase–producing bacte -
ria (eg, Staphylococcus spp, E coli). Although not as active as natural 
penicillins, aminopenicillins have activity against many anaerobic 
bacteria, including clostridial organisms. Organisms that are gener-
ally not susceptible include Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Serratia spp, 
indole-positive Proteus spp (Proteus mirabilis is susceptible), Entero-
bacter spp, Citrobacter spp, and Acinetobacter spp. Aminopenicillins 
are ineffective against methicillin-resistant staphylococci and are in-
active against mycobacteria, Mycoplasma spp, Rickettsia spp, fungi, 
protozoa, and viruses. 
Clavulanic acid has only weak antibacterial activity when used 
alone and is only available in fixed-dose oral combinations with 
amoxicillin. Clavulanic acid acts by competitively and irrevers -
ibly binding to beta-lactamases (including types II, III, IV , and V) 
and penicillinases produced by staphylococci. Staphylococci that 
are resistant to penicillinase-resistant penicillins (eg, oxacillin) are 
considered resistant to amoxicillin/potassium clavulanate, despite 
susceptibility testing that may indicate otherwise. Amoxicillin with 
potassium clavulanate is usually ineffective against type I cephalo -
sporinases. Members of the family Enterobacteriaceae, particularly 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa , often produce these plasmid-mediated 
cephalosporinases. When clavulanic acid is combined with amox -
icillin, there is little, if any, synergistic activity against organisms 
already susceptible to amoxicillin, but amoxicillin-resistant strains 
(due to beta-lactamase inactivation) may be covered.
When Kirby-Bauer susceptibility testing is performed, the Aug-
mentin®  disk (human-product trade name) is often used. Because the 
amoxicillin:clavulanic acid ratio of 2:1 in the susceptibility tests may 
not correspond to in vivo drug levels, susceptibility testing may not 
always accurately predict efficacy for this combination. A urinary 
tract-specific breakpoint in dogs and cats for amoxicillin/clavulanate 
is reported as less than 8/4 μg/mL because of the greater drug levels 
that are achieved in urine. This breakpoint should only be used for 
cystitis—not pyelonephritis, for which serum breakpoints should be 
applied.
Pharmacokinetics
Amoxicillin trihydrate is stable in the presence of gastric acid. Af -
ter oral administration, amoxicillin bioavailability is highly variable 
between species. Food will decrease the rate but not the extent of 
oral absorption, and many clinicians suggest giving the drug with food, 
particularly if there is concomitant GI distress.  In dogs, amoxicillin 
bioavailability was 64% to 77% following oral administration. 3  In 
cats, one study found the bioavailability to be ≈77%. 4 Amoxicillin 
serum levels will generally be 1.5 to 3 times greater than those of 
ampicillin after equivalent oral doses. In dogs following oral admin-
istration, maximum plasma concentrations of 11 to 21 µg/mL were 
reached after ≈1.38 to 2 hours. 3,5  In cats following a 10 mg/kg oral 
dose, maximum plasma concentrations of 5.89 µg/mL were reached 
in 1.69 hours.4 
After absorption, the volume of distribution for amoxicillin is 
≈0.28 to 0.71 L/kg in dogs3 and 0.86 L/kg in cats.4 The drug is widely 
distributed to most body tissues and fluids. When meninges are in -
flamed, amoxicillin will cross into the CSF in concentrations ranging 
from 10% to 60% of those found in serum. Very low levels of the 
drug are found in the aqueous humor, and low levels are found in 
tears, sweat, and saliva. Protein binding in dogs is ≈13%.
Amoxicillin is eliminated primarily unchanged via renal mecha -
nisms, principally by tubular secretion; however, some of the drug 
is metabolized by hydrolysis to penicilloic acids (inactive) and then 
excreted in the urine. Elimination half-lives of amoxicillin have been 
reported to be 0.91 to 1.52 hours in dogs 6 and ≈1.25 hours in cats. 4 
Clearance in cats is reportedly 0.45 L/hour/kg.
There is no evidence to suggest that the addition of clavulanic acid 
significantly alters amoxicillin pharmacokinetics.6 As a time-dependent 
antimicrobial, duration of time above the MIC is critical, so frequent 
dosing is necessary.
Clavulanate potassium is stable in the presence of gastric acid and 
is readily absorbed. In dogs following oral administration, maximum 
plasma concentrations of 2.06 to 2.3 µg/mL were reached after 0.95 
to 1.05 hours.5 In cats following oral administration, bioavailability 
of clavulanic acid was ≈98%, with maximum plasma concentrations 
of 1.41 µg/mL reached in 1.03 hours.4 
Clavulanic acid has an apparent volume of distribution of  
0.32 L/kg in dogs and 0.93 L/kg in cats.4 It is distributed (with amox-
icillin) into the lungs, pleural fluid, and peritoneal fluid. Low con -
centrations of both drugs are found in the saliva, sputum, and CSF 
(uninflamed meninges). Higher concentrations in the CSF are ex -
pected when meninges are inflamed, 7 but it is questionable wheth -
er therapeutic concentrations are attainable. Clavulanic acid is 13% 
bound to proteins in dog serum. 
Clavulanic acid is apparently extensively metabolized in dogs and 
rats, primarily to 1-amino-4-hydroxybutan-2-one. It is unknown 
whether this compound possesses any beta-lactamase–inhibiting 
activity. The drug is also excreted unchanged in the urine via glom-  
erular filtration. In dogs, 34% to 52% of a dose is excreted in the 
urine as unchanged drug and metabolites, 25% to 27% is eliminated 
in the feces, and 17% into respired air. Urine levels of active drug are 
considered high but may be only ≈20% of those of amoxicillin. In 
cats with azotemic chronic kidney disease given amoxicillin\clavu -
lanic acid, amoxicillin concentration was significantly lower in the 


===== Plumb PDF 99 =====
72    Amoxicillin/Clavulanate
urine and somewhat higher in serum when compared to cats with -
out kidney disease.8 
Elimination half-lives of clavulanic acid are reported to be 0.71 
to 0.83 hours in dogs 5 and 0.71 hours in cats. 4 Clearance in cats is 
reportedly 0.92 L/hour/kg.4 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Penicillins are contraindicated in patients with a history of hyper -
sensitivity to them. Penicillins should be used cautiously in patients 
with documented hypersensitivity to other beta-lactam antibiot -
ics (eg, cephalosporins, cefamycins, carbapenems) as there may be 
cross-reactivity.
Systemic antibiotics should not be administered orally in patients 
with septicemia, shock, or other grave illnesses, as absorption of the 
medication from the GI tract may be significantly delayed or dimin-
ished. Parental routes should be used for these cases.
Oral beta-lactam antibiotics and macrolides should not be ad -
ministered to rabbits, guinea pigs, chinchillas, or hamsters, as seri -
ous enteritis and clostridial enterotoxemia may occur.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects with the penicillins are usually not serious and have 
a relatively low frequency of occurrence.
Hypersensitivity reactions unrelated to dose can occur with these 
agents and can manifest as rashes (including severe cutaneous reac-
tions), fever, eosinophilia, neutropenia, agranulocytosis, thrombo -
cytopenia, leukopenia, anemia, lymphadenopathy, or anaphylaxis.
When penicillins are given orally, they may cause GI effects (eg, 
anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea). Because the penicillins may alter GI 
microbiota, antibiotic-associated diarrhea can occur and can allow 
for the proliferation of resistant bacteria in the colon (ie, superinfec-
tions). Probiotic use reduced GI abnormalities and diarrhea in labo-
ratory cats that received amoxicillin/clavulanate.9 
Cats diagnosed with chronic kidney disease (CKD) that were azo-
temic were more likely to experience multiple adverse effects when 
compared to CKD cats without azotemia.8
Neurotoxicity (eg, ataxia in dogs) has been associated with high 
doses or prolonged use of penicillins. Although the penicillins are 
not considered hepatotoxic, elevated liver enzymes have been re -
ported with their use. Other effects reported in dogs include tachy -
pnea, dyspnea, edema, and tachycardia.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Penicillins have been shown to cross the placenta. Safe use during 
pregnancy has not been firmly established, but it is not believed to 
be teratogenic. 
Amoxicillin and clavulanic acid are found in milk in low con -
centrations. Because safety has not been established in animals, this 
drug should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the 
potential risks to offspring.
Overdosage/Acute Toxicity
Acute oral penicillin overdoses are unlikely to cause significant prob-
lems other than GI distress, but other effects are possible (see Ad-
verse Effects). In humans, very high doses of parenteral penicillins, 
especially in patients with renal disease, have induced CNS effects.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions with amoxicillin/clavulanate have 
either been reported or are theoretical in humans or animals and 
may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise not -
ed, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential 
risks should be weighed and additional monitoring should be per -
formed when appropriate.
 ■ Aminoglycosides  (eg, gentamicin): beta-lactams can inacti -
vate aminoglycosides in vitro (and in vivo in patients with chronic 
kidney disease).
 ■ Bacteriostatic Antimicrobials  (eg, chloramphenicol, 
erythromycin, minocycline and other macrolides, tetracyclines, 
sulfonamides): Because there is evidence of in vitro antagonism 
between beta-lactam antibiotics and bacteriostatic antibiotics, use 
together generally has not been recommended in the past; howev-
er, the clinical significance of this is unclear.
 ■ Leflunomide : Prior, concurrent, or subsequent use of amoxicil-
lin/clavulanate with leflunomide without observing washout may 
increase the risk for hepatotoxicity.
 ■ Methotrexate (MTX) : Amoxicillin may decrease the renal 
excretion of MTX, causing increased MTX concentrations and 
potential MTX toxic effects.
 ■ Mycophenolate : May decrease concentrations of mycopheno-
late by decreasing concentrations of mycophenolate’s active me-
tabolite
 ■ Probenecid : Competitively blocks the tubular secretion of most 
penicillins, thereby increasing serum concentrations and serum 
half-lives
 ■ W arfarin : Concurrent use of amoxicillin/clavulanate may in -
crease the risk for warfarin-induced bleeding.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Amoxicillin may cause false positive urine glucose determina -
tions when cupric sulfate solution (Benedict’s Solution, Clinitest®)  
is used. Tests using glucose oxidase ( Tes-Tape®, Clinistix® ) are not 
affected by amoxicillin.
 ■ Because penicillins and other beta-lactam antibiotics can inacti -
vate aminoglycosides in vitro (and in vivo in patients in renal 
failure), serum concentrations of aminoglycosides may be falsely 
decreased if the patient is also receiving beta-lactam antibiotics, 
particularly when the serum is stored prior to analysis. It is rec -
ommended that if there is a delay in running the assay, samples 
should be frozen and, if possible, drawn at times when the be -
ta-lactam antibiotic is at a trough.
Dosages
NOTE: All dosages listed are for combined quantities of both 
drugs (unless otherwise noted).
DOGS:
Skin and soft tissue infections such as wounds, abscesses, cellu-
litis, superficial and deep pyoderma due to susceptible strains 
of the following organisms: beta-lactamase–producing Staphy-
lococcus aureus, non-beta-lactamase–producing Staphylococcus 
aureus, Staphylococcus spp, Streptococcus spp, and Escherichia 
coli. Periodontal infections due to susceptible strains of both 
aerobic and anaerobic bacteria (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
13.75 mg/kg PO twice daily. 10 Skin and soft tissue infections such 
as abscesses, cellulitis, wounds, superficial/juvenile pyoderma, 
and periodontal infections should be treated for 5 to 7 days or for 
48 hours after all signs have subsided. If no response is seen after 
5 days of treatment, therapy should be discontinued and the case 
reevaluated. Deep pyoderma may require treatment for 21 days; 
the maximum duration of treatment should not exceed 30 days.
Sporadic bacterial cystitis (extra-label): 12.5 – 25 mg/kg PO every 
8 to 12 hours for 3 to 5 days is an acceptable option but is not 
recommended as empirical therapy (ie, without or before culture 
and susceptibility testing); amoxicillin (without clavulanic acid) 
achieves high concentrations in the urine and is preferred for em-


===== Plumb PDF 100 =====
Amoxicillin/Clavulanate   73
pirical therapy.11 
Pyoderma (extra-label): 
a) Superficial pyoderma: 12.5 – 25 mg/kg PO twice daily12 for 
21 to 28 days up to a maximum of 90 days 13; fair evidence 
available to support moderate to high efficacy13 
b) Deep pyoderma: 12.5 – 25 mg/kg PO twice daily for at least 
28 days, up to a maximum of 90 days 13; good level of evi -
dence for high efficacy13 
Endocarditis (chronic therapy) secondary to a susceptible 
strain of Staphylococcus spp (extra-label): 20 mg/kg PO 3 times 
daily for 6 to 8 weeks14 
Canine infectious respiratory disease complex when a bacte -
rial component is involved (extra-label): 11 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours (twice daily) as a first-line treatment option for bacterial 
upper respiratory tract infection not suspected to be caused by 
Mycoplasma spp15 
CATS:
Skin and soft tissue infections such as wounds, abscesses, and 
cellulitis/dermatitis due to susceptible strains of the following 
organisms: beta-lactamase–producing Staphylococcus aureus , 
nonbeta-lactamase–producing Staphylococcus aureus , Staph-
ylococcus spp, Streptococcus spp, E coli, Pasteurella multocida, 
and Pasteurella spp. UTIs due to susceptible strains of E coli. 
(label dosage; FDA-approved): 62.5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO 
twice daily.10 Skin and soft tissue infections such as abscesses and 
cellulitis/dermatitis should be treated for 5 to 7 days or 48 hours 
after all signs have subsided, not to exceed 30 days. If no response 
is seen after 3 days of treatment, therapy should be discontinued 
and the case re-evaluated. UTIs may require treatment for 10 to 
14 days or longer. The maximum duration of treatment should 
not exceed 30 days. Therapy may be initiated prior to obtaining 
results from bacteriological and susceptibility studies. A culture 
should be obtained prior to treatment to determine susceptibility 
of the organisms to this drug. Following determination of suscep-
tibility results and clinical response to medication, therapy may 
be reevaluated. 
Sporadic bacterial cystitis (extra-label): 12.5 – 25 mg/kg PO ev -
ery 8 to 12 hours for 3 to 5 days is an acceptable option but is not 
recommended as empirical therapy (ie, without or before culture 
and susceptibility testing); amoxicillin (without clavulanic acid) 
achieves high concentrations in the urine and is preferred for em-
pirical therapy.11 
Upper respiratory tract disease (URTD) with a bacterial com -
ponent (extra-label): 12.5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours15,16 
BIRDS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 50 – 100 mg/kg PO every 6 
to 8 hours17 
FERRETS: 
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 10 – 20 mg/kg PO every 8 
to 12 hours18,19 
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy: resolution of clinical signs
 ■ Culture and susceptibility as indicated for clinical condition being 
treated.
 ■ Urine culture may be considered after 5 to 7 days when treating 
bacterial cystitis for longer periods of time. 11 It is important to 
note that positive cultures taken at this time should prompt ques-
tioning the owner about compliance and further investigation as 
to why the infection has not been eliminated (eg, underlying path- 
ology [eg, cystic calculi, neoplasia]); a positive culture at this time 
should not simply prompt a change in antibiotic choice. A nega -
tive culture during this time frame does not necessarily guarantee 
resolution of the infection.
Client Information
 ■ The oral suspension should preferably be refrigerated; any unused 
oral suspension should be discarded after 10 days.
 ■ This medicine can be given with or without food, but gastroin -
testinal side effects might be prevented if this medicine is given 
with food.
 ■ The most common side effects are diarrhea, vomiting, and loss of 
appetite
 ■ It is important to give this medication exactly as prescribed and 
to complete the full course of therapy, even if your animal seems 
better. Missing doses or stopping treatment early may result in 
treatment failure.
 ■ Do NOT give this drug to rabbits, guinea pigs, chinchillas, ham -
sters, rodents, or other “pocket pets, ” as life-threatening diarrhea 
may occur.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Commercially available dosage forms contain amoxicillin trihydrate, 
which occurs as a practically odorless, white, crystalline powder that 
is sparingly soluble in water. Amoxicillin differs structurally from 
ampicillin only by having an additional hydroxyl group on the phe-
nyl ring.
Clavulanate potassium is a beta-lactamase inhibitor; it occurs as 
an off-white crystalline powder, has a pKa of 2.7 (as the acid), and is 
very soluble in water and slightly soluble in alcohol at room tempera-
tures. Although available in commercially available preparations as 
the potassium salt, potency is expressed in terms of clavulanic acid.
Amoxicillin may also be known as amoxycillin, p-hydroxyam -
picillin, or BRL 2333; many trade names are available. Clavulanate 
potassium may also be known as clavulanic acid, BRL-14151K, or 
kalii clavulanas.
Storage/Stability
Clavulanate products should be stored at temperatures below 25°C 
(77°F), and some tablet formulations specify storage at 20°C to 25°C 
(68°F-77°F). Potassium clavulanate is very susceptible to moisture 
and should be protected from excessive humidity.
After reconstitution, oral suspensions are stable for 10 days when 
refrigerated. Unused portions should be discarded after that time. At 
room temperature, suspensions labeled for human use are reportedly 
stable for 48 hours. The veterinary oral suspension requires refrig -
eration and is reconstituted by adding 14 mL of water and shaking 
vigorously.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information is noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Oral Tablets and Chewable Tablets (4:1 amoxicillin:clavulanic 
acid ratio):
62.5 mg: Amoxicillin 50 mg/12.5 mg clavulanic acid (as the potassi-
um salt); 125 mg: Amoxicillin 100 mg/25 mg clavulanic acid (as the 
potassium salt); 250 mg: Amoxicillin 200 mg/50 mg clavulanic acid 
(as the potassium salt); 375 mg: Amoxicillin 300 mg/75 mg clavulan-
ic acid (as the potassium salt); Clavamox® Tablets, Clavamox® Chew-
able, generic; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs and cats.
Powder for Oral Suspension:
Amoxicillin 50 mg/12.5 mg clavulanic acid (as the potassium salt) 
per mL in 15 mL dropper bottles; Clavamox® Drops, generic; (Rx). 
FDA-approved for use in dogs and cats.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
NOTE: Human-labeled amoxicillin/clavulanate products have vary-


===== Plumb PDF 101 =====
74    Amphotericin B
ing ratios of amoxicillin:clavulanate ranging from 2:1 to 7:1. Addi -
tionally, human products are generally expressed in potency only as 
the amoxicillin component (eg, Augmentin® 875 contains 875 mg of 
amoxicillin and 125 mg of clavulanic acid), whereas the veterinary 
products are expressed as the total of both drugs. 
Amoxicillin (as trihydrate)/Clavulanic Acid (as potassium salt) 
Tablets: Amoxicillin 250 mg/125 mg clavulanic acid; Amoxicillin  
500 mg/125 mg clavulanic acid; Amoxicillin 875 mg/125 mg clavu -
lanic acid; Augmentin® , generic (Rx)
Chewable Tablets: Amoxicillin 125 mg/31.25 mg clavulanic acid; 
Amoxicillin 200 mg/28.5 mg clavulanic acid; 250 mg/62.5 mg clavu-
lanic acid and 400 mg/57 mg clavulanic acid; Augmentin® , generic; 
(Rx)
Powder for Oral Suspension—Amoxicillin/Clavulanic Acid (as po -
tassium salt) after reconstitution: Amoxicillin 125 mg/31.25 mg 
clavulanic acid per 5 mL in 75 mL, 100 mL, and 150 mL; Amoxicil -
lin 200 mg/28.5 mg clavulanic acid per 5 mL in 50 mL, 75 mL, and  
100 mL; Amoxicillin 250 mg/62.5 mg clavulanic acid per 5 mL in  
75 mL, 100 mL, and 150 mL; Amoxicillin 400 mg/57 mg clavulanic 
acid per 5 mL in 50 mL, 75 mL, and 100 mL; 600 mg/42.9 mg clavu-
lanic acid per 5 mL in 75 mL, 100 mL, 125 mL, and 200 mL; Augmen-
tin® a n d  Augmentin ES-600®, Amoclan®, generic; (Rx)
Amoxicillin 1000 mg/62.5 mg clavulanic acid oral extended-release 
tablet; Augmentin XR®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Amphotericin B
(am-foe-ter-i-sin bee) Abelcet® ,  AmBisome®, Fungizone®
Antifungal
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Systemic antifungal used for serious mycotic infections 
 ▶ Must be parenterally administered (IV or SC infusion) for sys-
temic infections
 ▶ Three different forms available on US market: conventional, 
formulated with sodium deoxycholate (generic); lipid complex 
(Abelcet®); and liposomal (AmBisome®). Each form has different 
reconstitution instructions, dilution, stability, storage, and dos-
age recommendations; thus, they are not interchangeable.
 ▶ Nephrotoxicity is the biggest concern, particularly with the 
deoxycholate form; newer products (lipid complex and liposo-
mal) are less nephrotoxic and penetrate into tissues better but 
are more expensive.
 ▶ Renal function monitoring is essential.
 ▶ Many potential drug interactions
Uses/Indications
Amphotericin B has activity against most systemic fungal pathogens 
in numerous animal species, but because the potential exists for se -
vere toxicity, its use should generally be limited to severe, life-threat-
ening infections, progressive disease unresponsive to other antifun-
gals, or in cases in which antifungal susceptibility warrants its use.
The liposomal form of amphotericin B can also be used to treat 
leishmaniasis and, although this form can be clinically effective, 
relapses inevitably occur. Additionally, concerns about the devel -
opment of amphotericin B-resistant Leishmania strains in human 
leishmaniasis has prompted the World Health Organization (WHO) 
to discourage the use of amphotericin B in the treatment of dogs 
with leishmaniasis.1,2 
Pharmacology/Actions
Amphotericin B is generally fungistatic, but it can be fungicid -
al against some organisms depending on drug concentration. This 
drug acts by binding to sterols (primarily ergosterol) in the fungal 
cell membrane and altering the permeability of the membrane, al -
lowing intracellular potassium and other cellular constituents to leak 
out. Because bacteria and rickettsial organisms do not contain ste -
rols, amphotericin B has no activity against them. Mammalian cell 
membranes also contain sterols (primarily cholesterol) and the drug’s 
toxicity may be a result of a similar mechanism of action, although 
amphotericin B binds less strongly to cholesterol than  ergosterol.
Amphotericin B has in vitro  activity against a variety of fungal or -
ganisms, including Blastomyces spp, Aspergillus spp, Paracoccidioi-
des spp, Coccidioides spp, Histoplasma spp, Cryptococcus spp, Mucor 
spp, and Sporothrix spp. Although absolute resistance to amphoteri-
cin B is rare, some strains of Aspergillus spp and Sporothrix spp have 
high minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values. Additionally, 
amphotericin B has in vivo  activity against some protozoa species, 
including Leishmania spp and Naegleria spp. Leishmania spp have 
ergostane-based sterols in their cell membranes, which may explain 
amphotericin B’s efficacy for treating this organism.
Pharmacokinetics
In humans, amphotericin B is poorly absorbed from the GI tract and 
must be administered parenterally to achieve sufficient concentra -
tions to treat systemic fungal infections. After IV injection, the drug 
reportedly penetrates well into most tissues except for the pancre -
as, muscle, bone, aqueous humor, or pleural, pericardial, synovial, 
and peritoneal fluids. The drug enters the pleural cavity and joints 
when inflamed. CSF concentrations are ≈3% of those found in the 
serum. Approximately 90% to 95% of amphotericin in the vascular 
compartment is bound to serum proteins. 3 The newer lipid forms 
of amphotericin B have higher penetration into the lungs, liver, and 
spleen than the conventional form. The lipid complex formulation 
reaches higher peak plasma concentrations and has a larger volume 
of distribution (131 L/kg) as compared with conventional formula -
tions (5 L/kg).4
The metabolic pathways of amphotericin B are not known, but 
amphotericin B exhibits biphasic elimination. In humans, an initial 
serum half-life of ≈24 hours and a longer terminal half-life of ≈15 
days have been described for the conventional formulation. 3 Seven 
weeks after treatment has stopped, amphotericin B can still be de -
tected in the urine. Approximately 2% to 5% of the drug is recovered 
in the urine in unchanged (biologically active) form.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Amphotericin B is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensi -
tive to it.3 Only use amphotericin B to treat severe, life-threatening 
infections, progressive disease unresponsive to other antifungals, or 
in cases in which it is indicated by antifungal susceptibility results.
Because of the serious nature of the diseases treated with systemic 
amphotericin B, it is not absolutely contraindicated in patients with 
renal disease, but it should be used cautiously with adequate mon -
itoring and only when safer options (eg, fluconazole, itraconazole) 
have failed. 
Do not confuse amphotericin B formulations. Each amphoteri -
cin B formulation (ie, deoxycholate [conventional], lipid complex, 
or liposomal) has different reconstitution instructions, dilution, sta-
bility, storage, and dosage recommendations; thus, they are not in -
terchangeable. Because of the toxicity of this drug, dose calculations 
and solution preparation procedures should be double-checked.
Adverse Effects
Amphotericin B is known for its nephrotoxic effects; most mamma-
lian patients will show some degree of renal toxicity after receiving 


===== BSAVA PDF 493 =====
Index: therapeutic class
477
APPENDIX I: GENERAL INFORMATIONAPPENDIX II: PROTOCOLSINDEX: GENERIC AND TRADE NAMESINDEX: THERAPEUTIC CLASS
Beta-lactams
Amoxicillin  24
Ampicillin  27
Cloxacillin  98
Co-amoxiclav  98
Penicillin G  309
Piperacillin  327
Ticarcillin  402
Cephalosporins
Cefalexin  67
Cefotaxime  68
Cefovecin  69
Ceftazidime  70
Ceftiofur  71
Cefuroxime  72
Fluoroquinolones
Ciprofloxacin  86
Enrofloxacin  147
Marbofloxacin  242
Ofloxacin  290  
Orbifloxacin  293
Pradofloxacin  335
Lincosamides
Clindamycin  91
Lincomycin  230
Macrolides
Azithromycin  40
Clarithromycin  89
Erythromycin  152  
Tylosin  420
Nitrofurans
Nitrofurantoin  285
Nitroimidazoles
Metronidazole  262  
Sulphonamides
Silver sulfadiazine  376
 Trimethoprim/sulphonamide  
   418
Tetracyclines
Doxycycline  140
Minocycline  269
Oxytetracycline  296
Others
Chloramphenicol  72
Clofazimine  92
Florfenicol  166
Fusidic  acid  178
Mupirocin  277
Polymyxin  B  330
Rifampin  359
Trimethoprim  418
Antifungals
Amphotericin  B  25
Climbazole  91
Clotrimazole  97
Enilconazole  146
Fluconazole  167
Flucytosine  168
Itraconazole  214  
Ketoconazole  219
Miconazole  265
Nystatin  287
Silver sulfadiazine  376
Terbinafine  393
Antiprotozoals
Allopurinol  11  
Amprolium  28
Imidocarb dipropionate  204
Meglumine antimonate  249
Metronidazole  262  
Miltefosine  268
Pentamidine isethionate  309
Pyrimethamine  353
Ronidazole  363
Sodium stibogluconate  382
Toltrazuril  407
Anthelmintics
Dichlorophen  122
Emodepside  144
Febantel  158
Fenbendazole  159
Oxantel  295
Piperazine  328
Praziquantel  337
Pyrantel  351
Anti-infectives continued


===== BSAVA PDF 494 =====
Index: therapeutic class
478
APPENDIX I: GENERAL INFORMATIONAPPENDIX II: PROTOCOLSINDEX: GENERIC AND TRADE NAMES INDEX: THERAPEUTIC CLASS
Anti-neoplastic
Behaviour modifiers
Blood and immune system
Alkylating agents
Chlorambucil  75  
Cyclophosphamide  102  
Dacarbazine  106
Melphalan  252  
Temozolomide  392
Anthracycline glycosides
Doxorubicin  138
Epirubicin  149
Antimetabolites
Cytarabine  104
Gemcitabine  181
Hydroxycarbamide  198  
Platinum analogues
Carboplatin  62
(see also Safety and handling of 
chemotherapeutic agents and 
Chemotherapy protocols in the 
Appendix)
Vinca alkaloids
Vinblastine  424
Vincristine  425
Antineoplastic NSAIDs
Piroxicam  324  
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors
Masitinib mesylate  245
Toceranib  405
Others
Asparaginase (l-Asparaginase, 
Crisantaspase)  31
Bleomycin  47
Dactinomycin  106
Dexrazoxane  118
Fluorouracil  170
Lomustine  235
Methotrexate  258  
Mitoxantrone  272
Rabacfosadine  356
Alprazolam  12  
Amitriptyline  22  
a-Casozepine  66
Cat appeasing pheromone  66
Clomipramine  93
Diphenhydramine  129
Dog appeasing pheromone  133
Doxepin  138
Feline facial fraction  F3  158
Fluoxetine  171  
Lorazepam  237  
Mirtazapine  270  
Propentofylline  346
Selegiline  371
l-Theanine  397
Serotonergic
Imipramine  205
Paroxetine  305
Sertraline  372  
Trazodone  413  
Anticoagulants
Aspirin  32  
Clopidogrel  96  
Heparin (low molecular weight)  
191
Heparin (unfractionated)  192
Colony-stimulating growth 
factors
Darbepoetin  180  
Erythropoietin  153  
Filgrastim  162
Lenograstim  226
Lithium carbonate  233
Immunostimulants
Interferon omega  210
Immunosuppressives
Azathioprine  38  
Ciclosporin  81
Immunoglobulins  206
Leflunomide  225
Mycophenolate mofetil  278  
Tacrolimus  390


===== BSAVA PDF 495 =====
Index: therapeutic class
479
APPENDIX I: GENERAL INFORMATIONAPPENDIX II: PROTOCOLSINDEX: GENERIC AND TRADE NAMESINDEX: THERAPEUTIC CLASS
Cardiovascular
Alpha-blockers
Phenoxybenzamine  317  
Beta-blockers
Atenolol  34  
Carvedilol  64
Propranolol  348  
Antiarrhythmics
Amiodarone  20  
Digoxin  123  
Esmolol  154  
Mexiletine  264  
Sotalol  383  
Verapamil  423
Antihypertensives
Amlodipine  23  
Antiplatelet aggregators
Aspirin  32  
Clopidogrel  96  
Diuretics
Amiloride  16
Furosemide  176
Hydrochlorothiazide  195
Spironolactone  385
Torasemide  409
Positive inotropes
Dobutamine  131
Dopamine  135
Pimobendan  326
Vasoconstrictors
Ephedrine  148
Vasodilators
Benazepril  42
Diltiazem  125
Enalapril  145
Glyceryl trinitrate  186
Hydralazine  194
Imidapril  203
Prazosin  338  
Ramipril  356
Sildenafil  375  
Telmisartan  391
Others
Dexrazoxane  118
Dermatological
Cleansers and sebolytics
Chlorhexidine  78
Sodium hypochlorite  381
Antihistamines
Cetirizine  73
Chlorphenamine  79  
Clemastine  90
Cyproheptadine  103  
Diphenhydramine  129
Hydroxyzine  199
Loratadine  236
Promethazine  344
Anti-inflammatory topical 
steroids
Hydrocortisone aceponate  197
Anti-inflammatory – others
Lokivetmab  234
Nicotinamide  289
Oclacitinib  289
Sodium cromoglicate  381
Ecto- and endoparasiticides
Eprinomectin  151
Indoxacarb  207
Ivermectin  216
Milbemycin  267
Selamectin  371
Spinosad  384
Ectoparasiticides
Afoxolaner  6
Amitraz  21
Deltamethrin  110
Dinetofuran  128
Fipronil  164
Flumethrin see Imidacloprid  202
Fluralaner  172
Imidacloprid  202
Lotilaner  238
Lufenuron  238
Moxidectin  276
Nitenpyram  285
Permethrin  312
Pyriprole  354
Sarolaner  369
Environmental ectoparasiticides
Methoprene  257
Pyriproxyfen  355
Hormonal replacements
See Endocrine
Immunosuppressives
Ciclosporin  81
Vasodilator
Pentoxifylline  311  
