
===== Plumb PDF 109 =====
82    Ampicillin/Sulbactam 
Ampicillin/Sulbactam 
(am-pi-sill-in; sul-bak-tam) Unasyn®
Potentiated Aminopenicillin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Parenteral potentiated aminopenicillin that may be used to 
treat infections for which amoxicillin/clavulanate would be 
appropriate, but an injectable antibiotic is required
 ▶ May be used for surgical prophylaxis 
 ▶ Hypersensitivity reactions possible; contraindicated in patients 
with documented severe hypersensitivity to penicillins
 ▶ Usually administered SC, IM, or IV every 6 to 8 hours
Uses/Indications
The addition of sulbactam to ampicillin broadens ampicillin’s spec-
trum through inhibition of some beta-lactamases. 
Ampicillin/sulbactam may be indicated when parenteral therapy 
is required for the treatment of aerobic or anaerobic gram-positive 
and gram-negative infections. In dogs and cats, ampicillin/sulbac -
tam may be considered when oral amoxicillin/clavulanate is not 
viable (eg, patient NPO, in cases of critical illness [eg, sepsis, pneu -
monia, other severe infections]), or for surgical prophylaxis.  For 
broad-spectrum uses, ampicillin/sulbactam is often combined with 
another drug such as a fluoroquinolone or aminoglycoside to pro -
vide enhanced gram-negative coverage.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated ampicil-
lin/sulbactam as a Critically Important, High Priority antimicrobial 
in human medicine.1 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) 
has designated ampicillin/sulbactam as Veterinary Critically Im -
portant Antimicrobial (VCIA) Agents in avian, bovine, and swine 
species.2
Pharmacology/Actions
Ampicillin is a time-dependent bactericidal agent that acts via in -
hibition of cell wall synthesis. Penicillins are bactericidal against 
susceptible bacteria and act by inhibition of mucopeptide synthesis 
in the cell wall, which results in a defective barrier and an osmoti -
cally unstable spheroplast. The exact mechanism for this effect has 
not been definitively determined, but beta-lactam antibiotics have 
been shown to bind to several enzymes in the bacterial cytoplasmic 
membrane that are involved with cell wall synthesis (eg, carboxypep-
tidases, transpeptidases, endopeptidases). Various beta-lactam anti-
biotics have different affinities for these enzymes (ie, penicillin-bind-
ing proteins), which helps explain the differences in spectrums of 
activity not explained by the influence of beta-lactamases. Like other 
beta-lactam antibiotics, penicillins are generally considered to be 
more effective against actively growing bacteria.
Sulbactam has some intrinsic antibacterial activity against some 
bacteria (eg, Neisseria spp, Moraxella spp, Bacteroides spp); however, 
for most bacteria, sulbactam alone does not achieve levels sufficient 
to act as an antibacterial agent. Sulbactam binding to certain pen -
icillin-binding proteins may explain its activity and, when used in 
combination with ampicillin, synergistic effects may result. On an 
mg-for-mg basis, clavulanic acid is a more potent beta-lactamase in-
hibitor than sulbactam, but sulbactam offers reduced likelihood of 
inducing chromosomal beta-lactamases, greater tissue penetration, 
and stability.
When sulbactam is combined with ampicillin, ampicillin’s spec-
trum of activity is extended to bacteria (eg, Escherichia coli, Pasteurella 
spp, Staphylococcus spp, Klebsiella spp, Proteus spp) that produce 
beta-lactamases of Richmond-Sykes types II through VI that would 
otherwise render ampicillin ineffective. Sulbactam binds to be -
ta-lactamases, thereby protecting the beta-lactam ring of ampicillin 
from hydrolysis. The efficacy of sulbactam involves how well it binds 
the specific beta-lactamase and the relative levels of sulbactam and 
beta-lactamase. In cases in which there is a high bacterial biobur -
den or bacteria are producing large amounts of beta-lactamase, 
efficacy may be limited. Other aerobic bacteria that may be sus -
ceptible to ampicillin/sulbactam include Streptococcus  spp, Listeria 
monocytogenes, Bacillus anthracis, Salmonella  spp, Pasteurella  spp, 
and Acinetobacter  spp. Anaerobic bacterial infections caused by 
Clostridium  spp, Bacteroides  spp, Fusobacterium  spp, Peptostrepto-
coccus  spp,  and  Propionibacterium spp may also be susceptible to 
ampicillin/sulbactam.3–5 Similar to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, am -
picillin/sulbactam can be used in the treatment of bacterial respi -
ratory tract infections, although ampicillin/sulbactam is ineffective 
against Mycoplasma spp and resistance in Bordetella spp is an in -
creasing problem in some regions. In general, ampicillin/sulbactam 
is excellent for beta-lactamase–producing gram-positive aerobic 
and anaerobic bacteria, but less effective for beta-lactamase–pro -
ducing gram-negative bacteria. 
Methicillin-resistant staphylococci are resistant to ampicillin/sul-
bactam. Ampicillin/sulbactam is usually ineffective against AmpC 
(type I) cephalosporinases, and efficacy against extended-spectrum 
beta-lactamase–producing bacteria is variable and often unpredict -
able. There is little—if any—synergistic activity against organisms 
already susceptible to ampicillin. 
Pharmacokinetics
See Ampicillin for pharmacokinetic information. 
Because sulbactam sodium is not appreciably absorbed from the 
GI tract, this medication must be given parenterally. A covalently 
linked double ester form of ampicillin/sulbactam (ie, sultamicillin) is 
orally absorbed, but this combination is not commercially available 
in the US. When sulbactam is administered parenterally (ie, IV , IM), 
its pharmacokinetic profile closely mirrors that of ampicillin’s phar-
macokinetic profile in most species studied. In a study of calves, plas-
ma concentrations of sulbactam during the elimination phase were 
consistently higher than those of ampicillin, leading the study  au -
thors to propose using a higher ratio (greater than 2:1 ampicillin/
sulbactam) if the combination is used in calves.6
A regional IV limb perfusion (RIVLP; 45-minute duration) with 
ampicillin/sulbactam (1.5 g; ratio, 2:1; total volume, 4 mL) admin -
istered in the dorsal common digital vein of the right rear limb of 
healthy, adult nonlactating cattle resulted in peak ampicillin serum 
concentrations of ≈5 mg/mL in the perfused limb and 2 mg/mL 
in the synovial fluid of the metatarsophalangeal joint 1 hour after 
RIVLP . Ampicillin concentration in synovial fluid remained above 
8 μg/mL for 19 hours. Maximum systemic ampicillin concentration 
was 2.5 μg/mL 5.4 hours after RIVLP . Sulbactam pharmacokinetics 
followed trends similar to ampicillin.7
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Penicillins are contraindicated in patients with a history of severe 
hypersensitivity (anaphylaxis) to them. Because cross-reactivity can 
occur, penicillins should be used cautiously in patients documented 
as being hypersensitive to other beta-lactam antibiotics (eg, cephalo-
sporins, cephamycins, carbapenems).
Ampicillin/sulbactam is contraindicated in humans with a his -
tory of ampicillin/sulbactam-associated cholestatic jaundice or he -
patic dysfunction; veterinary significance is unknown. In humans, 
ampicillin has been shown to lower seizure threshold and should be 
used with caution with any drug that also lowers seizure threshold8; 
significance in veterinary patients is not known.
Increased plasma ampicillin drug concentrations, AUC, and in -
creased elimination half-life have been documented in azotemic dogs.9 
Dosage adjustment (ie, reduced dosing frequency) may be needed. 


===== Plumb PDF 110 =====
Ampicillin/Sulbactam    83
Penicillins, cephalosporins, and macrolides should not be admin-
istered to rabbits, guinea pigs, chinchillas, or hamsters, as serious 
enteritis and clostridial enterotoxemia may occur.
Adverse Effects
IM injections may be painful, as pH of the solution is high. IV in -
jections may cause thrombophlebitis and phlebitis. Although hy -
persensitivity reactions to penicillins occur infrequently in animals, 
they can be severe (anaphylaxis), particularly after IV  administration.
Hepatotoxicity (ie, cholestatic hepatitis, cholestasis) has been re -
ported in some humans receiving ampicillin/sulbactam. Toxicity is 
usually reversible with discontinuation of therapy, but deaths have 
been reported. Veterinary significance is unknown. 
High doses or increased CNS penetration of penicillins have been 
associated with neurotoxicity (eg, ataxia in dogs). 10 Although peni -
cillins are not considered to be hepatotoxic, elevated liver enzymes 
have been reported in some dogs. Other effects reported in dogs in-
clude tachypnea, dyspnea, edema, and tachycardia. GI disturbances 
are possible, and Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea (CDAD) 
has been reported in humans.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Both ampicillin and sulbactam have been shown to cross the pla -
centa. Ampicillin/sulbactam should be used only when the potential 
benefits outweigh the risks. 
Both ampicillin and sulbactam are distributed into human breast 
milk in low concentrations but are considered to be compatible with 
breastfeeding. Nursing offspring should be monitored for GI distur-
bances.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Neurologic  effects (eg, ataxia) have rarely been reported, and risk 
increases with higher doses or conditions that can lead to increased 
CNS penetration (eg, meningitis); should these signs develop, the 
risks for continued use should be weighed with those associated 
with dose reduction or use of a different antibiotic. In humans, par -
ticularly those with renal disease, high doses of parenteral penicillins 
have induced CNS effects.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have ex -
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison control 
center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions with ampicillin/sulbactam either 
have been reported or are theoretical in humans or animals and may 
be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks 
should be weighed and additional monitoring performed when ap -
propriate.
 ■ Allopurinol : In humans, concurrent use has been implicated 
in increased occurrences of skin rashes; veterinary significance of 
this interaction is unknown. 
 ■ Aminoglycosides  (eg, amikacin, gentamicin ): Beta-lactam 
antibiotics can inactivate aminoglycosides in vitro (and in vivo in 
patients with chronic kidney disease).
 ■ Bacteriostatic Antimicrobials  (eg, chloramphenicol, 
erythromycin and other macrolides, tetracyclines, sulfon -
amides): Because there has been evidence of in vitro antagonism 
between beta-lactam antibiotics and bacteriostatic antibiotics, use 
together generally has not been recommended, but actual clinical 
importance is not clear and is currently in doubt.
 ■ Dichlorphenamide : Concurrent use may increase risk for 
 hypokalemia.
 ■ Methotrexate (MTX) : Ampicillin may decrease the renal ex -
cretion of MTX, causing increased MTX concentrations and po -
tential toxic effects.
 ■ Mycophenolate : Concurrent use may reduce concentrations 
or effects of mycophenolate.
 ■ Probenecid : Can reduce the renal tubular secretion of both 
ampicillin and sulbactam, thereby maintaining higher systemic 
concentrations for a longer period. This potentially beneficial in -
teraction requires further investigation before dosing recommen-
dations can be made for veterinary patients.
 ■ W arfarin:  Concurrent use may decrease vitamin K production 
and increase risk for bleeding.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Ampicillin may cause false-positive urine glucose determina -
tions when using cupric sulfate solution (Benedict’s solution, 
Clinitest®). Tests using glucose oxidase ( Test-Tape®, Clinistix®) are 
not affected by ampicillin.
 ■ Because penicillins and other beta-lactams can inactivate amino- 
glycosides in vitro and in vivo in patients in renal failure or when 
penicillins are used in larger doses, serum concentrations of ami-
noglycosides may be falsely decreased, particularly when the se -
rum is stored prior to analysis. It is recommended that samples 
should be drawn at times when the beta-lactam antibiotic is at a 
trough level, and if the assay cannot be run right away, samples 
should be frozen immediately.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
NOTE: Dosages are listed for combined amounts of ampicillin/
sulbactam.
Empiric antibiotic therapy in critically ill animals (extra-label): 
22 – 30 mg/kg IV every 6 to 8 hours; used in combination with 
a  parenteral  drug with gram-negative activity (eg, aminoglyco -
side, fluoroquinolone)
Infections susceptible to amoxicillin/clavulanate in patients 
unable to receive oral doses (extra-label): 22 mg/kg SC, IV , or 
IM every 8 hours
Surgical prophylaxis (extra-label): 22 mg/kg IV ≈1 hour prior 
to incision; redosing can be performed intraoperatively every 2 
hours if needed based on duration of surgery.
Monitoring
 ■ Because penicillins usually have minimal toxicity associated with 
their use, monitoring for efficacy is usually all that is required un-
less toxic signs develop.
 ■ Periodic liver panel (eg, liver enzymes, bilirubin) in patients with 
pre-existing hepatic dysfunction 
 ■ Serum concentrations and therapeutic drug monitoring are not 
routinely performed.
Client Information
 ■ Because of the dosing intervals required, this drug is best admin-
istered to inpatients only.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Commercial drug formulations contain sodium salts of both ampi -
cillin and sulbactam in a 2:1 ratio (eg, ampicillin, 250 mg; sulbactam, 
125 mg). Ampicillin sodium/sulbactam sodium for injection occurs 
as a white to off-white powder that is freely soluble in water or other 
aqueous solutions. The reconstituted solution is yellow to pale yellow 
and has a pH of 8 to 10. 
Ampicillin/sulbactam may also be known as Ampibactan®, Baci-
mex®, Begalin-P®, Bethacil®, Comabactan®, Galotam®, Loricin®, Sulam®, 
Sulperazon®, Synergistin®, Unacid®, Unacim®, Unasyn®, or Unasyna®.


===== Plumb PDF 111 =====
84    Amprolium
Storage/Stability
Ampicillin/sulbactam powder should be stored at temperatures at or 
below 30°C (86°F). 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Diluents for reconstituting the powder for IV use reported to 
be compatible with ampicillin/sulbactam include sterile water for 
injection and 0.9% sodium chloride. If the powder is reconstituted 
to a concentration of 30 mg/mL (combined concentration), the re -
sultant solution is stable for 72 hours at 4°C (39.2°F) or 8 hours at 
room temperature. After reconstitution and before administration, 
the solution can either be given slowly IV over 5 to 20 minutes or be 
further diluted into a 50- or 100-mL bag of 0.9% sodium chloride 
and administered IV over 15 to 30 minutes. 
When ampicillin/sulbactam is reconstituted for IM use, ster -
ile water for injection or 0.5% or 2% lidocaine HCl for injection 
may be used as a diluent; 3.2 mL of diluent should be added to the  
1.5 g vial and 6.4 mL of diluent to the 3 g vial. After reconstitution, 
the solution should be administered within 1 hour. 
Ampicillin/sulbactam injection is compatible with vancomycin 
when mixed at concentrations of 50/25 mg/mL of ampicillin/sulbac-
tam and 20 mg/mL or less of vancomycin. Ampicillin/sulbactam is 
Y-site compatible with aminocaproic acid, asparaginase, azithromy-
cin, carboplatin, cisplatin, cytarabine, dexmedetomidine hydrochlo-
ride, doxorubicin hydrochloride (liposomal), fat emulsions, gemcit-
abine hydrochloride, hydromorphone hydrochloride, methadone 
hydrochloride, metronidazole, pamidronate disodium, pantopra -
zole sodium, sodium acetate, vinblastine sulfate, vincristine sulfate, 
voriconazole, and zoledronic acid.
Ampicillin/sulbactam injection has variable or uncertain Y-site 
compatibility with amikacin sulfate, aminophylline, ascorbic acid 
(vitamin C), atracurium besylate, atropine sulfate, buprenorphine 
hydrochloride, butorphanol tartrate, calcium chloride, calcium glu-
conate, cefazolin sodium, cefotetan disodium, cefotaxime, ceftazi -
dime, ceftriaxone sodium, cefuroxime, chloramphenicol sodium 
succinate, clindamycin phosphate, cyclosporine, dexamethasone so-
dium succinate, dextrose 5% in water, digoxin, diltiazem hydrochlo-
ride, diphenhydramine hydrochloride, dopamine hydrochloride, 
epinephrine hydrochloride, erythromycin lactobionate, esmolol 
hydrochloride, famotidine, fentanyl citrate, fluconazole, furosemide, 
gentamicin sulfate, glycopyrrolate, heparin sodium, insulin (reg -
ular), lactated Ringer’s solution (LRS), lidocaine hydrochloride, 
magnesium sulfate, mannitol, metoclopramide, morphine sulfate, 
multiple vitamins injections, naloxone hydrochloride, nitroglycerin, 
nitroprusside sodium, norepinephrine bitartrate, oxytocin, penicil -
lin G potassium, penicillin G sodium, pentobarbital sodium, pheno-
barbital sodium, polymyxin B sulfate, potassium chloride, procain -
amide hydrochloride, ranitidine hydrochloride, sodium bicarbonate, 
thiamine hydrochloride (vitamin B1), and vasopressin.
Administration of ampicillin diluted in LRS has been shown to 
decrease  ampicillin concentrations by ≈30%; therefore, coadmin -
istration with LRS (ie, through the same fluid line) should be per -
formed with caution.11
Ampicillin/sulbactam is Y-site incompatible with amiodarone 
hydrochloride, amphotericin B conventional, amphotericin B lipo -
somal, ciprofloxacin, diazepam, dobutamine hydrochloride, doxo -
rubicin hydrochloride, doxycycline hyclate, hydralazine hydrochlo-
ride, hydrocortisone sodium succinate, hydroxyzine hydrochloride, 
lorazepam, mechlorethamine hydrochloride, methylprednisolone 
sodium succinate, midazolam hydrochloride, mitoxantrone hydro -
chloride, mycophenolate mofetil hydrochloride, ondansetron hy -
drochloride, phenytoin sodium, quinidine gluconate, trimethoprim/
sulfamethoxazole, tranexamic acid, and vinorelbine tartrate. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Ampicillin Sodium/Sulbactam Sodium Powder (injection): 1.5 g 
(ampicillin sodium 1 g; sulbactam sodium 0.5 g) and 3 g (ampicillin 
sodium 2 g; sulbactam sodium 1 g) in vials; 15 g (ampicillin sodium 
10 g; sulbactam sodium 5 g) in bulk; Unasyn® , generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Amprolium
(am-proe-lee-um) AmproMed®, Corid® 
Anticoccidial 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Thiamine analogue coccidiostat
 ▶ Prolonged high doses may cause thiamine deficiency; length 
of treatment usually does not exceed 14 days
 ▶ Occasionally may cause GI or neurologic effects
 ▶ May be unpalatable
Uses/Indications
Amprolium is FDA-approved for the treatment and prevention of 
Eimeria bovis and Eimeria zurnii in calves, and for the treatment of 
coccidiosis in poultry.
Although there are no FDA-approved products in the US for 
dogs, swine, sheep, or goats, amprolium has also been used in these 
species for the control of coccidiosis.
Pharmacology/Actions
By mimicking the structure of thiamine, amprolium competitively 
inhibits thiamine utilization by the parasite preferentially; amproli -
um has this same effect in the host but to a far less extent.1  
Amprolium is a coccidiostat. It has good activity against Eimeria 
tenella and Eimeria acervulina in poultry and can be used as a thera-
peutic agent against these organisms. Amprolium only has marginal 
activity or weak activity against Eimeria maxima, Eimeria mivati, 
Eimeria necatrix, and Eimeria brunetti; it is often used in combina -
tion with other agents (eg, ethopabate) to improve control against 
these organisms.
Amprolium acts primarily upon the first-generation trophozoites 
and schizonts in enterocytes, preventing differentiation of the mero-
zoites; it also suppresses the sexual stages and sporulation of the 
 oocysts.
Pharmacokinetics
Chickens receiving amprolium 20 mg/kg PO demonstrated the fol -
lowing pharmacokinetic values: maximum blood concentrations at 4 
hours; volume of distribution, 0.5 L/kg; clearance, 1.98 mL/kg/min.2
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Amprolium is not recommended to be used for more than 12 days 
in puppies.
The undiluted liquid is reportedly unpalatable. Excessive dietary 
thiamine can reduce or reverse the anticoccidial activity of the drug.
Adverse Effects
In dogs, neurologic disturbances (eg, “stargazing” , opisthotonos, cen-
tral blindness, circling, ataxia), depression, anorexia, and diarrhea 
have been reported but are rare and likely dose related. See Over-
dose/Acute Toxicity for treatment recommendations. 


===== Plumb PDF 112 =====
Amprolium   85
High dosages or long-term use of amprolium may induce neuro-
logic signs because of thiamine deficiency (eg, polioencephalomala-
cia [PEM], cerebrocortical necrosis). Parenteral thiamine (vitamin 
B1) can be used for treatment.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Amprolium has induced polioencephalomalacia (PEM) in sheep 
when administered at 880 mg/kg (16 times the normal dose) for 3 to 
6 weeks3 and at 1000 mg/kg for 3 to 5 weeks. Erythrocyte production 
has also been shown to cease in lambs receiving these high dosages. 
Overdoses of amprolium can produce neurologic signs (eg, “star-
gazing” , opisthotonos, central blindness, circling, ataxia). Treatment 
should consist of stopping amprolium therapy and administering 
parenteral thiamine. See Thiamine for more information.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretic in animals receiving amprolium and may be of significance in 
veterinary patients:
 ■ Thiamine : Exogenously administered thiamine in high doses 
may reverse or reduce the efficacy of amprolium.
Dosages
DOGS:
Coccidiosis (extra-label):
a. Using the 20% powder *4: a) Small dogs less than 10 kg  
[22 lb] anticipated adult weight): 60 – 100 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg)  
placed in a gelatin capsule and given PO once daily for 7 to 12 
days. Large pups (greater than 10 kg [22 lb] anticipated adult 
weight): 110 – 200 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) placed in a gelatin 
capsule and given PO once daily for 7 to 12 days. b) In food, 
for pups or bitches: 250 – 300 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) using 
the 20% powder on food once daily for 7 to 12 days. * NOTE: 
Using the 20% powder, a 100 mg dose will equate to 500 mg 
powder; a 200 mg dose = 1 g powder; a 250 - 300 mg dose =  
1.25 g - 1.5 g powder.
b. In water: a) 30 mL of the 9.6% solution in 3.8 liters (1 gal -
lon) of water (no other water provided) for 7 to 10 days4 OR b)  
1.5 tablespoonsful (22.5 mL) of the 9.6% solution in 3.8 liters 
(1 gallon) of water to be used as the sole drinking water source; 
treatment not to exceed 10 days.5 Monitor water consumption 
both for treatment and hydration assurance. Rarely, some dogs 
may not drink the amprolium water because of its bitter taste. 
In situations where dogs are cohabitants, it is necessary to 
place enough treated water for all to have access.
c. Combination therapy: Amprolium 150 mg/kg in combination 
with sulfadimethoxine 25 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for 14 days6
CATS:
Coccidiosis (extra-label):
1.  Using the 20% powder:  60 – 100 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO 
once daily for 7 days6
2.  In water:  1.5 teaspoonful (7.5 mL) of the 9.6% solution in  
3.8 liters (1 gallon) of water per day for 10 days5
3.  Combination therapy:  Amprolium 150 mg/kg in combina -
tion with sulfadimethoxine 25 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for 14 
days7
CATTLE:
As an aid in the treatment and prevention of coccidiosis caused 
by Eimeria bovis  and  Eimeria zuernii  in calves (label dosage; 
FDA-approved)): See product labels for additional information.
1. 5-day treatment protocol: 10 mg/kg daily PO for 5 days 
2. 21-day prevention protocol: 5 mg/kg daily PO for 21 days. Can 
be administered either as an oral drench or mixed into the sole 
source of fresh drinking water. 8,9 
SHEEP/GOATS:
Coccidiosis (extra-label):
1. Lambs: 55 mg/kg daily PO for 19 days10
2. Goat kids: 50 mg/kg daily PO for 5 days will effectively reduce 
the fecal shedding of Eimeria spp oocysts without inducing 
neurologic disease.11
CAMELIDS (NEW-WORLD):
Eimeria macusaniensis  (extra-label): Using a 1.5% solution,  
10 mg/kg PO once daily for 10 to 15 days; supplement with thia -
mine 10 mg/kg SC every 5 days during treatment.12
SWINE:
Coccidiosis treatment (extra-label): 25 – 65 mg/kg PO once or 
twice daily for 3 to 4 days10
AVIAN:
1. Treatment of coccidiosis in growing chickens, turkeys, and 
laying hens (label dosage; FDA-approved): Administer 0.012% 
solution in the sole source of drinking water for 3 to 5 days, 
then as 0.006% solution for an additional 1 to 2 weeks.13 Severe 
outbreaks may require higher initial dosages; see product la -
bels for additional information.
2. Coccidiosis in pet birds (extra-label): 
a. 15 – 30 mg/kg/day PO for 1 to 5 days; repeat 5 days later14 
b. In water: Using the 9.6% solution, 1 – 2.5 mL per liter of wa-
ter for 5 days or longer.14,15 Cages should be steam cleaned 
to prevent reinfection. Supplement diet with B vitamins. 
Toucans and mynahs are resistant to some strains.
FERRETS:
Coccidiosis (extra-label): 19 mg/kg once daily16
RABBITS/RODENTS/SMALL MAMMALS:
Coccidiosis (extra-label):
1. Rabbits: Using 9.6% solution, 1 mL/7 kg (15 lb) (≈0.15 mL/kg) 
PO once daily for 5 days. Diluted in drinking water: 0.5 mL of 
9.6% solution/500 mL for 10 days17
2. Gerbils, Mice, Rats, Hamsters : 10 – 20 mg/kg divided and 
given SC or IM every 8 to 24 hours
3. Chinchillas: 10 – 15 mg/kg per day divided and given SC, IM, 
or IV every 8 to 24 hours18
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Hydration, body weight
 ■ If using in high dosages (extra-label), watch for neurologic signs 
(eg, “stargazing, ” opisthotonos, central blindness, circling, ataxia).
Chemistry/Synonyms
Amprolium hydrochloride, a structural analogue of thiamine (vita -
min B1), occurs as a white or almost white, odorless or nearly odor -
less powder. One gram is soluble in 2 mL of water and is slightly 
soluble in alcohol.
Amprolium may also be known as amprocidi, Amprol®, Am-
promed®, Corid®, Coxoid®, or Coxiprol®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise instructed by the manufacturer, store amprolium 
products at room temperature 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information is noted.


===== Plumb PDF 113 =====
86    Antivenom, Latrodectus mactans
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Amprolium Oral Solution: 9.6% (96 mg/mL) in 473 mL and 1 gal -
lon bottles; Corid®, generic; (OTC). FDA-approved for use in calves 
(not veal calves). Slaughter withdrawal (when used as labeled) = 24 
hours. A withdrawal period has not been established for prerumi -
nating calves.
Amprolium Oral Solution: 9.6% (96 mg/mL) in 473 mL and 1 gallon 
bottles; Amprol®, generic; (OTC). FDA-approved for use in growing 
chickens, turkeys, and laying hens. Withdrawal information is not 
included on the FDA label.
Amprolium Soluble Powder: 20% (200 mg/g) in 283.5 g pouches  
Corid®; (OTC). FDA-approved for use in calves (not veal calves). 
NADA #033-165. Slaughter withdrawal (when used as labeled) = 24 
hours. A withdrawal period has not been established for prerumi -
nating calves. 
Amprolium Soluble Powder: 20% (200 mg/g) in 283.5 g pouch -
es Amprol® 128; generic; (OTC).  FDA-approved for use in growing 
chickens, turkeys, and laying hens; withdrawal information is not 
included on the FDA label. 
There are also available medicated feeds (amprolium alone) and 
combination products (medicated feeds, feed additives) containing 
amprolium with other therapeutic agents. These products may be la-
beled for use in calves, chickens, and/or turkeys.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Antivenom, Latrodectus mactans
Antivenom, Black Widow Spider 
(an-tie-ven-nin lah-tro-dec-tus mack-tans) Antivenom, Antidote
Antivenin and antivenom are synonymous terms and are used inter-
changeably throughout the monograph to avoid confusion between 
the currently preferred term (antivenom) and the term used on the 
product label (antivenin). NOTE: Veterinary poison control centers 
can offer current, detailed treatment recommendations (consulta-
tion fees may apply). See Important Contact Information.
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Neutralizes the venom of black widow spiders. Early antiven-
om administration (within 4 to 6 hours of envenomation) is 
associated with greater efficacy, but later administration can 
still be effective.
 ▶ May cause hypersensitivity reactions (acute and delayed)
 ▶ Product may be difficult for veterinarians to obtain in a timely 
manner in emergent situations; consider keeping this product 
on hand in areas where envenomation occurs more common-
ly.
 ▶ It is recommended to contact a veterinary poison control 
center for current treatment recommendations and assistance 
in locating and acquiring antivenom.
Uses/Indications
Black widow spider antivenom is used to treat envenomation by La-
trodectus mactans (black widow spider). Cats, horses, and camels are 
considered to be extremely sensitive to the alpha-latrotoxin in the 
spider venom, whereas dogs are considered more resistant.1,2 Clinical 
signs associated with envenomation occur within 8 hours of the spi-
der bite and are primarily neuromuscular (eg, severe pain, seizures, 
muscle spasms [especially in the chest wall, abdomen, and other 
large muscle mass areas], which may progress to flaccid paralysis in 
cats) and cardiovascular (eg, hypertension, tachycardia, cardiovas -
cular collapse); secondary respiratory compromise may result from 
muscular rigidity and lead to death if not treated. Within 24 hours, 
affected animals may lose up to 20% of their body weight. Cats may 
also develop hypersalivation and GI signs (eg, vomiting, diarrhea 3); 
death is very common in this species.1 
Pharmacology/Actions
Antivenoms act by binding to venom toxins and thereby neutralizing 
venom-induced effects in patients via passive immunization of im -
munoglobulins obtained from horses that are hyperimmunized with 
the venom of Latrodectus mactans. 
The use of antivenom early in the course of therapy is emphasized. 
Improvement in clinical signs may occur as early as 30 minutes after ad-
ministration,1,2 and complete recovery may be seen within 6 to 8 hours.2
Pharmacokinetics
No pharmacokinetic information was located.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Because there is a risk for anaphylaxis secondary to the equine immu-
noglobulins contained in this product, many clinicians recommend per-
forming sensitivity testing before administration; however, antivenom 
sensitivity testing is frequently unreliable, with false-positive and -nega-
tive results.4 Delayed serum sickness may occur several days to a couple 
weeks following antivenom administration. Antivenom dilution with 
and administration in IV fluids should be undertaken with extreme cau-
tion because of the risk of hypertension resulting from envenomation.
Adverse Effects
Anaphylaxis secondary to the product’s equine serum origin may oc-
cur; the incidence is rare in humans (less than 0.6%).1 Although rare, 
there is the possibility of life-threatening hypersensitivity reactions; 
appropriate resuscitative drugs (eg, epinephrine) and equipment 
should be readily available. The FDA-approved product contains a 
small vial of normal equine serum to perform intradermal hypersen-
sitivity testing. Alternatively, a 1:10 dilution of the antivenom admin-
istered intracutaneously at a dose of 0.02 – 0.03 mL has been suggested 
as a test for hypersensitivity. Wheal formation and erythema indicate 
a positive reaction and are generally seen within 30 minutes of admin-
istration. A negative response does not ensure that anaphylaxis will be 
avoided during treatment; slow IV administration is usually sufficient 
to identify animals that will react to the product. A pretreatment dose 
of diphenhydramine is often recommended before administering an-
tivenom, primarily to sedate the patient and, theoretically, to reduce 
any possible allergic reactions to the antivenom. 
Epinephrine (0.01 mg/kg IM and repeated at 15- to 20-minute 
intervals until the patient is stable) has been recommended if ear -
ly signs of anaphylaxis occur (clinical signs vary by species and in -
clude vomiting/diarrhea [dogs], dyspnea [cats/ruminants], nausea, 
pruritus, pyrexia, and hyperemia of the inner pinnae). Stopping the 
infusion, administering histamine H 1- and H 2-receptor antagonists 
(eg, diphenhydramine and famotidine, respectively), and restarting 
the infusion 5 minutes later at a slower rate may allow the dose to 
be administered without further problems.5 In severe envenomation, 
patients exhibiting allergic reactions to antivenom can still receive it; 
administration of antivenom as a slow IV infusion with concomitant 
diphenhydramine (and possibly epinephrine) has been suggested.
Muscle cramps have also been reported in humans following an-
tivenom administration. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
The safe use of black widow spider antivenom during pregnancy or 
lactation has not been established; however, it has been used success-
fully in human pregnancies.6-8 


===== BSAVA PDF 43 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
27
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
cause subcutaneous abscesses. Intralesional injections may also 
be performed in this condition at a dose of 1 mg/kg q7d in 
combination with oral itraconazole.
• Irrigation of bladder: Conventional amphotericin: 30–50 mg in 
50–100 ml of sterile water infused at a rate of 5–10 ml/kg into 
the bladder lumen daily for 5–15 days.
• Systemic mycoses: Lipid formulations (general guidelines):  
1 mg/kg q48h to cumulative dose of 12 mg/kg. Higher doses are 
tolerated (e.g. 1–2.5 mg/kg i.v. q48h for 4 weeks/to cumulative 
dose of 24–30 mg/kg). Reconstitute to 5 mg/ml with sterile 
water, then dilute required volume to 1 mg/ml with 5% dextrose 
water. 
• Leishmaniosis (lipid formulations):  1–2.5 mg/kg i.v. twice weekly 
for 8 injections. Increase dose rate gradually. A total cumulative 
dose of at least 10 mg/kg is required but treatment may be 
continued long term depending on clinical response. Use in this 
context is discouraged to avoid resistance developing to therapy 
for humans. 
Cats: 
• Systemic mycoses: Conventional amphotericin: 0.1–0.25 i.v. 
q48h. For details on administration, see doses for dogs.
• Cryptococcosis (conventional amphotericin, subcutaneous 
alternative): Conventional amphotericin: 0.5–0.8 mg/kg added 
to 400–500 ml of 0.45% saline/2.5% dextrose. This total volume 
is then administered s.c. 2–3 times a week to a cumulative level 
of 10–15 mg/kg. Do not inject solutions more concentrated 
than 20 mg/l as they will cause subcutaneous abscesses. 
Intralesional injections may also be performed in this condition 
at a dose of 1 mg/kg q7d in combination with oral itraconazole.
• Systemic mycoses: Lipid formulations (general guidelines):  
1 mg/kg q48h to cumulative dose of 12 mg/kg. Higher doses are 
tolerated (e.g. 1–2.5 mg/kg i.v. q48h for 4 weeks/to cumulative 
dose of 24–30 mg/kg). 
References
Foy DS and Trepanier LA (2010) Antifungal treatment of small animal veterinary patients. 
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice 40 , 1171–1188
Pennisi MG, Hartmann K, Lloret A et al . (2013) Cryptococcosis in cats: ABCD guidelines 
on prevention and management. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery 15 , 611–618 
Ampicillin
(Amfipen, Ampicare) POM-V 
Formulations: Injectable: Ampicillin sodium 250 mg, 500 mg 
powders for reconstitution (human licensed product only);  
100 mg/ml long-acting preparation. Oral: 250 mg capsule.
Action: Binds to penicillin-binding proteins involved in bacterial cell 
wall synthesis, thereby decreasing cell wall strength and rigidity, 
affecting cell division, growth and septum formation. It acts in a 
time-dependent fashion.


===== BSAVA PDF 44 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
28
Use: Active against many Gram-positive and Gram-negative aerobic 
organisms and obligate anaerobes, but not against those that 
produce penicillinases (beta-lactamases), e.g. Escherichia coli , 
Staphylococcus aureus. The difficult Gram-negative organisms such 
as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella are usually resistant. 
Ampicillin is excreted well in bile and urine. Maintaining levels above 
the MIC is critical for efficacy and thereby prolonged dosage 
intervals or missed doses can compromise therapeutic response. 
Dose and dosing interval is determined by infection site, severity and 
organism. Oral bioavailability is reduced in the presence of food.
Safety and handling: After reconstitution the sodium salt will 
retain adequate potency for up to 8 hours if refrigerated, but use 
within 2 hours if kept at room temperature.
Contraindications: Avoid the use of oral antibiotic agents in 
critically ill patients, as absorption from the GI tract may be 
unreliable. Do not use in animals with hypersensitivity to penicillins.
Adverse reactions: Nausea, diarrhoea and skin rashes are the 
commonest adverse effects.
Drug interactions: Avoid the concurrent use of ampicillin with 
bacteriostatic antibiotics (e.g. tetracycline, erythromycin, 
chloramphenicol). Do not mix in the same syringe as 
aminoglycosides. A synergistic effect is seen when beta-lactam and 
aminoglycoside antimicrobials are used concurrently.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs:  
• Routine infections: 10–20 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c., p.o. q6–8h.
• CNS or serious bacterial infections: up to 40 mg/kg i.v. q6h has 
been recommended.
Cats: 10–20 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c., p.o. q6–8h.
Amprolium
(Harkers Pigeon Coccidiosis Treatment ) AVM-GSL 
Formulations: Oral: 3.84% solution for dilution in water.
Action: Thiamine analogue that disrupts protozoal metabolism.
Use:
• Treatment of coccidiosis in dogs and cats.
Limit duration of therapy to 2 weeks.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Do not use for more than 2 weeks to 
minimize risk of thiamine deficiency in the host animal.
Adverse reactions: Anorexia, diarrhoea and depression in dogs. 
Prolonged high doses can cause thiamine deficiency and may result 
in neurological signs.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 45 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
29
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Drug interactions: Exogenously administered thiamine may 
reduce efficacy.
DOSES
Dogs: For coccidiosis various doses are suggested. 200–300 mg/
dog p.o. q24h for 7–12 days. Small puppies reduce to 60-100 mg/
dog p.o. q24h, larger puppies use 200 mg/dog p.o. q24h.
Cats: 60–100 mg/cat p.o. q24h for 7 days or 110–220 mg/kg on 
food q24h for 7–12 days.
Antivenom (European Adder)
POM
Formulations: Injectable: 10 ml vial for injection (100mg/ml).
Action: Immunoglobulin raised against venom inhibits toxic effects.
Use:
• Used in the management of snake bites by the European Adder 
(Viper).
Current approved suppliers can be found on the VMD website and a 
special dispensation from the VMD can enable supply, purchase and 
use prior to STC approval in urgent cases (contact the VMD). Before 
submitting an application, contact the relevant manufacturer to 
ensure they are able to supply the quantity of product you wish to 
import. Urgent provision may also be possible via the VPIS ToxBox 
service. The value of antivenom decreases with time following the bite 
(benefits to local swelling are limited to administration within 24 hours 
post-bite; however, benefits towards systemic signs, when present, 
continue even with administration >24 hours post-bite). There are no 
published studies conclusively supporting improved recovery time in 
small animals. This antivenom is unlikely to work for other snake bites 
and specialist help should be urgently sought for such bites.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Anaphylactic reactions may develop. Milder 
reactions reported include facial swelling unrelated to snake bite, 
profound panting, unproductive cough.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: Adder bite envenomation:  10 ml per animal slow i.v. 
(regardless of size). Consider giving 0.5 ml i.v. first and then wait 20 
min to test for anaphylaxis.
References
Hodgson L and Brambilla G (2017) Dogs with a European adder bite, does the use of 
antivenom with supportive treatment compared to supportive treatment alone improve 
time to recovery?  Veterinary Evidence  2, 1–11
Lund HS, Kristiansen V, Eggertsdóttir AV et al . (2013) Adverse reactions to equine-derived 
F(ab’)2 -antivenin in 54 dogs envenomated by Vipera berus berus . Journal of Veterinary 
Emergency and Critical Care 23 , 532–53
