
===== Plumb PDF 157 =====
130    Bethanechol
Intra-articular administration (extra-label): Most dosage rec -
ommendations range from 3 – 18 mg/joint (NOT mg/kg) in -
tra-articularly. Repeat doses should be limited to the minimum 
required to achieve soundness.
Monitoring
Monitoring of glucocorticoid therapy is dependent on its reason for 
use, dosage, agent used, dosage schedule (daily versus alternate day 
therapy), route of administration, duration of therapy, and the ani -
mal’s age and condition. The following list may not be appropriate 
or complete for all animals; use clinical assessment and judgment 
should adverse effects be noted:
 ■ Body weight, appetite, GI signs (eg, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea)
 ■ Signs of edema
 ■ Serum electrolytes
 ■ Total plasma protein, albumin
 ■ Blood glucose
 ■ Growth and development in young animals
 ■ Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test, if con -
cerned about iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism
Client Information
 ■ Carefully follow the instructions for how to give this medicine to 
your animal. Do not suddenly stop giving this medicine without 
talking to your veterinarian.
 ■ Do not give other medications (including over-the-counter 
[OTC] medication) or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID) 
medications while your pet is on this medication without talking 
to your veterinarian first.
 ■ There are many potential side effects that can be seen with these 
drugs, including increased or decreased appetite, vomiting, ab -
normal stool, and increased thirst and urination. Contact your 
veterinarian if these effects become severe or worsen.
 ■ While your animal is taking this medication, it is important to 
return to your veterinarian for periodic examinations and blood 
work. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A synthetic glucocorticoid, betamethasone has been manufactured 
as the base and as the dipropionate, acetate, and sodium phosphate 
salts. The base is used for oral dosage forms. The sodium phosphate 
and acetate salts are used in injectable preparations. The dipropio -
nate salt is used in topical formulations.
Betamethasone occurs as an odorless, white to practically white 
crystalline powder. It is insoluble in water and practically insoluble 
in alcohol. The acetate salt occurs as a white or creamy-white odor -
less powder. It is practically insoluble in water and soluble in alcohol. 
The sodium phosphate salt occurs as an odorless, white to practically 
white hygroscopic powder. It is freely soluble in water and slightly 
soluble in alcohol.
Betamethasone may also be known as flubenisolone, BetaVet®, or 
Celestone®.
Storage/Stability
The combination injectable product should be stored between 20°C to 
25°C (68°F-77°F) and protected from light. Shake well before using.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
If coadministration with a local anesthetic is desired, lidocaine 
1% or 2% (without parabens or phenol) mixed with betamethasone 
sodium phosphate/acetate injection has been suggested. 13 The lido-
caine should be drawn into the syringe after the dose of betametha -
sone is drawn up. Do not add lidocaine to the vial of betamethasone.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated betamethasone as a class 4 substance. Use of this drug 
may not be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and 
regulations before entering in a competition while this medication 
is being administered. Contact local racing authorities for further 
guidance. See Appendix for more information.
Betamethasone Injectable suspension: 6 mg/mL as 3.15 mg beta -
methasone sodium phosphate and 2.85 mg betamethasone acetate 
in 5 mL single-dose vials; BetaVet®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in 
horses. Not for use in horses intended for human consumption
Intra-articular injection: Betamethasone acetate 12 mg/mL (equiva-
lent to 10.8 mg betamethasone) and 3.9 mg/mL betamethasone di -
sodium phosphate (equivalent to 3 mg of betamethasone); Betavet 
Soluspan Suspension®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in horses. This 
product is listed in the FDA Green Book is no longer marketed.
Betamethasone valerate is also found in several otic and topical 
products either as a single agent or in combination with gentamicin.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Betamethasone Injection: betamethasone (as sodium phosphate)  
3 mg/mL and betamethasone acetate 3 mg/mL suspension in 5 mL 
multi-dose vials; Celestone Soluspan® , generic; (Rx)
Various topical formulations are also available.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Beta
Bethanechol
(beh-than-e-kole) Urecholine® 
Cholinergic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Cholinergic agent used primarily to increase urinary bladder 
contractility; bethanechol can also be used as a prokinetic 
agent and for treatment of clinical signs associated with 
dysautonomia. May be useful for adjunctive treatment of 
equine gastric ulcer syndrome (EGUS)
 ▶ Principal contraindications are GI or urinary tract obstructions 
or when the integrity of the urinary bladder wall is of concern.
 ▶ Adverse effects are related to cholinergic effects and include 
salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, GI distress, eme-
sis, and miosis (ie, SLUDGE-M).
 ▶ Cholinergic crisis is possible when injecting bethanechol IV or 
IM; atropine should be readily available.
Uses/Indications
Bethanechol can be used to stimulate urinary bladder contractions 
in small animal species. This drug appears to be most effective in 
the treatment of acute and partial detrusor atony secondary to acute 
urinary bladder overdistension and partial neurogenic lesions and 
when given in combination with other agents (eg, alpha-adrenergic 
antagonists, benzodiazepines) to reduce urethral resistance. A pilot 
study in healthy beagles showed no changes in urethral or urinary 
bladder function after bethanechol treatment was given for 15 days.1 
Bethanechol can be used as an esophageal prokinetic. This drug can 
also be used as a general GI prokinetic agent, but other agents (eg, 
metoclopramide, cisapride) are better tolerated.
Bethanechol has been shown to increase abomasum and duode -
num contractility in both healthy dairy cattle and cattle with left dis-
placement of the abomasum (LDA) 2; however, bethanechol did not 


===== Plumb PDF 158 =====
Bethanechol   131
alter the abomasal emptying rate in calves.3
In horses, bethanechol has been suggested as an adjunctive proki-
netic agent for treatment of equine gastric ulcer syndrome (EGUS) 
and in cases with adynamic ileus and gastroduodenal reflux.4-6
Pharmacology/Actions
Bethanechol directly stimulates cholinergic receptors. Its effects are 
principally muscarinic and has negligible nicotinic activity at rec -
ommended dosages. This drug is more resistant to hydrolysis than 
acetylcholine by cholinesterase and, therefore, has an increased du -
ration of activity.
Pharmacologic effects include increased esophageal peristalsis 
and lower esophageal sphincter tone, increased tone and peristaltic 
activity of the stomach and intestines, increased gastric and pancre-
atic secretions, increased tone of the detrusor muscle of the urinary 
bladder, and decreased bladder capacity. High parenteral dosages 
can result in adverse effects related to cholinergic effects on other 
systems (eg, increased bronchial secretions and constriction, mio -
sis, lacrimation, salivation). When administered SC or PO, bethan -
echol’s effects are predominantly seen in the GI and urinary tracts. 
A ceiling effect (ie, decreased response despite higher dosages) can 
be seen secondary to receptor desensitization and calcium depletion.
Pharmacokinetics
No information was located on the pharmacokinetics of this agent in 
veterinary species. In humans, bethanechol is poorly absorbed from 
the GI tract, and the onset of action is usually within 30 to 90 minutes 
after oral administration. After SC administration, effects begin within 
5 to 15 minutes and usually peak within 30 minutes. The duration of 
action after oral administration may last up to 6 hours after large doses 
and 2 hours after SC administration. SC administration yields a more 
enhanced effect on urinary tract stimulation than oral administration.
Bethanechol does not enter the CNS when administered at rec -
ommended doses; other distribution aspects of the drug are not 
known. The metabolic and excretory fate of bethanechol has not 
been described.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Bethanechol is contraindicated in animals with a known hypersensi-
tivity to the drug. Additional contraindications to bethanechol ther-
apy include urinary outflow obstruction, when the integrity of the 
urinary bladder wall is of concern (eg, after recent bladder surgery), 
hyperthyroidism, peptic ulcer disease or when other inflammatory 
GI lesions are present, recent GI surgery with resection and anas -
tomosis, GI obstruction or peritonitis, hypersensitivity to the drug, 
epilepsy, bronchoconstrictive disease (eg, asthma), hypotension, 
severe bradycardia or vagotonia, and vasomotor instability. Bethan-
echol should only be used in conjunction with another agent that 
will sufficiently reduce outflow resistance (eg, diazepam, dantrolene 
[striated muscle], phenoxybenzamine [smooth muscle]) when uri -
nary outflow resistance is increased due to enhanced urethral tone 
(not mechanical obstruction).
Retrograde urinary reflux to the kidney may occur if bethanechol 
fails to relax the urethral sphincter.
Adverse Effects
When administered orally to small animal species, adverse effects 
are usually mild; vomiting, diarrhea, salivation, and anorexia are the 
effects most likely to occur. Cardiovascular effects (eg, tachycardia, 
arrhythmias, hypotension) and respiratory effects (eg, asthma, dys -
pnea) are typically only seen after overdose or with high doses given 
SC. Bethanechol may stimulate pancreatic stimulation of amylase 
and lipase, and serum bilirubin and AST may be increased due to 
retention caused by contraction of the sphincter of Oddi.
In horses, salivation, lacrimation, and abdominal pain (colic) are 
potential adverse effects.
IV or IM use is not recommended; however, the IV route may be 
necessary in an emergency situation. Severe cholinergic reactions are 
likely if the drug is given IV . If injecting the drug (IV or IM), it is 
recommended that atropine be immediately available.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
No data were located regarding bethanechol use in pregnant ani -
mals. It is unknown if bethanechol is distributed into milk. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Clinical signs of overdose are cholinergic in nature. Muscarinic ef -
fects (eg, salivation, urination, defecation) are usually seen with PO 
or SC administration. If given IM or IV , a cholinergic crisis can oc-
cur; circulatory collapse, bloody diarrhea, shock, and cardiac arrest 
are possible.
Treatment for bethanechol toxicity is atropine (see Atropine). 
Epinephrine may also be used to treat clinical signs of bronchospasm 
(see Epinephrine).
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving bethanechol and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Anticholinergic Drugs  (eg, atropine, glycopyrrolate, prop-
antheline): Can antagonize bethanechol’s effects
 ■ Beta Adrenergic Antagonists : May increase the risk for ar-
rhythmias and bronchospasm
 ■ Cholinergic Drugs  (eg, neostigmine, physostigmine, pyr -
idostigmine): Because of additional cholinergic effects, bethan -
echol should generally not be used concomitantly with other cho-
linergic drugs.
 ■ Ganglionic Blocking Drugs  (eg, mecamylamine, tri -
methaphan): Can produce severe GI and hypotensive effects
 ■ Quinidine, Procainamide : Can antagonize the effects of 
bethanechol
Laboratory Considerations 
 ■ None noted
Dosages
NOTE: The injectable product is no longer commercially available 
in the United States.
DOGS:
Increase urinary bladder contractility caused by detrusor mus-
cle atony or treatment for clinical signs related to dysautono -
mia (extra-label): 2.5 mg – 25 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO 3 times 
daily. Some dogs may respond to twice-daily administration.
GI prokinetic (extra-label): 5 – 15 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO ev -
ery 8 hours. May give up to 25 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) every 8 
hours. Improvement in esophageal motility in dogs with megae -
sophagus is possible.7,8
CATS:
Increase urinary bladder contractility caused by detrusor mus-
cle atony or treatment for clinical signs related to dysautono -


===== Plumb PDF 159 =====
132    Bisacodyl
mia (extra-label): 1.25 mg (¼ of a 5 mg tablet) – 7.5 mg/cat (NOT 
mg/kg) PO 3 times daily. Some cats may respond to twice daily 
dosing.
HORSES: 
Increase urinary bladder contractility caused by detrusor mus-
cle atony (extra-label): 0.025 – 0.075 mg/kg SC every 8 hours for 
2 to 3 doses, then 0.25 – 0.75 mg/kg PO 2 to 4 times daily. If no 
response after 5 days, discontinue therapy. NOTE: The PO dose is 
10 times that of the SC dose.
Adjunctive treatment for equine gastric ulcer syndrome 
(EGUS) (extra-label): 0.025 – 0.03 mg/kg SC every 4 to 8 hours 
until no reflux, then 0.3 – 0.4 mg/kg PO 3 to 4 times daily9-11
CATTLE:
Adjunctive treatment for cecal dilation/dislocation (CDD);  
(extra-label): 0.07 mg/kg SC 3 times daily for 2 days, if clinical 
signs are mild, defecation is present, and rectal examination does 
not reveal torsion or retroflexion. If these criteria are not met 
or no improvement is seen within 24 hours of medical therapy, 
surgical therapy is recommended. NOTE: Compounded prepa -
rations are required, as no products are commercially available.12
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Urination frequency, urine volume, and urinary bladder palpa -
tion
 ■ Adverse effects including signs of colic
Client Information
 ■ This drug is prescribed to help animals urinate more easily. In 
horses, it may be used to treat gastric ulcer syndrome.
 ■ It is recommended that food be given with this medicine to re -
duce nausea and/or vomiting.
 ■ In dogs and cats, side effects include vomiting, diarrhea, lack of 
appetite, and increased drooling. Contact your veterinarian if any 
of these signs are severe, worsen, or continue to be a problem.
 ■ In horses, side effects include watery eyes, drooling, and signs of 
colic. Contact your veterinarian if any of these signs are severe, 
worsen, or continue to be a problem.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Bethanechol, a synthetic cholinergic ester that is structurally and 
pharmacologically related to acetylcholine, occurs as a slightly hy -
groscopic white or colorless crystalline powder with a slight, amine-
like or fishy odor. It exhibits polymorphism, with one form melting 
at 211°C (411°F) and the other form at 219°C (426°F). The drug is 
freely soluble in water and alcohol.
Bethanechol chloride may also be known as carbamylmethylcho-
line chloride, Duvoid®, Miotonachol®, Muscaran®, Myo Hermes®, Myo-
choline®, Myotonine®, Ucholine®, Urecholine®, Urocarb® , or Urotonine®.
Storage/Stability
Bethanechol tablets should be stored in air-tight, light-resistant con-
tainers at room temperature 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information has been noted.
Information on bethanechol oral suspension compounded from 
commercially available tablets has been published. 13 Triturating 12 
bethanechol 50 mg tablets with 60 mL of Ora-Plus® and qs ad to 
120 mL with Ora-Sweet® (or Ora-Sweet® SF) yields a 5 mg/mL oral 
suspension that retains more than 90% potency for 60 days stored 
at both 5°C (41°F) and 25°C (77°F). Compounded preparations of 
bethanechol should be protected from light.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) 
has designated this drug as a class 4 substance. See the Appendix for 
more information. Use of this drug may not be allowed in certain 
animal competitions. Check rules and regulations before entering in 
a competition while this medication is being administered. Contact 
local racing authorities for further guidance.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Bethanechol Chloride Oral Tablets: 5 mg, 10 mg, 25 mg, and 50 mg; 
Urecholine® ,  generic; (Rx)
An injectable product was formerly commercially available; a com -
pounding pharmacy may be able to prepare a bethanechol injectable 
form.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Bisacodyl
(bis-a-koe-dill) Dulcolax® 
Laxative
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Stimulant laxative used short-term in dogs and cats
 ▶ Contraindicated in patients with GI obstruction
 ▶ Adverse effects include GI cramping and diarrhea 
 ▶ Do not administer with milk products or liquid antacids; tab-
lets should not be crushed or split.
Uses/Indications
Bisacodyl oral and rectal products are used as stimulant laxatives in 
dogs and cats. Efficacy is improved when patients are adequately hy-
drated prior to administration.
In preparation of dogs for colonoscopy, bisacodyl in combina -
tion with sodium phosphate +/- warm water enema produced a 
colon-cleansing effect which appeared to be less effective than that 
achieved with a polyethylene glycol (PEG)-electrolyte solution.1
Pharmacology/Actions
A stimulant laxative, bisacodyl is thought to produce catharsis by 
increasing peristalsis via direct stimulation on the intramural nerve 
plexuses of intestinal smooth muscle. Bisacodyl has been shown to 
increase fluid and ion accumulation in the colon thereby enhancing 
catharsis.
Pharmacokinetics
Bisacodyl is minimally absorbed after either oral or rectal admin -
istration. Intestinal or bacterial enzymes convert it to an active de -
sacetyl metabolite, which is excreted in the feces. Onset of action is 
generally 6 to 10 hours after oral administration and 15 minutes to 1 
hour after rectal administration.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Bisacodyl is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to it. 
Stimulant laxatives are contraindicated in animals with GI obstruc -
tion (not constipation), undiagnosed rectal bleeding, or when the 
animal is at risk for intestinal perforation. Use with caution in pa -
tients with infiltrative bowel disease, acute GI conditions, or dehy -
dration. Review specific product labels carefully as some may con -
tain other active ingredients (eg, docusate).
Bisacodyl should only be used short-term, as long-term use can 
damage myenteric neurons.
Adverse Effects
Bisacodyl has relatively few adverse effects when used occasionally; 
abdominal discomfort (cramping), nausea, or diarrhea may be noted 
after use.


===== Plumb PDF 160 =====
Bismuth Subsalicylate    133
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Because there is minimal bisacodyl absorption following adminis -
tration, the risk to the fetus or the nursing offspring is expected to 
be limited.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The reported LD 50 in a dog after oral administration is 15 g/kg. 2 
Overdoses may result in severe cramping, diarrhea, vomiting and, 
potentially, fluid and electrolyte imbalances. Animals should be 
monitored and given replacement parenteral fluids and electrolytes 
as necessary.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have ex -
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison control 
center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions either have been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving bisacodyl and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Antacids, Aluminum-, Calcium- or Magnesium-Containing/  
Milk : Do not give antacids or milk within an hour of bisacodyl 
tablets as it may cause premature disintegration of the enteric 
coating resulting in a diminished therapeutic effect.
 ■ Oral Medications : Stimulant laxatives may potentially de -
crease GI transit time thereby affecting absorption of other oral 
medications. Separate doses by 2 hours if possible.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Cathartic (extra-label): Anecdotally, one 5 mg tablet/cat or small 
dog (NOT tablet/kg) PO once daily; one to three 5 mg tablets  
(5 – 15 mg)/dog (NOT tablets/kg) PO once daily for medium to 
large dogs. Do not break or crush tablets. 
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is a stimulant laxative used in dogs and cats.
 ■ Do not crush, split, or allow your animal to chew tablets.
 ■ Diarrhea, stomach pain, and cramping can occur.
 ■ Do not give milk (dairy) products or liquid antacids within one 
hour of giving the oral tablets as it can dissolve the protective 
coating on the tablets.
 ■ If you are giving other oral medicines to your animal, try to give 
them two hours apart from the bisacodyl oral dose. Bisacodyl can 
prevent other medicines from being absorbed properly.
 ■ Bisacodyl should only be used on an occasional basis; long-term, 
regular use can cause harm to the intestinal tract.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A diphenylmethane laxative, bisacodyl occurs as white to off-white 
crystalline powder. It is practically insoluble in water and sparingly 
soluble in alcohol.
Bisacodyl may also be known as bisacodylum; many trade names 
are available.
Storage/Stability
Bisacodyl suppositories, enemas, and enteric-coated tablets should 
be stored at temperatures less than 25°C (77°F) and protected from 
humidity.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Do not crush tablets. The 10 mg suppositories can be cut lengthwise 
to deliver a 5 mg rectal dose.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Bisacodyl Enteric-coated Oral Tablets: 5 mg; Dulcolax® , generic; 
(OTC). NOTE: Some Dulcolax® products may contain other active 
ingredients (eg, docusate); check product label carefully.
Bisacodyl Rectal Suppositories: 10 mg: Dulcolax®, generic; (OTC) 
Bisacodyl Rectal Enema: 10 mg/30 mL; (OTC)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Bismuth Subsalicylate
BSS
(biz-mith sub-sa-liss-ih-layt) Pepto-Bismol®
Antidiarrheal; Gastroprotectant
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat diarrhea and as a component of triple/quadruple 
therapy for treating Helicobacter GI infections
 ▶ High doses may cause salicylism; use with caution in cats.
 ▶ Constipation/impaction may occur.
 ▶ May change feces color to gray-black or greenish-black
 ▶ Bismuth is radiopaque and may interfere with GI radiographic 
testing.
 ▶ Refrigeration may improve palatability.
 ▶ Possible teratogen
Uses/Indications
In veterinary medicine, bismuth subsalicylate products are used to 
treat diarrhea, as a gastroprotectant, and as a component of triple or 
quadruple therapy for treating Helicobacter GI infections. 
In humans, bismuth subsalicylate is used to treat other GI symp-
toms (indigestion, cramps, gas pains) and in the treatment and pro-
phylaxis of traveler’s diarrhea.
Pharmacology/Actions
Bismuth subsalicylate is thought to possess gastroprotectant, an -
ti-endotoxic, and weak antimicrobial properties in the GI tract. It is 
believed that the parent compound is cleaved in the small intestine 
into bismuth carbonate and salicylate. The protectant, anti-endotox-
ic, and weak antimicrobial properties are thought to be derived from 
the bismuth. The salicylate component has antiprostaglandin activity 
that may contribute to its effectiveness and reduce clinical signs asso-
ciated with secretory diarrheas.
Pharmacokinetics
No pharmacokinetic information specific to veterinary medicine has 
been located. In humans, the amount of bismuth absorbed is negligi-
ble, whereas the salicylate component is rapidly and completely ab -
sorbed. Salicylates are highly bound to plasma proteins and are metab-
olized in the liver to salicylic acid. Salicylic acid, conjugated salicylate 
metabolites, and any absorbed bismuth are all excreted renally.
Bismuth subsalicylate did not alter gastric pH in healthy adult 
horses.1
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Salicylate absorption may occur. Do not use in patients hypersen -
sitive to aspirin or other salicylates. Use of this product in patients 


===== Plumb PDF 161 =====
134    Bismuth Subsalicylate
with preexisting bleeding disorders or GI ulcers may exacerbate 
underlying conditions. Because of the potential for adverse effects 
caused by the salicylate component, this drug should be used cau -
tiously, if at all, in cats. Antidiarrheal products are not a substitute for 
adequate fluid and electrolyte therapy when required.
Adverse Effects
Bismuth subsalicylate may change stool color to a gray-black or green-
ish-black; do not confuse with melena. One case report of a rhesus 
macaque suggests that chronic use may cause renal  pigmentation.2
In human infants and debilitated individuals, use of this product 
may cause fecal impaction. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Salicylates are possible teratogens and have been shown to delay par-
turition; in humans, their use should be avoided during pregnan -
cy, particularly during later stages. 3 Use with caution in pregnant 
 animals.
Salicylates are excreted into human breast milk, and salicylate 
toxicity is possible.3 Use with caution in nursing dams.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Bismuth subsalicylate liquid/suspension contains ≈8.7 mg/mL salic-
ylate. Two tablespoons (30 mL) are approximately equivalent to one 
325 mg aspirin tablet. Products containing bismuth may cause neu-
rotoxicity at high doses. Common clinical signs in dogs include di -
arrhea, lethargy, vomiting, ataxia, weakness, and panting. Common 
clinical signs in cats include diarrhea, lethargy, and inappetence. See 
Aspirin for more information. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving bismuth subsalicylate and 
may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise not -
ed, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the po-
tential risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Aspirin : Because bismuth subsalicylate contains salicylate, con -
comitant administration with aspirin may increase salicylate se -
rum concentrations and increase risk for adverse effects (eg, GI 
ulceration).
 ■ Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors (ACEIs; eg, 
benazepril, enalapril): Salicylates may enhance the nephrotoxic 
effects and reduce the effectiveness of ACE inhibitors. Monitor 
appropriately.
 ■ Anticoagulants (eg, heparin, rivaroxaban, warfarin ): May 
increase bleeding risk
 ■ Clopidogrel : May have additive antiplatelet effects
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one): Cor-
ticosteroids may increase the clearance of salicylates, decrease sa-
licylate serum concentrations, and increase GI bleeding risk.
 ■ Loop Diuretics (eg, furosemide): Salicylates may decrease the 
diuretic effect of loop diuretics. The serum concentration of salic-
ylates may be increased by loop diuretics.
 ■ Methotrexate : Aspirin may displace methotrexate from plas-
ma proteins, increasing the risk for methotrexate toxicity.
 ■ NSAIDs (eg, carprofen, meloxicam, robenacoxib): Concomitant 
administration with NSAIDs may increase the risk of  bleeding.
 ■ Tetracycline Antibiotics (eg, doxycycline): Products con -
taining bismuth can decrease the absorption of orally adminis -
tered tetracycline products. If both agents are to be used, separate 
drugs by at least 2 hours and administer tetracycline first. If nec -
essary, tetracyclines may be given 6 hours after bismuth admin -
istration.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ At high doses, salicylates may cause false-positive results for uri-
nary glucose if using the cupric sulfate method ( Clinitest® , Bene-
dict’s solution) and false-negative results if using the glucose oxi-
dase method (Clinistix® o r  Tes-Tape®) .
 ■ Urinary ketones measured by the ferric chloride method (Ger -
hardt) may be affected if salicylates are in the urine (reddish color 
produced).
 ■ Salicylates in the urine may interfere with 5-HIAA determina -
tions by the fluorometric method.
 ■ Falsely elevated vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) may be seen with 
most methods used if salicylates are in the urine. Falsely lowered 
VMA concentrations may be seen if using the Pisano method.
 ■ Urinary excretion of xylose may be decreased if salicylates are 
given concurrently.
 ■ Falsely elevated serum uric acid concentrations may be measured 
if using colorimetric methods.
 ■ As bismuth is radiopaque, it may interfere with GI tract radiologic 
examinations.
Dosages
NOTE: Liquid doses below refer to suspensions of bismuth subsalic-
ylate that are 17.5 mg/mL (1.75%) (eg, veterinary suspensions, orig-
inal Pepto-Bismol®  liquid) unless otherwise specified. Several over-
the-counter products list dosages for dogs, cats, horses, cattle, and 
swine; however, none of the products or labeling are FDA-approved.
DOGS:
Acute diarrhea or as a GI “coating agent” (extra-label): Liquid: 
0.25 – 2 mL/kg (4.4 – 35 mg/kg) PO 3 to 4 times per day
Helicobacter gastritis infections using triple therapy (extra- 
label):
a) Bismuth subsalicylate suspension (original Pepto-Bismol®)  
0.22 mL/kg (3.85 mg/kg) PO every 4 to 6 hours in combination 
with metronidazole 15.4 mg/kg and amoxicillin 11 mg/kg PO 
every 8 hours for 3 weeks4
b) Bismuth subsalicylate 262 mg tablets given based on body 
weight (less than 5 kg (11 lb) = 0.25 tablet; 5 to 9.9 kg (11 to 
21.8 lb)= 0.5 tablet; 10 to 24.9 kg (22 to 54.8 lb) = 1 tablet; 
greater than 25 kg = 2 tablets) every 12 hours in combination 
with metronidazole 10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours and amoxi -
cillin 15 mg/kg every 12 hours for 2 weeks5
c) Bismuth subsalicylate suspension 0.22 mL/kg (3.85 mg/kg) 
PO every 6 to 8 hours in combination with metronidazole  
11 – 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours and amoxicillin 22 mg/kg 
PO every 12 hours for 3 weeks6 
CATS:
Diarrhea (extra-label): 0.5 – 1 mL/kg (8.8 – 17.5 mg/kg) PO every 
12 hours. Use cautiously in cats; recommend not treating for more 
than 3 days7
Helicobacter gastritis infections using triple therapy (extra-label): 
Bismuth subsalicylate suspension (original Pepto-Bismol®) 0.22 
mL/kg (3.85 mg/kg) PO every 4 to 8 hours in combination with 
metronidazole 11 – 15.4 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours and amox-
icillin 11 – 22 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for 3 weeks4,6
Helicobacter gastritis infections using quadruple therapy (extra- 
label): Bismuth subsalicylate (262 mg tablets; Pepto-Bismol®)  
¼ tablet/cat (total dose) PO twice daily, ± H 2 blocker (eg, fa -
motidine) or omeprazole in combination with metronidazole  
