
===== Plumb PDF 177 =====
150    Buprenorphine
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Bupivacaine Liposome Injectable Suspension 1.3% (13.3 mg/mL) in 
10 mL and 20 mL single-use vials; Exparel®; (Rx)6
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Buprenorphine
(byoo-pre-nor-feen) Buprenex® ,  Simbadol®, Zorbium®
Opioid Partial Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Partial mu-opioid agonist used primarily as an injectable and 
buccal (ie, oral transmucosal [OTM]) analgesic, especially in 
cats
 ▶ Often used as a component of short-term immobilization and 
anesthetic drug combinations 
 ▶ Buccal/OTM administration is well tolerated and can be effec-
tive, but bioavailability is low by this route, as is standard  
(0.3 mg/mL) buprenorphine administered SC.
 ▶ Longer onset of action and longer duration of action as com-
pared with most other opioids
 ▶ Rarely, may cause respiratory depression
 ▶ Because of tight buprenorphine receptor binding, standard 
doses of naloxone may not completely reverse drug effects.
 ▶ DEA Schedule III (C-III) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Buprenorphine is most often used as an analgesic for mild to mod -
erate pain or in preanesthetic drug combinations in small animals. 
In most species, buprenorphine provides less analgesia than pure 
mu-opioid agonists (eg, morphine, hydromorphone) and it is less se-
dating than most other opioids (particularly butorphanol). For acute 
pain control, buprenorphine may have the disadvantage of a longer 
onset of action than other opioids.
In dogs, an isoflurane MAC-sparing effect occurs at IV dosages of 
0.01 mg/kg, 0.05 mg/kg, and 0.1 mg/kg1 but methadone (0.3 mg/kg)  
provided more effective presurgical analgesia than buprenorphine 
(0.02 mg/kg) in dogs sedated with acepromazine and medetomi -
dine prior to undergoing ovariohysterectomy (OHE). 2 Use of the 
feline-labeled Simbadol® (0.02 mg/kg IM) prior to surgery in dogs 
(pretreated with acepromazine and carprofen and undergoing ovari-
ohysterectomy) provided similar postoperative analgesia as standard 
buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg IM) but more dogs in the standard bu -
prenorphine group (3/12) required postoperative rescue analgesia 
(vs 0/12 for Simbadol®).3 Oral transmucosal (OTM) administration 
can provide effective analgesia (0.02 and 0.12 mg/kg were studied) 4 
but bioavailability is low and variable with this route. 5 When used 
epidurally in combination with bupivacaine for stifle arthroplasty, 
buprenorphine produced sufficient analgesia for up to 24 hours.6 Bu-
prenorphine/bupivacaine combination for infraorbital nerve block 
had an isoflurane-sparing effect and extended the duration of anal -
gesia to 48 to 96 hours.7
In cats, one product (Simbadol®) is a high-concentration (1.8 mg/ 
mL), long-duration (72 hour) form of buprenorphine that is FDA-  
approved for SC administration for the control of postoperative pain 
associated with surgical procedures. A transdermal buprenorphine 
solution is FDA-approved for the control of postoperative pain. It is 
applied by veterinary staff in the clinic or hospital 1 to 2 hours prior 
to surgical procedures and provides analgesia for 4 days.8 
In one study, when combined with medetomidine (0.002 mg/kg),  
standard concentration buprenorphine (0.3 mg/mL; 0.002 mg/kg) 
given IM provided equivalent analgesia to that provided by butorph-
anol (0.4 mg/kg) or methadone (0.5 mg/kg). 9 Combined with dex -
medetomidine (0.001 mg/kg), butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg) provided 
better sedation and less vomiting than buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg)  
when administered IM to cats. 10 With standard buprenorphine, 
buccal/OTM administration can be a practical, effective method for 
controlling postoperative pain. However, IV or IM administration 
of buprenorphine provides better postoperative (OHE) analgesia as 
compared with SC or buccal/OTM administration, and the cats re -
ceiving buprenorphine by the OTM route experienced a high prev -
alence of treatment failure.11 Multidose injectable formulations may 
be less palatable to cats when given by the OTM route than the pre-
servative-free formulation.12 Combining opioids such as buprenor -
phine with short-term NSAIDs for postoperative pain control pro -
vides better analgesia than buprenorphine alone.13 
In the UK and Australia, there are licensed buprenorphine prod-
ucts that are labeled for postoperative analgesia in dogs, cats, and 
horses and potentiation of the sedative effects of centrally acting 
agents in dogs and horses.
Pharmacology/Actions
Buprenorphine has partial agonist activity at the mu receptor and is 
a kappa-receptor antagonist. Buprenorphine is considered 30 times 
more potent than morphine and exhibits many of the same actions as 
the pure opioid agonists. It produces a dose-related analgesia; how -
ever, at higher doses, analgesic effects may plateau. Buprenorphine 
has a high affinity for, and slow dissociation from, mu  receptors in 
the CNS, which may explain its relatively long duration of action. 
In dogs, sedative effects are generally seen after 15 minutes, but an -
algesia may not develop fully until 30 minutes postadministration. 
Analgesia is unlikely to persist for 12 hours unless pain is mild. A 6- 
to 8-hour duration of analgesic effect is often reported but analgesia 
may be as short as 4 hours, with high variability between cats.13 Mul-
timodal analgesia with frequent pain assessment is recommended. 
The high-concentration, long duration buprenorphine product lasts 
72 hours when given SC to cats.
The cardiovascular effects of buprenorphine may cause a decrease 
in both blood pressure and cardiac rate. Rarely, human patients may 
exhibit increases in blood pressure and cardiac rate. Respiratory de-
pression is a possibility and decreased respiratory rates have been 
noted in horses treated with buprenorphine. GI effects appear to be 
minimal in cats treated with buprenorphine.
Pharmacokinetics
In cats, buprenorphine is rapidly and completely absorbed when 
given IM.14 Peak concentrations after SC injection can vary widely; 
blood concentrations are low and do not appear to correlate with an-
algesic effect. Buprenorphine has a volume of distribution at steady-
state (VDss) of ≈3 to 8 L/kg and a clearance of ≈8 to 20 mL/kg per 
minute. Elimination half-life is ≈6 to 7 hours. When administered 
by the buccal/OTM route, bioavailability is low and highly variable 
(≈20% to 30%). 13,15 The human transdermal patch buprenorphine 
(Transtec®; UK) applied to cats has demonstrated widely variable 
blood concentrations and, without a loading dose, does not appear 
to provide adequate analgesia.  Individual variability in response to 
buprenorphine administration by all administration routes, espe -
cially SC and OTM, has been reported. Some cats may not receive 
sufficient analgesia from buprenorphine.13 
In dogs, oral bioavailability is very low (5%), but buprenorphine 
administered via the buccal/OTM route is ≈35% to 50% absorbed. 5 
Elimination half-life ranges from 4 to 9 hours, 16 and wide interpa -
tient variability exists. In a small pilot study, application of topical 
buprenorphine patches showed that plasma concentrations in -
creased during the first 36 hours, then remained between 0.7 and  
1 ng/mL during the study period.17 In greyhounds, when buprenor-
phine was administered IV , the volume of distribution, plasma clear-


===== Plumb PDF 178 =====
Buprenorphine   151
ance, and terminal half-life were 3.54 L/kg, 10.3 mL/minute/kg, and 
3.96 hours, respectively. 18 A pharmacokinetic study in 6 mongrel 
dogs resulted in a volume of distribution, plasma clearance, and ter-
minal half-life of 4.68 L/kg, 23.3 mL/minute/kg, and 3.97 hours, 19 
respectively, when buprenorphine was administered IV , and a termi-
nal half-life of 12.74 hours when the extended-release injection was 
administered SC.20
In horses, the onset of action is ≈15 minutes after IV dosing. 
Buprenorphine is variably absorbed after IM administration and 
bioavailability is ≈50% to 80%. 21 Volume of distribution is ≈2.5 to  
3 L/kg.22,23 The peak effect occurs within 30 to 45 minutes and the du-
ration of action may last up to 8 hours. Elimination half-life after an 
IV or IM dose is ≈3.5 to 6 hours. 22,23 Because acepromazine exhibits 
a similar onset and duration of action, many equine clinicians favor 
using acepromazine in combination with buprenorphine. One study 
found plasma buprenorphine concentrations between 0.34 and  
2.45 ng/mL after IV administration of 10 μg/kg. 24 In foals younger 
than 21 days of age, buprenorphine 0.01 – 0.02 mg/kg IV had a VDss 
of 6.5 L/kg; clearance was 56 mL/kg/minute, and elimination half-life 
was ≈2 hours.25 The same dosage administered sublingually was only 
25% bioavailable, and plasma concentration reached the presumed 
therapeutic concentration briefly in only one foal; however, physio-
logic changes did occur, indicating absorption of the drug. The ther-
apeutic concentration could be lower in foals than in other species.
Elimination half-life was 1 to 2.7 hours after IV and SC adminis -
tration in alpacas, and SC bioavailability was 64%.26
The distribution of the drug has not been well studied. Data from 
work done in rats reflect that buprenorphine concentrates in the liv-
er but is also found in the brain, GI tract, and placenta. It is highly 
bound (96%) to plasma proteins (not albumin).
In most species, buprenorphine is metabolized in the intestinal 
wall and liver27,28 by N-dealkylation likely via CYP3A4 (forming nor-
buprenorphine, which is active). Buprenorphine and norbuprenor -
phine also undergo glucuronidation; metabolites are then eliminat -
ed by biliary excretion into the feces (≈70%) and urinary excretion 
(≈27%).
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
The drug is contraindicated in patients with a known hypersensitiv-
ity to it or other opioids.
Because of the potential for decreased clearance with subsequent 
exaggerated/prolonged effects, all opioids should be used with cau -
tion in patients that have hypothyroidism, impaired hepatic func -
tion, or adrenocortical insufficiency (Addison’s disease), and in pe-
diatric, geriatric, or severely debilitated patients.
Rarely, patients may develop respiratory depression from bu -
prenorphine; therefore, it should be used cautiously in patients with 
compromised pulmonary function. Like other opioids, buprenor -
phine must be used with caution in patients with head trauma, in -
creased CSF pressure, or other CNS dysfunction (eg, coma), as any 
degree of respiratory depression could result in excessive partial 
pressure of arterial carbon dioxide with a subsequent increase in in-
tracranial pressure.
Patients with severe hepatic dysfunction may eliminate the drug 
more slowly than normal patients. Buprenorphine may increase bile 
duct pressure and should be used cautiously in patients with biliary 
tract disease29; however, this appears to not have any clinical impact. 
As with all opioids, buprenorphine should also be used with caution 
in horses that show signs of diminished GI tract motility.
Opioid analgesics are contraindicated in patients stung by scor -
pions (eg, Centruroides spp), as these drugs may potentiate venom 
effects.30
Mild sedation can occur in both dogs and cats, making buprenor-
phine an important component of a preanesthetic protocol; howev-
er, excitement can occur in horses and, less commonly, in cats, as is 
true of other opioids. Mild postoperative hyperthermia can occur in 
cats.28
Because buprenorphine can cause excitement in horses, when it 
is used as a preoperative analgesic, an IV sedative should be admin-
istered prior to, or in conjunction with, the buprenorphine injec -
tion.22,23
The standard formulation of buprenorphine by the SC route is not 
recommended due to poor absorption. Buprenorphine should not 
be administered via the intrathecal or peridural routes. 
The transdermal solution requires ≈30 minutes to dry, and once 
dried the risk for human buprenorphine exposure following contact 
of the administration site is limited. Clinic staff should use personal 
protective equipment (impermeable gloves, eye protection, labora -
tory coat) when preparing or administering any of the concentrated 
buprenorphine products.8
Adverse Effects
Although rare, respiratory depression appears to be the major ad -
verse effect. Other adverse effects (eg, sedation, nausea, vomiting, 
bradycardia, excitement [primarily cats and horses]) may be noted 
but generally occur less frequently as compared with other opioids. 
In dogs, as with other opioids, salivation, bradycardia, hypother-
mia, agitation, dehydration, and miosis have been reported. Tachy -
cardia, vomiting, and high blood pressure rarely occur. Injection site 
reactions and skin lesions have been noted with the non-FDA-ap -
proved extended-release injectable formulation and are most likely 
due to a reaction to the vehicle.31 SC administration of high-concen-
tration buprenorphine to dogs resulted in varying degrees of seda -
tion, reduced appetite, panting, whining, and hyperptyalism.20  
In cats, as with other opioids, mydriasis and behavioral effects (eg, 
excessive purring, pacing, rubbing, hiding) can be seen. Vomiting, 
salivation, anorexia, and hyperthermia occur rarely; however, hyper-
thermia was observed in ≈28% of cats on the day after surgery; con -
stipation and mydriasis also were noted.32 Vomiting occurred in 55% 
of cats receiving buprenorphine/dexmedetomidine combination 
with only 5% vomiting in cats receiving dexmedetomidine/butorph-
anol.10 In a study, high doses of standard buprenorphine (0.24, 0.72, 
and 1.2 mg/kg/day SC) for 9 consecutive days were well tolerated in 
young cats. Adverse effects included hyperactivity, tachycardia, diffi-
culty in handling, disorientation, agitation, and mydriasis.33 
In horses, buprenorphine may cause ataxia, excitement, and dimin-
ished gut sounds, but colic has not been a major concern. All horses 
(n = 4) developed constipation after receiving a single SC or IM dose 
of an experimental sustained-release buprenorphine formulation. 34 
Administration with a sedative (eg, acepromazine, detomidine) may 
help decrease excitement and cardiac and respiratory rates.
In rabbits, SC buprenorphine reduced food and water intake, GI 
transit, and fecal output.35,36 
The primary adverse effect seen in humans is sedation, with an 
incidence of ≈66%. 29 Buprenorphine may cause urine retention or 
difficulty voiding, particularly with high IV doses or epidural ad -
ministration.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safe use of veterinary buprenorphine formulations in breeding, preg-
nant, or lactating animals has not been established. The drug crosses 
the placenta. Although no controlled studies have been performed 
in domestic animals or humans, the drug has exhibited no evidence 
of teratogenicity or causing impaired fertility in laboratory animals. 
Early fetal death and postimplantation loss have been noted in rats.27 
The Vetergesic® 0.3 mg/mL solution for injection for dogs and cats 
label (Canada) states that the drug is contraindicated preoperatively 
for cesarean section due to concerns for respiratory depression in 
offspring.27


===== Plumb PDF 179 =====
152    Buprenorphine
In rats, maternal milk buprenorphine concentration equaled or 
exceeded that of plasma 27; however, maternal milk buprenorphine 
concentrations are low in humans37 and no adverse effects were seen 
in 4-week-old infants nursing from buprenorphine-treated women.38 
There are no data for commonly encountered veterinary species.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The intraperitoneal LD 50 of buprenorphine has been reported to 
be 243 mg/kg in rats. The ratio of lethal dose to effective dose is at 
least 1000:1 in rodents. Because of the apparent high index of safety, 
life-threatening acute overdoses should be rare in veterinary medi -
cine, but most overdoses will cause clinical signs. Common findings 
in dogs (in decreasing frequency) include vocalization, ataxia, hy -
persalivation, hypothermia, and lethargy.
Treatment with naloxone and doxapram has been suggested for 
cases of acute overdoses causing respiratory or cardiac effects.27 Sec-
ondary to buprenorphine’s high affinity for the mu-opioid receptor, 
high doses and/or repeated doses of naloxone may be required to 
treat respiratory depression. See Naloxone.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving buprenorphine and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks 
should be weighed, and additional monitoring performed when 
appropriate. NOTE: Drug interactions may be positive rather than 
adverse (eg potentiation of local anesthetic effects when combined 
with buprenorphine).
 ■ Anesthetics, Local  (eg, mepivacaine, bupivacaine ): When 
buprenorphine and the local anesthetic agent are combined in the 
same syringe and injected perineurally, the anesthetic action may 
be potentiated.
 ■ Anticonvulsants (eg, phenobarbital, phenytoin ): May de -
crease plasma buprenorphine concentrations 
 ■ Benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam, midazolam): Case reports of 
humans developing respiratory/cardiovascular/CNS depression; 
use combination with caution
 ■ CNS Depressant Agents  (eg, anesthetic agents, antihista -
mines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, phenothiazines, tran -
quilizers): May cause increased CNS or cardiorespiratory depres-
sion when used with buprenorphine
 ■ Desmopressin: The concurrent use of desmopressin and opi -
oids may increase the risk for hyponatremia. 
 ■ Erythromycin : Can increase plasma buprenorphine 
 concentrations
 ■ Halothane : Reduced hepatic blood flow during anesthesia can 
increase buprenorphine effects.
 ■ Ketoconazole, Itraconazole, Fluconazole : Can increase 
plasma buprenorphine concentrations
 ■ Metoclopramide: Concurrent use of metoclopramide and bu-
prenorphine may increase the risk for CNS depression. 
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors  (MAOIs; eg, selegiline, 
amitraz): Possible additive effects or increased CNS depression; 
combination is not recommended in humans due to additional 
risk for serotonin syndrome29
 ■ Naloxone : Will reduce analgesia but is less effective at reversing 
buprenorphine effects as compared with other opioids
 ■ Opioids (Pure Mu-Agonists) (eg, fentanyl, hydromor -
phone): Buprenorphine may potentially antagonize some analge-
sic effects but may also reverse some of the sedative and respirato-
ry depressant effects of pure agonists.
 ■ Pancuronium : If used with buprenorphine, may cause increased 
conjunctival changes
 ■ Phenobarbital: Concurrent use of phenobarbital and bu -
prenorphine may result in increased risk for CNS depression and/
or decreased plasma concentrations of buprenorphine. 
 ■ QT Prolonging Agents (eg, cisapride, quinidine, sotalol ): 
Concurrent use can increase the risk for life-threatening arrhyth-
mias in humans; significance in veterinary patients is unknown. 
 ■ Rifampin : Potentially decreased plasma buprenorphine concen-
trations
 ■ Serotonergic Agents (eg, clomipramine, fluoxetine, mir -
tazapine, trazodone): Concurrent use may increase the risk for 
serotonin syndrome.29
 ■ Tramadol : May increase the risk for serotonin syndrome and 
respiratory depression29
Laboratory Considerations
None noted
Dosages
DOGS:
Analgesia (all extra-label):
a) General use: 5 – 30 μg/kg (0.005 – 0.03 mg/kg) IV or IM 
every 4 to 6 hours; consider extended dosing interval to 8 to 
12 hours for treating mild pain. NOTE: SC administration 
of buprenorphine does not provide clinical analgesia due to 
erratic drug absorption.39 
b) Constant rate infusion (CRI):  Following an IV loading 
dose of 5 – 10 μg/kg (0.005 – 0.01 mg/kg), 2 – 4 μg/kg/
hour IV CRI has been suggested. Acceptable analgesia was 
described in a pharmacokinetic study evaluating a loading 
dose of 15 μg/kg (0.015 mg/kg) IV administered after re -
covery from anesthesia, followed by 2.5 μg/kg/hour IV CRI 
for 6 hours.40 
c) Postoperative analgesia: 10 – 20 μg/kg (0.01 – 0.02 mg/kg)  
IV or IM. 41,42 For further pain relief, repeat if necessary 
with 10 μg/kg (0.01 mg/kg) after 3 to 4 hours or 20 μg/kg  
(0.02 mg/kg) every 5 to 6 hours; exact timing is based on 
expected duration of the dose administered, degree of pain, 
and results of pain assessment. 
d) Postoperative analgesia using the feline-labeled bu -
prenorphine product ( Simbadol®): In dogs undergoing 
ovariohysterectomy, buprenorphine 20 μg/kg (0.02 mg/kg) 
IV , IM in combination with acepromazine 0.02 mg/kg IM 
as a premedication followed by carprofen 4.4 mg/kg SC ad-
ministered after induction of anesthesia provided immedi-
ate postoperative analgesia (duration not determined).39
e) Buccal (oral transmucosal; OTM) for postsurgical anal -
gesia: Based on study results, the authors concluded that  
120 μg/kg (0.12 mg/kg) buccally before OHE was an effec -
tive analgesic with minimal intraoperative and postoper -
ative adverse effects. 43 Under experimental conditions, 30 
μg/kg (0.03 mg/kg) provided antinociceptive effects.44
Premedication before surgery or as an anesthetic adjunct (extra- 
label): NOTE: Many potential combinations have been suggested; 
the following are examples and are not inclusive. For additional 
information, refer to anesthesia-specific references. 
a) In one study, buprenorphine 20 μg/kg (0.02 mg/kg) was 


===== Plumb PDF 180 =====
Buprenorphine   153
combined in the same syringe with either acepromazine  
0.03 mg/kg or dexmedetomidine (dosed by body surface area 
at 250 μg/m
2
) and injected IM prior to induction of anesthe-
sia. IV catheters were placed 30 to 45 minutes after premed -
ication, and general anesthesia was induced with propofol 
or alfaxalone. Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg IV was given after in -
duction and before surgery started. General anesthesia was 
maintained with isoflurane. Both combinations (buprenor -
phine with either acepromazine or dexmedetomidine) result-
ed in suitable anesthesia and analgesia for dogs undergoing 
elective procedures; some animals required additional anal -
gesia within 4 hours of the premedication. Postsurgical anal-
gesic differences were not clinically significant.45
b) In another study, the efficacy and cardiorespiratory effects 
of a combination of dexmedetomidine 15 μg/kg, ketamine  
3 mg/kg, and either buprenorphine 40 μg/kg, butorphanol 
0.2 mg/kg, or hydromorphone 0.05 mg/kg as a single IM in-
jection (with or without reversal by atipamezole) in dogs un-
dergoing castration was tested. Supplemental isoflurane was 
used when anesthesia was considered inadequate during sur-
gery. The authors concluded that the most suitable analgesic 
with this drug combination was buprenorphine and that the 
use of atipamezole after surgery shortened recovery times.46
CATS:
Analgesia: 
a) Control of postoperative pain associated with surgical 
procedures (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
i. Using the high-concentration SC injection ( Simbadol®): 
0.24 mg/kg SC once daily for up to 3 days. 28 Administer 
the first dose ≈1 hour prior to surgery. Do not dispense 
for administration at home by the pet owner due to the 
risks associated with the high concentration of Simbadol®  
(1.8 mg/mL) compared with other buprenorphine products.
ii. Using the transdermal solution (Zorbium®): The label dos-
age provides a dosage range of 2.7 – 6.7 mg/kg, and the du-
ration of analgesia is 4 days.8 Apply to healthy and non-in-
jured skin at the dorsal cervical region; part hair prior to 
application. Administer in the veterinary clinic or hospital 
1 to 2 hours prior to surgical procedure.
• For cats weighing 1.2 to 3 kg (2.6 to 6.6 lb): 0.4 mL  
(8 mg)
• For cats weighing greater than 3 kg (6.6 lb) and up to  
7.5 kg (16.5 lb): 1 mL (20 mg) 
b) General use and postoperative analgesia  (extra-label): 
10 – 30 μg/kg (0.01 – 0.03 mg/kg) standard buprenorphine 
IM, IV , or buccal/OTM every 4 to 8 hours. Dosages at the 
high end of the dosing range may be required for more 
severe pain. NOTE: If using buccal/OTM, suggest using 
upper end of dosing range or higher (up to 0.05 mg/kg).  
Use of high-concentration buprenorphine ( Simbadol®)  
0.12 – 0.24 mg/kg buccal/OTM provided analgesia under 
experimental conditions with a duration of 8 to 12 hours 
(not 24 hours as provided by SC administration).47
c) Constant rate infusion (extra-label): Although not report-
ed in cats, anecdotally the use as an infusion is the same as 
that used in dogs.
Premedication before surgery or as an anesthetic adjunct  (ex-
tra-label): NOTE: Many potential combinations have been sug -
gested; the following are examples and are not inclusive. For addi-
tional information, refer to anesthesia-specific references.
a) 0.01 – 0.03 mg/kg buprenorphine IM either 30 minutes pri-
or to or combined with medetomidine 0.1 mg/kg (or dex -
medetomidine 0.05 – 0.08 mg/kg) and ketamine 10 mg/kg 
and given IM for a brief, light plane of anesthesia. Inhalant 
may be needed for longer-term anesthesia or moderate-se-
vere pain-level procedures. 48 Atipamezole can be used to 
reverse the alpha-2 agonist, if desired.
b) In one study, buprenorphine at 20 μg/kg (0.02 mg/kg) was 
combined in the same syringe with either acepromazine  
0.03 mg/kg or dexmedetomidine (dosed by body surface 
area at 250 μg/m 2) and injected IM. IV catheters were 
placed 30 to 45 minutes after premedication and general 
anesthesia induction was done using propofol or alfax -
alone. Meloxicam was given IV (0.3 mg/kg) after induction 
before surgery started. General anesthesia was maintained 
with isoflurane. Both combinations (buprenorphine with 
either acepromazine or dexmedetomidine) resulted in suit-
able anesthesia and analgesia for cats undergoing elective 
procedures; some animals required additional analgesia 
within 4 hours of the premedication. Cats given dexmede -
tomidine were more sedated than when acepromazine was 
used. Analgesic effect differences postsurgery were not clin-
ically significant.45
c) In a study assessing analgesia after OHE, one of the proto -
cols used was: 10 minutes prior to surgery, ketamine 60 mg/
m2 (≈3 mg/kg), midazolam 3 mg/m2 (≈0.2 mg/kg), medeto-
midine 600 μg/m2 (≈30 μg/kg), and buprenorphine 180 μg/
m2 (≈9 μg/kg) were combined and given as a single IM injec-
tion in the quadriceps muscles. In addition, either carprofen  
(4 mg/kg) or meloxicam (0.3 mg/kg) was given SC. All pro-
tocols in the study provided adequate analgesia.49
HORSES: 
Neuroleptanalgesia (all extra-label): 
a) 4 – 10 μg/kg (0.004 – 0.01 mg/kg) IV; usually given with a 
sedative such as acepromazine and/or detomidine. 50–52 IM 
administration could also be used, but bioavailability may 
be reduced, and onset of action delayed.
b) Analgesia: 10 μg/kg (0.01 mg/kg) IV , given 5 minutes after 
administration of an IV sedative. 41 A single dose may be 
repeated if necessary, after no less than 1 to 2 hours. A case 
report noted 6 μg/kg (0.006 mg/kg) sublingually every 12 
hours provided analgesia to a 5-month-old filly with a C1 
fracture.53 
c) To potentiate sedation: 5 μg/kg (0.005 mg/kg) IV given 5 
minutes after administration of an IV sedative. 41 The dose 
may be repeated after 10 minutes if necessary. 
SHEEP:
Sedation (extra-label): 0.02 mg/kg combined with acepromazine 
0.03 mg/kg and given IM provided similar sedation as morphine/
acepromazine.54
SWINE:
Analgesic (extra-label): 0.04 mg/kg IM once effectively reduced 
lameness55 and alleviated castration-related pain behaviors 56 in 
piglets.
FERRETS:
Analgesic (extra-label): 0.01 – 0.05 mg/kg SC or IM 2 to 3 times 
daily.57Anecdotally can use as a preanesthetic/anesthetic adjunct 
combined with an alpha-2 agonist and ketamine at the same dos-
ages listed for cats.
RABBITS/GUINEA PIGS:
Analgesic (all extra-label):
a) Rabbits:
1. 0.05 mg/kg SC, IM, or IV every 4 to 12 hours; 0.5 mg/kg 
rectally every 12 hours58
2. One study in rabbits found that a compounded buprenor -
phine extended release (ER) formulation was at least as 


===== Plumb PDF 181 =====
154    Buprenorphine
effective as commercially available buprenorphine for 
postoperative analgesia. The ER formulation was prepared 
using FDA-approved buprenorphine powder and a pro -
prietary polymer matrix. The product was administered 
at 0.12 mg/kg SC as a single injection and compared with 
commercially available buprenorphine at 0.02 mg/kg SC 
every 12 hours.59
b) Guinea pigs: 0.05 mg/kg SC or IV every 4 to 12 hours 60
Premedication or anesthetic adjunct in rabbits (all extra-label):
a) Compromised patients: 0.05 – 0.1 mg/kg SC61
b) Buprenorphine 0.03 – 0.05 mg/kg IM or SC either 30 min -
utes before or combined with medetomidine 0.25 mg/kg 
(or dexmedetomidine 0.125 mg/kg) and ketamine 15 mg/
kg IM or SC for a brief, light plane of anesthesia. Inhalant 
may be needed for longer-term anesthesia or moderate-se-
vere pain-level procedures. 62 Atipamezole can be used to 
reverse the alpha-2 agonist, if desired.
c) Healthy animals before uncomplicated elective proce -
dures: buprenorphine 0.02 – 0.06 mg/kg combined with 
midazolam (0.25 – 0.5 mg/kg) and given IM within 20 min-
utes of procedure; used with a local or line incisional block 
using lidocaine and bupivacaine 63
MICE/RATS:
Analgesic: 
a) Mice: 
i.  Postprocedural pain control (label dosage, FDA-indexed): 
• Using extended-release buprenorphine suspension:  
3.25 mg/kg SC as a single injection.64 If needed, a single 
repeat dose may be administered 72 hours after the initial 
dose.
• Using extended-release buprenorphine solution: 
1 – 1.5 mg/kg SC65 
ii.  Using standard buprenorphine (extra-label): 
0.05 – 0.1 mg/kg SC every 12 hours60
b) Rats: 
i.  Postprocedural pain control using extended-release 
buprenorphine product (label dosage, FDA-indexed):  
0.65 mg/kg SC as a single injection. 64 If needed, a single 
repeat dose may be administered 72 hours after the initial 
dose.
ii.  Using standard buprenorphine (extra-label): 0.01 – 0.05 mg/ 
kg SC or IV every 8 to 12 hours or 0.1 – 0.25 mg/kg PO 
every 8 to 12 hours60
Monitoring
 ■ Analgesic efficacy (pain scores)
 ■ Respiratory effects (respiratory rate, ETCO2, SpO2)
 ■ Cardiac effects (heart rate, ECG, blood pressure)
 ■ Body temperature (in cats, due to potential development of hy -
perthermia)
Client Information
 ■ Buprenorphine is an opioid analgesic often used for short-term 
pain relief. It is given either by injection or buccally (ie, oral trans-
mucosally [OTM]; squirted into the side of the mouth).
 ■ When giving buccally/OTM to cats, gently squirt or drip just un-
der the tongue or in the cheek pouch for the best effect. The doses 
are very small for this potent drug, so be sure you are giving the 
exact amount your veterinarian has prescribed.
 ■ Sedation is the most common side effect.
 ■ Buprenorphine is classified as a schedule III (C-III) controlled 
drug by the federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) and re -
quires a new written prescription for refills. Use of this medica -
tion in animals or humans other than those for whom they are 
prescribed is illegal.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Buprenorphine is a thebaine derivative and a synthetic partial-opi -
oid agonist. It occurs as a white crystalline powder with a solubility 
of 17 mg/mL in water and 42 mg/mL in alcohol. The commercially 
available injectable product (Buprenex® ) has a pH of 3.5 to 5 and is a 
sterile solution of the drug dissolved in D 5W . Terms of potency are 
expressed in terms of buprenorphine. The commercial human prod-
uct contains 0.324 mg/mL of buprenorphine HCl, which is equiva -
lent to 0.3 mg/mL of buprenorphine. Autoclaving may considerably 
decrease drug potency.
Buprenorphine HCl may also be known as buprenorphini hydro-
chloridum, CL-112302, NIH-8805, UM-952; trade names include 
Animalgesics®, BupaqB, Buprenex®,  Buprenodale®, EthiqaXR®, Simba-
dol®, Suboxone® ,  Subutex®, a n d  Temgesic®,   and  Vetergesic®.
Storage/Stability
Buprenorphine Injection 1.8 mg/mL ( Simbadol®) should be stored 
at temperatures up to 25°C (77°F) and protected from light and ex -
cessive heat (greater than 40°C [104°F]). The vial has a 56-day in-use 
shelf-life. 
Buprenorphine transdermal solution should be stored at tem -
peratures up to 25°C (77°F) and protected from light.
As a controlled substance, buprenorphine must be stored in an 
area that is substantially constructed and securely locked in accor -
dance with DEA regulations. Follow applicable local, state, and fed-
eral rules regarding disposal of unused or wasted controlled drugs.
Store buprenorphine extended-release injectable suspension vials 
(Ethiqa XR®) at temperatures between 15°C and 25°C (59°F-77°F) or 
refrigerated. Do not freeze. Discard 28 days after broaching. Wear 
gloves when handling. Allow drug to reach room temperature before 
administration. 
Store buprenorphine extended-release injectable solution ( Bu-
preLab-Rat®) between 15° and 30°C (59°-86°F). Discard 28 days after 
broaching.
Buprenorphine 0.3 mg/mL injection should be stored at 20°C to 
25°C (68°F-77°F) and protected from prolonged exposure to light. 
Temperatures above 40°C (104°F) or below freezing should be 
 avoided. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Buprenorphine is reported to be compatible with the following 
IV solutions and drugs: acepromazine, atropine, diphenhydramine, 
D5W , D5W with normal saline, glycopyrrolate, haloperidol, hy -
droxyzine, lactated Ringer’s solution, normal saline, scopolamine, 
and xylazine. Although no published data could be located to sup -
port stability for these combinations, buprenorphine injection has 
also been mixed in syringes with detomidine, dexmedetomidine, 
ketamine, medetomidine, and midazolam.
Buprenorphine is reportedly incompatible with diazepam and 
lorazepam.
An in vitro study demonstrated that a 3 mg/mL buprenorphine 
solution compounded for buccal/OTM use was stable for at least 90 
days when stored at room temperature or refrigerated. 66 A buccal/
OTM buprenorphine suspension was prepared by dissolving a 2 mg 
sublingual tablet in 0.6 mL deionized water and adding to 6 mL sim-
ple syrup (final concentration, 0.3 mg/mL). The product had a pH of 
3.9 and was stable for 21 days at room temperature or refrigerated. 
A pharmacokinetic study using this formulation showed that peak 
concentration and AUC were ≈45% and ≈50% lower, respectively, 


===== BSAVA PDF 69 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
53
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
distribution of drugs in the epidural space and prevent adverse 
pressure effects.
• Interpleural: 1 mg/kg diluted with normal saline to a total 
volume of 5–20 ml depending on the size of the animal. The 
solution can be instilled via a thoracotomy tube. Dilution 
reduces pain on injection due to the acidity of bupivacaine. 
Cats: Doses as for dogs. Accurate dosing in cats is essential to 
prevent overdose. 
References
Bernard F, Kudnig ST and Monnet E (2006) Hemodynamic effects of intrapleural 
lidocaine and bupivicaine combination in anaesthetized dogs with and without an open 
pericardium. Veterinary Surgery  35, 252–258
Radlinsky MG, Mason DE, Roush JK et al . (2005) Use of a continuous local infusion of 
bupivicaine for postoperative analgesia in dogs undergoing total ear canal ablation. 
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association  227, 414–419Buprenorphine
(Bupaq, Buprecare, Buprenodale, Buprevet, 
Vetergesic) POM-V CD SCHEDULE 3 
Formulations: Injectable: 0.3 mg/ml solution; available in 1 ml 
vials that do not contain a preservative, or in 10 ml multidose bottle 
that contains chlorocresol as preservative.
Action: Analgesia through high affinity, low intrinsic activity and 
slow dissociation with the mu receptor.
Use:
• Relief of mild to moderate perioperative pain.
• It may antagonize the effects of full opioid agonists (e.g. 
methadone, fentanyl), although the clinical relevance of 
interactions between full mu agonists and buprenorphine has 
recently been questioned.
However, in practice it is not recommended to administer 
buprenorphine when the subsequent administration of full mu 
agonists is likely. If analgesia is inadequate after buprenorphine, a full 
mu agonist may be administered without delay. Buprenorphine may 
be mixed with acepromazine or dexmedetomidine to provide 
sedation for minor procedures or pre-anaesthetic medication. 
Response to all opioids is variable between individuals; therefore, 
assessment of pain after administration is imperative. Onset of 
action of buprenorphine may be slower than methadone (>15 min). 
Duration of effect is approximately 6 hours in cats and is likely to be 
similar in dogs. Buprenorphine is metabolized in the liver; some 
prolongation of effect may be seen with impaired liver function. The 
multidose preparation is unpalatable given sublingually due to the 
preservative. There is emerging evidence that analgesic efficacy of 
buprenorphine s.c. may be less than similar doses of buprenorphine 
administered i.m. or i.v. to cats, therefore, this route is not 
recommended in cats or dogs.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.


===== BSAVA PDF 70 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
54
Contraindications: Combination with full mu agonists is not 
recommended for analgesia; therefore, do not use for 
premedication when administration of potent opioids during surgery 
is anticipated.
Adverse reactions: Side effects are rare after clinical doses. 
Buprenorphine crosses the placenta and may exert sedative effects 
in neonates born to bitches and queens treated prior to parturition. 
Pain on i.m. injection of the multidose preparation has been 
anecdotally reported.
Drug interactions: In common with other opioids, buprenorphine 
will reduce the doses of other drugs required for induction and 
maintenance of anaesthesia.
DOSES
When used for sedation is generally given as part of a combination. 
See Appendix for sedation protocols in cats and dogs.
Dogs: Analgesia: 0.02 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c. q6h.
Cats: Analgesia: 0.02–0.03 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c. q6h. Also well 
tolerated and effective when given oral transmucosally.
References
Giordano T, Steagall PV, Ferreira TH et al . (2010) Postoperative analgesic effects of 
intravenous, intramuscular, subcutantous or oral transmucosal buprenorphine 
administered to cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Veterinary Anaesthesia and 
Analgesia  37, 357–366
Goyenchea Jaramillo LA, Murrell JC and Hellebrekers LJ (2006) Investigation of the 
interaction between buprenorphine and sufentanil during anaesthesia for ovariectomy 
in dogs. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 33 , 399–407Butorphanol
(Alvegesic, Dolorex, Torbugesic, Torbutrol, 
Torphasol) POM-V 
Formulations: Injectable: 10 mg/ml solution. Oral: 5 mg, 10 mg 
tablets.
Action: Analgesia resulting from affinity for the kappa opioid 
receptor. Also has mu receptor antagonist properties and an 
antitussive action resulting from central depression of the cough 
mechanism.
Use:
• Management of mild perioperative pain.
• Provision of sedation through combination with acepromazine 
or alpha-2 agonists.
• Potent antitussive agent indicated for the relief of acute or 
chronic non-productive cough associated with 
tracheobronchitis, tracheitis, tonsillitis or laryngitis resulting from 
inflammatory conditions of the upper respiratory tract.
Butorphanol has a very rapid and relatively short duration of action; in 
different models analgesia has been shown to last between 45 minutes 
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 71 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
55
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
and 4 hours. Butorphanol is metabolized in the liver and some 
prolongation of effect may be seen with impaired liver function. 
Butorphanol crosses the placenta and may exert sedative effects in 
neonates born to bitches and queens treated prior to parturition. 
Butorphanol is unlikely to be adequate for the management of severe 
pain. Higher doses of full mu agonists may be needed to provide 
additional analgesia after butorphanol but it is not necessary to wait 4 
hours after butorphanol administration to give other opioids. Response 
to all opioids appears to be very variable between individuals; 
therefore, assessment of pain after administration is imperative.
Safety and handling: Protect from light.
Contraindications: Animals with diseases of the lower respiratory 
tract associated with copious mucus production. Premedication 
when administration of potent opioids during surgery is anticipated.
Adverse reactions: As a kappa agonist/mu antagonist, side 
effects such as respiratory depression, bradycardia and vomiting are 
rare after clinical doses. Cough suppression following torbugesic 
tablets may be associated with mild sedation.
Drug interactions: In common with other opioids, butorphanol 
will reduce the doses of other drugs required for induction and 
maintenance of anaesthesia. Combination with full mu agonists is 
not recommended for analgesia, addition of butorphanol will reduce 
analgesia produced from the full mu agonist.
DOSES
When used for sedation is generally given as part of a combination. 
See Appendix for sedation protocols in cats and dogs.
Dogs:  
• Analgesia: 0.2–0.5 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c.
• Antitussive: 0.05–0.1 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c., 0.5–1 mg/kg p.o. 
q6–12h.
Cats: Analgesia: 0.2–0.5 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c. 
References
Simon BT, Steagall PV, Monteiro BP et al . (2016) Antinociceptive effects of intravenous 
administration of hydromorphone hydrochloride alone or followed by buprenorphine 
hydrochloride or butorphanol tartrate to healthy conscious cats. American Journal of 
Veterinary Research  77, 245–251
Butylscopolamine (Hyoscine)
(Buscopan) POM-V, POM
Formulations: Injectable: 4 mg/ml butylscopolamine + 500 mg/
ml metamizole in 100 ml multidose bottle (Buscopan Compositum); 
20 mg/ml butylscopolamine only, in 2 ml ampoules. Oral: 10 mg 
tablet containing butylscopolamine only.
Action: Inhibits M1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in the GI 
and urinary tracts causing smooth muscle relaxation but does not 
cross the blood–brain barrier.
