
===== Plumb PDF 209 =====
182    Capromorelin
closed.13 Do not freeze. Use product within 12 weeks of opening. Un-
less otherwise instructed by the manufacturer, store other cannabidi-
ol (CBD) products at room temperature in tightly closed containers. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Many compounded formulations are available. It is recommended to 
request a certificate of analysis that demonstrates product potency 
and purity. A 3-fold difference in cannabidiol (CBD) concentration 
was discovered between batches of commercially supplied CBD in 
oil.26
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
Other than the product FDA-approved for human use ( Epidiolex®), 
cannabidiol (CBD) products are compounded, and as such, product 
quality (eg, potency, purity, stability) is not overseen or enforced by 
the FDA. Considerations for selecting a product include:
1. Choose a product made from hemp, not marijuana. Legal -
ly, CBD oil products must be derived from hemp and must 
contain less than 0.3% tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Because 
hemp contains minimal amounts of THC, using a product de-
rived from hemp will limit the amount of THC present. Legally 
grown hemp is no longer a controlled substance under federal 
law, but it may be a controlled substance in individual states. 
See Chemistry/Synonyms for further information.
2. Request a certificate of analysis (COA). Reputable companies 
will provide a COA of their products stating CBD, THC, or 
other cannabinoid content. Some companies will also confirm 
the absence of other harmful toxins (eg, pesticides, microbes, 
residual solvents, heavy metals).
3. Using CBD in animals has not been approved by the FDA. 
State and local laws vary, and practitioners should consult in -
dependent legal counsel to determine their compliance obliga-
tions with respect to the veterinary use of CBD.
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated CBD as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not be 
allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regulations 
before entering in a competition while this medication is being ad -
ministered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. See 
Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Cannabidiol Solution: 100 mg/mL in 60 mL or 100 mL bottles; Epid-
iolex®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Cannabidiol (CBD)
Capromorelin
(kap-roe-moe-rel-in) Elura®, Entyce®
Appetite Stimulant
Prescriber Highlights 
 ▶ FDA-approved to stimulate appetite in dogs, and for manage-
ment of weight loss in cats with chronic kidney disease
 ▶ Ghrelin-receptor agonist that stimulates growth hormone 
release and causes the feeling of hunger
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity and acromegaly 
(hypersomatotropism) in cats.
 ▶ Use with caution in dogs and cats with hepatic dysfunction, in 
dogs with renal insufficiency, and in cats with cardiac disease 
or severe dehydration. Hyperglycemia has occurred in healthy 
cats given labeled doses of capromorelin; use in diabetic pa-
tients has not been evaluated and may not be appropriate.
 ▶ Adverse effects include vomiting, hypersalivation, hiding 
behavior (cats), diarrhea, and polydipsia; some cats have de-
veloped hypotension and bradycardia after administration.  
Uses/Indications 
Capromorelin is labeled for the stimulation of appetite in dogs and 
for the management of weight loss in cats with chronic kidney dis -
ease (CKD). 
In preapproval studies, dogs given capromorelin for 4 to 7 days 
had an ≈60% increase in food consumption and ≈6% weight gain as 
compared with the baseline.1 In a clinical field study, 68.6% of dogs 
receiving capromorelin experienced increased appetite based on 
owner observation as compared with 44.6% of dogs that received the 
vehicle control. In the same study, 76% of dogs receiving capromo -
relin gained weight (1.8% increase) as compared with 44.6% of dogs 
that received the control (0.1% increase). 2 A post-approval study 
demonstrated that healthy beagles treated with capromorelin had an 
average 60% increase in food consumption compared to an 11% de-
crease in placebo-treated dogs.3
In cats with CKD, field studies demonstrated a 3.3% increase in 
body weight after 2 weeks of treatment, and 5.2% increase after 8 
weeks.4 In healthy laboratory cats receiving capromorelin, food con-
sumption increased by 25% to 45% and body weight increased by 4% 
to 6.6% as compared with an 11% food consumption increase and 
1% decrease in body weight in cats receiving a placebo.5,6 In a safety 
study, cats given capromorelin 6 mg/kg PO once daily for 91 days 
had a nonsignificant increase in food consumption but significant 
weight gain.6 Further studies are warranted to establish efficacy.
Pharmacology/Actions 
Capromorelin is a ghrelin-receptor agonist that stimulates growth 
hormone (GH) release and causes release of insulin-like growth fac-
tor 1 (IGF1). Serum GH and cortisol increased in healthy dogs given 
capromorelin for 7 days, and levels returned to baseline 8 hours after 
administration; the magnitude of GH and cortisol elevations were 
diminished by days 4 and 7 as compared with day 1. Increased IGF1 
levels were sustained throughout the 7-day study period.7 Sustained 
elevation of IGF1 was also noted in cats.8 
Ghrelin appears to regulate cardiac, gastric, and pancreatic func-
tion and may result in anxiety. In mice, exogenous ghrelin acceler -
ates gastric emptying and intestinal transit.9 At the spinal cord level, 
capromorelin stimulates bladder emptying in mice 10 and colonic 
motility in rats.11,12
In addition to stimulating appetite and the effects described above 
in rats, ghrelin and ghrelin-receptor agonists have been shown to 
stimulate bone formation, increase muscle mass, and have anti-in -
flammatory and immunomodulatory effects.13


===== Plumb PDF 210 =====
Capromorelin   183
Pharmacokinetics 
In dogs, ≈44% of an oral dose is absorbed 14 and peak levels are 
reached within 1 hour. Protein binding is ≈50%. Hepatic metabolism 
is primarily via cytochrome P450 3A4 isozyme (CYP3A4) and CY -
P3A5. Elimination half-life is ≈1.2 hours. Capromorelin (primarily 
as metabolites) is excreted in urine (≈37%) and feces (≈62%) within 
72 hours of oral administration. Capromorelin does not accumulate 
with repeated administration.1,15
In fasted healthy cats, capromorelin peak concentration is reached 
within 0.25 to 1 hour after administration.4 Giving with food delays 
time to peak concentration (0.5 to 4 hours) and reduces capromore-
lin peak concentration by ≈50% and exposure (AUC) by ≈40% com-
pared to fasted cats.4 Half-life in fasted cats is 1.1 hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Capromorelin is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it or 
its components. Avoid use in cats with acromegaly (hypersomato-  
tropism). Caution should be used in dogs and cats with hepatic dys-
function, in dogs with renal insufficiency, and in cats with cardiac 
disease or severe dehydration. Although the manufacturer recom -
mends using capromorelin with caution in dogs with renal insuffi -
ciency, cats with CKD enrolled in a pilot study gained weight and 
tolerated the drug. 16 Blood glucose may increase for several hours 
after administration to cats4,17; capromorelin use in diabetic or predi-
abetic cats has not been evaluated and may not be appropriate.
Drug interactions are possible in dogs concurrently treated with 
CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 inducers and inhibitors, but specific interac-
tions have not been reported to date. See Drug Interactions.
Adverse Effects 
Adverse effects reported in dogs during clinical trials included di -
arrhea, vomiting, polydipsia, hypersalivation, flatulence, nausea, ab-
dominal discomfort, increased gut sounds, and lethargy. 15 Elevated 
BUN and phosphorus have also been noted.
In cats with CKD (median age 15 years and 67% with Stage 2 CKD) 
receiving capromorelin 2 mg/kg/day, reported adverse effects includ-
ed vomiting, hypersalivation, inappetence, hiding behavior, lethargy, 
anemia, dehydration, progression of CKD stage, diarrhea, upper re-
spiratory infection, UTI, and hyperglycemia. Emesis, increased saliva-
tion, lip smacking, and head shaking reportedly  occurred immediately 
after administration and resolved within a few minutes. 4,6,17 Clinical 
signs of bradycardia and hypotension may occur after administration, 
reaching peak effect after 1 hour, and resolving within 4 hours4; an-
ecdotally, in some instances, hypotension may be profound enough 
to require fluid resuscitation. Hypotension appears to decrease in 
magnitude with repeated dosing. In healthy cats, insulin secretion and 
glycemic control decreased during the first several days of treatment; 
significance in diabetic patients has not been ascertained.17 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
The manufacturer recommends capromorelin not be used in breed-
ing, pregnant, or lactating bitches or queens, as safety studies have 
not been performed for these animals.4,15
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 
In safety studies in dogs, capromorelin (7 mg/kg/day and  
40 mg/kg/day) was associated with increased salivation, red and 
swollen paws, increased liver weight, and hepatocellular vacuola -
tion. In dogs receiving capromorelin at 17.5 times the label dose for 
up to 12 months, the drug was generally well tolerated and result -
ed in statistically insignificant decreased RBC count, hemoglobin, 
and hematocrit as compared with a placebo. Dose-related increased 
cholesterol and alkaline phosphatase were also noted.7 Increased PR 
interval was noted on the ECG in dogs receiving either 7 mg/kg/day 
or 40 mg/kg/day; however, no evidence of cardiac toxicity was noted 
on physical examination or cardiac histopathology.1
Cats receiving capromorelin (6 mg/kg/day PO) for 91 days tol -
erated treatment well with no significant alterations in clinical pa -
thology.8 One cat receiving capromorelin 10.5 mg/kg/day as part of a 
safety study developed hyperglycemia and was euthanized after the 
onset of diabetic ketoacidosis. 4 Cats receiving capromorelin (up to 
60 mg/kg/day PO) for 14 days experienced a greater frequency of 
emesis, hypersalivation, and lethargy as compared with the control 
group.6 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions 
No drug interactions with capromorelin have been reported. Capro-
morelin is metabolized by CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 in dogs. In feline 
field studies, capromorelin was used concurrently with parenteral 
fluids, methimazole, amlodipine, antibiotics, laxatives, antiparasit -
ics, and antiemetics. 18 The following drug interactions are theoret -
ical in animals receiving capromorelin and may be of significance 
in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not 
necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks must be weighed, 
and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
 ■ CYP3A4 Inhibitors  (eg, amiodarone, cimetidine, diltiazem, 
erythromycin, itraconazole, ketoconazole ): May reduce capro -
morelin metabolism in dogs
 ■ CYP3A4 Inducers (eg, phenobarbital, rifampin): May in -
crease capromorelin metabolism in dogs
Laboratory Interactions 
 ■ None noted
Dosages 
DOGS:
Appetite stimulation (label dosage; FDA-approved): 3 mg/kg PO 
once daily. NOTE: The effectiveness of capromorelin solution has 
not been evaluated beyond 4 days of treatment.15 
CATS:
Management of weight loss in cats with chronic kidney disease 
(label dosage; FDA-approved): 2 mg/kg PO once daily 30 minutes 
before routine feeding.4 Readminister the dose if the cat receives 
only a partial dose, or if the cat vomits within 15 minutes of ad -
ministration.
Appetite stimulation (extra-label): 1 – 3 mg/kg PO once daily for 
up to 21 days5 
Monitoring 
 ■ Food and fluid intake
 ■ Body weight
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, vomiting, diarrhea, inappetence, lethargy)
 ■ Additional monitoring as applicable to address underlying con -
dition(s)
Client Information
 ■ Gently shake the bottle prior to withdrawing the appropriate 
amount of solution using the provided syringe (dog product 
only). Rinse syringe between treatment doses.
 ■ Store medication out of reach of other pets and children.
 ■ Drooling, vomiting, and head shaking may occur shortly after ad-
ministration.
 ■ Common side effects in dogs include vomiting and frequent uri -
nation. In cats, vomiting, hypersalivation, lack of appetite, hiding 
behavior, and lethargy have been noted.


===== Plumb PDF 211 =====
184    Carbimazole
 ■ When giving this medicine to cats:
a) Administer the dose 30 minutes prior to feeding. 
b) Only readminister if a partial dose is received, or if your 
cat vomits within 15 minutes. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Capromorelin is a growth hormone secretagogue-receptor agonist. 
The commercial oral solutions contain capromorelin tartrate. No 
solubility data was located.
Capromorelin is also known as AT-002, RQ-5, CP-424391, En-
tyce®, and Elura®.
Storage/Stability 
Capromorelin should be stored at or below 30°C (86°F) and kept out 
of reach of children and pets. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
None noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Capromorelin Flavored Solution: 30 mg/mL in 10 mL, 15 mL, and 
30 mL bottles; Entyce®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs. NADA 
#141-457
Capromorelin Flavored Solution: 20 mg/mL in 15 mL bottles; Elura®; 
(Rx). FDA-approved for use in cats. NADA #141-536
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Carbimazole
(kar-bi-ma-zole) Vidalta®
Antithyroid
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Prodrug of methimazole; used for treatment of feline hyper-
thyroidism
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity to carbimazole or 
methimazole and in cats with abnormal red or white blood cell 
counts, thrombocytopenia, coagulopathies, severe liver dis-
ease, diabetes mellitus, or with signs of autoimmune disease. 
Use with caution in cats with existing renal or hepatic disease.
 ▶ Most adverse effects occur within the first 3 months of treat-
ment; vomiting, hyporexia, and lethargy are the most fre-
quent. Eosinophilia, leukopenia, and lymphocytosis are usually 
transient. Rare but serious effects include self-induced excoria-
tions, bleeding, hepatopathy, thrombocytopenia, agranulocy-
tosis, immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, immune-mediat-
ed thrombocytopenia, and acquired myasthenia gravis.
 ▶ Dosing requirements may change with time.
 ▶ Typically administered PO; give with food. Do not crush or split 
tablets.
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies methimazole (the active carbimazole metab-
olite) as a hazardous drug; use appropriate precautions when 
handling.
Uses/Indications
Carbimazole (a prodrug of methimazole) and methimazole are con-
sidered by most clinicians to be the agents of choice for treatment 
of feline hyperthyroidism and hyperthyroidism-associated clinical 
signs in cats.1 
Pharmacology/Actions 
Carbimazole is converted almost entirely to methimazole in vivo. 
Methimazole inhibits thyroid peroxidase and interferes with iodine 
incorporation into tyrosyl residues of thyroglobulin, thereby inhib -
iting thyroid hormone synthesis. It also inhibits iodinated tyrosyl 
residues from coupling to form iodothyronine. Methimazole has no 
effect on the release or activity of thyroid hormones already formed 
or in general circulation. 
Pharmacokinetics 
Carbimazole is rapidly absorbed from the GI tract and rapidly and 
nearly totally converted to methimazole. 1 Administering carbim -
azole with food increases bioavailability. Because of differences in 
molecular weight (carbimazole 5 mg vs methimazole 3 mg), to attain 
an equivalent serum concentration, the dose of carbimazole for oral 
administration must be ≈2 times that of methimazole.2
In cats, the volume of distribution of methimazole is variable 
(0.12 – 0.84 L/kg). Methimazole apparently concentrates in thyroid 
tissue and biologic effects persist beyond measurable blood concen-
trations. After oral dosing, plasma elimination half-life ranges from 
2.3 to 10.2 hours. There is usually a 1- to 3-week lag time between start-
ing the drug and significant reductions in serum T4. Timed-release for-
mulations of carbimazole can extend methimazole (active metabolite) 
half-life and allow once-daily dosing. Carbimazole may be amenable for 
use transdermally with twice-daily dosing in cats to control hyperthy-
roidism.
In dogs, methimazole has a serum half-life of 8 to 9 hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Carbimazole is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to 
it or methimazole. It should not be used in patients with concurrent 
systemic diseases (eg, severe primary liver disease, diabetes melli -
tus1) or with hematologic abnormalities (eg, anemia, neutropenia, 
lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia), coagulopathies, or autoimmune 
disease.1,3 Use with caution in cats with preexisting hepatic disease.
Because carbimazole is a prodrug and is converted into methima-
zole, cats that have had prior severe reactions to methimazole should 
not receive carbimazole.1
Treatment of hyperthyroid cats with methimazole can unmask 
underlying renal disease because lowering thyroid hormone levels 
decreases glomerular filtration rates.4 As such, a cat’s renal parame-
ters should be monitored closely during treatment (see Monitoring).5 
In a study, a significant reduction in serum creatinine was noted after 
restoration of euthyroidism in cats with iatrogenic hypothyroidism 
caused by methimazole or carbimazole.6  
The prevalence of moderate to severe thyroid disease (eg, large 
thyroid tumors, multifocal disease, intrathoracic thyroid mass -
es) increased with the duration of hyperthyroidism, despite ongo -
ing methimazole use; the authors speculated that this finding may 
indicate a progressive nature of feline hyperthyroidism that is not 
stopped by maintaining euthyroidism with methimazole.7
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies methimazole (the active carbimazole metabolite) 
as a hazardous drug representing an occupational hazard to health -
care workers; wash hands after handling and use personal protective 
equipment (PPE) accordingly to minimize the risk for exposure.8 
Consider writing part of the drug’s name in uppercase letters 
(tall man designations) on prescriptions/orders to reduce the risk 
for errors. Do not confuse carbiMAZOLe with carbamazEPINE or 
CARBOplatin. Additionally, do not write prescriptions for this drug 
using the abbreviation SID. Many nonveterinary pharmacists are 
unfamiliar with this abbreviation and could interpret it as another 
abbreviation (eg, QID).
Adverse Effects
Most adverse effects associated with carbimazole or methimazole use 
in cats occur within the first 3 months of therapy. 9 In cats receiving 
carbimazole, vomiting, anorexia, and lethargy occur most frequent-


===== Plumb PDF 212 =====
Carbimazole   185
ly1,10 (≈10%), are often transient, and can typically be managed with a 
dosage reduction.11 Eosinophilia, leukopenia, and/or lymphocytosis 
may be noted in ≈5% of cats 12; these hematologic effects are usually 
also transient and generally do not require drug withdrawal unless 
the blood dyscrasia is persistent or severe.1 
Methimazole and carbimazole may also rarely cause self-induced 
excoriations and hepatopathy, and potentially trigger immune-me -
diated hemolytic anemia and immune-mediated thrombocytopenia 
in cats1,9,13-15; these more serious effects generally require withdrawal 
of the drug. In one study, increased antinuclear antibodies (ANA) 
were noted in ≈22% of all cats receiving methimazole, and in ≈50% 
of cats receiving methimazole for greater than 6 months, but none 
of the cats had signs of a lupus-like syndrome. 9 The occurrence of 
ANA is dose dependent, 16 and although elevated ANA have histor -
ically been viewed as an indication for dose reduction, this may not 
be necessary in the absence of clinical signs or other indications of 
autoimmune disease.9 Rarely, cats treated with methimazole or car -
bimazole have developed acquired myasthenia gravis that requires 
drug withdrawal.17,18 One case report indicated that a cat developed 
hypersensitivity vasculitis after receiving carbimazole.19
Potentially, treatment with methimazole or carbimazole could 
unmask underlying renal dysfunction in some cats.20 The hyperthy-
roid state may increase GFR and, by treating the hyperthyroidism, 
this effect is abolished.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Carbimazole has been associated with teratogenic and embryotoxic 
effects in rats.1 Do not use carbimazole in pregnant animals as it may 
also affect offspring thyroid development or function. 
Methimazole enters milk and reaches concentrations higher than 
those found in maternal serum. 1 If treatment with carbimazole is 
necessary for nursing queens, switch to milk replacer for nursing 
animals.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity  
Acute toxicity that may be seen with overdoses includes those effects 
listed in Adverse Effects. Agranulocytosis, thrombocytopenia, auto-
immune hemolytic anemia, GI bleeding (potentially with hemate -
mesis), hepatitis, and nephritis are perhaps the most serious effects 
that may be seen.1 Coat and skin abnormalities (erythema, alopecia) 
can also occur. Treatment of overdose/toxicity consists of following 
standard protocols for handling an oral ingestion (eg, empty stom -
ach, administer charcoal if not contraindicated) and to treat sup -
portively and based on clinical signs.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving carbimazole or methimazole 
and may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise 
noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but veterinar-
ians should weigh the potential risks and perform additional moni -
toring when appropriate.
 ■ Anticoagulants (eg, heparin, rivaroxaban ): Methimazole 
may potentiate anticoagulant activity.
 ■ Benzimidazole Antiparasitics (eg, albendazole, fenben-
dazole, thiabendazole): Concurrent use with methimazole can 
reduce hepatic oxidation of benzimidazoles and increase blood 
levels of the parent drug or its metabolites.1,16,21-23 
 ■ Beta-Adrenergic Antagonists (eg, atenolol, propranolol): 
Beta-blocker dose may need to be decreased once the patient be -
comes euthyroid.16 
 ■ Chloramphenicol: Combination with carbimazole may in -
crease the risk for myelosuppression
 ■ Digoxin : Correction to euthyroidism reduces digoxin clear -
ance,16 resulting in increased digoxin exposure and risk for tox -
icity. A reduction in the digoxin dose may be needed when the 
patient becomes euthyroid.
 ■ Dipyrone: Combination with carbimazole may increase the risk 
for myelosuppression.
 ■ Iodine 131 : There was no difference in response to radioiodine 
based on when methimazole was discontinued relative to I 131 ad-
ministration.24 
 ■ Phenobarbital : Concurrent use of phenobarbital may reduce 
the clinical effectiveness of carbimazole.
 ■ Prednis(ol)one: A reduction in predniso(lo)ne dose may be 
needed when the patient becomes euthyroid.
 ■ Theophylline : Theophylline dose may need to be reduced once 
the patient becomes euthyroid.16 
 ■ W arfarin : In humans with hyperthyroidism, the metabolism of 
vitamin K clotting factors is increased, resulting in increased sen-
sitivity to oral anticoagulants.25 By reducing the effects of hyper -
thyroidism, methimazole may decrease clotting factor metabo -
lism, thus reducing the effects of warfarin. However, patients that 
are euthyroid on methimazole and receiving warfarin may de -
velop hypoprothrombinemia if methimazole is stopped and they 
become thyrotoxic again. Methimazole also has antivitamin K 
activity, so anticoagulants may be potentiated by methimazole. 16 
Recommendation: If methimazole and warfarin are used togeth -
er, increased monitoring of anticoagulant effect is warranted.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Methimazole and carbimazole may affect serum fructosamine  
levels in diabetic cats. Increased serum fructosamine after 6 weeks 
of treatment has been reported. It has been recommended that 
serum fructosamine not be used to initially diagnose or assess the 
adequacy of diabetic control in cats with concurrent hyperthy -
roidism until hyperthyroidism is controlled for at least 6 weeks.26
 ■ Technetium-99m Pertechnetate : Carbimazole adminis -
tration should be discontinued at least 2 weeks prior  to thyroid 
scintigraphy, as it may interfere with accurate detection of ectopic 
thyroid tissue.12,27,28
Dosages
CATS:
Hyperthyroidism:
a) Immediate-release tablets (extra-label): Most dosage recom -
mendations are initially 5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 8 to 
12 hours.10,12,15 Once a euthyroid state is established, the dosage 
amount or frequency is slowly decreased to the lowest effective 
dose. Most cats will require 2.5 – 5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO 
every 12 hours, but some cats can be controlled on once-daily 
dosing.12,29
b) Sustained-release tablets (extra-label): 15 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg)  
PO once daily at the same time each day. 1,30 10 mg/cat  
(NOT mg/kg) PO once daily can be considered for cats with 
moderate hyperthyroidism (TT4 between 50 and 100 nmol/L;  
3.9 – 7.8 µg/dL). Adjust dosage within a range of 10 – 25 mg/cat/
day (NOT mg/kg) in 5 mg increments depending on clinical 
signs and TT4 (NOTE: Tablets cannot be split, so combinations of 
10 mg and 15 mg tablets must be used). If cat requires doses less 
than 10 mg/day, use alternate-day dosing (eg, 10 – 15 mg/cat  
[NOT mg/kg] every other day), or consider different  treatment.


===== Plumb PDF 213 =====
186    Carboplatin
Monitoring
During the first 3 months of therapy (baseline and after every 3 and 
6 weeks of treatment or dosage change)5,16:
 ■ Physical examination to include body weight, body condition 
score, heart rate, and fundic examination
 ■ Blood pressure
 ■ CBC (including platelet count)
 ■ Serum chemistry profile
 ■ Serum TT 4: Blood samples can be collected at any time (ie, do not 
need to be collected at a prescribed time after methimazole treatment).
 ■ Serum fT4: Note that this assay is not indicated as a sole monitor-
ing parameter for hyperthyroidism.
 ■ Serum TSH: May be useful to evaluate for iatrogenic hypothyroidism
 ■ NOTE: Cats receiving higher dosages should be monitored more 
frequently.
After stabilization (at least 3 months of therapy)16:
 ■ Body weight
 ■ Blood pressure
 ■ TT4 at 3- to 6-month intervals
 ■ Other diagnostic tests as indicated by adverse effects
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine with food. Do not crush or split tablets.
 ■ For this medication to work, give it exactly as your veterinarian 
prescribed.
 ■ This medicine will decrease excessive thyroid hormones but does 
not cure the condition. It may take several weeks before your cat 
shows improvement.
 ■ While your cat is taking this medicine, your cat will require close 
monitoring with regular examinations by your veterinarian as 
well as blood tests. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
 ■ Treatment is long term, often for the remainder of your cat’s life.  
 ■ Most side effects (including vomiting, decreased appetite, or low 
energy level occur in the first 3 months of therapy. If any of these 
side effects are seen, stop giving this medicine to your cat and 
contact your veterinarian before restarting this medicine.
 ■ Serious side effects are rare. If your cat develops yellow skin, eyes, 
or gums ( jaundice) or becomes intensely itchy, discontinue this 
medicine and contact your veterinarian immediately.
 ■ Wash your hands with soap and water after handling the medicine 
(even if gloves are worn) or used litter. 
 ■ Pregnant women or women who may become pregnant, nursing 
mothers, or people with low thyroid hormones should avoid han-
dling carbimazole. If this is not possible, wear disposable gloves 
while handling this medication and cat litter or bodily fluids (ie, 
feces, blood, saliva) of treated animals. Do not reuse gloves. Once 
used, the gloves should be thrown away in the trash.
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined by 
the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). 
Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the use of personal 
protective equipment when handling this medicine.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A thioimidazole-derivative antithyroid drug, carbimazole occurs 
as a white to creamy white powder with a characteristic odor. It is 
slightly soluble in water and soluble in alcohol.
Carbimazole may also be known as carbimazolum, Basolest®, Cam-
azol®, Carbimazole ®,  Carbazole®,  Carbistad®, Cazole ®, Neo Tomizol ®, 
NeoMercazole®, Neo-Thyreostat ®, Thyrostat ®, Tyrazol ®, Vidalta ®, or 
Neo-morphazole®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, carbimazole tablets should be stored at 
room temperature (not above 77°F [25°C]) in tightly closed contain-
ers and protected from light.1 Do not remove desiccants from man-
ufacturer’s bottle.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted. Do not crush or break the pro -
longed-release tablets.1
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE IN THE UNITED STATES
In some countries: Carbimazole Oral Prolonged-Release Tablets:  
10 mg and 15 mg; Vidalta®; (POM-V)
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
There are no FDA-approved products in the United States; elsewhere 
it may be available as: 
Carbimazole Oral Tablets: 5 mg, 10 mg, 15 mg, and 20 mg. Many 
trade names available outside the US; (POM) 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Carboplatin
(kar-boe-pla-tin) Paraplatin®
Antineoplastic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Platinum antineoplastic agent used for a variety of carcino-
mas and sarcomas. In general, less nephrotoxic and fewer GI 
adverse effects as compared to cisplatin.
 ▶ Unlike cisplatin, carboplatin may be used safely in cats.
 ▶ Contraindicated in patients with a history of hypersensitivity 
to carboplatin or other platinum agents, and with severe bone 
marrow depression. Use with caution in patients with hepatic 
or renal disease, or active infection.
 ▶ Primary adverse effects include bone marrow suppression 
(dose-limiting toxicity) and GI upset. Neutrophil nadir in dogs 
typically occurs around day 14 or 21 after administration.
 ▶ Embryotoxic, teratogenic
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies carboplatin as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling. 
Uses/Indications
Carboplatin is a broad-spectrum antineoplastic agent used to treat 
a variety of neoplastic diseases, including carcinoma (squamous cell 
carcinoma, ovarian carcinoma, pulmonary carcinoma, nasal carcino-
ma, anal sac apocrine gland adenocarcinoma,1 colonic adenocarcino-
ma, urinary tract carcinoma,2 hepatocellular carcinoma, and thyroid 
adenocarcinoma), melanoma,3 and sarcoma (osteosarcoma4). 
Unlike cisplatin, systemic carboplatin appears to be safe and 
well-tolerated in cats.5,6
Intracavitary carboplatin may be used to treat carcinomatosis 
and other malignant effusions.7 Interventional radiology techniques 
can be used to facilitate intra-arterial carboplatin administration for 
the treatment of lower urinary tract carcinoma. 8 Carboplatin may 
be considered for intralesional use in conditions such as equine sar-
coids9 and to treat adenocarcinoma in birds. 10,11 Carboplatin beads 
and poloxamer gel have also been used locally. They have been well 
tolerated in different species (equines, canines, and felines), though 
efficacy has not been thoroughly established.12–14
Carboplatin is a radiation sensitizing agent. 15 Small studies have 
shown the tolerability of carboplatin in combination with other che-
motherapy agents, such as toceranib 16 or 5-fluorouracil 1716,17; how-
ever, further studies are needed to determine the efficacy of these 
combinations.


===== BSAVA PDF 77 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
61
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
diseases and dermatological changes (pruritus, alopecia and 
self-induced trauma) are reported but rare. Treatment of 
hyperthyroidism can decrease glomerular filtration rate, thereby 
increasing serum urea and creatinine values, and can occasionally 
unmask occult renal failure.
Drug interactions: Carbimazole should be discontinued before 
iodine-131 treatment. Do not use with low iodine prescription diets.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: Hyperthyroidism: starting dose 15 mg/animal p.o. 
q24h unless total thyroxine concentrations are <100 nmol 
(nanomoles)/l in which case starting dose is 10 mg p.o. q24h. Adjust 
dose in 5 mg increments but do not break tablets.
References
Daminet S, Kooistra HS, Fracassi F et al . (2014) Best practice for the pharmacological 
management of hyperthyroid cats with antithyroid drugs. Journal of Small Animal 
Practice 55, 4–13
Carbomer 980
(Lubrithal, Ocry-gel, OptixCare, Viscotears*)  
P, general sale 
Formulations: Ophthalmic: 0.2% (10 g tube, single-use vial), 0.25% 
(10 g tube) gel. This formulation is marketed specifically for small 
animals. Other formulations are widely available for general sale.
Action: Linear polymer (polyacrylic acid). Replaces the aqueous 
and mucin layers of the trilaminar tear film (mucinomimetic).
Use:
• Tear replacement.
• Management of quantitative (keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) or 
dry eye) and qualitative tear film disorders.
It has longer corneal contact time than the aqueous tear substitutes 
(e.g. polyvinyl alcohol).
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: It is tolerated well and ocular irritation is 
unusual.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: 1 drop per eye q4–6h.


===== BSAVA PDF 78 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
62
Carboplatin
(Carboplatin*, Paraplatin*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 10 mg/ml solution.
Action: Binds to DNA to form intra- and interstrand cross-links and 
DNA-protein cross-links, resulting in inhibition of DNA synthesis and 
function.
Use:
• May be of use in a number of neoplastic diseases including anal 
sac adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, ovarian 
carcinoma, mediastinal carcinoma, pleural adenocarcinoma, 
nasal carcinoma and thyroid adenocarcinoma.
• Improves survival times when used as an adjunct to amputation 
in dogs with appendicular osteosarcoma.
The drug is highly irritant and must be administered via a preplaced 
i.v. catheter. Do not use needles or i.v. sets containing aluminium as 
precipitation of the drug may occur. This drug is generally now 
preferred over cisplatin due to reduced GI and renal toxicity. Use 
with caution in patients with abnormal renal function, active 
infections, hearing impairment or pre-existing hepatic disease.
Safety and handling: Potent cytotoxic drug that should only be 
prepared and administered by trained personnel. See Appendix and 
specialist texts for further advice on chemotherapeutic agents.
Contraindications: Contraindicated in patients with known 
hypersensitivity to platinum containing compounds. Do not use in 
patients with pre-existing bone marrow suppression.
Adverse reactions: Include myelosuppression, nephrotoxicity, 
ototoxicity, nausea, vomiting, electrolyte abnormalities, 
neurotoxicity and anaphylactic reactions (including a delayed 
cutaneous hypersensitivity). However, produces fewer adverse 
reactions than cisplatin.
Note that there may be delayed or unpredictable side effects in cats 
(thought to be due to GFR changes in older cats).
Drug interactions: Concomitant use of aminoglycosides or other 
nephrotoxic agents may increase risk of nephrotoxicity. May 
adversely affect the safety and efficacy of vaccinations. Potential to 
act as a radiosensitizer for patients receiving concommitant 
radiotherapy.
DOSES
See Appendix for chemotherapy protocols and conversion of body 
weight to body surface area.
Dogs: All uses: 300 mg/m2 i.v. q3–4wk injected into the side port of 
a freely running i.v. infusion of 0.9% NaCl over a 10–15 min period.
Intrapleural/intraperitoneal dose: 225–300 mg/m 2 diluted in 0.9% 
NaCl or 5% dextrose water (in one text this is diluted to 10 mg/ml 
then again in 1 ml per 4.5 kg body weight) over a 5–10 min period  
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 79 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
63
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
(it is advised to consult a veterinary oncology specialist before 
administering via this route).
Cats: All uses: 200 mg/m2 i.v. q3–4wk injected into the side port of 
a freely running i.v. infusion of 0.9% NaCl over a 10–15 min period.
Intrapleural/intraperitoneal dose: 200–240 mg/m
2 diluted in 0.9% 
NaCl or 5% dextrose water over a 5–10 min period (it is advised to 
consult a veterinary oncology specialist before administering via  
this route). 
References
Bailey DB, Rassnick KM, Erb HN et al . (2004) Effect of glomerular filtration rate on 
clearance and myelotoxicity of carboplatin in cats with tumors. American Journal of 
Veterinary Research  65, 1502–1507
Skorupski KA, Uhl JM, Szivek A et al . (2016) Carboplatin versus  alternating carboplatin 
and doxorubicin for the adjuvant treatment of canine appendicular osteosarcoma: a 
randomized, phase III trial. Veterinary and Comparative Oncology  14, 81–87Carprofen
(Canidryl, Carprodyl, Carprox Vet, Dolagis, 
Rimadyl, Rimifin) POM-V 
Formulations: Injectable: 50 mg/ml. Oral: 20 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg 
tablets (in plain and palatable formulations).
Action: Preferentially inhibits COX-2 enzyme, thereby limiting the 
production of prostaglandins involved in inflammation. Other 
non-COX-mediated mechanisms are suspected to contribute to the 
anti-inflammatory effect but these have not yet been identified.
Use:
• Control of postoperative pain and inflammation following 
surgery.
• Reduction of chronic inflammation, e.g. degenerative joint 
disease, osteoarthritis.
In cats, carprofen is only licensed as a single perioperative dose for 
the control of postoperative pain. Carprofen also has antipyretic 
effects. All NSAIDs should be administered cautiously in the 
perioperative period. Although carprofen preferentially inhibits 
COX-2, it may still adversely affect renal perfusion during periods of 
hypotension. If hypotension during anaesthesia is anticipated, delay 
carprofen administration until the animal is fully recovered from 
anaesthesia and normotensive. Liver disease will prolong the 
metabolism of carprofen, leading to the potential for drug 
accumulation and overdose with repeated dosing. Prolonged 
long-term treatment should be under veterinary supervision. In cats, 
due to the longer half-life and narrower therapeutic index, particular 
care should be taken not to exceed the recommended dose and the 
use of a 1 ml graduated syringe is recommended to measure the 
dose accurately. Tablets are not authorized for use in cats.
Safety and handling: Formulations that use palatable tablets can 
be extremely palatable. Animals have been reported to eat tablets 
spontaneously, resulting in overdose. Ensure that tablets are stored 
