
===== Plumb PDF 257 =====
230    Ceftriaxone
Ceftriaxone
(sef-try-ax-ohn) Rocephin®
Third-Generation Cephalosporin 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Injectable antibiotic used to treat serious bacterial infections 
 ▶ Achieves therapeutic concentrations in CNS; long half-life
 ▶ Adverse effects include hypersensitivity reactions and injec-
tion site reactions (eg, skin tightness, induration).
 ▶ Administer ceftriaxone IV over 30 minutes (or longer). Pain on 
IM injection is reduced when reconstituted with lidocaine.
 ▶ In the United States, extra-label drug use of cephalospo-
rins is restricted in food-producing animals.
Uses/Indications
Ceftriaxone is used to treat serious infections (particularly against 
susceptible Enterobacteriaceae) that are not susceptible to other 
agents or when aminoglycosides are not indicated because of their 
potential toxicity. Its long half-life, good CNS penetration, and ac -
tivity against Borrelia burgdorferi have also made ceftriaxone a po -
tential choice for treating Lyme borreliosis and other infections in 
animals. Although ceftriaxone has been reported for the treatment 
of uncomplicated lower UTI, 1 its use is not recommended for this 
purpose.2 In dogs, ceftriaxone’s lower protein binding and shorter 
half-life (when compared with humans) give it no advantage over the 
other parenteral third-generation cephalosporins. In horses, intra -
peritoneal ceftriaxone successfully treated cases of septic peritonitis.3
The World Health Organization (WHO) classifies third-gen -
eration cephalosporins as Critically Important, Highest Priority 
antimicrobials for human medicine. 4 The Office International des 
Epizooties (OIE) has designated third-generation cephalosporins 
as Veterinary Critically Important Antimicrobial (VCIA) agents in 
avian, bovine, ovine, and swine species.5
Pharmacology/Actions  
Ceftriaxone is a third-generation injectable cephalosporin agent that 
is bactericidal and displays time-dependent killing. Third-genera -
tion cephalosporins retain the gram-positive activity of the first- and 
second-generation agents, but have much expanded gram-negative 
activity. This class of antibiotics is often chosen for their excellent 
gram-negative coverage and significantly less toxic potential (as 
compared with the aminoglycosides). As with the second-generation 
cephalosporins, enough variability exists with individual bacterial 
sensitivities that susceptibility testing is necessary. 
Ceftriaxone is ineffective against methicillin-resistant staphy -
lococci, enterococci, extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-  
producing Enterobacterales, and AmpC-producing Enterobactera -
les. It generally has excellent activity against gram-negative bacteria; 
however, it is not a good choice for Serratia spp, Pseudomonas spp, 
some Proteus spp, Citrobacter spp, and Enterobacter spp (“SPICE” 
organisms).
Pharmacokinetics
In humans, ceftriaxone is not absorbed after oral administration and 
must be given parenterally. It is widely distributed throughout the 
body and highly bound (95%-98%) to plasma proteins. Ceftriaxone 
crosses into the CNS; CSF concentrations are higher when meninges 
are inflamed. Ceftriaxone is excreted by both renal and biliary mech-
anisms; elimination half-lives are ≈6 to 11 hours.
In dogs, ceftriaxone bioavailability after IM or SC administration 
was equal after IV administration, but peak concentrations occur 
much faster after IM (≈30 minutes) than SC (80 minutes) adminis -
tration.6 Peak concentrations are higher with IM administration than 
with SC, but total area under the curve is similar for both routes. 
Elimination half-life is longer after SC administration (1.73 hours) 
than after either IM (1.17 hours) or IV administration (0.88 hours). 
The authors of the study concluded that once or twice daily IM or SC 
injections of 50 mg/kg should be adequate to treat most susceptible 
infections in dogs. 
In a study of cats, ceftriaxone was well-absorbed when adminis -
tered IM and SC. 7 Elimination half-life averaged between 1.5 and 2 
hours. Protein binding was not determined. 
One study compared healthy cows with endometritic cows.8 After 
a single ceftriaxone IV dose, elimination half-life was about 1 hour 
in healthy cows, clearance was 0.3 L/kg/hour, and volume of distri -
bution was 0.5 L/kg. In endometritic cows, elimination half-life was 
slightly longer at 1.56 hours, clearance was 0.56 L/kg/hour, and vol-
ume of distribution was 1.55 L/kg. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Cephalosporins are contraindicated in patients with a history of 
hypersensitivity to them. Because there may be cross-reactivity, 
cephalosporins should be used cautiously in patients that have a 
documented hypersensitivity to other beta-lactam antibiotics (eg, 
penicillins, cefamycins, carbapenems).
Human patients that have significant renal insufficiency with con-
comitant hepatic impairment may need dosage adjustments9; the rel-
evance of this finding for veterinary patients is unclear. 
Ceftriaxone can be easily confused with other cephalosporins. 
Consider writing orders and prescriptions using tall man lettering: 
cefTRIAXone.
Adverse Effects
Because use of ceftriaxone is limited in veterinary patients, an accu-
rate adverse effect profile has not been determined. Pain at the injec-
tion site has been reported.6,7 In dogs, very high dosages (100 mg/kg 
per day) of ceftriaxone have caused sludge in the bile. 
One case report describes 2 horses that were experimentally in -
fected with Borrelia burgdorferi and experienced anaphylactoid re -
actions (ie, nonimmunologic anaphylaxis) after receiving ceftriax -
one treatment.10 Each horse was supposed to receive 25 mg/kg IV , 
but both infusions were stopped early because of the reaction. Both 
horses had previously received penicillin without any problems. It 
is unclear whether the reactions were due to the drug itself, caused 
by a reaction between the drug and the infection, or due to massive 
die-off of the bacteria. 
The following adverse effects have been reported in humans and 
may or may not apply to veterinary patients: hematologic effects, in-
cluding eosinophilia (6%), thrombocytosis (5%), leukopenia (2%), 
and, more rarely, anemia, neutropenia, lymphopenia, and thrombo-
cytopenia.9 Approximately 2% to 4% of humans get diarrhea. Hy -
persensitivity reactions (usually a rash) have been noted. Increased 
serum concentrations of liver enzymes, BUN, creatinine, and urine 
casts have been described in ≈1% to 3% of patients. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Cephalosporins cross the placenta. Teratogenic effects were not 
demonstrated in studies in pregnant mice and rats that received up 
to 20 times the label doses of ceftriaxone.9 Ceftriaxone is considered 
compatible with human pregnancy.11
Ceftriaxone enters maternal milk in low concentrations.12 Ceftri-
axone is considered compatible with breastfeeding in humans.11
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
All beagles receiving ceftriaxone 300 mg/kg/day IV developed soft  
or mucoid feces and diarrhea; emesis was common.13 As limited in-
formation is available, overdoses should be monitored and treated 


===== Plumb PDF 258 =====
Ceftriaxone   231
supportively based on clinical signs.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions either have been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving ceftriaxone and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Aminoglycosides and other Nephrotoxic Drugs (eg, 
amphotericin B): Concurrent use of parenteral aminoglycosides 
or other nephrotoxic drugs with cephalosporins is somewhat 
controversial. Cephalosporins could cause additive nephrotox -
icity when used with these drugs, but this interaction has only 
been well-documented with cephaloridine (no longer marketed). 
In vitro studies have demonstrated that cephalosporins can have 
synergistic or additive activity against certain bacteria when used 
with aminoglycosides.
 ■ Calcium Salts, Intravenous (IV) : Concomitant use with 
calcium-containing solutions has caused fatal calcium/ceftriax -
one precipitates in lungs and kidneys of neonatal humans. Do 
not mix with calcium or administer calcium-containing solutions 
(eg, lactated Ringers, Hartmann’s solution) or products within 48 
hours of ceftriaxone administration. There have been no reported 
interactions between oral calcium products and ceftriaxone.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Because bacterial sensitivity to third-generation cephalosporin 
antibiotics is unique, when Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion procedures 
are employed for testing susceptibility, a specific ceftriaxone 30 µg 
disk should be used. A cephalosporin-class disk containing ceph-
alothin should not be used to test for ceftriaxone susceptibility.
 ■ Except for cefotaxime, cephalosporins may cause false-positive 
urine glucose determinations when cupric sulfate solution (Ben-
edict’s solution, Fehling’s solution, Clinitest® ) is used. Tests that use 
glucose oxidase (Tes-Tape®,  Clinistix® ) are not affected by cephalo-
sporins.
 ■ Ceftriaxone in high concentrations (50 µg/mL or greater) may 
cause falsely elevated serum creatinine  levels when manual 
methods of testing are used. Automated methods do not appear 
to be affected.
Dosages
NOTE: In humans, it is recommended that IV infusions be ad -
ministered over 30 minutes (60 minutes in neonates) at concen -
trations between 10 – 40 mg/mL.9 
DOGS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 50 mg/kg IM or SC once or 
twice daily,6 based on a pharmacokinetic study
Borreliosis | Lyme disease | Borrelia burgdorferi infection (ex-
tra-label): 25 mg/kg IV or SC once daily for 14 to 30 days14
Infective endocarditis caused by Streptococcus canis (extra-la-
bel): 20 mg/kg IV twice daily for 2 weeks, followed by long-term 
treatment with oral antibiotics15
CATS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 25 mg/kg IM or SC every 12 
hours7, based on a pharmacokinetic study
Borreliosis | Lyme disease | Borrelia burgdorferi infection (ex-
tra-label): 25 mg/kg IV or SC once daily for 14 to 30 days14
HORSES:
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 25 – 50 mg/kg every 12 
hours IV or IM16
Adjuvant treatment for septic peritonitis (extra-label): 25 mg/kg  
diluted in 250 mL of warmed 0.9% sodium chloride and adminis-
tered intraperitoneally once daily until resolution of clinical signs 
and laboratory parameters.3 Used in combination with parenteral 
antimicrobial therapy (eg, gentamicin) and supportive treatment. 
The study authors recommend reserving intraperitoneal ceftriax-
one for aggressive cases or cases that have failed to respond to 
routine antibiotics.
Monitoring
 ■ Culture and susceptibility testing as indicated by clinical condi -
tion
 ■ Because cephalosporins usually have minimal toxicity associat -
ed with their use, monitoring for efficacy is usually all that is re -
quired.
 ■ With long-term administration, consider periodic monitoring of 
CBC, chemistry panel, and urinalysis.
Client Information
 ■ This drug must be injected; it does not work when given by mouth.
 ■ This drug causes pain when administered in the muscle. If the 
drug is given at home to small animals, it usually is administered 
by injecting under the skin (subcutaneously).
Chemistry/Synonyms
A third-generation cephalosporin, ceftriaxone sodium occurs as a 
white to yellowish-orange crystalline powder. It is soluble in water 
(400 mg/mL at 25°C [77°F)). Potencies of commercial products are 
expressed in terms of ceftriaxone. One gram of ceftriaxone sodium 
contains 3.6 mEq of sodium.
Ceftriaxone sodium may also be known as ceftriaxonum na -
tricum, Ro-13-9904, or Ro-13-9904/000; many trade names are 
 available.
Storage/Stability
The sterile powder for reconstitution should be stored between 20°C 
to 25°C (68°F-77°F) and protected from light.
After reconstituting with sterile water, 0.9% sodium chloride, or 
D5W , ceftriaxone solutions (at concentrations of up to 100 mg/mL) 
are stable for 2 days at room temperature and for 10 days when re -
frigerated. Solutions of 250 mg/mL are stable for 24 hours at room 
temperature and 3 days when refrigerated. At concentrations of  
10 – 40 mg/mL, solutions frozen at -20°C (-4°F) are stable for 26 
weeks. Reconstituted solutions do not need to be protected from 
normal light; solution color may darken over time.
Solutions reconstituted with 1% lidocaine to a concentration of 
100 – 350 mg/mL are stable for 24 hours at room temperature and 3 
days when refrigerated.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
When ceftriaxone is used IM in humans, it may be reconstituted 
with lidocaine 1% (10 mg/mL, without epinephrine) to reduce pain 
on administration.
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Ceftriaxone is compatible with dextrose 5% and sodium chloride 
0.9%. The manufacturer does not recommend admixing any other 
anti-infective drugs with ceftriaxone sodium, but amikacin and met-
ronidazole are reported to be compatible.
Do not mix with calcium or calcium-containing solutions (eg, 
lactated Ringer’s) or administer simultaneously (Y-site) with cal -
cium or calcium-containing products (see Drug Interactions) as a 


===== Plumb PDF 259 =====
232    Cefuroxime
precipitate may form.
Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
NOTE: Extra-label use of cephalosporins in food-producing animals 
is restricted. Contact the Food Animal Residue Avoidance Databank 
(FARAD) for guidance in determining withdrawal periods.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Ceftriaxone Injection Powder for Solution: 250 mg, 500 mg, 1 g, 2 g, 
10 g, and 100 g (as base) in vials, single-use  duplex containers, and 
in bulk; generic; (Rx). Rocephin®  has been discontinued in the United 
States.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Cefuroxime
Cefuroxime Axetil
Cefuroxime Sodium
(sef-yoor-oks-eem) Ceftin®, Zinacef®
Second-Generation Cephalosporin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Oral and parenterally administered second-generation 
cephalosporin that is more active against some gram-nega-
tive bacteria than first-generation (eg, cephalexin, cefazolin) 
cephalosporins
 ▶ Potentially useful in small animals when a cephalosporin is de-
sired but there is resistance to first-generation cephalosporins, 
or when slightly enhanced gram-negative coverage is desired 
for surgical prophylaxis
 ▶ Limited clinical experience in veterinary medicine
 ▶ Adverse effects most commonly seen in small animal species 
are GI-related
Uses/Indications
Cefuroxime is a semi-synthetic second-generation cephalosporin 
with enhanced activity against some gram-negative pathogens when 
compared with the first-generation agents. Cefuroxime is available 
in both oral and parenteral dosage forms. It may be useful in small 
animal species when a cephalosporin is desired to treat bacterial in-
fections that are resistant to first-generation cephalosporins, when 
slightly enhanced gram-negative coverage is desired for surgical pro-
phylaxis, or for the treatment of bacterial meningitis or other CNS 
infections in which inflamed meninges will allow cefuroxime to 
penetrate into the CNS. Little information is available regarding the 
clinical use of cefuroxime in small animal species.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated cefurox-
ime as a Highly Important antimicrobial for human medicine. 1 The 
Office International des Epizooties (OIE) has designated cefuroxime 
as a Veterinary Highly Important Antimicrobial (VHIA) Agent in 
bovine species.2
Pharmacology/Actions
Cefuroxime, like other cephalosporins, is a time-dependent bacteri-
cidal antibiotic and acts by inhibiting cell wall synthesis. Its spectrum 
of activity is similar to that of cephalexin, but it is more active against 
gram-negative bacteria, including strains of Escherichia coli, Klebsiel-
la pneumoniae, Salmonella spp, and Enterobacter spp. It is not effec-
tive against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus spp, Pseudomonas 
spp, Serratia spp, or Enterococcus spp and it has little activity against 
Bacteroides fragilis. It is also ineffective against extended-spectrum  
beta-lactamase (ESBL)–producing bacteria. 
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, cefuroxime is rapidly distributed after IV injection. The vol-
ume of distribution is about 0.49 L/kg. The elimination half-life is 
≈1.12 hours. When cefuroxime is given at 20 mg/kg IM, the elimina-
tion half-life is 1.13 hours, bioavailability is ≈80%, and peak plasma 
concentration is 23 µg/mL. When given at the same dose SC, the 
elimination half-life is 1.04 hours, bioavailability is ≈77%, and peak 
plasma concentration is 15.4 µg/mL. Clearance is 0.34 L/kg/hour for 
both routes. The authors concluded that cefuroxime given at 20 mg/kg  
IM or IV every 11 hours, or SC every 12 hours, would be effective for 
bacteria with an MIC less than or equal to 1 µg/mL, but the interval 
would need to be shortened to every 8 hours (IM or SC) for bacteria 
with an MIC less than or equal to 4 µg/mL; however, further phar -
macokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies as well as clinical trials 
are needed.3
In goats, after 40 mg/kg is administered, IM bioavailability is high 
and protein binding is low. Volume of distribution is about 0.46 L/kg. 
Elimination half-life is about 2.1 hours (IM).
In humans, cefuroxime axetil is well absorbed after oral admin -
istration and is rapidly hydrolyzed in the intestinal mucosa and cir -
culation to the parent compound.4 Bioavailability ranges on average 
from 37% (fasted) to 52% (with food). Peak serum concentrations 
occur in about 2 to 3 hours after oral dosing. When the sodium salt 
is administered IM, peak concentrations occur within 15 minutes to 
1 hour. Cefuroxime is widely distributed after absorption, including 
to the bone, aqueous humor, and joint fluid.4,5 Therapeutic levels can 
be attained in the CSF if meninges are inflamed. Binding to human 
plasma proteins ranges from 35 to 50%. Cefuroxime is primarily ex-
creted unchanged in the urine; elimination half-life in patients with 
normal renal function is between 1 to 2 hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
No specific information is available for veterinary patients. In hu -
mans, cefuroxime is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensi-
tive to it or other cephalosporins. Dosage adjustment is recommend-
ed in humans with severe renal impairment.
Cefuroxime can be easily confused with other cephalosporins. 
Consider writing orders and prescriptions using tall man lettering: 
cefUROXime.
Adverse Effects
As use of cefuroxime in animals has been limited, a comprehensive 
adverse effect profile has not been determined. A 6-month toxici -
ty study of oral cefuroxime axetil given at dosages ranging from  
100 mg/kg/day to 1600 mg/kg/day in beagles demonstrated little 
adversity associated with cefuroxime. 6 At the highest dosing levels 
(≈80 times the recommended dose), some vomiting and slight sup -
pression of body weight gain were noted. Minor reductions in neu -
trophils and red blood cells and prolonged prothrombin times were 
also seen.
When cefuroxime is used clinically in dogs, GI effects (eg, inappe-
tence, vomiting, diarrhea) would be the most likely expected adverse 
effects, but incidence rates are not known.
The use of cephalosporins in patients documented to be hyper -
sensitive to penicillin-class antibiotics is controversial. In humans, 
it is estimated that up to 15% of patients that are hypersensitive to 
penicillins will also be hypersensitive to cephalosporins7.
Cefuroxime is generally well-tolerated in humans. Injection site 
inflammation can occur when cefuroxime is used IV . GI effects 
(eg, nausea, diarrhea) may occur, but are not frequently reported. 
 Eosinophilia and hypersensitivity reactions (including anaphylaxis) 
are possible. Neurologic effects (eg, hearing loss, seizures), pseudo -
membranous colitis, serious dermatologic reactions (eg, toxic epi -
dermal necrolysis [TEN], Stevens-Johnson syndrome), hematologic 


===== Plumb PDF 260 =====
Cefuroxime   233
effects (eg, pancytopenia, thrombocytopenia), and interstitial ne -
phritis have been reported rarely.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Studies performed in pregnant mice at dosages of up to 6400 mg/kg  
and rabbits at 400 mg/kg demonstrated no adverse fetal effects. In 
humans, cefuroxime is considered compatible with pregnancy.8 
Cefuroxime enters maternal milk in low concentrations. Al -
though cefuroxime is likely safe for nursing offspring, the potential 
for adverse effects cannot be ruled out, particularly alterations to gut 
flora with resultant diarrhea. In humans, cefuroxime is considered 
compatible with breast feeding.8
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Beagles receiving daily dosages of up to 1600 mg/kg/day orally toler-
ated cefuroxime well (see Adverse Effects).6
Cerebral irritation with seizures has been reported with large 
overdoses in humans. Plasma concentrations of cefuroxime can be 
reduced with hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions either have been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving cefuroxime and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Aminoglycosides (eg, gentamicin): Potential for increased 
risk of nephrotoxicity—monitor renal function; however, amino -
glycosides and cephalosporins may have synergistic or additive 
actions against some gram-negative bacteria (Enterobacteriace -
ae).
 ■ Antacids, Aluminum-, Calcium-, or Magnesium-Con -
taining : Antacids may decrease serum levels of oral cefuroxime. 
Separate doses by 1 to 2 hours.
 ■ H2-Receptor Antagonists (eg, famotidine, ranitidine ): H 2 
antagonists may significantly decrease the absorption of cefurox-
ime. Concurrent use is not recommended.
 ■ Nephrotoxic Drugs (eg, amphotericin B, furosemide): Con-
current use with cephalosporins could potentially cause additive 
nephrotoxicity, although this is somewhat controversial. Use to -
gether cautiously and monitor renal function closely.
 ■ Probenecid : Reduced renal excretion of cefuroxime. 
 ■ Proton Pump Inhibitors (eg, omeprazole, pantoprazole ): 
Cefuroxime absorption may be significantly decreased. Concur -
rent use is not recommended.
 ■ Sodium Bicarbonate : Cefuroxime absorption may be de -
creased. Separate doses by 1 to 2 hours.
 ■ Vitamin K Antagonists : Cephalosporins may enhance the an-
ticoagulant effects of vitamin K antagonists (eg, warfarin).
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Cefuroxime may cause false-positive urine glucose determina -
tions when using the copper reduction method (Benedict’s solu-
tion, Fehling’s solution, Clinitest® ); tests utilizing glucose oxidase 
(Tes-Tape®,  Clinistix® ) are not affected by cephalosporins.
 ■ In humans, particularly with azotemia, cephalosporins have 
caused a false-positive direct Coombs test.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 
a) Oral: Anecdotally, 10 – 15 mg/kg IV every 8 to 12 hours 
b) Parenteral: From a small PK study, 20 mg/kg SC every 12 
hours for bacteria with MIC less than or equal to 1 µg/mL 
OR 20 mg/kg IM or SC every 8 hours for bacteria with MIC 
less than or equal to 4 µg/mL3
Surgical prophylaxis (extra-label): 20 – 50 mg/kg IV slowly (over 
at least 3 to 5 minutes) ≈30 minutes prior to surgery (often given 
at induction) and every 1.5 to 3 hours during surgery
GOATS:
Susceptible infections for organisms with MIC less than or 
equal to 1 µg/mL (extra-label): 40 mg/kg IM every 12 hours 
based on a pharmacokinetic study9
Monitoring
 ■ Because cephalosporins usually have minimal toxicity associat -
ed with their use, monitoring for efficacy is usually all that is re -
quired.
 ■ Patients with diminished renal function may require intensified 
renal monitoring.
 ■ Therapeutic drug monitoring is not routinely done with these 
agents.
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine with food.
 ■ Do not crush tablets. This medicine has a bitter taste. Contact 
your veterinarian if you have trouble medicating your animal.
 ■ The most common side effects are diarrhea, vomiting, and loss of 
appetite. Contact your veterinarian if your animal develops severe 
vomiting/diarrhea or rash/itching.
 ■ Be sure to give this medicine to your animal as long as your veter-
inarian has prescribed, even if your animal seems better.
 ■ Cephalosporin antibiotics have an odor that resembles cat urine, 
but this is normal.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Cefuroxime axetil occurs as a white or almost white powder that is 
insoluble in water and slightly soluble in dehydrated alcohol.
Cefuroxime sodium occurs as a white or almost white hygroscop-
ic powder that is freely soluble in water.
Cefuroxime may also be known as CCI-15641, cefuroxim, cefu -
roxima, cefuroximum, cefuroksiimi, or cefuroksimas; many interna-
tionally registered trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Cefuroxime axetil tablets should be stored in tight containers at 
room temperature (15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]); protect from excessive 
moisture.
The powder for suspension should be stored at 2°C to 30°C 
[36°F-86°F]. Once reconstituted, it should be kept refrigerated (2°C 
to 8°C [36°F-46°F]) and any unused suspension should be discarded 
after 10 days.
The powder for injection should be stored at room temperature 
(15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]) and protected from light. The powder 
may darken, but this does not indicate any loss of potency. When 
the powder is reconstituted with sterile water to a concentration of  
90 mg/mL, the resulting solution is stable for 24 hours at room tem-
perature; 48 hours, if refrigerated. The 7.5 g pharmacy bulk container 
is stable for 7 days when reconstituted to 95 mg/mL and kept under 
refrigeration. Any of these containers may be further diluted into a 
compatible IV solution such as 5% dextrose, 0.9% sodium chloride, 
or Ringer’s, and the resulting solution is stable for 24 hours at room 
temperature or up to 7 days if refrigerated. The powder for injection 


===== Plumb PDF 261 =====
234    Cephalexin
may be reconstituted at up to 90 mg/mL and then immediately fro -
zen in a Viaflex mini-bag containing 50 to 100 mL of 0.9% sodium 
chloride or 5% dextrose. This solution is stable for up to 6 months 
when it is stored at -20°C (-4°F). Thaw at room temperature and do 
not refreeze. Thawed solutions are stable for 24 hours at room tem-
perature or 7 days under refrigeration.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent upon factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information.
Cefuroxime is compatible with dextrose 5 and 10%, Ringer’s in-
jection, lactated Ringer’s, and sodium chloride 0.9%. Drugs that are 
reportedly compatible when mixed with cefuroxime for IV use in -
clude clindamycin, furosemide, and metronidazole. Drugs that may 
be given at a Y-site with a cefuroxime infusion running include mor-
phine, hydromorphone, and propofol. Cefuroxime is incompatible 
with aminoglycosides, ciprofloxacin, and ranitidine.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Cefuroxime Axetil Oral Tablets (film coated): 125 mg, 250 mg, and 
500 mg; Ceftin®, generic; (Rx)
Cefuroxime Axetil Oral Suspension: 25 mg/mL and 50 mg/mL  
(125 mg/5 mL and 250 mg/5 mL; as base) when reconstituted in  
50 mL and 100 mL; generic; (Rx)
Cefuroxime Sodium for Injection: 750 mg, 1.5 g, 7.5 g, and 225 g (as 
sodium); Zinacef®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Cephalexin
(sef-a-lex-in) Rilexine®, Keflex®
First-Generation Cephalosporin
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ First-generation oral cephalosporin. Some countries may have 
an injectable form.
 ▶ May be administered with food (especially if GI upset occurs)
 ▶ Most likely adverse effects are GI in nature; hypersensitivity 
reactions are possible
Uses/Indications
Cephalexin is labeled for the treatment of secondary superficial bac-
terial pyoderma in dogs caused by susceptible strains of Staphylo-
coccus pseudintermedius. Cephalexin is also often used extra-label 
for other bacterial skin infections such as deep pyoderma. Cepha -
lexin has also been used clinically in cats, ferrets, reptiles, and birds, 
particularly for susceptible staphylococcal infections. Cephalex -
in is considered a first-tier drug for the treatment of bacterial skin 
 infections.1,2 
Cephalexin may not be effective in patients with history of lack of 
response to other cephalosporins, multiple antibiotic use, and multi-
drug resistance. Before using cephalexin in these cases, antimicrobi-
al culture and susceptibility testing is recommended. Additionally, 
topical antimicrobial therapy using antibacterial agents and biocides 
with proven anti-staphylococcal efficacy should be considered prior 
to systemic antibiotics, including cephalexin, for any surface or su -
perficial pyoderma and wound infections, particularly those that are 
mild or associated with localized lesions or due to methicillin-resis-
tant infections, to help reduce antibiotic pressure and antimicrobial 
resistance.3
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated cepha -
lexin as a Highly Important antimicrobial for human medicine.4 The 
Office International des Epizooties (OIE) has designated cephalexin 
as a Veterinary Highly Important Antimicrobial (VHIA) Agent in 
bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, and swine species.5
Pharmacology/Actions
Cephalexin is a first-generation cephalosporin that exhibits activ -
ity against bacteria usually covered by this class. First-generation 
cephalosporins generally possess excellent coverage against most 
gram-positive pathogens (excluding enterococci); they are active in 
vitro against streptococci and staphylococci. Because first-genera -
tion cephalosporins have variable coverage against most gram-neg -
ative pathogens, their usefulness for these bacteria is mainly for 
treatment of lower UTIs because of the high drug concentrations 
achieved in urine. With the exception of Bacteroides fragilis, most 
anaerobes are susceptible to the first-generation agents. Resistance is 
of increasing concern, particularly with methicillin-resistant staph -
ylococci and extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) producing 
Enterobacteriaceae. 
Cephalexin is inactive against Enterococcus spp, Pseudomonas spp, 
Rickettsia spp, mycobacteria, Mycoplasma spp, fungi, and viruses.
Cephalosporins are considered time-dependent and bactericidal 
against susceptible bacteria, and they act by inhibiting mucopeptide 
synthesis in the cell wall, which results in a defective barrier and an 
osmotically unstable spheroplast. The exact mechanism for this ef -
fect has not been definitively determined, but beta-lactam antibiotics 
have been shown to bind to several enzymes (eg, carboxypeptidases, 
transpeptidases, endopeptidases) in the bacterial cytoplasmic mem-
brane that are involved in cell wall synthesis. The different affinities 
that various beta-lactam antibiotics have for these enzymes (also 
known as penicillin-binding proteins [PBPs]) help explain the dif -
ferences in spectrums of activity of these drugs that are not explained 
by the influence of beta-lactamases. Like other beta-lactam antibi -
otics, cephalosporins are generally considered to be more effective 
against actively growing bacteria. For bactericidal activity, cephalo -
sporin levels should exceed bacterial MIC for at least 40% of the dose 
interval for staphylococcal infections and ≈60% of the dose interval 
for streptococcal infections.6  
Pharmacokinetics
In a study in dogs and cats, peak serum concentrations reached  
18.6 µg/mL ≈1.8 hours after a mean oral dose of 12.7 mg/kg in dogs 
and reached 18.7 μg/mL ≈2.6 hours after an oral dose of 22.9 mg/kg  
in cats.7 Elimination half-lives ranged from 1 to 2 hours in both spe-
cies. Bioavailability after oral administration is ≈90% in dogs and 
≈60% in cats.8,9 A different study found that protein binding of ceph-
alexin in dogs is low (21%) and elimination half-life in interstitial 
fluid (protein unbound) is ≈3.2 hours, as compared with 4.7 hours 
in total plasma.10 The FDA-approved tablets that were administered 
at 22 mg/kg orally to fasted dogs yielded peak concentrations of  
21.7 µg/mL 1.4 hours after administration; when the tablets were 
given with food, a lower peak concentration (17 µg/mL) was reached 
more quickly (1.2 hours). Elimination half-lives were 7.3 hours fast-
ed and 8.8 hours given with food. The drug is renally eliminated.
There may be temporal differences in pharmacokinetics depend-
ing on the time of day the drug is administered. Six beagles given 
cephalexin orally at 10:00 and 22:00 had significantly lower peak 
concentrations (77%) after the 22:00 dose as compared with the 
10:00 dose. In addition, the elimination half-life was ≈50% longer 
with the evening dose as compared with the morning dose. Clinical 
significance is not clear, as times above an MIC of 0.5 µg/mL were 
not different.11
In horses, oral cephalexin has low bioavailability (≈5%) and a 
short plasma half-life (≈2 hours), and at dosages of 30 mg/kg PO 


===== BSAVA PDF 84 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
68
therapeutic response. Dose and dosing interval is determined by 
infection site, severity and organism. In severe or acute conditions, 
doses may be doubled or given at more frequent intervals.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Avoid use in animals with hypersensitivity to 
other beta-lactam antimicrobials (cross-hypersensitivity in <10% of 
human patients).
Adverse reactions: Vomiting and diarrhoea most common; 
administration with food may reduce these reactions. Injection may 
be painful.
Drug interactions: May be an increased risk of nephrotoxicity if 
cephalosporins are used with aminoglycosides, amphotericin or 
loop diuretics (e.g. furosemide); monitor renal function. Do not mix 
in the same syringe as aminoglycosides.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs: 15 mg/kg p.o. q8–12h; 10 mg/kg i.m., s.c. q24h.
Cats: 15 mg/kg p.o. q8–12h; 10 mg/kg i.m., s.c. q24h.
Increased doses (20–30mg/kg p.o. q8–12h) should be used for 
superficial pyoderma and to treat severe, Gram-negative or 
orthopaedic infections.
Cefotaxime
(Cefotaxime*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 500 mg, 1 g, 2 g powders for 
reconstitution.
Action: It binds to proteins involved in bacterial cell wall synthesis, 
thereby decreasing cell wall strength and rigidity, and affecting cell 
division. Resistant to many bacterial beta-lactamases, particularly 
those produced by Staphylococcus  spp. As other beta-lactam 
antibacterials, works in a time-dependent fashion.
Use: As a 3rd generation cephalosporin, it is classified as a highest 
priority critically important antibiotic by the World Health 
Organization and European Medicines Agency, emphasizing the need 
for prudent use. Good activity against many Gram-negative 
organisms, especially Enterobacteriaceae (not Pseudomonas) but 
lower activity against many Gram-positive organisms than 1st and 2nd 
generation cephalosporins. It is important to maintain tissue 
concentrations above the MIC. Use should be reserved for: patients 
with acute sepsis or serious infection where cultures are pending or 
culture and sensitivity testing shows sensitivity; or where other 
licensed preparations are not appropriate, and the animal is not a 
good candidate for intensive aminoglycoside therapy (e.g. pre-
existing renal dysfunction). Use with care in patients with renal disease 
and consider increasing dose interval. There are few published studies 
evaluating appropriate dosing rates and suggested dose rates are 
largely extrapolated from human pharmacokinetic information.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 85 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
69
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Safety and handling: The reconstituted solution is stable for 24 
hours when refrigerated.
Contraindications: Patients hypersensitive to penicillins may also 
be sensitive to cephalosporins (cross-hypersensitivity in <10% of 
human patients); avoid use in animals with reported sensitivity to 
other beta-lactam antimicrobials.
Adverse reactions: May produce pain on injection. GI 
disturbance and superinfection with resistant microorganisms is a 
potential risk.
Drug interactions: Bactericidal activity may be affected by 
concomitant use of bacteriostatic agents (e.g. oxytetracycline, 
erythromycin). The cephalosporins are synergistic with the 
aminoglycosides, but should not be mixed in the same syringe. 
May be increased risk of nephrotoxicity if cephalosporins are used 
with amphotericin or loop diuretics (e.g. furosemide); monitor 
renal function.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs, Cats: Various doses have been suggested and vary. 40–50 
mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c. q8h. Some authors have suggested that lower 
doses of 10–20 mg/kg q12h have good clinical efficacy in the dog. 
References 
Sumano H, Gutierrez L and Ocampo L (2004) Pharmacokinetics and clinical efficacy of 
cefotaxime for the treatment of septicaemia in dogs. Acta Veterinaria Hungarica 52, 85–95
Cefovecin
(Convenia) POM-V 
Formulations: Injectable: lyophilized powder which when 
reconstituted contains 80 mg/ml cefovecin.
Action: It binds to penicillin-binding proteins involved in bacterial 
cell wall synthesis, decreasing cell wall strength and rigidity, and 
affecting cell division. Resistant to some penicillinases produced by 
Staphylococcus spp. but ineffective against meticillin-resistant 
staphylococci. Works in a time-dependent fashion.
Use: As a 3rd generation cephalosporin, it is classified as a highest 
priority critically important antibiotic by the World Health Organization 
and European Medicines Agency, emphasizing the need for prudent 
use. Cefovecin should not be considered if a 14-day course of 
antimicrobial would not ordinarily be required for the infection being 
treated. Indicated for the prolonged treatment of skin, soft tissue and 
urinary tract infections. Also used as part of the management of 
severe periodontal disease. Good efficacy against Staphylococcus, 
Streptococcus, Pasteurella multocida and Proteus, and anaerobes 
such as Prevotella, Fusobacterium, Bacteroides and Clostridium. Not 
active against Pseudomonas spp., Enterococcus spp., or Bordetella 


===== BSAVA PDF 86 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
70
bronchiseptica. Its high protein binding may prohibit reaching 
effective serum levels to treat systemic Escherichia coli. Due to its 
unique pharmacokinetic profile, cefovecin has an extremely long 
half-life and only requires administration every 14 days.
Safety and handling: Store in the refrigerator even prior to 
reconstitution; use reconstituted drug within 28 days.
Contraindications: Do not use in cats and dogs <8 weeks old. 
Avoid use during lactation and in pregnant animals, as safety has not 
been established.
Adverse reactions: Appears to be relatively safe but has not been 
assessed in renal disease. Reported adverse reactions include mild 
GI disturbance and transient swelling at the injection site, as well as 
type I, II and III hypersensitivity reactions.
Drug interactions: Highly bound to plasma proteins, therefore it 
would be prudent to exhibit caution when using in conjunction with 
other highly protein-bound drugs such as furosemide and NSAIDs.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs, Cats: 8 mg/kg s.c., equivalent to 1 ml/10 kg of reconstituted 
drug subcutaneously. May be repeated after 14 days up to 3 times.
Ceftazidime
(Fortum*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 500 mg, 1 g, 2 g, 3 g powders for 
reconstitution.
Action: It binds to proteins involved in bacterial cell wall synthesis, 
thereby decreasing cell wall strength and rigidity, and affecting cell 
division. Resistant to some bacterial beta-lactamases. It works in a 
time-dependent fashion.
Use: As a 3rd generation cephalosporin, it is classified as a highest 
priority critically important antibiotic by the World Health 
Organization and European Medicines Agency, emphasizing the 
need for prudent use. Higher activity against many Gram-negative 
organisms but lower activity against many Gram-positives when 
compared with 1st and 2nd generation cephalosporins. Very good 
activity against Pseudomonas  in humans. Use should be limited to 
cases with a confirmed susceptibility and acute sepsis or serious 
infections where licensed preparations are found to be 
inappropriate. Limited information on clinical pharmacokinetics in 
animal species and doses given below are empirical. Important to 
maintain tissue concentrations above the MIC with regular doses.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Patients hypersensitive to penicillins may also 
be sensitive to cephalosporins (cross-hypersensitivity in <10% of 
human patients); avoid use in animals with reported sensitivity to 
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
