
===== Plumb PDF 349 =====
322    Cyclosporine (Systemic)
Cyclosporine (Systemic)
Ciclosporin, Cyclosporine A
(sye-kloe-spor-een) Atopica®, Cyclavance®, Neoral®, 
 Sandimmune®
Immunosuppressive
See also Cyclosporine Ophthalmic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ FDA-approved products are available for dogs to control 
 atopic dermatitis and for cats to control allergic dermatitis. 
 ▶ Often used extra-label for treatment of immune-mediated 
disorders in dogs and cats, and to prevent rejection of kidney 
transplants in cats
 ▶ GI adverse effects (eg, vomiting, soft stools) are common at 
the start of treatment but typically resolve within a few weeks.
 ▶ Use of microemulsion or “modified” formulations is highly rec-
ommended. If using human-labeled products, Sandimmune® 
is not bioequivalent to, and must not be interchanged with, 
Atopica®, Cyclavance®, Neoral®, or Gengraf®. 
 ▶ Counseling pet owners to ensure knowledge of the dispens-
ing system is important when using solutions FDA-approved 
for animals. 
 ▶ For indications other than atopic dermatitis, consider ther-
apeutic drug monitoring (pharmacokinetic and pharma-
codynamic) to assess efficacy and minimize adverse effect 
 potential.
 ▶ Many potential drug interactions
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies cyclosporine as a hazardous drug; personal 
protective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to 
minimize the risk for exposure.
Uses/Indications
Cyclosporine is FDA-approved for use in dogs for the control of 
atopic dermatitis. In cats, it is FDA-approved for the control of feline 
allergic dermatitis as manifested by excoriations (including facial 
and neck), miliary dermatitis, eosinophilic plaques, and self-induced 
alopecia. Therapeutic effect for atopic dermatitis may not be seen 
in the first few weeks of treatment, and the drug is unsuitable for 
acute flares of atopic dermatitis. 1 Concurrent treatment with corti -
costeroids1,2 or oclacitinib3 can be considered during this interval to 
control pruritus. 
In dogs, extra-label indications include perianal fistulas (anal fu -
runculosis),4–7 immune-mediated blood disorders (eg, IMHA), 8 in-
flammatory bowel disease, 9 idiopathic chronic hepatitis, sebaceous 
adenitis, sterile nodular panniculitis, sterile granuloma/pyogranu -
loma complex, neutrophilic dermatosis resembling pyoderma gan -
grenosum, eosinophilic dermatitis with edema (ie, Wells syndrome), 
neutrophilic dermatitis (ie, Sweet syndrome), alopecia areata, vas -
culitis, ulcerative dermatoses of the nasal philtrum, dermatomyo -
sitis, contact allergy, chronic pedal furunculosis, metatarsal sinus 
tracts, refractory cases of juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis 
and lymphadenitis (ie, juvenile cellulitis), reactive histiocytic disor -
ders, proliferative otitis externa, idiopathic keratinization disorders 
(ie, primary seborrhea in springer spaniels, cairn terriers, and West 
Highland white terriers and follicular hyperkeratosis in cocker span-
iels), autoimmune diseases such as pemphigus foliaceus (controver-
sial results), lupus erythematosus complex, meningoencephalitis of 
unknown etiology (MUE),10 erythema multiforme, and uveoderma-
tologic syndrome.11 Ketoconazole may be concurrently prescribed to 
reduce cyclosporine dose requirements as a cost-saving measure (see 
Drug Interactions).
In cats, extra-label indications include feline urticaria pigmento -
sa, chronic stomatitis,12 feline acquired alopecia (ie, pseudopelade), 
pemphigus erythematosus and foliaceus, 13 dirty face syndrome in 
Persian cats, 11 idiopathic pruritus, allograft transplant rejection, 14 
pure red cell aplasia,15 immune-mediated thrombocytopenia,16,17 and 
inflammatory bowel disease.18 
The microemulsion form, or “modified” version, of oral products 
(ie, Atopica®, Cyclavance®, Neoral®) is highly recommended, as it is 
better absorbed and provides more consistent peak and trough drug 
concentrations.19 
Pharmacology/Actions
Cyclosporine, a calcineurin inhibitor, is an immunosuppressive 
agent that focuses on cell-mediated immune responses, with some 
humoral immunosuppressive action. Cyclosporine binds to T-cell 
cyclophilin and blocks calcineurin-mediated T-cell activation. 
T-helper lymphocytes are the primary target, but T-suppressor cells 
are also affected. Cyclosporine can also inhibit cytokine produc -
tion and release (including IL-2 and interferon-gamma in dogs 20–22 
and IL-3, IL-4, and tissue necrosis factor-alpha in humans), there -
by affecting the function of eosinophils, mast cells, granulocytes, 
and macrophages. It may also inhibit antigen-presenting functions 
of the dermal immune system. 23 It is not considered myelosuppres-
sive. One study suggests that cyclosporine therapy does not affect 
circulating lymphocyte CD4/CD8 ratio. 24 Cyclosporine appears to 
increase thromboxane production in dogs,25,26 and low-dose aspirin 
inhibits this effect.27
Pharmacokinetics
Cyclosporine is a substrate for the P-glycoprotein (P-gp) efflux trans-
porter, resulting in a wide range of bioavailability between patients. 
NOTE: Neoral®, Gengraf®, Atopica®, and Cyclavance® are NOT bio-
equivalent with Sandimmune®. In addition, the human microemul -
sion product (ie, Neoral®) has not been proven to be as equally bio -
available as Atopica® in dogs; however, a generic veterinary-modified 
cyclosporine product (ie, Cyclavance®) has demonstrated bioequiva-
lence with Atopica®.28 
In dogs, the veterinary-labeled oral product (ie, cyclosporine 
modified, Atopica®) is rapidly absorbed, and bioavailability is 45% 
in fasted dogs. Food in the GI tract increases variability of bioavail -
ability and reduces it by ≈20%.29 Protein binding is ≈90%,23 and vol-
ume of distribution is 7.8 L/kg.30 Cyclosporine is distributed in high 
concentrations into the liver, fat, and blood cells (granulocytes, 5% 
to 12%; lymphocytes, 5% to 9%) and significantly accumulates in the 
skin.23 It does not appreciably enter the CNS; this may be because it 
is a P-glycoprotein efflux transporter substrate.29 The drug is primar-
ily metabolized in the liver via the cytochrome P450 system (like -
ly CYP3A), excreted into the bile, and eliminated in the feces. Less 
than 1% of a dose is excreted unchanged into the urine. Elimination 
half-life in dogs has been reported as ≈5 to 12 hours. 31 Clearance 
has been consistently found to be 3.66 to 7.1 mL/minute/kg. 29 Dogs 
with diabetes mellitus demonstrate increased clearance and reduced 
elimination half-life.32 Pharmacokinetic parameters were not altered 
when the veterinary-labeled cyclosporine capsules were stored fro -
zen (-20°C [-4°F]) for 28 days.33
In cats, oral cyclosporine (modified) bioavailability is ≈25% and is 
highly variable, but drug absorption is not significantly altered when 
administered with or without food.23,34 Additionally, the bioavailabil-
ity of subcutaneous cyclosporine was reported to be very good in 
cats.35 The drug does not appear to be absorbed transdermally.36 The 
product label recommends administering on a consistent schedule 
(ie, with or without food, time of day). 37 Volume of distribution is 
3.3 L/kg, time to maximum absorption (T max) is 1 to 2 hours, and 
maximum concentration (Cmax) is 480 ng/mL.23,34 Hepatic and intes-
tinal metabolism (eg, hydroxylation, demethylation) produce inac -


===== Plumb PDF 350 =====
Cyclosporine (Systemic)   323
tive metabolites. Elimination half-life in cats is ≈24 hours but varies 
considerably, with estimates as short as 6.8 hours to more than 40 
hours in some healthy cats. Elimination occurs mainly in the feces.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Cyclosporine is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive 
to it or any component (eg, polyoxyethylated castor oil) in the prod-
ucts. It is contraindicated in animals with malignant disorders or a 
history of malignant neoplasia and in cats infected with FeLV or FIV . 
Safe use has not been established in dogs weighing less than 1.8 kg 
(4 lb); in cats weighing less than 1.4 kg (3 lb); or in dogs or cats less 
than 6 months of age.37,38
This drug should be used with caution in animals with diabetes 
mellitus or renal insufficiency, as it may cause elevated levels of se -
rum glucose, creatinine, and/or urea nitrogen. 37,38 Cats should test 
negative for FeLV and FIV before being treated with this drug. Cats 
on cyclosporine therapy appear to be at risk for developing systemic 
toxoplasmosis.39 High cyclosporine blood concentrations (adminis -
tered doses of 7.5 mg/kg/day orally) may be associated with a higher 
risk for developing systemic toxoplasmosis.40 To avoid infection, cats 
should be kept indoors, not eat raw meat, and not be allowed to hunt 
during treatment. 41 Ideally, toxoplasma titers should be evaluated 
prior to starting cyclosporine in cats.42 Only use cyclosporine in ani-
mals with active infection when the benefits outweigh the risks.23 Use 
may increase susceptibility to opportunistic bacterial and fungal in-
fections and development of neoplasia.43,44 Diminished immune re -
sponse to vaccinations can occur. Killed vaccines are recommended 
if vaccination is considered in dogs receiving cyclosporine therapy. 
The drug’s impact on the immune response to modified live vaccines 
is not known. 
Cyclosporine is a P-gp substrate. Historically, reports have not 
shown increased sensitivity to cyclosporine and dose reductions 
in dogs with the multidrug resistance ( MDR1) gene mutation (also 
known as  ABCB1-1delta) have not been recommended.45,46 Howev-
er, there is a case report of one dog receiving a low dose of cyclo -
sporine (3.3 mg/kg PO every 12 hours) who developed a secondary 
infection. Subsequent pharmacodynamic testing revealed marked 
immunosuppression and MDR1 testing showed that the dog was 
heterozygous for the MDR1 gene mutation. The MDR1 mutation was 
suspected to have contributed to the excessive immunosuppression 
experienced in this patient.47 Careful use with clinical and therapeu-
tic drug monitoring is recommended, especially when the patient is 
not responding to therapy at recommended dosages, or when sec -
ondary infections develop at dosages lower than expected to cause 
significant immunosuppression.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies cyclosporine as a hazardous drug (nonantineo -
plastic agent representing an occupational hazard to healthcare 
workers); personal protective equipment (PPE) should be used ac -
cordingly to minimize the risk for exposure. 
Do not confuse cycloSPORINE (ciclosporin) with cycloPHOS -
phamide.49 In addition, do not write prescriptions for this drug 
using the abbreviation SID . Many human-medicine pharmacists 
are not aware of this abbreviation and could interpret it as another 
abbreviation (eg, QID).
NOTE: Neoral®, Gengraf®, Atopica, and Cyclavance® are NOT bio-
equivalent with Sandimmune®.
Adverse Effects
In dogs, vomiting, anorexia, soft stools, and diarrhea 50 are the most 
commonly seen adverse effects. Dogs commonly vomit when start -
ing therapy, but this generally abates with time. GI effects rarely 
require discontinuation of the drug. Giving the drug with a small 
amount of food or freezing capsules for 30 to 60 minutes before ad-
ministration have been suggested to alleviate vomiting.33 
Gingival hyperplasia, altered glucose metabolism/diabetes melli -
tus,51 hypertrichosis, excessive shedding, psoriasiform lichenoid-like 
dermatosis, and papillomatosis have been reported in dogs. Gingival 
hyperplasia has been treated with oral and toothpaste forms of azi -
thromycin with limited efficacy.52 Hepatotoxicity or thromboembol-
ic events have been reported but are believed to be rare. One study 
showed that low-dose aspirin inhibits cyclosporine-induced throm-
boxane synthesis.27 One case series of 6 dogs describes the devel -
opment of Burkholderia cepacia complex deep skin infections while 
receiving oral cyclosporine.53 Bacteriuria and UTIs may occur.54
In one appraisal study, the prevalence of bacterial infections in 
828 dogs with atopic dermatitis receiving anti-allergic dosages of 
oral cyclosporine was 11%, most commonly affecting the cutaneous 
and urinary systems and not multiple systems.55 In 95 dogs receiving 
higher dosages of cyclosporine for other diseases, the prevalence of 
bacterial infection was 17%, occurring most often in the GI, urinary, 
and respiratory systems. The prevalence of bacterial infections in 
atopic dogs treated with cyclosporine appears to be low and occur 
most often in the skin. However, when given for immunosuppres -
sion, the prevalence of bacterial infections appears to be higher and 
to affect 1 or more body systems.
In cats, GI effects (including vomiting, diarrhea, hypersalivation, 
decreased appetite, and anorexia) are often reported during the first 
month of therapy.56,57 Resulting weight loss may lead to hepatic lip -
idosis in this species (rare). Lethargy, malaise, behavior changes, 
increased hair growth, acute bullous keratopathy, 58 gingival hyper -
plasia, and flares of latent viral infections have also been noted in 
cats receiving cyclosporine. Hemolytic uremic syndrome has been 
reported after renal transplant.59 Cats developing fatal systemic toxo-
plasmosis while on cyclosporine therapy have been reported. 39,41,60 
Anaphylaxis is rare but possible. 
Although nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity 61 are potential con -
cerns in dogs and cats, extremely high blood cyclosporine concen -
trations (ie, greater than 3000 ng/mL) must be present before neph-
rotoxicity is a significant problem.
Because of the drug’s immunosuppressive effects, animals may be 
more susceptible to opportunistic infections (eg, nocardiosis62, atyp-
ical fungal infections 63,64). Cyclosporine use may predispose dogs 
and cats to development of neoplastic diseases; however, evidence 
is lacking. In humans, this risk is increased with long-term use and 
when administered in combination with other immunosuppressive 
agents (eg, steroids).65 
Because the drug has an unpleasant taste, it has been suggested 
that oral solutions be placed in gelatin capsules or used with water or 
taste-masking flavoring agents. In one study, Cyclavance® oral solu-
tion was shown to be significantly more often accepted by dogs, im-
proving dosing compliance, compared with Atopica® capsules, when 
both were mixed with dry food (99.3% vs 27.1%, respectively).66  
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Cyclosporine has been shown to be fetotoxic and embryotoxic in rats 
and rabbits at doses 2 to 5 times the recommended dose. 65 Reduced 
fetal weight and growth, skeletal retardation, and premature birth 
have occurred. The manufacturer does not recommend use in preg-
nant or breeding dogs or cats. Use during pregnancy only when the 
risks outweigh the benefits.
Cyclosporine is distributed into maternal milk; the manufacturer 
does not recommend use in lactating queens or bitches.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Oral LD50 in rabbits is greater than 320 mg/kg.65 Single oral doses of 
33 mg/kg in dogs and 40 mg/kg in cats have resulted in no clinical 


===== Plumb PDF 351 =====
324    Cyclosporine (Systemic)
signs. Acute overdoses may cause adverse GI effects as well as tran -
sient renal or hepatotoxicity. Acute kidney injury requiring hemodi-
alysis and increased liver enzymes was reported in a dog that acci -
dentally received a single 33 mg/kg IV dose. 61 Clinical signs in cats 
given 40 mg/kg for up to 6 months were extensions of adverse effects. 
Overdoses may be treated with gastric decontamination (induction 
of emesis is apparently effective in humans if done within 2 hours of 
ingestion); treat supportively and according to clinical signs.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving cyclosporine and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate. Cyclo -
sporine is a CYP450 and P-glycoprotein substrate and its metabo -
lism can be affected by inhibitors, inducers, and other substrates. 
The following drugs may increase cyclosporine blood levels and 
the risk for cyclosporine toxicity:
 ■ Acetazolamide
 ■ Allopurinol
 ■ Amiodarone
 ■ Amphotericin B Liposome/Lipid complex
 ■ Angiotensin Receptor Blockers  (ARBs; eg, telmisartan, 
 valsartan) 
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, fluconazole, itraconazole, keto -
conazole): Ketoconazole significantly increases cyclosporine 
blood concentration in dogs 67,68; fluconazole has demonstrated 
variable effects. 69,70 Itraconazole appears to affect cyclosporine 
pharmacokinetics in cats71 but not in dogs. Many clinicians con -
currently use ketoconazole in dogs to reduce the dose and resul -
tant cost of cyclosporine treatment, particularly for large dogs. 
Only use a combination of ketoconazole and cyclosporine with 
caution and understand that monitoring of cyclosporine levels 
may be required. Of note, one study found an increase in cyclospo-
rine concentrations up to 75% following a dose of  ketoconazole. 
 ■ Bromocriptine
 ■ Calcium Channel Blockers  (eg, amlodipine, diltiazem, ve-
rapamil)
 ■ Carvedilol
 ■ Ceftriaxone
 ■ Chloramphenicol 
 ■ Cimetidine:  May delay absorption but was not found to signifi-
cantly alter maximum concentrations (Cmax)72 
 ■ Cisapride
 ■ Clonidine 
 ■ Colchicine: Colchicine levels may also increase. This combina-
tion is contraindicated in human patients with renal impairment.
 ■ Corticosteroids : Methylprednisolone does not appear to af -
fect cyclosporine levels in dogs. 
 ■ Danazol
 ■ Digoxin
 ■ Estrogens
 ■ Fatty Acids (Essential/Omega ): Fatty acid supplementation 
may provide a cyclosporine-sparing effect.73
 ■ Fluoroquinolones  (eg, ciprofloxacin, enrofloxacin, marbo -
floxacin, orbifloxacin, pradofloxacin)
 ■ Fluvoxamine
 ■ Glipizide, Glyburide
 ■ Grapefruit Juice, Grapefruit Juice Powder 74
 ■ Imipenem
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics  (eg, azithromycin, clarithromycin,75,76 
erythromycin)
 ■ Medroxyprogesterone
 ■ Metoclopramide: A study in dogs demonstrated  that meto-
clopramide did not significantly alter cyclosporine pharmacoki -
netics.74
 ■ Metronidazole
 ■ Omeprazole
 ■ Sertraline
The following drugs may decrease the blood levels of cyclosporine:
 ■ Azathioprine
 ■ Carbamazepine
 ■ Clindamycin: Clindamycin may decrease cyclosporine bio -
availability; however, this interaction does not appear to occur in 
dogs.
 ■ Cyclophosphamide
 ■ Famotidine
 ■ Griseofulvin
 ■ Mitotane
 ■ Octreotide
 ■ Phenobarbital 77
 ■ Rifampin
 ■ St. John’s Wort: This interaction appears to be of significance 
in dogs.78
 ■ Sulfadiazine/Sulfamethoxazole
 ■ Sulfasalazine
 ■ Terbinafine
 ■ Trimethoprim : May also increase the risk for nephrotoxicity
 ■ W arfarin : May also reduce efficacy of warfarin
Additional interactions:
 ■ ACE Inhibitors  (eg, benazepril, enalapril ): There have been 
case reports in humans in which renal function declined.
 ■ Alprazolam: Concurrent use may decrease alprazolam bio -
availability and pharmacodynamics effects.
 ■ Darbepoetin: May cause additive increases in blood pressure. 
Additionally, may alter cyclosporine blood concentrations, as cy-
closporine is bound by red blood cells 
 ■ Digoxin : Cyclosporine may increase digoxin levels with possible 
toxicity.
 ■ Doxorubicin : Cyclosporine can increase doxorubicin and 
doxorubicinol (active metabolite) levels.
 ■ Fentanyl : Concurrent use may increase the risk for fentanyl 
toxicity.
 ■ Furosemide : Concurrent use may increase the risk for gouty ar-
thritis in humans.
 ■ Hydrochlorothiazide : Concurrent use may increase the risk 
for hyperuricemia.
 ■ Immunosuppressive Agents (eg, azathioprine, corticoste -
roids): May increase the risk for infection or malignancy
 ■ Ivermectin:  Cyclosporine may inhibit P-gp (MDR1) transport-
er and increase ivermectin concentrations.23,34
 ■ Leflunomide:  Increased risk for leflunomide-induced adverse 
hematologic effects
 ■ Melphalan : Increased risk for renal injury
 ■ Methotrexate (MTX) : Cyclosporine may increase MTX con-
centrations.


===== Plumb PDF 352 =====
Cyclosporine (Systemic)   325
 ■ Midazolam : Concurrent use may decrease midazolam clear -
ance and increase midazolam plasma concentrations.
 ■ Morphine : Combination may increase morphine exposure.
 ■ Mycophenolate : Concurrent use may reduce levels of myco -
phenolate.
 ■ Nephrotoxic Drugs, Other  (eg, acyclovir, aminoglycosides, 
amphotericin B, colchicine, NSAIDs, trimethoprim, vancomy-
cin): Possible additive nephrotoxicity; avoid combination
 ■ Oclacitinib:  Although concurrent administration of oclaci -
tinib and cyclosporine appears safe when administered for up to 
3 weeks,3 the combination of cyclosporine and oclacitinib is rel -
atively contraindicated for long-term use, especially in cases in 
which infection is present, because of the theoretical increased 
risk for immunosuppression.1
 ■ Omeprazole: Concurrent use may result in altered cyclospo -
rine concentrations.
 ■ Potassium Supplements:  Increased risk for hyperkalemia
 ■ Spironolactone  and other Potassium-Sparing Diuretics 
(eg, triamterene): Increased risk for hyperkalemia
 ■ V accinations : Vaccine response may be delayed or reduced in 
patients receiving cyclosporine79; avoid use of modified live vac -
cines.
 ■ Vincristine : Concurrent use may increase vincristine plasma 
concentrations.
Laboratory considerations
 ■ Intradermal allergy testing (IDT): Drug withdrawal may be rec-
ommended for at least 4 weeks prior to intradermal testing if cyc-
losporine has been administered for longer than 30 days.80
Dosages
NOTE: Dosages are for cyclosporine (modified), Atopica®, Cycla-
vance®, Neoral®, or equivalent; these dosages are not interchange-
able with Sandimmune® (or equivalent) dosages.
DOGS:
Control of atopic dermatitis:
a) Label dosage; FDA-approved: 5 mg/kg (3.3 – 6.7 mg/kg) PO 
once daily for 30 days in dogs weighing at least 1.8 kg (3.9 lb). 
Following this initial treatment period, dose may be tapered 
to every other day, then twice per week until a minimum 
frequency that will maintain the desired therapeutic effect is 
reached. Give at least 1 hour before, or 2 hours after, meals. 38 
It may take 4 to 6 weeks to observe the full benefits. To reduce 
the incidence of vomiting in dogs when starting therapy, some 
clinicians will start at a low dose, give with food, and gradu -
ally increase oral doses over the first week or so. In one small 
study81, 12 of 21 dogs (57%) were able to be maintained on 
every-other-day or twice-weekly cyclosporine administration.
b) Concurrent administration with ketoconazole (extra-label): 
In larger dogs, cyclosporine 2.5 – 3 mg/kg PO once daily with 
ketoconazole 2.5 – 5 mg/kg PO once daily is effective and 
may reduce cost. 68 Ideally, cyclosporine should be given on 
an empty stomach, but if it causes GI upset, giving with food 
may help. One study found similar cyclosporine levels in dogs 
treated with either cyclosporine (alone) 5 mg/kg PO once daily 
or cyclosporine 2.5 mg/kg PO once daily with ketoconazole  
2.5 mg/kg PO once daily.67 After control of pruritus is achieved, 
the cyclosporine dose can gradually be reduced to the lowest 
effective dose (eg, daily, then switch to giving every second 
or third day). For less than daily administration (eg, every 48 
hours), give ketoconazole only on the days cyclosporine is ad-
ministered.
Perianal fistulas (Anal furunculosis) (extra-label): Many dosag-
es have been found to be effective. When used alone, cyclosporine  
4 – 7.5 mg/kg PO twice daily. Alternatively, cyclosporine 1 – 4 mg/kg  
PO twice daily with ketoconazole 5 mg/kg PO once daily. After 
condition is controlled, increase the administration interval to the 
lowest frequency that controls clinical signs.4–7
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (extra-label): 5 mg/kg PO 
every 12 hours as adjunctive treatment to corticosteroids8 
Sebaceous adenitis,82 sterile nodular panniculitis, neutrophil -
ic dermatoses resembling pyoderma gangrenosum, alopecia 
areata, chronic pedal furunculosis, metatarsal sinus tracts, cu-
taneous histiocytosis, dermatomyositis, proliferative chronic 
otitis, idiopathic keratinization disorders (extra-label): 5 mg/kg 
PO once daily. After condition is controlled, increase the adminis-
tration interval to the lowest frequency that controls clinical signs.
Pemphigus foliaceus, refractory cases  (extra-label): Variable 
results have been reported. Higher doses such as cyclosporine  
15 mg/kg PO once daily or cyclosporine 5 – 10 mg/kg PO once 
daily combined with ketoconazole 5 – 10 mg/kg PO once daily 
may be helpful.83
Discoid lupus erythematosus, vesicular cutaneous lupus ery -
thematosus (extra-label): 5 mg/kg PO once daily
Exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus  (extra-label): Cyc -
losporine 2.5 – 10 mg/kg PO once daily with or without keto -
conazole 5 – 7 mg/kg PO once daily
Steroid-refractory inflammatory bowel disease (extra-label): 
Cyclosporine 5 mg/kg PO once daily demonstrated an improve -
ment in clinical signs in 12 out of 14 dogs.9 Some clinicians advo-
cate for giving cyclosporine as a divided dose given twice daily for 
treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.
Idiopathic chronic hepatitis (extra-label): Median dose is 8 mg/kg  
PO daily, with a range of 2.5 – 12.7 mg/kg/day. Median time to 
biochemical remission (ie, ALT, less than 1.1 times the upper limit 
of normal) was 2.5 months. Concurrent hepatoprotectant treat -
ment was not associated with increased likelihood of remission.84
Juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis 
(juvenile cellulitis), refractory cases  (extra-label): 10 mg/kg PO 
once daily
Immunosuppressant for renal transplant  (extra-label): Empir -
ical dosages generally range from 3 – 6 mg/kg PO twice daily or 
5 – 7.5 mg/kg once daily. Ketoconazole or grapefruit juice powder 
have been used to lower cyclosporine dose requirements. To re -
duce transplant rejection, 10 – 15 mg/kg PO twice daily85,86 is gen-
erally used and therapeutic drug monitoring (blood cyclosporine 
concentrations) or pharmacodynamic monitoring can be used to 
assess adequacy of therapy. 
Meningoencephalitis of unknown etiology/origin (MUE/
MUO; extra-label): 3 – 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. 87 A reason-
able starting dosage is 5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours.10
Primary immune-mediated polyarthritis (IMP A)  (extra  
label): Cyclosporine 5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours with carprofen  
2.2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for 7 days for analgesia was shown 
in one study to be an effective alternative to prednisone.88
Myasthenia gravis: 4 mg/kg PO every 12 hours demonstrated im-
proved clinical signs of 2 dogs in a case report 
CATS:
Allergic dermatitis as manifested by excoriations (including 
facial and neck), miliary dermatitis, eosinophilic plaques, and 
self-induced alopecia  (label dosage; FDA-approved): Initially, 
7 mg/kg PO once daily for a minimum of 4 to 6 weeks or until 
resolution of clinical signs. Following this initial daily treatment 
period, the dosage may be tapered by decreasing administration 


===== Plumb PDF 353 =====
326    Cyclosporine (Systemic)
to every other day or twice weekly to maintain the desired ther -
apeutic effect. The lowest effective dosing frequency should be 
used. Administer directly on a small amount of food or orally just 
after feeding. When possible, administer on a consistent schedule 
with regard to meals and time of day. If a dose is missed, the next 
dose should be administered (without doubling) as soon as pos -
sible, but administration should be no more frequent than once 
daily.37 NOTE: In studies,89,90 ≈75% of cats receiving daily cyclo -
sporine were able to undergo dose reduction. Of those cats, ≈60% 
were able to be maintained on twice-weekly administration and 
15% were maintained on every-other-day administration for the 
8-week study period.
Allergic dermatitis (extra-label): 2.5 – 5.0 mg/kg SC once daily to 
every other day seemed to be an effective alternative therapy for 
cats that cannot be treated orally.35
Pemphigus complex (extra-label): 5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours 
either alone or in combination with a glucocorticoid13
Sebaceous adenitis, idiopathic granulomatous folliculitis and 
furunculosis (extra-label): 5 mg/kg PO once daily91 
Immunosuppressant (usually as part of an immunosuppres -
sive protocol) (extra-label): 3 – 4 mg/kg PO every 12 hours or  
5 – 7 mg/kg PO once daily. To reduce transplant rejection, 
twice-daily administration with prednisolone 0.125 – 0.25 mg/kg 
PO every 12 hours is generally used; therapeutic drug monitoring 
is recommended. See Monitoring.
Alternative to glucocorticoid therapy for feline asthma  (ex -
tra-label): 4 mg/kg PO every 12 hours was reported in one case as 
effective for treatment of feline asthma.92
Chronic stomatitis (extra-label): 2.5 mg/kg PO twice daily12
Pure red cell aplasia (extra-label): 5 – 10 mg/kg/day PO, although 
a dosage up to 20 mg/kg/day was noted15 
Thrombocytopenia purpura (extra-label): 5 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours with prednisone 2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours, from a case 
report17
Monitoring
 ■ Therapeutic efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ Consider therapeutic drug monitoring (pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic) to assess effectiveness of therapy, particularly 
when response is poor or when adverse effects occur. Therapeutic 
drug monitoring can also be considered when changing brands or 
manufacturers, especially if response to therapy changes in the in-
dividual patient. Cyclosporine blood concentrations are not typi-
cally monitored when treating atopic dermatitis93 or inflammato-
ry bowel disease9 because the blood concentrations were found to 
not correlate with clinical efficacy, but this may be warranted in 
some cases.50 
a) Pharmacokinetic monitoring (or measurement of blood con -
centrations) should ideally occur no sooner than 60 hours af -
ter starting therapy and whole blood (not plasma) should be 
tested, as cyclosporine concentrates in blood cells. 19 When 
monitoring blood drug concentrations, therapeutic trough 
whole-blood concentrations (12 hours after last dose) have 
been suggested to be between 300 and 500 ng/mL for trans -
plantation and life-threatening disease but may not reliably 
predict clinical response for immunosuppression. 94 Because 
different methodologies may yield different results and differ-
ent conditions are managed with a range of cyclosporine blood 
concentrations, it is recommended to contact a laboratory for 
current recommendations. 
b) Pharmacodynamic monitoring can also be used in dogs re -
ceiving cyclosporine therapy to provide information on dos -
ing for individual animals. This test is offered to clinicians as 
a PCR-based assay, with samples being submitted after 1 week 
of starting or changing therapy.95,96 When using pharmacody-
namic monitoring in dogs, a single peak sample (2 hours post-
administration) is recommended for dogs receiving twice-dai-
ly administration, whereas both peak and trough (just before 
the next dose) samples are recommended in dogs receiving 
once daily therapy.
 ■ Baseline CBC; repeat as clinically relevant (eg, signs of infection)
 ■ Baseline serum chemistry profile, then monthly to every 3 to 6 
months has been suggested for most conditions. For treatment 
of IMHA in dogs, recommendations are to evaluate relevant bio-
chemical variables every 2 to 3 months owing to the risk for hep-
atotoxicity in a small proportion of dogs.8 
 ■ Urinalysis and urine culture should also be monitored due to po-
tential risks for UTIs.54
 ■ Blood glucose in diabetic patients
 ■ Body weight: Persistent, progressive weight loss that resulted in 
hepatic lipidosis was reported during field studies in 2 out of 205 
cats. 
Client Information
 ■ For this medication to work, give it exactly as your veterinarian 
has prescribed. It is a good idea to always check the prescription 
label to be sure you are giving the medicine correctly.
 ■ Preferably, dogs should receive the medicine on an empty stom -
ach (at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal). If the dog 
vomits after receiving the drug, try giving the medication frozen 
or with a small amount of food. Freezing capsules for 30 to 60 
minutes before administration can also be tried.
 ■ Cats can be given the medication with or without food; make sure 
to give it the same way each day. If giving with food, first mix the 
medication into a small portion of food to ensure the entire dose 
is consumed, then offer the remaining food.
 ■ For many conditions, if a dose is missed, the next dose should be 
given as soon as possible and then the usual schedule should be 
restarted. For serious conditions (eg, kidney transplant), contact 
your veterinarian if a dose is missed.
 ■ Vomiting, decreased appetite, soft stools, and diarrhea are the 
most common side effects. These signs usually get better on their 
own, but if they worsen or continue, contact your veterinarian. 
 ■ Capsules should be stored in their original container until admin-
istration. 
 ■ Capsules should not be broken or opened. 
 ■ If using the oral liquid, do not rinse or clean the syringe between 
doses.
 ■ It is recommended that you wear gloves when giving capsules or 
oral solutions to your animal. Wash your hands thoroughly after 
handling.
 ■ Depending on the condition being treated, it may take up to 4 to 6 
weeks to see an improvement in your animal’s condition.
 ■ Watch for signs of infection (eg, low energy level, poor appetite) 
and/or persistent, progressive weight loss; if seen, contact your 
veterinarian immediately.
 ■ If your animal is taking cyclosporine for immunosuppression, 
your veterinarian may need to perform blood tests to evaluate 
how well this medicine is working. Do not miss these important 
follow-up visits.
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined 
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH). Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the use 
of personal protective equipment when handling this  medicine.


===== BSAVA PDF 99 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
83
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
increased risk of nephrotoxicity if ciclosporin is administered with 
aminoglycosides, NSAIDs, quinolones, or trimethoprim/
sulphonamides; concomitant use of ciclosporin not 
recommended. Increased risk of hyperkalaemia if used with ACE 
inhibitors. As a substrate and inhibitor of the MDR 1 P-glycoprotein 
transporter, co-administration of ciclosporin with P-glycoprotein 
substrates such as macrocyclic lactones (e.g. ivermectin and 
milbemycin) could decrease the efflux of such drugs from blood–
brain barrier cells, potentially resulting in signs of CNS toxicity.
DOSES
See Appendix for immunosuppression protocols.
Dogs:
• Ocular disease: apply approximately 0.5 cm of ointment to the 
affected eye q12h. It may take 2–4 weeks for improvement to 
occur (occasionally up to 12 weeks). Maintenance treatment 
should be continued with application q12h; in cases of excessive 
tear production, application can be reduced to q24h but only 
with caution and long-term, regular monitoring of tear 
production.
• Atopic dermatitis: 5 mg/kg p.o. q24h until signs controlled.
• Perianal fistula, sebaceous adenitis: 5 mg/kg p.o. q24h – may 
be increased in non-responsive cases to q12h.
• Immune-mediated disease:  5 mg/kg p.o. q12h. A proportion of 
dogs may require higher doses and pharmacodynamic 
monitoring is therefore advisable.
Cats:
• Atopic dermatitis: 7 mg/kg p.o. q24h until signs controlled.
• Immune-mediated disease: dosing strategies are not well 
defined but typically 3–5 mg/kg p.o. q12h or 5–7 mg/kg p.o. q24h.
References
Nuttall T, Reece D and Roberts E (2014) Life-long diseases need life-long treatment: 
long-term safety of ciclosporin in canine atopic dermatitis. Veterinary Record 174(S2), 3–12
Swann JW, Garden OA, Fellman CL et al . (2019) ACVIM consensus statement on the 
treatment of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in dogs. Journal of Veterinary 
Internal Medicine  29, 513–518Cimetidine
(Zitac, Cimetidine*, Tagamet*) POM-V, POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 100 mg/ml solution in 2 ml ampoule. 
Oral: 100 mg, 200 mg tablets, 40 mg/ml syrup.
Action: Histamine (H2) receptor antagonist, reducing histamine-
induced gastric acid secretion. Rapidly absorbed with high 
bioavailability; undergoes hepatic metabolism and renal excretion. 
Plasma half-life is about 2 hours. It is not an antiemetic. Has weak 
anti-androgenic effects.
Use:
• Management of idiopathic, uraemic or drug-related erosive 
gastritis, gastric and duodenal ulcers, oesophagitis, and 


===== BSAVA PDF 100 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
84
hypersecretory conditions secondary to gastrinoma, mast cell 
neoplasia or short bowel syndrome. Efficacy against NSAID-
induced ulcers is controversial.
Rebound gastric acid secretion may be seen on cessation of 
cimetidine, so therapy should be tapered. Concomitant treatment 
with sucralfate may be helpful. If used i.v., should be administered 
over 30 minutes to prevent cardiac arrhythmias and hypotension. 
Dosage should be reduced for animals with renal impairment.  
Less effective at reducing gastric acidity than more modern H2 
blockers and proton pump inhibitors. Cimetidine has minimal 
prokinetic effects.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Rare, although hepatotoxicity and 
nephrotoxicity have been reported in humans. Adverse reactions 
are generally minor even at high doses, but thrombocytopenia has 
been reported in dogs. Transient and self-resolving slight swelling 
of mammary glands may be observed in female dogs. In humans, 
cimetidine has also been associated with headache and  
decreased libido.
Drug interactions: Retards oxidative hepatic drug metabolism 
by binding to the microsomal cytochrome P450. May increase 
plasma levels of beta-blockers (e.g. propranolol), calcium-channel 
blockers (e.g. verapamil), diazepam, lidocaine, metronidazole, 
pethidine and theophylline. When used with other agents that 
cause leucopenia may exacerbate the problem. Sucralfate may 
decrease bioavailability: although there is little evidence to suggest 
this is of clinical importance, it may be a wise precaution to 
administer sucralfate at least 2 hours before cimetidine. Stagger 
oral doses by 2 hours when used with other antacids, digoxin, 
itraconazole or maropitant.
DOSES
Dog: All uses: 5 mg/kg p.o., i.v., i.m. q8h.
Cats: All uses: 2.5–5 mg/kg p.o., i.v., i.m. q12h.
References
Marks SL, Kook PH, Papich MG et al . (2018) ACVIM consensus statement: support for 
rational administration of gastrointestinal protectants to dogs and cats. Journal of 
Veterinary Internal Medicine  32, 1823–1840
Cimicoxib
(Cimalgex) POM-V 
Formulations: Oral: 8 mg, 30 mg, 80 mg chewable tablets.
Action: Selectively inhibits COX-2 enzyme, thereby limiting the 
production of prostaglandins involved in inflammation.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 101 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
85
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Use:
• For the treatment of pain and inflammation associated with 
osteoarthritis and the management of perioperative pain due to 
orthopaedic or soft tissue surgery in dogs.
For perioperative use, one dose 2 hours before surgery, followed by 
3–7 days of treatment, is indicated. All NSAIDs should be 
administered cautiously in the perioperative period. Although 
cimicoxib preferentially inhibits COX-2, it may still adversely affect 
renal perfusion during periods of hypotension. If hypotension during 
anaesthesia is anticipated, delay cimicoxib administration until the 
animal is fully recovered from anaesthesia and normotensive. Liver 
disease will prolong the metabolism of cimicoxib, leading to the 
potential for drug accumulation and overdose with repeated dosing. 
For the relief of pain and inflammation associated with osteoarthritis, 
an initial treatment period of 6 months is indicated; this can be 
extended depending on clinical need for analgesic treatment.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Do not give to dogs <10 weeks of age; the 
safety of cimicoxib has not been determined in dogs <6 months of 
age, therefore, monitor dogs in this age group carefully for signs of 
NSAID-related adverse effects. Do not give to dehydrated, 
hypovolaemic or hypotensive patients, or those with GI disease or 
blood clotting problems. Administration to patients with concurrent 
renal or hepatic disease may carry additional risk, careful 
monitoring of patients is required if cimicoxib is administered to 
these patient groups. Do not give to pregnant or lactating bitches. 
Do not administer concurrently or within 24 hours of other NSAIDs 
and glucocorticoids.
Adverse reactions: GI signs are commonly reported but most 
cases are mild and recover without treatment. Stop therapy if signs 
persist beyond 1–2 days. Some animals develop signs with one NSAID 
and not another. A 3–5 day wash-out period should be allowed before 
starting therapy with another NSAID. Stop therapy immediately if GI 
bleeding is suspected. There is a small risk that NSAIDs may precipitate 
cardiac failure in humans and this risk in animals is unknown.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs: 2 mg/kg p.o. q24h administered with or without food.
Cats: Not authorized for cats.
Cinchophen
(PLT tablets) POM-V 
Formulations: Oral: 200 mg tablets in combination with 
prednisolone 1 mg.
Action: Anti-inflammatory agent via non-steroidal action.
