
===== Plumb PDF 354 =====
Cyproheptadine   327
 ■ Cats receiving cyclosporine should be kept indoors and not al -
lowed to hunt or eat raw meat due to the risk for developing an 
infection called toxoplasmosis. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Cyclosporine (ie, cyclosporin A, ciclosporin, cyclosporin) is a nat -
urally produced immunosuppressant agent. It is a nonpolar, cyclic, 
polypeptide antibiotic that consists of 11 amino acids and it occurs 
as a white, fine crystalline powder. It is relatively insoluble in water 
but generally soluble in organic solvents and oils. Molecular weight 
is 1202.61.
Because of the difficulties surrounding absorption, many different 
formulations have been approved over the years. Initial formulations 
included a vegetable-oil base (ie, Sandimmune®), but marked differ-
ences in bioavailability led to the approval of a human microemul -
sion formulation (ie, Neoral®) and a veterinary product (ie, Atopica®) 
with better bioavailability as compared with the parent product. 31 
Because of the wide differences in formulation, and therefore phar -
macokinetics, it is recommended that only the veterinary product 
(ie, Atopica®) be used for veterinary patients.
Cyclosporine is commercially available in several dosage forms, 
including oral solutions, capsules, and a concentrate for injection. 
To increase oral absorption, a microemulsion-forming preparation 
(ie, Neoral®) is also available as capsules and an oral liquid. The vet -
erinary products (ie, Atopica® and Cyclavance®) are microemulsion 
products equivalent to Neoral®. All oral formulations contain ethanol 
≈10% to 13% and the injection contains ≈33% ethanol.
Cyclosporine may also be known as ciclosporin, 27-400, ciclospo-
rinum, cyclosporine A, OL-27-400, Atopica®, Cyclavance®, Gengraf®, 
Neoral®, Sandimmune®, or Sigmasporin®.
Storage/Stability
The veterinary capsules (ie, Atopica®) should be stored and dispensed 
in the original unit-dose container at controlled room temperature 
(15°C-25°C [59°F-77°F]). One study reported that capsules are sta -
ble in the freezer for 28 days. 33 The veterinary oral solutions are la -
beled to only be dispensed in the original container and stored at 
controlled room temperature between 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F); do 
not refrigerate. After the container is opened, use contents within 
2 months to 12 weeks. Refer to specific product labels for further 
information.
The human oral liquid and capsules for emulsion (ie, Neoral®, 
Gengraf®) should be stored in their original containers at 20°C to 
25°C (68°F-77°F). Temperatures below 20°C (68°F) may cause the 
solution to gel or flocculate. Rewarming to 25°C (77°F) can reverse 
this process without harm.
The oral liquid and oral capsules (ie, Sandimmune®) should be 
stored in their original containers at temperatures less than 30°C 
(86°F); protect from freezing and do not refrigerate. After opening 
the oral liquid, use within 2 months.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information.
Cyclosporine for injection is compatible with lactated Ringer’s, 
sodium chloride 0.9%, and dextrose 5% IV solutions. It is reportedly 
Y-site compatible with amikacin, atropine, buprenorphine, butor -
phanol, calcium salts, cefazolin, dexamethasone sodium succinate, 
dexmedetomidine, diphenhydramine, dobutamine, dopamine, dox-
ycycline, epinephrine, erythromycin, famotidine, fentanyl, fluco -
nazole, furosemide, heparin, lidocaine, methadone, methylpredniso-
lone sodium succinate, metoclopramide, metronidazole, morphine, 
penicillin G, piperacillin/tazobactam, potassium salts, propofol, so -
dium bicarbonate, vasopressin, and zoledronic acid. 
It is Y-site incompatible with amphotericin B (lipid-based), am-
picillin, cyanocobalamin, diazepam, insulin (regular), ketamine, 
magnesium sulfate, phenobarbital, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, 
and voriconazole.
Human preparations of cyclosporine solutions may adhere to 
plastic and therefore should not be mixed in a plastic cup or with 
plastic utensils.65 
Because there are approved oral dosage forms for both dogs and 
cats, routine compounding for use in these species is discouraged. A 
study97 found some compounded cyclosporine solutions deviated by 
more than 10% from the labeled concentration.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Cyclosporine (Modified) Capsules: 10 mg, 25 mg, 50 mg, and 100 mg;  
Atopica®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs. NADA #141-218
Cyclosporine (Modified) Oral Solution: 100 mg/mL in 5 mL, 15 mL, 
30 mL, and 50 mL vials; Cyclavance®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in 
dogs. ANADA #200-689
Cyclosporine (Modified) Oral Solution: 100 mg/mL in 5 mL and  
17 mL bottles; Atopica® for Cats; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in cats. 
NADA #141-329 
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Cyclosporine Modified (Microemulsion) Oral Capsules (Soft-gela -
tin): 25 and 100 mg; Neoral®, Gengraf®, generic; (Rx). These prod -
ucts may be bioequivalent with, and Neoral® contains the same 
formulation as, the veterinary-approved product (ie, Atopica®).
Cyclosporine Modified Oral Solution (Microemulsion):  
100 mg/mL in 50 mL bottles; Neoral®, generic; (Rx). This product 
may be bioequivalent with, and contains the same formulation as, 
the veterinary-approved product (ie, Atopica® for Cats).
Cyclosporine Oral Solution: 100 mg/mL in 50 mL bottles with sy -
ringe; Sandimmune®; (Rx). This product is not bioequivalent with the 
veterinary-approved product (ie, Atopica® for Cats).
Cyclosporine Oral Capsules (Soft gelatin): 25 and 100 mg; Sandim-
mune®; generic; (Rx). These products are not bioequivalent with vet-
erinary-approved products (ie, Atopica®).
Cyclosporine Concentrated Solution for Injection: 50 mg/mL in  
5 mL single-use amps; Sandimmune®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Cyproheptadine
(sip-roe-hep-ta-deen) Periactin®
First-Generation Antihistamine
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Serotonin antagonist antihistamine that can be useful in the 
management of serotonin-syndrome in small animals and 
has been used as an appetite stimulant in cats. Limited or no 
efficacy as an antipruritic/antihistamine in dogs and cats or for 
asthma in cats
 ▶ In horses, used for photic head shaking and treatment of pitu-
itary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID).
 ▶ Use with caution in animals with urinary or GI obstruction, 
severe CHF, or angle-closure glaucoma
 ▶ Adverse effects include CNS depression (cats may demon-
strate paradoxical hyperexcitability) and anticholinergic 
effects.


===== Plumb PDF 355 =====
328    Cyproheptadine
Uses/Indications
Cyproheptadine may be useful in cats as an appetite stimulant,1,2 but 
it is not recommended in the management of hepatic lipidosis. 3,4 It 
may be useful for urine spraying in male cats. 5 Cyproheptadine use 
in cats as monotherapy for eosinophilic airway inflammation 6 and 
asthma7 is not effective.
Cyproheptadine is indicated for the treatment of histamine-me -
diated pruritic and allergic skin conditions, including urticaria and 
insect-bite hypersensitivity in dogs and cats; however, its efficacy for 
pruritic and allergic diseases is questionable in dogs. In one dou -
ble-blind, placebo-controlled study, there was no improvement of 
pruritus in 16 of 16 allergic dogs that were treated with cyprohepta-
dine 0.1 mg/kg PO every 24 hours.8  Guidelines for atopic dermatitis 
treatment in dogs indicate that antihistamines have modest efficacy 
in controlling pruritus associated with atopic dermatitis; for optimal 
efficacy, cyproheptadine should be given continuously (ie, daily) as 
preventive therapy. Cyproheptadine is of limited benefit in the man-
agement of acute flares.9 
Historically the drug has been used as adjunctive therapy for 
 canine hyperadrenocorticism. However, one study demonstrated 
lack of efficacy of cyproheptadine in dogs treated for pituitary de -
pendent hyperadrenocorticism, 10 and more effective medications 
(eg, trilostane, mitotane) are now available.
Cyproheptadine may be useful as adjunctive treatment in dogs11,12 
or cats13 with serotonin syndrome or to reduce dysphoria (vocaliza-
tion, disorientation) associated with baclofen, carisoprodol, selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), or tricyclic antidepressants 
(TCAs).
In horses, cyproheptadine has been used for treating photic head-
shaking14 and as adjunctive therapy for pituitary pars intermedia 
dysfunction (PPID) when sole therapy with pergolide fails to control 
signs. 15
Pharmacology/Actions
Similar to other H1-receptor antihistamines, cyproheptadine acts by 
competing with histamine for H1-receptor sites on effector cells. An-
tihistamines do not block histamine release but can antagonize its ef-
fects. Cyproheptadine also possesses potent antiserotonin activity, in 
addition to anticholinergic and calcium channel blocking actions.16
Pharmacokinetics
Available data are limited. Cyproheptadine is well absorbed after 
oral administration; however, its distribution characteristics are not 
well-described. Cyproheptadine may be almost completely metab -
olized in the liver, and the metabolites are excreted in the urine; in 
humans, elimination is reduced in chronic kidney disease. 17 Elimi-
nation half-life in cats averages about 13 hours, 18 but there is wide 
interanimal variability.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Cyproheptadine is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it. 
In humans, the manufacturer states the drug is contraindicated in 
newborn or premature infants, and should be used with caution 
in patients with prostatic hypertrophy, hyperthyroidism, bladder 
neck obstruction, severe cardiac disease, hypertension, epilepsy, an-
gle-closure glaucoma or increased intraocular pressure, or pylorodu-
odenal obstruction.17
Cyproheptadine increased seizure severity, reduced seizure 
threshold, and decreased anticonvulsant efficacy in animal models 
of convulsions.19
Adverse Effects
The most likely adverse effects seen with cyproheptadine use in vet-
erinary patients are related to its CNS depressant (eg, sedation) and 
anticholinergic effects (eg, dry mucous membranes, decreased GI 
motility, hyperthermia, tachycardia, urine retention).
Polyphagia may be an unwanted effect in dogs 8 and cats 20 when 
this drug is used for indications other than as an appetite stimulant. 
A paradoxical agitated state can develop in cats, which resolves with 
dose reduction or drug discontinuation. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Cyproheptadine has been tested in pregnant lab animals in doses up 
to 32 times higher than the labeled dose without evidence of harm 
to fetuses. Nevertheless, because safety has not been established in 
other species, its use during pregnancy should be weighed carefully.
It is not known whether cyproheptadine is distributed into milk. 
In humans, the drug is contraindicated in nursing mothers because 
of potential for toxicity in newborns and infants.17 Because safety has 
not been established in animals, this drug should only be used when 
the maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The oral LD50 in the rat is 295 mg/kg orally. 17 There are no specif -
ic antidotes available. Treat significant overdoses using standard GI 
decontamination protocols when appropriate and supportive ther -
apy when required. The adverse effects seen with overdoses are an 
extension of the drug’s adverse effects, principally CNS depression 
(although CNS stimulation may be seen), anticholinergic effects (eg, 
dry mucous membranes, tachycardia, urinary retention, hyperther -
mia) and possibly hypotension. Physostigmine may be considered 
for serious CNS anticholinergic effects; benzodiazepines may be 
used to treat seizures, if necessary.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving cyproheptadine and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Anticholinergic Agents  (eg, amantadine, atropine, glyco-
pyrrolate, oxybutynin): May have additive anticholinergic effects
 ■ Cholinergic Agonists  (eg, pilocarpine): Decreased efficacy 
of cyproheptadine
 ■ CNS Depressant Agents (eg, acepromazine, anesthetic 
agents [inhalant, injectable], cannabidiol, diazepam, gabapen-
tin, methocarbamol, phenobarbital): May increase CNS depres-
sion
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, sele-
giline): Prolonged and intensified anticholinergic effects. Combi-
nation is considered contraindicated in humans.
 ■ Mirtazapine:  Concurrent cyproheptadine and mirtazapine use 
should be avoided due to antagonistic mechanisms of action.2
 ■ Opioids (eg, buprenorphine, morphine): May increase anticho-
linergic and/or CNS depressant effects
 ■ Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor s (eg, fluoxetine, 
paroxetine, sertraline): Cyproheptadine may decrease efficacy.
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants  (TCAs; eg, clomipramine, ami-
triptyline): Cyproheptadine may decrease TCA efficacy.
 ■ Tramadol : Cyproheptadine may decrease tramadol efficacy.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ It is recommended that antihistamines be discontinued at least 7 
days prior to intradermal allergy testing (IDT).21
 ■ Cyproheptadine may increase amylase and prolactin serum levels 


===== Plumb PDF 356 =====
Cytarabine   329
when administered with thyrotropin-releasing hormone.
 ■ Cyproheptadine can decrease TSH secretion.
 ■ Cyproheptadine may cause a false-positive tricyclic antidepres-
sant screen.
Dosages
DOGS:
Appetite stimulant (extra-label): 0.2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours; 
may be dosed less frequently if inappetence is mild.
Adjunctive treatment of dysphoria associated with serotonin 
syndrome and toxicoses (eg, SSRIs, TCAs,  amphetamines, ba-
clofen; extra-label): 1.1 mg/kg PO; doses may be repeated every 1 
to 6 hours as needed until signs have resolved. 11,12 In cases where 
PO dosing is not possible (eg, severe vomiting), crush tablets, mix 
with saline, and administer rectally.22
Antihistamine (extra-label): 0.5 – 2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours; 
there is little evidence that higher dosages improve efficacy.
CATS:
Appetite stimulant (extra-label): 1 – 4 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO 
every 12 to 24 hours; alternatively, 0.2 – 1 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours.1,2 Most cats require twice-daily dosing and it may take 3 
days to see effect. Before starting treatment, adequate antiemetic 
and/or analgesic therapy is necessary. Taper drug when discontin-
uing to prevent rebound anorexia.
Antihistamine (extra-label): 2 – 4 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO ev -
ery 12 hours.20 Efficacy was noted within 3 to 10 days of initiating 
therapy. 
Adjunctive treatment of serotonin syndrome  (extra-label):  
2 – 4 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO; additional doses may be repeated 
every 4 to 6 hours as needed until clinical signs related to sero -
tonin syndrome have resolved. In cases where PO dosing is not 
possible (eg, severe vomiting), crush tablets, mix with saline, and 
administer rectally.22
HORSES:
Photic head shaking  (extra-label): 0.3 – 0.6 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours14
Adjunctive therapy for refractory pituitary pars intermedia 
dysfunction (PPID ) (extra-label): Cyproheptadine 0.25 mg/kg 
PO once to twice daily given concurrently with pergolide15,23; may 
require 4 to 8 weeks to determine efficacy. See Pergolide.
Monitoring
 ■ Appetite
 ■ Body weight
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, CNS depression, anticholinergic effects [eg, 
dry mucous membranes, tachycardia, urine retention])
Client Information
 ■ Cyproheptadine is an antihistamine that can also be used as an 
appetite stimulant or as a treatment for certain toxicities.
 ■ Antihistamines should be used on a regular, ongoing basis in ani-
mals that respond to them. They work better if used before expo-
sure to an allergen (eg, pollens). 
 ■ May be given with or without food. If your animal vomits or acts 
sick after receiving the drug on an empty stomach, try giving the 
next dose with food or a small treat. If vomiting continues, con -
tact your veterinarian. 
 ■ May cause drowsiness (sleepiness); this effect may lessen with time. 
 ■ Cats can become overly excited when receiving this medication.
Chemistry/Synonyms
An antihistamine that also possesses serotonin antagonist proper -
ties, cyproheptadine HCl occurs as a white to slightly yellow crystal-
line powder. Approximately 3.64 mg are soluble in 1 mL of water and 
28.6 mg in 1 mL of methanol.
Cyproheptadine HCl may also be known as cyproheptadini hy -
drochloridum, Ciplactin®, Cyheptine®, Cyprogin®, Cyprono®, Cypro-
sian®, Klarivitina®, Nuran®, Periactine®, Periactinol®, Periatin®, Peri-
tol®, Polytab®, Practin®, Preptin®, Supersan®, or Trimetabol®.
Storage/Stability
Store cyproheptadine HCl tablets and oral solution at room tempera-
ture 20° to 25°C (68°F-77°F). Avoid freezing oral syrup (solution).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. See  Appendix for more 
information. Use of this drug may not be allowed in certain animal 
competitions. Check rules and regulations before entering in a com-
petition while this medication is being administered. Contact local 
racing authorities for further guidance.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS
Cyproheptadine HCl Oral Tablets: 4 mg; generic; (Rx)
Cyproheptadine HCl Oral Syrup: 2 mg/5 mL (0.4 mg/mL) in  
473 mL; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Cytarabine
Cytosine Arabinoside
(sye-tare-a-bean) Cytosar-U®
Antineoplastic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Parenteral immunosuppressant/antineoplastic used in dogs 
and cats for lymphoreticular neoplasms and leukemias and 
meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown origin.
 ▶ Contraindications include patients with a hypersensitivity to 
this drug.
 ▶ Adverse effects primarily include GI effects and myelosuppres-
sion; increased ALT may occur.
 ▶ Adequate monitoring is essential.
 ▶ Potential embryotoxic and teratogenic effects 
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies cytarabine as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Cytarabine is used primarily in small animals as adjunctive treat -
ment for lymphoreticular neoplasms (eg, lymphoma), myeloprolif -
erative disease (ie, leukemias), and CNS lymphoma. Its use as a sin-
gle agent in canine lymphoma demonstrated poor efficacy.1 Data for 
use as a single agent or as part of multiagent protocol in cats for the 
treatment of lymphoma or leukemia are limited. Other studies have 
shown that rescue protocols containing cytarabine for the treatment 
of canine lymphoma are effective.2-6 
Cytarabine can be used in combination with glucocorticoids for 
treating meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown origin in dogs 7-10 
and cats.11 
Cytarabine has also been used in horses to treat lymphomas, but 
data are limited to individual case reports.12,13


===== Plumb PDF 357 =====
330    Cytarabine
Pharmacology/Actions
Cytarabine is converted intracellularly into aracytidine triphosphate, 
which competes with deoxycytidine triphosphate to inhibit DNA 
polymerase, resulting in inhibition of DNA synthesis. Cytarabine is 
specific to the S phase of the cell cycle (DNA synthesis) and blocks 
cell progress from the G1 phase to the S phase. Incorporation of cy-
tarabine into DNA is responsible for both drug activity and toxicity.
Acquired resistance to cytarabine has been reported and is 
thought to be due to several mechanisms. 
Pharmacokinetics
Cytarabine has very poor systemic availability after oral adminis -
tration but can be administered IV , SC, and intrathecally. Doses of 
600 mg/m2 IV as a bolus or as an IV CRI over 12 hours cross the 
blood–brain barrier in healthy beagles. 14 In dogs given cytarabine 
50 mg/m2 SC injections or 25 mg/m 2 per hour IV CRI for 8 hours, 
the volume of distribution was 0.67 L/kg. Elimination half-lives were 
similar (1.35 hours SC; 1.15 hours CRI), as were peak concentra -
tions. Rate of absorption after SC was very rapid, with peak levels 
occurring less than 1 hour after the dose was administered. It is im-
portant to note that SC administration did not achieve steady-state 
concentrations, as cytarabine was rapidly absorbed and eliminated 
quickly (t½= 1.35 hours). This study also suggests a CRI may pro -
duce prolonged exposure of cytarabine at cytotoxic levels in plasma, 
but it is not known if this correlates with differences in efficacy or 
toxicity.15 Similar pharmacokinetic parameters (Vd = 0.9 L/kg, t ½ = 
1.1 hours) in dogs given 50 mg/m2 SC injection were noted in a sep-
arate study,9 and cytarabine concentration remained above 1 µg/mL 
for 2 hours after administration. Overall drug exposure was similar, 
but cytarabine concentrations were significantly higher for a longer 
duration (as compared with 50 mg/m2 SC every 12 hours for 4 doses) 
with dosing regimens of 100 mg/m2 SC every 12 hours for 2 doses or 
200 mg/m2 SC as a single dose.8 
In humans, cytarabine is widely distributed throughout the body. 
CSF levels can reach ≈40% of the levels found in plasma. Elimination 
half-life in the CSF is significantly longer than that of serum. Circulat-
ing cytarabine is rapidly metabolized by the enzyme cytidine deam-
inase principally in the liver to the inactive metabolite ara-U (uracil 
arabinoside). About 80% of the dose is excreted in the urine within 24 
hours as both ara-U (≈90%) and unchanged cytarabine (≈10%).
The drug apparently crosses the placenta, but it is unknown if it 
enters milk.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Cytarabine can cause severe toxicity, depending on the dose and rate 
of administration. It should only be used where adequate monitoring 
and support can be administered. Cytarabine is contraindicated in 
patients with previous hypersensitivity reactions and should be used 
with caution in patients with pre-existing bone marrow depression, 
hepatic or renal dysfunction, or infection. In humans, acute pancre-
atitis and sudden respiratory distress syndrome have been reported. 
Some commercially available products contain benzyl alcohol.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies cytarabine as a hazardous drug; personal protec-
tive equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure.16 
Adverse Effects
In dogs, the most common adverse effects following IV CRI are 
GI (65%) and hematologic toxicities, with neutropenia (35%) and 
thrombocytopenia (12%) being the most common. 1,17 Myelosup -
pressive effects (eg, anemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia) are 
more pronounced with IV versus SC administration. Lower doses 
in dogs (eg, for inflammatory brain disease) had minimal adverse 
effects (ie, mild to moderate anemia in less than 1% of patients). 18 
Humans experience biphasic leukocyte nadir, first from days 7 to 9 
and again at days 15 to 24, with a brief rise in cell count between the 
nadirs. Platelet decreases begin around day 5, with nadir occurring 
at ≈days 12 to 15.
GI disturbances include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
and oral ulceration. Neurotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, lethargy, and fever 
may also occur with cytarabine therapy. Increased ALT was noted in 
15% of dogs in a study.17
Alopecia and delayed regrowth of shaven hair have been reported 
in dogs; breeds with a continuously growing hair coat (eg, poodles, 
terriers, Afghan hounds, old English sheepdogs) are more likely to 
experience significant hair loss.
Three cases (n = 138) of calcinosis cutis at cytarabine SC injection 
sites were reported in dogs receiving concurrent prednisolone for 
treatment of meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown etiology.19 
In addition, there was 1 case report of suspected drug-induced 
infiltrative lung disease following a 24-hour cytarabine infusion.20
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Cytarabine is teratogenic in laboratory animals, particularly when 
administered during the first trimester. Fetal harm has been de -
scribed following cytarabine administration to pregnant women.  
Although it is unknown if cytarabine enters maternal milk, the 
potential mutagenicity and carcinogenicity of the drug warrants us-
ing extreme caution in allowing the dam to continue nursing while 
receiving cytarabine. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug should 
only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the potential 
risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The toxicity of cytarabine is dependent on dose and rate of adminis-
tration. The intravenous LD50 in dogs is 172 mg/kg and greater than 
7000 mg/kg in mice.21 Treatment is supportive, as there is no known 
antidote, but the drug is dialyzable.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged to consult with one of 
the 24-hour poison consultation centers that specialize in providing 
information specific for veterinary patients. For general information 
related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact informa-
tion for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving cytarabine and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Flucytosine (5-FC): Cytarabine may antagonize the anti-infec-
tive activity of flucytosine.
 ■ Myelosuppressive Agents  (eg, antineoplastics, immuno-
suppressants, iron chelators): Concurrent use with other bone 
marrow depressant medication may result in additive myelosup-
pression, avoid combination when possible.
 ■ V accines (live and inactivated ): May diminish vaccine efficacy 
and enhance adverse effects of live vaccines
Dosages
NOTE: The following dosages should be used only as a gener -
al guide because of the potential toxicity of this drug to patients, 
veterinary staff, and clients and because chemotherapy indica -
tions, treatment protocols, monitoring and safety guidelines often 
change. 
 Consultation with a veterinary oncologist and referral to current 
veterinary oncology references22-26 are strongly  recommended.
DOGS:
Antineoplastic agent (extra-label): 


===== Plumb PDF 358 =====
Cytarabine   331
Intravenous: 
a) 300 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) as a continuous IV infusion (deliv -
ered over 4 to 72  hours) once weekly or as part of the day 1 
DMAC multi-agent chemotherapy protocol17,27,28
b) 600 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) as a continuous IV infusion  
(300 mg/m2 given daily over 48 hours)1
c) 300 – 600  mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg), as a continuous IV infusion 
(delivered over 5-8 hours) starting on day 1 with an injection 
of carboplatin chemotherapy, on day 7, and/or day 14 of the 
treatment cycle3
d) 750 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) as a continuous IV infusion  
(150 mg/m2 given daily for 5 consecutive days, in addition to 
GMCSF , EPO, and ondansetron injections) as part of a VCAA-
based multi-agent chemotherapy protocol4
Subcutaneous: (See Pharmacokinetics regarding SC administra-
tion concerns.)
a) Two doses of 100 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) SC given 2 hours apart 
(total dose, 200 mg/m2) as part of the DMAC multi-agent che-
motherapy protocol2
b) 300 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) SC as a single dose as part of DMAC 
multi-agent chemotherapy protocol27,28
c) 300 – 600 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) SC split into 3 to 4 daily doses 
over 3 to 4 days, starting on day 1 along with carboplatin che -
motherapy3
d) 150 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) SC every 12 hours for 48 hours was 
used in a patient with large granular lymphocyte T-cell lym -
phoma as part of a multi-agent chemotherapy protocol with 
L-asparaginase, CCNU, and vincristine.29 
e) 33 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) SC every 8 hours for 5 days along with 
bleomycin6
Inflammatory brain disease (eg, meningoencephalomyelitis of 
unknown etiology; extra-label): In combination with glucocorti -
coid therapy:
Subcutaneous: (see Pharmacokinetics for SC administration)  
50 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) SC every 12 hours for 48 hours, repeat 
every 3 weeks7,8,18,30-32
Intravenous: 
a) 100 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) as a continuous IV infusion given 
over 24 hours33,34
b) 200 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) as a continuous IV infusion given 
over 8 to 24 hours35 or over 48 hours36 
CATS:
Antineoplastic agent (extra-label): There are limited data available 
to support dosing in cats, but cytarabine has been dosed as below:
Subcutaneous: (See Pharmacokinetics regarding SC administra-
tion concerns.)
a) 10 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) SC every 12 hours for 2 to 4 days37 
b) 50 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) SC every 12 hours for 48 hours as part 
of multi-agent chemotherapy protocol38 
c) 300 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) SC has also been used as part of 
DMAC chemotherapy rescue protocol for feline lymphoma.5
Intravenous: 100 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) IV along with other che -
motherapeutic agents39 
Inflammatory brain disease (eg, meningoencephalomyelitis of 
unknown etiology; extra-label): 
Subcutaneous: (See Pharmacokinetics regarding SC administration 
concerns.) 50 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) SC every 12 hours for 48 hours11
HORSES:
Antineoplastic agent  (extra-label): Consultation with a veteri -
nary oncologist is encouraged before use; usual doses in horses 
are 200 – 300 mg/m 2 (usually 1 – 1.5 g/horse per dose) SC or IM 
every 1 to 2 weeks.12,40
Monitoring
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, inappetence, lethargy, drooling [oral ulcer -
ations], vomiting, diarrhea, fever)
 ■ CBC with platelets (baseline, nadir, prior to subsequent treat -
ments)
 ■ Liver and renal function (baseline and periodic)
Client Information
 ■ Cytarabine is a chemotherapy (ie, cancer) drug. The drug and its 
byproducts can be hazardous to other animals and people that 
come in contact with it. On the day your animal gets the drug and 
then for a few days afterward, all bodily waste (eg, urine, feces, 
litter), blood, and vomit should only be handled while wearing 
disposable gloves. Seal the waste in a plastic bag, and then place 
both the bag and gloves in the regular trash.
 ■ GI toxicity (eg, ulceration, diarrhea, vomiting) can occur. If diar-
rhea is severe or continues, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ Bone marrow depression can occur. The greatest effects on bone 
marrow usually occur within a few weeks after treatment. Y our 
veterinarian will do blood tests to watch for this, but if you see 
bleeding, bruising, fever (indicating an infection), or if your ani -
mal becomes very tired easily, contact your veterinarian right away.
 ■ It is important to immediately report any signs associated with 
toxicity (eg, abnormal bleeding, bruising, urination, depression, 
infection, shortness of breath).
 ■ Hair loss and delayed regrowth of shaven hair have been reported 
in dogs; breeds with a continuously growing hair coat (eg, poodles, 
terriers, Afghan hounds, old English sheepdogs) are more likely 
to experience significant hair loss.
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined 
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH). Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the use 
of personal protective equipment when handling this  medicine.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Cytarabine, a synthetic pyrimidine nucleoside antimetabolite, oc -
curs as an odorless, white to off-white crystalline powder with a pKa 
of 4.35. It is freely soluble in water and slightly soluble in alcohol.
Cytarabine may also be known as 1-beta- d-arabinofuranosylcy-
tosine, arabinosylcytosine, ara-C, cytarabine liposome, cytarabinum, 
cytosine arabinoside, liposomal cytarabine, NSC-63878, U-19920, 
U-19920A, WR-28453, ARA-cell®, Alexan®, Arabine ®, Aracytin ®, 
Aracytine®, Citab ®, Citagenin®, Citaloxan®, Cylocide, Cytarbel ®, Cy -
tarine®, Cytosar-U®, DepoCyt ®, DepoCyte ®, Erpalfa ®, Ifarab®, Larac -
it®, Medsara®, Novutrax®, Serotabir®, Starasid®, Tabine®, Tarabine®, o r  
 Udicil®.
Storage/Stability
Cytarabine sterile powder for injection should be stored protected 
from light at 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F); store intact vials of solution 
at 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F). After reconstitution with bacteriostatic 
water for injection, solutions are stable for 48 hours at room tem -
perature, although the manufacturer recommends administration as 
soon as possible after preparation.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatible with 5% dextrose in water, 5% dextrose in sodium chlo-
ride (0.2%, 0.9%), 5% dextrose in lactated Ringer’s, 10% dextrose in 
0.9% sodium chloride, lactated Ringer’s, normal saline, Ringer’s, and 
sodium lactate 1/6 M. Cytarabine is incompatible with the following 
for y-site administration: allopurinol, amiodarone, amphotericin B, 
daptomycin, diazepam, lansoprazole, and phenytoin. Incompatible 
with the following in admixtures and syringes: fluorouracil, heparin, 
regular insulin, oxacillin, and penicillin G potassium.
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 


===== BSAVA PDF 119 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
103
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
and chloramphenicol reduce cyclophosphamide efficacy. If 
administered with doxorubicin there is an increased risk of 
cardiotoxicity. Insulin requirements are altered by concurrent 
cyclophosphamide.
DOSES
See Appendix for chemotherapy protocols and conversion of body 
weight to body surface area.
Dogs:
• Lymphoid neoplasia: generally 50 mg/m2 p.o. q48h or 3–4 
consecutive days/week; or 200–250 mg/m 2 p.o or i.v. q3wk.
• Metronomic chemotherapy: 10–15 mg/m 2 p.o. q24h.
• Multiple myeloma in patients refractory to melphalan: 1 mg/kg 
p.o. q24h.
• Macroglobulinaemia in patients refractory to chlorambucil:  
1 mg/kg p.o. q24h.
Cats:
• Lymphoid neoplasia: as for dogs, except 200–300 mg/m 2 in 
‘high dose’ COP regimes.
References
Elmslie RE, Glowe P and Dow SW (2008) Metronomic therapy with cyclophosphamide 
and piroxicam effectively delays tumor recurrence in Dogs with Incompletely Resected 
Soft Tissue Sarcomas. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine  22, 1373–1379
Teske E, van Straten G, van Noort R et al. (2002) Chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, 
vincristine and prednisolone (COP) in cats with malignant lymphoma: new results with an 
old protocol. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 16, 179–186
Cyclosporin(e) see Ciclosporin  
Cyproheptadine
(Periactin*) POM 
Formulations: Oral: 4 mg tablet.
Action: Binds to and blocks the activation of H1 histamine and 
serotonin receptors.
Use:
• Management of allergic disease.
• Appetite stimulation.
• Also used in cats with aortic thromboembolism as serotonin, 
along with other mediators, is involved in collateral 
vasoconstriction. Maintenance of this collateral supply is 
important in recovery.
Use with caution in cases with urinary retention, angle-closure 
glaucoma and pyloroduodenal obstruction. Specific doses for dogs 
and cats have not been determined by pharmokinetic studies and 
clinical effectiveness has not been established.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.


===== BSAVA PDF 120 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
104
Adverse reactions: May cause mild sedation, polyphagia, weight 
gain. May reduce seizure threshold.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: 0.1–0.5 mg/kg p.o. q8–12h.
Cytarabine (Cytosine arabinoside, Ara-C)
(Cytarabine*, Cytosar-U*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 100 mg, 500 mg powders for 
reconstitution.
Action: The active nucleotide metabolite ara-CTP is incorporated 
into DNA and inhibits pyrimidine and DNA synthesis. Cytarabine is 
therefore S-phase-specific.
Use:
• Management of lymphoproliferative and myeloproliferative 
disorders. For dogs diagnosed with lymphoma with bone 
marrow involvement, addition of cytarabine into a VCAA 
combination protocol may improve survival time.
• Cytarabine is widely used for the treatment of 
meningoencephalitis of unknown origin (MUO, previosuly GME) 
and other suspected immune-mediated encephalitides in the 
dog. There is currently no general agreement on the best 
treatment protocol, but combination therapy of prednisolone 
and cytarabine is widely reported.
Safety and handling: Cytotoxic drug; see Appendix and 
specialist texts for further advice on chemotherapeutic agents. 
After reconstitution, store at room temperature and discard after 48 
hours or if a slight haze develops.
Contraindications: Do not use if there is evidence of bone 
marrow suppression or substantial hepatic impairment.
Adverse reactions: Vomiting, diarrhoea, leucopenia. As it is a 
myelosuppressant, careful haematological monitoring is required. 
Conjunctivitis, oral ulceration, neurotoxicity, hepatotoxicity and fever 
have also been seen. Calcinosis cutis has been reported at the site of 
injection in three dogs.
Drug interactions: Oral absorption of digoxin is decreased. 
Activity of gentamicin may be antagonized. Simultaneous 
administration of methotrexate increases the effect of cytarabine.
DOSES
See Appendix for chemotherapy protocols and conversion of body 
weight to body surface area.
Dogs, Cats:
• Lymphoproliferative neoplastic disease: 100–150 mg/m 2 given 
i.v. or s.c. over 2–5 days (as part of a VCAA-based protocol), or 
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 121 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
105
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
100 mg/m2 by continuous i.v. infusion over 24–96h, or 20 mg/
m2 intrathecally q1–5d. Or 200 mg/m 2 given i.v. (over 4 hours) or 
s.c. once every two weeks as part of the DMAC protocol. 
• MUO/GME: 50 mg/m2 s.c. q12h for 4 doses. Repeat at 3, 7, 11, 
16, 21, 27 and 33 weeks (if clinical benefit seen), then stop. CRI 
(100 mg/m2 CRI over 24h) at the same intervals.
References
Marconato L, Bonfanti U, Stefanello D et al . (2008) Cytosine arabinoside in addition to 
VCAA-based protocols for the treatment of canine lymphoma with bone marrow 
involvement: does it make the difference? Veterinary Comparative Oncology 6 , 80–89
Zarfoss M, Schatzberg S, Venator K et al . (2006) Combined cytosine arabinoside and 
prednisone therapy for meningoencephalitis of unknown aetiology in 10 dogs. Journal 
of Small Animal Practice 47 , 588–595
