
===== Plumb PDF 309 =====
282    Clindamycin 
 ■ Dinoprost : Clenbuterol may antagonize the effects of dinoprost 
(prostaglandin F2 alpha).23
 ■ Oxytocin : Clenbuterol may antagonize the effects of oxyto -
cin.23,31
 ■ Sympathomimetic Amines, Other  (eg, albuterol, phenyl-
propanolamine): Concomitant administration with other sym -
pathomimetic amines may enhance the adverse effects of clen -
buterol.
 ■ Theophylline/Aminophylline: May enhance the adverse ef-
fects (eg, tachycardia, CNS stimulation) of clenbuterol
 ■ Tricyclic antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline, clomip -
ramine): May potentiate the vascular effects of clenbuterol
 ■ Xylazine : Clenbuterol may antagonize the uterine contractility 
effects of xylazine32; this effect likely applies to other alpha-2 ag -
onists.
Dosages
HORSES: 
Management of airway obstruction (label dosage; FDA-ap -
proved): Initially, 0.8 μg/kg PO twice daily for 3 days; if no im -
provement, dose can be increased to 1.6 μg/kg twice daily for 3 
days; if no improvement, dose can be increased to 2.4 μg/kg twice 
daily for 3 days; if no improvement, dose can be increased to  
3.2 μg/kg twice daily for 3 days; if no improvement, therapy should 
be discontinued. Recommended duration of therapy is 30 days, 
then it should be withdrawn and therapy should be reevaluated. 
If signs return, the above stepwise dosage schedule can be reiniti-
ated.1 NOTE: One study of horses with SEA noted increased air -
way reactivity and reduced bronchodilatory effects after 21 days 
of administration of clenbuterol. Use clenbuterol no longer than 
is needed for clinical benefit.6 
Adjunctive treatment for dystocia emergencies  (extra-label): 
300 μg/500 kg (1102 lb) mare IV slowly ( NOTE: Parenteral for-
mulation not available commercially in the United States). The 
drug’s fast onset of action when given IV allows the veterinarian 
to decide quickly if uterine relaxation will correct the problem. 
Clenbuterol is particularly useful when repelling the equine fe -
tus to allow manipulation of the head and limbs. May be used in 
combination with sedatives, analgesics, and tranquilizers. Xyla -
zine or detomidine may inhibit the uterine relaxant effects of 
 clenbuterol.33
CATTLE:
Uterine relaxant in cattle (extra-label): 300 μg/cow (NOT μg/kg) 
slow IV once. May be used during embryo transfer or during the 
final stages of pregnancy, including labor. NOTE: IV formulation 
not available in the United States. Extra-label use of clenbuterol in 
food-producing animals is prohibited by the FDA.23
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is usually used in horses with asthma or airway 
obstruction to relax muscles and improve breathing.
 ■ Clenbuterol may be used to treat difficult delivery ( dystocia) 
emergencies in mares.
 ■ This medicine can be used to prevent labor and thus, it should be 
used with caution in pregnant animals.
 ■ Seek immediate medical attention if accidental ingestion occurs 
in humans.
 ■ Extra-label use in food animals in the United States is illegal. Use 
may also be prohibited in show or racing horses. Check rules and 
regulations before entering your animal in a competition while 
this medication is being administered.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Clenbuterol HCl is a substituted phenylaminoethanol beta-2-adren-
ergic agonist. It is very slightly soluble in water and has a molecular 
weight of 313.65. The commercial syrup is a colorless solution.
Clenbuterol HCl may also be known as NAB-365, clebuterolum, 
Bronchopulmin®, Dilaterol®, Planipart®, Respipulmin®, Spiropent®, or 
Ventipulmin®.
Storage/Stability
The commercially available syrup should be stored at or below 25°C 
(77°F); avoid freezing. The manufacturer warns to replace the safety 
cap on the bottle when not in use. 
Clenbuterol injection should be stored below 25°C (77°F) and dis-
carded 28 days after first use.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information is noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Clenbuterol HCl Oral Syrup: 72.5 μg/mL in 100 mL and 330 mL bot-
tles; Ventipulmin® Syrup; (Rx). NADA #140-973. Do not use in horses 
intended for human consumption.
Clenbuterol HCl for Injection: 0.03 mg/mL (30 μg/mL) in 10 mL 
vials; Planipart® (POM-V , CD [Sch 4 pt 2])
Extra-label clenbuterol use in food animals is prohibited by federal 
United States law.
Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) Uni -
form Classification Guidelines for Foreign Substances (UCGFS) 
Class 3 Drug. Use of this drug may not be allowed in certain ani -
mal competitions. Check rules and regulations before entering in a 
competition while this medication is being administered. Contact 
local racing authorities for further guidance. See Appendix for more 
information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Clindamycin 
(klin-da-mye-sin) Antirobe®,  Cleocin®
Lincosamide Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used for broad-spectrum coverage against many anaerobes, 
gram-positive aerobic cocci, and Toxoplasma spp
 ▶ Contraindicated in hindgut fermenters (eg, horses, rodents, 
ruminants, lagomorphs) and patients that are hypersensitive 
to lincosamides
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with liver or renal dysfunction; 
dose reduction should be considered if the dysfunction is 
severe.
 ▶ Potential adverse effects include gastroenteritis, and esopha-
geal injuries if dry pilled.
Uses/Indications
Labeled indications for clindamycin include treatment of skin infec-
tions (eg, wounds, abscesses), dental infections, and osteomyelitis 
(in dogs) caused by coagulase-positive staphylococci (ie, Staphy-
lococcus aureus, Staphylococcus intermedius ), Streptococcus spp (in 
cats), Bacteroides fragilis, Prevotella melaninogenicus, Fusobacterium 
necrophorum, and Clostridium perfringens.1 


===== Plumb PDF 310 =====
Clindamycin    283
Clindamycin is also used for a variety of protozoal infections, in-
cluding toxoplasmosis, but high doses may be required to achieve 
adequate CNS concentrations.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated clinda -
mycin as a Highly Important antimicrobial for human medicine. 2 
The Office International des Epizooties  (OIE) has designated lin -
cosamides as Veterinary Highly Important Antimicrobial (VHIA) 
Agents in veterinary species.3
Pharmacology/Actions
Lincosamide antibiotics may act as bacteriostatic or bactericidal 
agents, depending on the concentration of the drug at the infec -
tion site and the susceptibility of the organism. Lincosamides act by 
binding to the 50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible bacteria, there -
by inhibiting peptide bond formation and protein synthesis of the 
bacterial cell wall. The lincosamides—lincomycin and clindamy -
cin—share mechanisms of action and have similar spectrums of ac -
tivity, although lincomycin is usually less active against susceptible 
organisms. Complete cross-resistance occurs between the 2 drugs, 
and at least partial cross-resistance occurs between lincosamides and 
erythromycin.
Most aerobic gram-positive cocci are susceptible to lincosamides. 
Clindamycin has excellent activity against staphylococci and strep -
tococci. Other organisms that are generally susceptible include Cory-
nebacterium diphtheriae, Nocardia asteroides, Erysipelothrix spp, and 
Mycoplasma spp. Enterococci are inherently resistant. Acquired re -
sistance is a potential problem, particularly among staphylococci. In-
ducible resistance to clindamycin is common in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and occurs less commonly in other 
methicillin-resistant staphylococci. 4–6 Methicillin-resistant staphy -
lococci, particularly methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus pseudinter-
medius, are usually resistant to clindamycin. This resistance cannot 
be detected with routine testing and can lead to treatment failure. 
Testing for inducible clindamycin resistance is important in any 
Staphylococcus spp that have been reported as erythromycin-resis -
tant or in cases in which erythromycin susceptibility has not been 
reported; erythromycin-susceptible staphylococci will not be induc-
ibly resistant.5,6 Streptococcal resistance is rare.
Most anaerobic bacteria are susceptible to lincosamides. There is a 
low prevalence of resistance in the Bacteroides fragilis group.
Clindamycin has activity against a variety of protozoal organisms, 
but it may be more suppressive than curative in the treatment of 
Toxoplasma gondii infections. Clindamycin can have a delayed onset 
of action (1 to 3 days), and drug concentrations may not be high 
enough to achieve complete efficacy. Clindamycin is not effective 
against the extracellular tachyzoites associated with these protozoal 
infections.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, oral bioavailability is ≈73%, and the elimination half-life is 
reportedly 5 hours after oral administration and 10 to 13 hours after 
SC administration. The volume of distribution is ≈0.9 L/kg. Half-life 
may be longer with higher dosages. One study in dogs found a mean 
half-life of ≈4 hours after administration of 5.5 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours as compared with 7 to 10 hours after administration of 11 mg/kg  
PO every 24 hours; overall drug exposure (area under the curve 
[AUC]0-24/MIC) was higher with the higher, once-daily dose.7
In cats, clindamycin half-life after a dose of 11 mg/kg is ≈16 
hours (capsules) and 8 hours (liquid). The volume of distribution is  
≈1.6 L/kg to 3 L/kg. The highest concentrations are found in the 
lungs, liver, spleen, jejunum, and colon.
In humans, the drug is rapidly absorbed from the gut, and ≈90% 
of the total dose is absorbed. Food decreases the rate of absorption 
but not the extent. Peak serum concentrations are attained ≈45 to 
60 minutes after oral administration. After IM administration, peak 
concentrations are attained ≈1 to 3 hours postinjection.
Clindamycin is distributed in most tissue and fluids. Therapeu -
tic concentrations are achieved in bone, synovial fluid, bile, pleural 
fluid, peritoneal fluid, skin, and myocardial tissue. Clindamycin also 
penetrates well into abscesses, scar tissue, and WBCs. CNS concen -
trations may only reach 40% of those found in serum if meninges are 
inflamed and use for this indication in humans is not recommended. 
Clindamycin does not penetrate the eye at concentrations required 
to treat infections. Clindamycin is ≈93% bound to plasma proteins. 
The drug crosses the placenta and can be distributed in milk at con-
centrations equal to those in plasma.
Clindamycin palmitate and clindamycin phosphate are inactive, 
and hydrolysis in vivo to free (active) clindamycin usually occurs 
rapidly. Clindamycin is partially metabolized in the liver to both ac-
tive and inactive metabolites. The unchanged drug and metabolites 
are excreted in the urine, feces, and bile; however, active drug con -
centrations in urine are poor (low). Halflives can be prolonged in 
patients with severe renal or hepatic dysfunction.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Clindamycin should never be administered undiluted as a bolus.8 A 
calculated dose should be administered by IV intermittent infusion 
over at least 10 to 60 minutes (see Dosages).
Although there have been case reports of parenteral administra -
tion of lincosamides to horses, cattle, and sheep, lincosamides are 
contraindicated in hind-gut fermenters, such as horses, ruminants, 
rabbits, hamsters, chinchillas, and guinea pigs, as serious GI effects, 
including death, can occur. Clindamycin is also contraindicated in 
patients with known hypersensitivity to it or lincomycin.
Clindamycin has been implicated in causing esophagitis and, po-
tentially, esophageal strictures in small animal species. 9 Dry pilling 
should be avoided when administering this drug.
Patients with severe renal and/or hepatic disease should receive 
the drug with caution; the manufacturer suggests monitoring serum 
clindamycin levels in dogs or cats receiving high-dose therapy.1
In humans, it has been suggested to use the drug with caution in 
patients with atopy or a history of GI disease, particularly colitis; the 
significance of this suggestion for veterinary patients is not known.
Clindamycin use is becoming more scrutinized and restricted in 
humans due to the risk for severe Clostridium difficile infection and 
Clostridium difficile–associated diarrhea (CDAD). Clindamycin in 
5% dextrose injection therapy has been associated with severe colitis, 
which may end up fatal. Though of lesser concern in dogs and cats, it 
may need to be monitored.
Adverse Effects
Reported adverse effects after oral administration in dogs and cats 
include gastroenteritis (eg, emesis, loose stool, infrequently bloody 
diarrhea [dogs]). In a study of healthy cats, administration of a sym-
biotic (prebiotic and probiotic mixture) 1 hour after administration 
of oral clindamycin reduced antibiotic-associated GI signs.10 In rab-
bits, cholestyramine reduced enterotoxemia caused by IV clindamy-
cin administration.11
There have been case reports of esophageal injuries (eg, esoph -
agitis, strictures) in cats when solid dose forms were administered 
without food or a water bolus. Cats may occasionally show signs of 
hypersalivation or lip-smacking after oral administration. IM injec-
tions reportedly cause pain at the injection site.
In humans, eye pain and contact dermatitis have been reported.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Clindamycin crosses the placenta, and cord blood concentrations 
are ≈46% of those found in maternal serum. Safe use in dogs and 
cats during pregnancy has not been established, but the drug has not 
been implicated in causing teratogenic effects. 
Clindamycin is distributed in milk; nursing puppies or kittens of 


===== Plumb PDF 311 =====
284    Clindamycin 
mothers receiving the drug may develop diarrhea; however, in hu -
mans, the American Academy of Pediatrics considers clindamycin 
compatible with breastfeeding. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
There is little information available regarding overdoses of this drug. 
In dogs, oral dosages of up to 300 mg/kg/day for up to 1 year did 
not result in toxicity. Dogs receiving 600 mg/kg/day for 6 months 
developed anorexia, vomiting, and weight loss; erosive gastritis and 
focal gallbladder necrosis were found on necropsy. Cats that received  
110 mg/kg/day for 15 days or 55 mg/kg/day for 42 days displayed 
little evidence of toxicity. 1 Hyporexia, vomiting, and/or diarrhea 
occurred in healthy research cats that received oral clindamycin  
≈35 mg/kg/day.12 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving clindamycin and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Aminoglycosides: Clindamycin has been reported to antago -
nize the bactericidal activity of aminoglycosides in vitro.
 ■ CYP3A Inducers (eg, phenobarbital, rifampin): In humans, 
clindamycin is a substrate of CYP3A isoenzymes, and inducers 
of this isoenzyme may reduce plasma clindamycin concentration 
and decrease antimicrobial effectiveness.13 Veterinary significance 
is uncertain.
 ■ CYP3A Inhibitors (eg, clarithromycin, ketoconazole): In 
humans, clindamycin is a substrate of CYP3A isoenzymes and 
inhibitors of this isoenzyme may increase plasma clindamycin 
concentration and risk for adverse effects. Veterinary significance 
is uncertain.
 ■ Cyclosporine : Clindamycin has been reported to reduce levels 
in humans, but this apparently does not occur in dogs.
 ■ Erythromycin : In vitro antagonism when used with clindamy-
cin; concomitant use should likely be avoided.
 ■ Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  (eg, atracurium, pancu-
ronium): Clindamycin possesses intrinsic neuromuscular block-
ing activity and should be used cautiously with other neuromus -
cular blocking agents. 
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Slight increases in serum liver enzymes  (AST, ALT, ALP) 
can occur. Apparently, no clinical significance has been associated 
with these increases.
Dosages
NOTE: Clindamycin should never be administered IV as an un -
diluted bolus. The calculated dose should be administered by IV 
intermittent infusion over at least 10 to 60 minutes at a maximum 
rate of 30 mg/minute (do not exceed 1200 mg/hour). The final 
concentration for administration should not exceed 18 mg/mL.
DOGS:
Skin infections (eg, wounds, abscesses) and dental infections  
(label dosage; FDA-approved): 5.5 – 33 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 
for a maximum of 28 days. 1 If no response after 3  to 4 days, the 
drug should be discontinued.
Osteomyelitis (label dosage; FDA-approved): 11 – 33 mg/kg PO 
every 12 hours for a minimum of 28 days1
Pyoderma, superficial  (extra-label): 5.5 – 10 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours.14 Fair level of evidence for moderate to high efficacy. 15 
Pharmacokinetic studies have suggested 11 mg/kg PO every 24 
hours to be at least equal, if not more effective, than 5.5 mg/kg PO 
every 12 hours.7,16
Pyoderma, deep (extra-label): 11 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours 
for at least 1 week beyond clinical resolution
Systemic infections (eg, sepsis) ; (extra-label): 10 mg/kg slow IV 
infusion every 12 hours.17,18 NOTE: Broad-spectrum coverage re-
quires an additional antibiotic (eg, aminoglycoside, fluoroquino-
lone) for protection against gramnegative organisms.
Surgical prophylaxis for gram-positive aerobes and anaerobic 
coverage prior to dental procedure (extra-label): 11 – 22 mg/kg  
PO every 12 to 24 hours for 5 days prior to dental cleaning19; how-
ever, there is no evidence that this practice minimizes the risk 
for bacterial translocation from the oral cavity during a dentistry 
procedure.20
Surgical prophylaxis for gram-positive aerobes and anaerobic 
coverage when beta-lactam antibiotics are contraindicated (ex-
tra-label): 
a) 5 – 11 mg/kg PO 60 minutes preoperatively21 
b) 10 mg/kg slow IV infusion to be completed 30 minutes be -
fore incision21 
Susceptible protozoal infections (extra-label): 
a) Babesia gibsonii: 
i. Begin therapy with diminazene aceturate 2 mg/kg SC ev -
ery 48 hours for 3 doses. Once complete, begin (day 8 of a 
treatment regimen) clindamycin 25 mg/kg PO twice daily 
for 21 days. This treatment regimen was shown to reduce 
infection relapse rates.22 
ii. In cases of atovaquone resistance, clindamycin 30 mg/kg 
PO every 12 hours with diminazene aceturate 3.5 mg/kg IM 
once on the first day of treatment and imidocarb dipropri-
onate 6 mg/kg SC once on the day after diminazene admin-
istration; the average duration of treatment was 6 weeks.23
iii. Alternative after atovaquone and azithromycin failed to 
eliminate infection on PCR test: Clindamycin 25 mg/kg PO 
twice daily in combination with metronidazole 15 mg/kg 
PO twice daily and doxycycline 5 mg/kg PO once daily for 
30 to 90 days24
b) Hepatozoon canis: Clindamycin 10 mg/kg PO every 8 hours 
in combination with sulfadiazine/trimethoprim 15 mg/kg 
PO every 12 hours and pyrimethamine 0.25 mg/kg PO every 
24 hours (or ponazuril 10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours) for 14 
days.25
c) Other protozoal (eg, Neospora spp,26 Toxoplasma spp) in -
fections: Most recommendations for adjunctive treatment 
are clindamycin 12.5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for at least 2 
weeks or longer. Additional drugs are often used (eg, sulfadi-
azine/trimethoprim, pyrimethamine).
CATS:
Skin infections (eg, deep wounds, abscesses) and dental infec -
tions (label dosage; FDA-approved): 11 – 33 mg/kg PO every 24 
hours.1 In cases of acute infections, therapy should not continue 
for more than 3 to 4 days if no clinical response is seen. The max-
imum labeled treatment period is 14 days.
Systemic infections (eg, sepsis) ; (extra-label): 10 mg/kg slow IV 


===== Plumb PDF 312 =====
Clindamycin    285
infusion every 12 hours. 17,18 Up to 33 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 
may be considered in refractory infections that are still suscep -
tible to clindamycin. NOTE: Broad-spectrum coverage requires 
an additional antibiotic (eg, aminoglycoside, fluoroquinolone) for 
protection against gram-negative organisms.
Surgical prophylaxis for gram-positive aerobes and anaerobic 
coverage when beta-lactam antibiotics are contraindicated  (ex-
tra-label): 
a) 11 mg/kg PO 60 minutes preoperatively21 
b)  10 mg/kg slow IV infusion to be completed 30 minutes be-
fore incision27
Toxoplasmosis (extra-label): 10 – 12 mg/kg slow IV infusion ev -
ery 12 hours until able to tolerate oral administration for a total 
of 4 weeks.28 Patients with uveitis should receive topical, oral, or 
parenteral glucocorticoids to reduce the risk for secondary glau -
coma and lens luxations.29
BIRDS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label):
a) 25 mg/kg PO every 8 hours30
b) For mild spore-forming enteric bacterial infections: 50 mg/
kg PO every 12 hours for 5 to 10 days31
FERRETS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 5 – 10 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours32
REPTILES:
Susceptible anaerobic infections (extra-label):
a) 5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours33
b) Respiratory infections (eg, anaerobes, mycoplasma): 5 mg/
kg PO every 24 hours for 14 days34
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Culture and susceptibility testing as warranted by clinical presen-
tation
 ■ Adverse effects, particularly vomiting and severe diarrhea
 ■ Periodic CBC and liver and kidney chemistry profiles if therapy 
persists for more than 30 days13
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is an antibiotic that is used to treat infections of 
skin, wounds, and bone, but is also useful in the treatment of 
toxoplasmosis.
 ■ Give this medicine as directed by your veterinarian.
 ■ Do not give this medicine to horses, cattle, sheep, goats, deer, 
rabbits, mice, rats, hamsters, or guinea pigs, as it may cause fatal 
diarrhea.
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. Do not dry pill, 
as doing so may cause throat burns. Give a small amount of food 
or water (slightly over a teaspoonful) after pilling.
 ■ This medicine has a very bitter taste and may require disguising in 
food to get the animal to take it.
 ■ Be sure to let your veterinarian know if your animal has any se -
vere, prolonged, or bloody vomiting or diarrhea.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Clindamycin, a semisynthetic derivative of lincomycin, is available 
as hydrochloride hydrate, phosphate ester, and palmitate hydrochlo-
ride. The potency of all 3 salts is expressed as milligrams of clin -
damycin. The hydrochloride occurs as a white to practically white 
crystalline powder. The phosphate occurs as a white to off-white hy-
groscopic crystalline powder. The palmitate HCl occurs as a white 
to off-white amorphous powder. All may have a faint characteristic 
odor and are freely soluble in water. With the phosphate, ≈400 mg 
is soluble in 1 mL of water. Clindamycin has a pKa of 7.45. The com-
mercially available injection has a pH of ≈6 (range, 5.5 to 7).
Clindamycin HCl may also be known as chlorodeoxylincomy -
cin hydrochloride, (7S)-chloro-7-deoxy-lincomycin hydrochloride, 
clindamycini hydrochloridum, U-28508, or U-25179E; many trade 
names are available.
Storage/Stability
Clindamycin capsules and the palmitate powder for oral solution 
should be stored at controlled room temperature 20°C to 25°C (68°F 
to 77°F). After reconstitution, do not refrigerate the palmitate oral 
solution (human product), as thickening may occur. It is stable for 2 
weeks at room temperature. The veterinary oral solution should be 
stored at room temperature and has an extended shelf life.
Store clindamycin phosphate injection at controlled room tem -
perature. If refrigerated or frozen, crystals may form, which resolu -
bilize on warming.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors, such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Clindamycin for injection is reportedly compatible for at least 24 
hours in the following IV infusion solutions: dextrose 5%, dextrose 
10%, dextrose combinations with Ringer’s solution, lactated Ringer’s, 
and sodium chloride, sodium chloride 0.9%, Normosol R, Ringer’s 
solution, and lactated Ringer’s solution.
Clindamycin for injection is reportedly compatible with the fol -
lowing drugs: amikacin sulfate, amphotericin B (cholesteryl, lipid 
complex, and liposomal), aztreonam, buprenorphine, butorphanol, 
calcium salts, cefazolin sodium, cefoperazone sodium, cefotaxime 
sodium, ceftazidime sodium, cefuroxime sodium, dobutamine, 
doxycycline, famotidine, furosemide, gentamicin sulfate, heparin 
sodium, hydrocortisone sodium succinate, ketamine, lidocaine, 
methylprednisolone sodium succinate, magnesium sulfate, meto -
clopramide HCl, metronidazole, morphine sulfate, ondansetron, 
penicillin G potassium/sodium, piperacillin/tazobactam sodium, 
potassium chloride, sodium bicarbonate, tobramycin HCl (not in 
syringes), verapamil HCl, and vitamin-B complex with C.
Drugs that are reportedly incompatible with clindamycin include 
aminophylline, amphotericin B (conventional colloid), ampicillin 
sodium, ciprofloxacin, diazepam, midazolam, quinidine gluconate, 
ranitidine HCl, pantoprazole, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, and 
ceftriaxone sodium. 
In a study, clindamycin impregnated in calcium hemihydrate 
beads failed to elute in a concentration above the MIC for common 
infecting bacteria.35 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Clindamycin HCl Oral Capsules: 25 mg, 75 mg, and 150 mg; An-
tirobe® ; (Rx). NADA #120-161. FDA-approved for use in dogs
Clindamycin HCl Oral Tablets: 25 mg, 75 mg, and 150 mg; Clintabs®;  
(Rx). NADA #200-316. FDA-approved for use in dogs
Clindamycin HCl Oral Solution: 25 mg/mL in 30 mL bottles; Antirobe® 
Aquadrops, Clinsol®, generic; (Rx). NADA #135-940. FDA-approved 
for use in dogs and cats
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Clindamycin HCl Oral Capsules: 75 mg, 150 mg, and 300 mg; Cleo-
cin® , generic; (Rx)
Clindamycin Palmitate HCl Granules for Oral Solution: 75 mg/5 mL 
in 100 mL; Cleocin® Pediatric, generic; (Rx)


===== Plumb PDF 313 =====
286    Clodronate 
Clindamycin Phosphate Solution Concentrate for Injection:  
150 mg/mL in 2 mL, 4 mL, and 6 mL single-dose vials and 2 mL, 
4 mL, and 6 mL ADD-Vantage® delivery vials; 150 mg, 300 mg,  
600 mg, and 900 mg in 50 mL or 60 mL with 5% dextrose flexible 
bags; Cleocin®, generic; (Rx)
Also available in topical and vaginal preparations
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Clodronate 
Clodronic Acid
(kloe-dron-ayte) OSPHOS®
Bisphosphonate
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Bisphosphonate approved for clinical signs associated with 
navicular syndrome in horses
 ▶ Contraindications include patients with known hypersensitive 
to it or those with impaired renal function or a history of renal 
disease.
 ▶ Do not administer concurrently with NSAIDs (eg, phenylbuta-
zone).
 ▶ Adverse effects include abdominal pain (colic), discomfort, 
and agitation.
 ▶ Given IM; dose is divided into 3 equal injections. Single-use 
vial; discard unused drug.
 ▶ May be re-administered every 3 to 6 months if initially 
 effective
Uses/Indications
In horses, clodronate is indicated for the control of clinical signs as-
sociated with navicular syndrome. 1 Based on a pre-approval study, 
75% of treated horses were deemed a treatment success, defined as 
an improvement in lameness grade in the primarily affected limb 
by at least 1 AAEP grade and no worsening of lameness grade in 
the other forelimb on Day 56 after treatment. Clinical improvement 
was most evident at 2 months posttreatment; approximately 65% of 
horses that responded to initial treatment maintained their level of 
improvement through the 6-month evaluation.
A human-labeled (E.U.) IV form was used in a study to determine 
the effects of clodronate (4 mg/kg in 150 mL 0.9% NaCl IV infusion 
24 hours post vitamin D3 administration; administration rate not re-
ported) on vitamin D3-induced hypercalcemia in dogs. The authors 
concluded that clodronate may be useful within the first 24 hours 
to treat vitamin D3-induced hypercalcemia in dogs, but that further 
studies are necessary to define toxicity and appropriate dosing.2
Liposome-encapsulated clodronate (LCP) is preferentially phago-
cytosed by osteoclasts, macrophages, and dendritic cells, which then 
undergo apoptosis. Therefore, LCP may be clinically useful for treat-
ing certain autoimmune diseases. Research is ongoing to evaluate 
LCP for the management of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia 
and malignant histiocytosis in dogs.3
Pharmacology/Actions
Clodronate is a bisphosphonate that inhibits bone resorption by 
binding to calcium phosphate crystals thereby inhibiting their for -
mation and dissolution, and by directly inhibiting osteoclast cell 
function. Clodronate’s mechanism of action for treating navicular 
disease is not well understood. 
Pharmacokinetics
After IM injection in horses, clodronate disodium is rapidly ab -
sorbed and cleared from the plasma. Plasma half-life of the parent 
compound is relatively fast (≈2 to 3 hours). Like other bisphospho -
nates, a percentage of bioavailable clodronate is taken up by bone 
and then slowly excreted over a sustained period of time (months 
to years). The actual residence time in equine bone has not been es-
tablished. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Clodronate is contraindicated in animals with a known hypersensi -
tivity to clodronate or clodronic acid, in horses with impaired renal 
function or with a history of renal disease, or in pregnant or lactating 
mares.1 See Reproductive/Nursing Safety. Do not administer con -
currently with NSAIDs (eg, phenylbutazone). See Drug Interactions.
Use with caution in horses younger than 4 years of age as the drug 
has not been evaluated in this age group.1 Since bisphosphonates can 
affect bone, they may affect bone growth in young, growing horses.
As a class, bisphosphonates are renally excreted and may be as -
sociated with GI and renal toxicity. Use clodronate with caution in 
patients receiving other potentially nephrotoxic drugs (eg, amino -
glycosides).1 Animals should be well-hydrated prior to and after clo-
dronate administration.
Use with caution in horses with conditions affecting mineral or 
electrolyte homeostasis (eg, hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, hypo -
calcemia) as bisphosphonates can affect plasma concentrations of 
electrolytes (eg, calcium, magnesium, and potassium) immediately 
posttreatment, with effects lasting up to several hours.1
Adverse Effects
In pre-approval field studies, the following adverse reactions in hors-
es were reported: Within 2 hours of injection: discomfort, agitation, 
pawing, or signs of colic (reported together; incidence rate 9%); lip 
licking (5.4%); yawning (4.5%); head shaking (2.7%); and injection 
site swelling (1.8%). One horse (of 111) developed colic that required 
treatment and another, hives, and pruritus. Other reported adverse 
effects (partial listing) include renal failure, polydipsia, polyuria, an-
orexia, lethargy, hypercalcemia, hyperkalemia, hyperactivity, recum-
bency, and injection site reactions.1 
Reduced bone turnover and remodeling may lead to increased 
bone fragility, especially when given at high doses or with long-term 
use.1
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Bisphosphonates have been shown to cause fetal developmental ab-
normalities in laboratory animals and uptake into fetal bone may 
be greater than into maternal bone creating a possible risk for fetal 
skeletal or other abnormalities.1 
Although oral bioavailability is likely very low, bisphosphonates 
may be excreted in milk and absorbed by nursing animals.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Five of 6 horses given single doses of 5 times the labeled dosage  
(9 mg/kg) IM divided evenly into 5 separate injection sites showed 
changes in attitude (eg, agitation, nervousness, pawing, circling, and 
tail twitching) within 6 minutes of the dose. Four of 6 also showed 
excessive yawning, flehmen, tongue rolling, head shaking, and head 
bobbing. All horses developed mild to moderate muscle fascicula -
tions between 2 and 30 minutes posttreatment. By 30 minutes post-
treatment, 4 of 6 also developed signs of discomfort and possible 
abdominal pain including full body stretching, repetitive lying down 
and rising, and kicking at the abdomen. At approximately 1 hour post-
treatment, 1 horse exhibited agitation and clinical signs of colic re -
quiring medical therapy. This horse responded to medical therapy and 
was clinically normal at 7 hours posttreatment. Three of 6 developed 


===== BSAVA PDF 108 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
92
clindamycin, and partial cross-resistance with erythromycin. Use 
with care in individuals with hepatic or renal impairment.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Colitis, vomiting and diarrhoea are reported. 
Although not a major problem in dogs and cats, discontinue drug if 
diarrhoea develops. In cats may be associated with oesophagitis and 
oesophageal stricture; therefore, consider following solid dosage 
forms such as tablet administration with a small water or food bolus.
Drug interactions: May enhance the effect of non-depolarizing 
muscle relaxants, (e.g. tubocurarine) and may antagonize the effects 
of neostigmine and pyridostigmine. Do not administer with 
macrolide, chloramphenicol or other lincosamide antimicrobials as 
these combinations are antagonistic.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs:   
• 5.5 mg/kg p.o. q12h or 11 mg/kg q24h; in severe infection can 
increase to 11 mg/kg q12h.
• Toxoplasmosis/neosporosis: 25 mg/kg p.o. daily in divided 
doses.
Cats:
• 5.5 mg/kg p.o. q12h or 11 mg/kg q24h.
• Toxoplasmosis: 25 mg/kg p.o. daily in divided doses; increased 
doses of 30–50 mg/kg p.o. daily have been recommended for 
CNS involvement.
References
Beatty JA, Swift N, Foster DJ et al . (2006) Suspected clindamycin-associated 
oesophageal injury in cats: five cases. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery 8 , 
412–419
Hu HZ, Jeffery ND, Donnelly J et al . (2016). What is your neurologic diagnosis? Journal 
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 249 , 1007–1010
Clofazimine
(Clofazimine*) POM 
Formulations: Oral: 100 mg capsule.
Action: Not entirely clear but appears to be antimycobacterial and 
has membrane disrupting properties.
Use: Mycobacterial infections including feline leprosy. Limited 
information available with most derived from human medicine. For 
feline mycobacterial infection long-term treatment is required and 
combination therapy is utilized, e.g. with clarithromycin and 
doxycycline or fluoroquinolones. Monitor hepatic and renal function 
during treatment. Use with caution in hepatic and renal impairment.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 109 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
93
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: In humans the major adverse effects are 
nausea, diarrhoea, discoloration of skin, eyes and body fluids and 
renal and hepatic impairment (monitor functions during therapy). 
Photosensitization can also occur and treated animals should be 
housed indoors.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs, Cats: 4–8 mg/kg p.o. q24h for 2–6 months. For the 
management of mycobacterial infections, the drug is generally used 
in combination therapy with other antimicrobials including 
fluoroquinolones and clarithromycin. Refer to specialist texts.
Clomipramine
(Clomicalm) POM-V 
Formulations: Oral: 5 mg, 20 mg, 80 mg tablets.
Action: Both clomipramine and its primary metabolite 
desmethylclomipramine are active in blocking serotonin and 
noradrenaline reuptake in the brain, with resultant anxiolytic, 
antidepressant and anticompulsive effects.
Use:
• Licensed for use in association with a behaviour modification 
plan for the management of separation-related disorders in 
dogs.
• Also used in management of a wider range of anxiety-related 
disorders in dogs and cats, including compulsive behaviours, 
noise fears and urine spraying.
• Has been reported in the treatment of cataplexy in the dog, with 
resolution of signs after 3-months treatment.
Care required before use in animals with a history of constipation, 
epilepsy, glaucoma, urinary retention or arrhythmias. Can be used 
with benzodiazepines.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Patients sensitive to tricyclic or serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor antidepressants. Do not give with, or within 2 
weeks of, monoamine oxidase inhibitors (e.g. selegiline). Not 
recommended for use in male breeding animals, as testicular 
hypoplasia may occur. 
Adverse reactions: May cause sporadic vomiting, changes in 
appetite or lethargy. Vomiting may be reduced by co-administration 
with a small quantity of food. May cause urinary retention in cats. The 
safety margin is quite low with toxic side effects observed at 2–3 mg/
kg, although fatal does is >10 times the recommended dose.


===== BSAVA PDF 110 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
94
Drug interactions: May potentiate the effects of anticholinergic 
agents (e.g. atropine), other CNS active drugs (e.g. barbiturates, 
benzodiazepines, general anaesthetics, neuroleptics), 
sympathomimetics (e.g. adrenaline) and coumarin derivatives. 
Simultaneous administration with cimetidine may lead to increased 
plasma levels of clomipramine. Plasma levels of certain antiepileptic 
drugs, e.g. phenytoin and carbamazepine, may be increased by 
co-administration with clomipramine.
Should not generally be used alongside other serotonergic agents 
given risk of serotonin syndrome, although use alongside trazodone 
may be considered in exceptional cases, so long as patient carefully 
monitored for signs of serotonin syndrome. 
DOSES
Dogs: 1–2 mg/kg p.o. q12h.
Cats: 0.25–1 mg/kg p.o. q24h.
References 
King JN, Simpson BS, Overall KL et al . (2000) Treatment of separation anxiety in dogs 
with clomipramine: results from a prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, parallel-group, multicenter clinical trial. Applied Animal Behaviour Science 
67, 255–275
Pfeiffer E, Guy N and Cribb A (1999) Clomipramine-induced urinary retention in a cat. 
The Canadian Veterinary Journal 40, 265
Clonazepam
(Klonopin*, Linotril*, Rivotril* and several others) 
POM 
Formulations: Oral: 500 mcg, 0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, 1.0 mg, 2 mg 
tablets. 500 mcg/5 ml, 2 mg/5 ml oral solution.
Action: Long-acting benzodiazepine with anticonvulsant, muscle 
relaxant and anxiolytic properties. Enhances activity of gamma-
aminobutyric acid (GABA), through binding at the benzodiazepine 
site of the GABAA receptor. In addition, affects glutamate 
decarboxylase activity.
Use:
• Management of muscular hypertonicity (episodic falling) in the 
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel.
• Anxiolytic for behaviour modification in both cats and dogs and 
for hyperaesthesia in cats.
• It has been used to treat epilepsy in cats but more suitable 
medications are available, including phenobarbital, imepitoin 
(although to date there have been no publications on its efficacy 
in cats), levetiracetam and diazepam.
Tolerance may develop following prolonged therapy, with reduction 
in clinical effect. Care is required when withdrawing clonazepam 
after prolonged therapy and the dose should be tapered off.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
