
===== Plumb PDF 270 =====
Chlorambucil   243
potassium chloride 35 mg/mL gel/paste in 80 mL and 300 mL; D-Tox-
Besc®,  Activated Charcoal Gel with Electrolytes®; (OTC). Labeled for 
use in small and large animal species
Activated hardwood charcoal and thermally activated attapulgite 
clay (concentrations not labeled) in an aqueous gel suspension in 8 fl 
oz bottle, 60 mL tube, and 300 mL tube with easy dose syringe; UAA® 
(Universal Animal Antidote) Gel; (OTC). Labeled for use in dogs and 
cats and for grain overload in ruminants
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Activated charcoal oral powder: 15 g, 30 g, 40 g, 120 g, 240 g, and UD 
30 g; generic; (OTC)
Activated charcoal oral liquid/suspension with sorbitol: 25 g in  
120 mL and 50 g in 240 mL; Actidose® with Sorbitol, generic; (OTC)
Activated charcoal liquid/suspension without sorbitol: 208 mg/mL 
to 12.5 g in 60 mL, 15 g in 72 mL, 25 g in 120 mL, and 50 g in 240 
mL; Actidose-Aqua®, generic; (OTC)
Activated charcoal oral granules: 25 g; EZ Char®; (OTC)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Chlorambucil
(klor-am-byoo-sil) Leukeran®
Antineoplastic, Immunosuppressant 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Nitrogen mustard derivative antineoplastic and immunosup-
pressant in dogs, cats, and horses
 ▶ Caution: Pre-existing bone marrow depression or infection
 ▶ Adverse effects: Primarily myelosuppression and GI toxicity
 ▶ Known teratogen; National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health (NIOSH) hazardous drug; use appropriate precau-
tions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Chlorambucil may be useful as part of multidrug protocols in a va -
riety of neoplastic diseases, including lymphocytic leukemia, T-cell 
lymphoma,1 GI lymphoma,2,3 multiple myeloma, lymphangiosarco-
ma,4 mast cell tumor,5 cutaneous plasmacytosis, polycythemia vera, 
macroglobulinemia, and ovarian adenocarcinoma. Chlorambucil 
may also be used as a solo metronomic agent for some neoplasias 
(eg, hemangiosarcoma, transitional cell carcinoma).6,7 It may also be 
useful as adjunctive therapy for some immune-mediated conditions 
(eg, inflammatory bowel disease, nonerosive arthritis, immune-  
mediated hemolytic anemia, immune-mediated skin disease).8,9
Pharmacology/Actions
Chlorambucil is an aromatic nitrogen mustard derivative and an al-
kylating antineoplastic agent. Its chemical reactivity is nonspecific, 
but the primary cytotoxic effect is due to alkylation of cancer cell 
DNA strands resulting in cross-linking and cellular apoptosis. Im -
munosuppressive effects may not be noted until 2 to 4 weeks after 
starting the drug.
Acquired resistance to chlorambucil has been reported and is 
thought to be caused by several mechanisms.10 
Pharmacokinetics
Chlorambucil is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral ad -
ministration, reaching C max in ≈1 hour. It is highly bound to plas -
ma proteins. Although it is unknown if chlorambucil crosses the 
blood–brain barrier, neurologic adverse effects have been reported. 
Chlorambucil is extensively metabolized in the liver primarily to the 
active metabolite phenylacetic acid mustard. Phenylacetic acid mus-
tard is further metabolized to other metabolites that are excreted in 
the urine. Terminal half-life is 1.5 hours in humans.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Chlorambucil is contraindicated in patients with a history of hyper-
sensitivity to it or other alkylating agents. It should be used with cau-
tion in patients with pre-existing bone marrow depression, patients 
susceptible to bone marrow depression (including patients receiving 
long-standing maximum-tolerated dose chemotherapy), or patients 
that have an active systemic infection. Because chlorambucil is he -
patically metabolized, use with caution in patients with hepatic im -
pairment.
Because chlorambucil is a chemotherapy agent with potential 
to cause teratogenic effects, proper and safe handling methods are 
recommended to reduce personal and occupational exposure.11 The 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) clas-
sifies chlorambucil as a hazardous drug.12 
Adverse Effects
The most common major adverse effect associated with chlorambu-
cil therapy is myelosuppression (eg, anemia, leukopenia, thrombo -
cytopenia). Myelosuppression may occur gradually, with nadirs oc -
curring within 7 to 14 days of the start of therapy. Recovery generally 
takes from 7 to 14 days. Severe bone marrow depression, an uncom-
mon adverse effect occurring more often with prolonged (months to 
years) therapy, can result in pancytopenia that may require months 
to years for recovery. GI toxicity (eg, vomiting, diarrhea) is more 
common with higher (20 mg in humans) pulse doses. Hepatotoxici-
ty was noted in 23% of dogs in one study.5 Alopecia and delayed re-
growth of shaven hair have been reported in dogs; breeds with a con-
tinuously growing hair coat (eg, poodles, terriers, Afghan hounds, 
old English sheepdogs) are more likely to experience significant hair 
loss. Lower-dose metronomic therapy (4 mg/m2 [NOT mg/kg] once 
daily) in dogs is associated with a lower incidence of adverse effects. 
One study that evaluated several metronomic dose schedules found 
that dogs receiving 6 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) once daily and 8 mg/m 2  
(NOT mg/kg) once daily were at higher risk for adverse effects (GI 
and hematologic) as compared with dogs that received 4 mg/m 2 
(NOT mg/kg) once daily. In addition, higher dosages of metronomic 
chlorambucil did not improve tumor response.13
One case report of neurotoxicity (eg, facial twitching, myoclonus, 
agitation, seizures) in a cat has been reported.14 In addition, acquired 
Fanconi syndrome has been reported in 4 cats receiving chloram -
bucil and corticosteroids. Partial or complete resolution of Fanconi 
syndrome was seen in 3 of 4 cats within 3 months of discontinuing 
chlorambucil therapy.15 In another report, chlorambucil was sus -
pected of causing seizures in a dog.16
In humans, skin reactions that may progress to erythema multi -
forme or toxic epidermal necrolysis have been reported rarely. Bron-
chopulmonary dysplasia with pulmonary fibrosis, neurotoxicity, uric 
acid nephropathy, and hepatotoxicity have also been reported. Sec -
ondary malignancies may occur.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Chlorambucil has been documented to cause teratogenic effects in 
laboratory animals. Use during pregnancy only when the benefits to 
the dam outweigh the potential risks. In humans, chlorambucil has 
caused prolonged or permanent azoospermia in men, amenorrhea 
in women, and both reversible and irreversible infertility, particular-
ly when given during pre-puberty and puberty. 
It is unknown whether chlorambucil enters maternal milk. In 
humans, it is recommended to discontinue nursing if the mother is 
receiving the drug.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 


===== Plumb PDF 271 =====
244    Chlorambucil
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The oral LD50 of chlorambucil in rats and mice is 76 mg/kg and 80 
mg/kg, respectively. Experiences with acute overdoses in humans 
have been limited, but doses of up to 5 mg/kg resulted in neuro -
logic (seizures) toxicity and pancytopenia (nadirs at 1  to 6 weeks 
postingestion). All patients recovered without long-term sequelae. 
Supportive treatment and gut emptying protocols are recommend -
ed following an overdose but beware of rapidly changing neurologic 
status if inducing vomiting. CBC should be monitored for several 
weeks following an overdose, and blood component therapy may be 
necessary. Chlorambucil is not dialyzable.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have ex -
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison center 
specializing in providing veterinary-specific information is recom -
mended. For general information related to overdose and toxin ex -
posures, as well as contact information for poison control centers, 
refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving chlorambucil and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Myelosuppressive Agents  (eg, antineoplastics, immuno-
suppressants, iron chelators): Concurrent use with other bone 
marrow depressant medications may result in additive myelosup-
pression; avoid combination when possible.
 ■ V accines (live and inactivated ): Chlorambucil may diminish 
vaccine efficacy and enhance adverse effects of vaccines.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Chlorambucil may raise serum uric acid  concentrations. Drugs 
such as allopurinol may be required to control hyperuricemia in 
some patients.
Dosages
NOTE: Because of the potential toxicity of this drug to patients, 
veterinary personnel, and clients, and because chemotherapy indi-
cations, treatment protocols, monitoring, and safety guidelines often 
change, the following dosages should be used only as a general guide. 
Consultation with a veterinary oncologist and referral to current vet-
erinary oncology references17-21 are strongly recommended.
W ARNINGS: 
1. Chlorambucil dosages are commonly based on surface area 
(mg/m2). Do not confuse with citations that list dosages in 
mg/kg. Commercial tablet size (2 mg) may make precise dos-
ing difficult without compounding. 
2. Tablets should not be crushed, split, or formulated into a 
liquid, unless adequate environmental, personal, and occu -
pational exposure can be safeguarded.
 DOGS:
Immunosuppressive agent  (extra-label): Commonly dosed at 
1.95 – 4.5 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) once daily. Dosages are generally 
rounded to the nearest 2 mg. Following remission, chlorambucil 
has been dosed every other day for maintenance.8 Use lowest dos-
age that will control condition. Often used in conjunction with 
prednisolone
Inflammatory colorectal polyps (extra-label): Consider in dogs 
with inflammatory colorectal polyps that do not respond well to 
traditional therapies (based on a retrospective study of 6 dachs -
hunds): average chlorambucil initial dose: 2 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) 
PO once daily used in combination with EITHER prednisolone 
0.47 mg/kg PO once daily OR firocoxib 6.2 mg/kg PO daily (aver-
age). A positive response was seen in 5 of 6 dogs.22
Antineoplastic agent (metronomic) (all are extra-label):
a) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia: 3 – 6 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) 
PO every day for 1 to 2 weeks, then decrease to 3 – 6 mg/m 2 
(NOT mg/kg) PO every other day as determined by routine 
hematologic screening and cancer response. 23 Concurrently 
with chlorambucil, prednis(ol)one can be used at a dosage of 
1 mg/kg PO every day for 1 to 2 weeks, then 0.5 mg/kg PO 
every other day thereafter.
b) Mast cell tumor : 4 – 6 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) PO every 48 
hours for 8 weeks. Chlorambucil treatment followed 3 or 4 
sessions of lomustine 60 – 90 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) every 21 
days.5
c) Lymphoma and other lymphoreticular neoplasia  OR as 
a substitute for cyclophosphamide in the COP or CHOP 
protocol if sterile hemorrhagic cystitis occurs : 1.4 mg/kg 
PO once on the same schedule as cyclophosphamide, in sub-
stitute of cyclophosphamide23
d) Metronomic chemotherapeutic agent (eg, hemangiosar -
coma, transitional cell carcinoma)  (extra-label): 4 mg/m 2 
(NOT mg/kg) PO once daily. For dogs weighing more than 
8 kg (17.6 lb), the dose is rounded to the nearest 2 mg; for 
dogs weighing less than or equal to 8 kg (17.6 lb), the dose is 
compounded to 4 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg).6,7 
CATS:
Immunosuppressive agent (extra-label): Chlorambucil is gener-
ally considered a second-line immunosuppressant (after gluco -
corticoids) in cats and often used in conjunction with prednis -
olone. Anecdotal chlorambucil dosing recommendations vary 
and the commercial tablet size (2 mg) may make precise dosing 
difficult without compounding. For immune-mediated condi -
tions, chlorambucil is commonly dosed initially at 0.1 – 0.2 mg/kg  
(≈1.5 – 4 mg/m 2 PO once daily). If using the entire 2 mg tablet, 
chlorambucil is dosed in a practical manner every 48 hours for 
cats weighing more than 4 kg (8.8 lb) and every 72 hours for cats 
weighing less than 4 kg (8.8 lb). Once remission occurs, the dose 
is reduced or the dosing interval (often every 3 to 4 days) is ex -
tended to an interval that still controls the condition.
Low-grade GI lymphoma ; chronic lymphocytic leukemia (ex-
tra-label): Several protocols using chlorambucil with predniso -
lone have had a relatively high degree of efficacy, including:
a) Chlorambucil 15 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) PO once daily for  
4 days repeated every 3 weeks, and prednisolone initially at  
3 mg/kg PO once daily24
b) Chlorambucil 20 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg) (rounded to nearest 
2 mg) PO once every 2 weeks and prednisolone 2 mg/kg PO 
once daily25
c) Chlorambucil 2 mg/cat (NOT mg/m2 or mg/kg) PO every 2 to 
3 days (48-72 hours) and prednisolone 5 – 10 mg PO every 12 
to 24 hours26
HORSES:
Adjunctive therapy in treating lymphoma using the LAP pro -
tocol (extra-label): Cytarabine 200 – 300 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg)  
SC or IM once every 1 to 2 weeks; chlorambucil 20 mg/m2 (NOT 
mg/kg) PO every 2 weeks (alternating with cytarabine) and 
prednisone 1.1 – 2.2 mg/kg PO every other day. If this protocol 
is ineffective (no response seen in 2 -4 weeks), add vincristine at  
0.5 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) IV once weekly.27 
FERRETS:
Adjunctive therapy in treating lymphoma (extra-label): As part 
of a multiagent protocol, 2 mg total dose (NOT mg/kg) PO in 
weeks 11 and 20 of a 20-week protocol


===== Plumb PDF 272 =====
Chloramphenicol   245
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy
 ■ Baseline CBC, serum chemistry profile, urinalysis
 ■ Frequency of hematologic monitoring depends on protocol em -
ployed. Consultation with a veterinary oncologist is recommend-
ed. Recommendation for patients receiving continuous dosing 
without breaks is CBC 1 month after starting treatment, then 
CBC/serum chemistry profile every 2 to 3 months thereafter or 
earlier if patient is presented for unexpected changes in behaviors 
(eg, weight loss, fever, reduced activity, and/or appetite). For pa -
tients receiving bolus dosing with hiatus between treatment, CBC 
is recommended 1 week after each treatment. If neutrophils are 
less than 2500/µL or platelets less than 75,000/µL, stop chloram -
bucil until patient has recovered, and reduce dose by 10% to 20% 
or increase dosing interval. Other references recommend CBCs 
at 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 12 weeks and then every 3 to 6 months 28 or, in 
cats, CBCs at 2 to 3 weeks after starting therapy and every 3 to 6 
months thereafter.29
 ■ For sexually intact patients, verify pregnancy status prior to ad -
ministration.
Client Information
 ■ Bone marrow depression can occur. The greatest effects on bone 
marrow usually occur within a few weeks after treatment. Y our 
veterinarian will do blood tests to watch for bone marrow depres-
sion, but if you see bleeding, bruising, or fever (indicating an in -
fection), or if your animal tires easily, contact your veterinarian 
right away.
 ■ Chlorambucil may be toxic to the gastrointestinal tract and cause 
vomiting and gastrointestinal upset. Chlorambucil may cause 
changes in blood cell counts, which may cause increased risk 
for bleeding, bruising, infection, lethargy, bloody diarrhea, and 
shortness of breath. Contact your veterinarian immediately if you 
notice these or any other atypical signs. Contact your veterinarian 
immediately if you notice abnormal bleeding, bruising, depres -
sion, infection, shortness of breath, or bloody diarrhea.
 ■ It is important to follow your veterinarian’s orders in administer-
ing this medication as prescribed to help minimize the risk for 
side effects.
 ■ Routine bloodwork is recommended to monitor for changes in 
blood cell counts and liver and kidney laboratory values while the 
animal is on this medication. Do not miss these important fol -
low-up visits.
 ■ Handle this drug with caution. Wear gloves when administering 
medication or cleaning up your animal’s waste. Those who are 
pregnant, attempting to conceive, or nursing should not adminis-
ter the drug or clean up the animal’s waste. 
 ■ Hair loss and delayed regrowth of shaven hair have been reported 
in dogs; breeds with a continuously growing hair coat (eg, poodles, 
terriers, Afghan hounds, old English sheepdogs) are more likely to 
experience significant hair loss.
 ■ This medication is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined 
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH). Talk with your veterinarian or pharmacist about the 
use of personal protective equipment when handling this medi -
cine.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Chlorambucil is a nitrogen mustard derivative antineoplastic agent. 
It occurs as an off-white, slightly granular powder. It is soluble in 
diethyl ether or acetone but is considered insoluble in water with a 
pKa of 5.75.
Chlorambucil may also be known as CB-1348, NSC-3088, WR-
139013, chlorambucilum, chloraminophene, chlorbutinum, Chlora-
minophene®,  Leukeran® , or Linfolysin®.
Storage/Stability
Chlorambucil tablets should be stored in light-resistant, well-closed 
containers under refrigeration (2˚C -8˚C [36˚F-46˚F]). Tablets can 
be stored at a maximum of 30°C (86°F) for up to 1 week.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compounding chlorambucil should only be undertaken in facil -
ities where adequate environmental and personnel exposure can 
be safeguarded. 
Compounded preparation stability: For chlorambucil 2 mg/mL 
oral suspension, crush 60 2 mg oral tablets completely and suspend 
in 30 mL of methylcellulose 1%. Dilute with a sufficient amount of 
syrup for a final total volume of 60 mL. A 2 mg/mL oral suspension 
retains 90% potency for 7 days at 5°C (41°F).
Suspensions of chlorambucil stored at room temperature rapidly 
decompose with losses greater than 15% in 1 day. Chlorambucil is 
rapidly hydrolyzed independently of pH, but minimal hydrolysis oc-
curs at pH 2. Refrigeration slows hydrolysis.
Compounded chlorambucil capsules demonstrated variable po -
tency (71% to 104% of labeled strength), and stability and potency 
should be considered when prescribing compounded oral chemo -
therapy.30
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: 
Chlorambucil Oral Tablets (film-coated): 2 mg; Leukeran® ; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Chloramphenicol
(klor-am-fen-i-kole) Chloromycetin® ,    Victeon®
Antibacterial
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Broad-spectrum antibiotic with good tissue penetration, 
including in the eye, CNS, and prostate
 ▶ Use in food animals is prohibited by the FDA.
 ▶ Use should be avoided or pursued with extreme caution in an-
imals with preexisting hematologic disorders or hepatic failure 
as well as in animals that are pregnant, or that are neonates. 
Doses may need to be reduced in animals with hepatic or 
renal insufficiency.
 ▶ Lower dosages are used in cats, for which there is a greater risk 
for complications, particularly with long-term use (ie, longer 
than 14 days).
 ▶ GI adverse effects are possible; there is also the potential 
for myelosuppression, especially with high-dose, long-term 
treatment.
 ▶ National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) 
Hazardous Drug; use appropriate precautions when handling 
Uses/Indications
Because of potential adverse effects in animals and human exposure 
concerns, chloramphenicol should only be used when other anti -
microbial agents are not viable options. Chloramphenicol is used 
in small animal species and horses for the treatment of a variety of 
bacterial infections, particularly those caused by streptococci, staph-
ylococci, and anaerobes. In dogs, chloramphenicol is indicated for 
the treatment of bacterial pneumonia, canine respiratory disease 
complex, as well as ocular infections, otitis media, and UTIs caused 
by susceptible bacteria. This antibiotic is also potentially useful for 


===== Plumb PDF 273 =====
246    Chloramphenicol
the treatment of methicillin-resistant staphylococcal infections and 
bacterial prostatitis caused by susceptible bacteria. In cats, it is used 
for the treatment of haemobartonellosis, chlamydiosis, ocular infec-
tions, and UTIs. Chloramphenicol appears relatively safe to use in 
hindgut-fermenting species (eg, rabbits, guinea pigs, horses). 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated chloram-
phenicol as a Highly Important antimicrobial for human medicine.1 
Pharmacology/Actions
Chloramphenicol usually acts as a time-dependent, bacteriostat -
ic antibiotic, but it can be bactericidal at higher concentrations or 
against some susceptible organisms. Chloramphenicol acts by bind-
ing to the 50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible bacteria, thereby 
preventing bacterial protein synthesis. Erythromycin, clindamycin, 
lincomycin, and tylosin also bind to the same bacterial ribosomal 
subunit, but unlike these other antibiotics, chloramphenicol appears 
to also have an affinity for mitochondrial ribosomes of rapidly pro -
liferating mammalian cells (eg, bone marrow) that may result in re-
versible bone marrow suppression.
Chloramphenicol has a wide spectrum of activity against many 
aerobic and anaerobic gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. 
Gram-positive aerobic organisms that are generally susceptible to 
chloramphenicol include many streptococci and staphylococci. 
Some strains of methicillin-resistant staphylococci are susceptible. 
Chloramphenicol is also effective against some gram-negative aer -
obes, including Neisseria spp, Brucella spp, Salmonella spp, Proteus 
spp, Shigella spp, and Haemophilus spp. Many anaerobic bacteria (eg, 
Clostridium spp, Bacteroides spp [including B fragilis], Fusobacteri-
um spp, Veillonella spp) are susceptible to chloramphenicol. Chlor -
amphenicol also has activity against Nocardia spp, Chlamydia spp, 
Mycoplasma spp, and Rickettsia spp. This antibiotic is ineffective for 
the treatment of viral, fungal, or parasitic infections
Antimicrobial resistance appears to be mediated by enzymatic 
acetylation and inactivation by chloramphenicol acetyltransferases, 
efflux pumps, or altered ribosomal binding sites.2–4 
At present, the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) 
has established a susceptibility breakpoint for most human bacteri -
al pathogens at an MIC target of 8 µg/mL. Some studies show that 
equine plasma concentrations did not reach the recommended MIC 
target.5–7
Pharmacokinetics
Chloramphenicol is rapidly absorbed after oral administration; peak 
serum concentrations occur ≈30 minutes after administration. The 
compounded oral suspension produces significantly lower peak se -
rum concentrations when administered to horses 5 and fasted cats. 
The palmitate and sodium succinate salts are hydrolyzed to the base 
in the GI tract and liver.
Chloramphenicol is widely distributed throughout the body, and al-
though the highest concentrations are found in the liver and kidney, the 
drug attains therapeutic concentrations for some pathogens in most tis-
sues and fluids, including the aqueous and vitreous humor and synovial 
fluid. CSF concentrations may be up to 50% of those in the serum when 
meninges are uninflamed and higher when meninges are inflamed. 
There may be a 4- to 6-hour lag time before CSF peak concentrations oc-
cur. Chloramphenicol concentrations in the prostate are ≈50% of those 
in the serum. Because only a small amount of the drug is excreted un-
changed in the urine in dogs, chloramphenicol is not a good option for 
treatment of lower UTIs. The volume of distribution of chloramphen-
icol has been reported as 1.6 – 1.8 L/kg in dogs, 2.4 L/kg in cats, and 
1.41 L/kg in horses. Chloramphenicol is ≈30% to 60% bound to plasma 
proteins. A recent study in horses indicated that plasma chloramphen-
icol concentrations after oral administration of chloramphenicol base  
(50 mg/kg) were lower than previously reported, resulting in a recom-
mendation to evaluate the MIC of the causative bacterium before using 
this drug.7
The elimination half-life has been reported as 1.1 to 5 hours (av -
erage, ≈2.4 hours) in dogs, less than 1 hour in foals and ponies, and 4 
to 8 hours in cats. The elimination half-life in birds is highly variable 
across species, ranging from 26 minutes in pigeons to nearly 5 hours 
in bald eagles and peafowl.8
In most species, chloramphenicol undergoes hepatic metabolism 
primarily via glucuronidative mechanisms. Parent drug (≈10%) and 
metabolites (≈90%) are predominantly renally eliminated (ie, only 
≈5% to 15% of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine). Cats 
have less ability to glucuronidate drugs, so ≈25% of a dose is excreted 
unchanged in the urine.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
The FDA prohibits use of chloramphenicol in food animals.
Chloramphenicol is contraindicated in those hypersensitive to it. 
Because of the potential for hematopoietic toxicity, chloramphenicol 
should be used with extreme caution, if at all, in animals with pre -
existing hematologic abnormalities, especially preexisting anemia. 
Chloramphenicol should be used with caution in animals with im -
paired hepatic or renal function, as drug accumulation can occur; 
dosage adjustments may be needed in these patients. Chloramphen-
icol should only be used in animals in hepatic failure when no other 
effective antibiotics are available and then only with prolonged treat-
ment intervals. Consideration should be given to monitoring WBC 
and RBC counts in animals in which long-term use (greater than 14 
days) is anticipated. See also Reproductive/Nursing Safety. 
Use with caution in cats. Dosages for dogs and cats are significant-
ly different.
Chloramphenicol should be used with caution in neonatal ani -
mals, particularly in young kittens. In human neonates, circulatory 
collapse (ie, Gray syndrome) has occurred with chloramphenicol 
use.9 This syndrome is probably caused by toxic drug accumulation 
secondary to an inability to conjugate the drug or excrete the conju-
gate effectively.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies chloramphenicol as a hazardous drug; personal 
protective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize 
the risk for exposure.10 
Do not confuse chloramphenicol with chlorambucil, chlorpheni-
ramine, or chlorpromazine.
Adverse Effects
Although chloramphenicol toxicity in humans has been greatly dis-
cussed in the literature, it is generally considered to have a low order 
of toxicity in adult companion animals when administered appro -
priately. A retrospective review found that in 51 dogs treated with 
chloramphenicol at recommended doses (≈50 mg/kg) for methicil -
lin-resistant Staphylococcus pseudintermedius (MRSP) pyoderma, 
53% developed adverse effects that included GI signs (47%), lethargy 
(14%), shaking (8%), and increased liver enzymes (6%). 11 Anemia, 
panting, and aggression were reported in individual dogs. GI signs 
and rear limb weakness were noted in another retrospective review.12 
Peripheral neuropathy (ie, rear limb weakness) anecdotally appears 
to be more common in large-breed dogs, which may be more like -
ly due to ease of recognition of this clinical sign versus a truly in -
creased incidence. As there is no evidence that peripheral neuropa -
thy is dose-related, treatment of large-breed dogs at the lower end of 
the dose range should be weighed against consequences of treatment 
failure.
Development of aplastic anemia (reported in humans) does not 
appear to be a significant problem for veterinary patients9; however, 
a dose-related bone marrow suppression (reversible) has been seen 
in all species, primarily with long-term therapy. Early signs of bone 
marrow toxicity can include vacuolation of many of the early cells 


===== Plumb PDF 274 =====
Chloramphenicol   247
of the myeloid and erythroid series, as well as lymphocytopenia and 
neutropenia. Thrombocytopenia associated with chloramphenicol 
use in cats has been reported.
Other possible adverse effects include anorexia, vomiting, diar -
rhea, and depression. Chloramphenicol in guinea pigs can have a 
negative effect on the cardiovascular system, as seen by ECG changes 
(eg, shortened P waves, P-R interval, QRS complex).13 
Cats tend to be more sensitive to developing adverse effects to 
chloramphenicol than dogs, but this is likely because the drug’s half-
life is longer in cats due to poor glucuronidation capacity. Cats given 
higher-than-label feline dosages for prolonged periods (eg, 50 mg/
kg every 12 hours for 2 to 3 weeks) may experience a high incidence 
of adverse effects, including bone marrow hypoplasia, and should be 
closely monitored.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Chloramphenicol should not be administered to dogs maintained 
for breeding purposes, as significant disorders in gonad morphol -
ogy and function have been noted under experimental conditions.14 
Chloramphenicol readily crosses the placenta to achieve concen -
trations at 75% of maternal blood. The drug may decrease protein 
synthesis in the fetus, particularly in the bone marrow. It should be 
given with extreme caution during pregnancy and only when the 
maternal benefits of therapy clearly outweigh the risks to the fetus.
Because chloramphenicol is found in milk in humans at 50% of 
serum concentrations, the drug should be given with extreme cau -
tion to nursing animals, particularly within the first week of giving 
birth. Use of an alternative antimicrobial is recommended during 
nursing.15
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Dosages of 200 mg/kg/day for up to 4 months were tolerated by 
dogs,14 but cats show toxicity at 60 mg/kg daily within 14 days.16
Because of the potential for serious bone marrow toxicity, large 
overdoses of oral chloramphenicol should be handled by GI decon -
tamination using standard protocols followed by supportive care 
based on clinical presentation. For more information on chloram -
phenicol toxicity, see Adverse Effects.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
Chloramphenicol is a cytochrome P450 CYP2B11 inhibitor in dogs 
and may possibly inhibit other CYP isoenzymes in dogs and other 
species. The following drug interactions have either been reported or 
are theoretical in humans or animals receiving chloramphenicol and 
may be of significance in veterinary patients. ( NOTE: Cats may be 
particularly susceptible to chloramphenicol’s effects on the hepatic 
metabolism of other drugs.)
 ■ Acetaminophen : Concurrent use of chloramphenicol and acet-
aminophen resulted in increased serum concentrations of chlor -
amphenicol in one human study, but subsequent studies have 
contradicted that result. There are no veterinary data for this in -
teraction.
 ■ Aminoglycosides (eg, amikacin, gentamicin, streptomycin): 
May cause antibacterial antagonism; clinical significance, if any, 
is not clear
 ■ Anti-Anemia Drugs  (eg, epoetin, folic acid, iron, vitamin 
B12): Chloramphenicol may delay hematopoietic response.
 ■ Aspirin and Other Salicylates (eg, bismuth subsalicylate): 
Chloramphenicol may delay hepatic metabolism of the salicylate 
and therefore potentiate toxicity.
 ■ Beta-Lactam Antibiotics  (eg, cephalosporins, penicillins): 
May cause antibacterial antagonism; clinical significance, if any, 
is not clear
 ■ Cimetidine : May reduce the metabolism of chloramphenicol, 
increasing the risk for toxicity
 ■ Cyclophosphamide:  Chloramphenicol may reduce formation 
of the active cyclophosphamide metabolite and reduce cyclophos-
phamide efficacy. Additive myelosuppression may occur.
 ■ Cyclosporine : May increase the risk for cyclosporine toxicity
 ■ Dipyrone:  May increase the risk for myelosuppression
 ■ Glipizide: Chloramphenicol may decrease sulfonylurea metab-
olism and increase the risk for hypoglycemia.
 ■ Ketamine : Chloramphenicol may prolong effects. Chloram -
phenicol did not prolong anesthesia in dogs receiving xylazine/
ketamine in a study.17
 ■ Lev amisole: Fatalities have been reported after concomitant le-
vamisole and chloramphenicol administration; avoid using these 
agents together.
 ■ Lidocaine : Chloramphenicol may delay hepatic metabolism.
 ■ Methadone : Chloramphenicol inhibits hepatic metabolism and 
increases methadone effects.18
 ■ Midazolam : Chloramphenicol may prolong effects.
 ■ Myelosuppressive Drugs  (eg, azathioprine, interferons, 
methimazole, toceranib): May cause additive bone marrow de -
pression
 ■ Opioids : Chloramphenicol can significantly inhibit metabolism 
and prolong opioid effects.
 ■ Pentobarbital : Chloramphenicol has been demonstrated to pro-
long the duration of pentobarbital anesthesia by 120% in dogs and 
260% in cats,19,20 but there was no prolonged duration in guinea pigs.21
 ■ Phenobarbital/Primidone : Chloramphenicol may inhib -
it phenobarbital metabolism, and phenobarbital may decrease 
chloramphenicol concentrations. Interaction does not apply to 
chloramphenicol ophthalmic ointment.22,23
 ■ Propofol : Chloramphenicol may prolong anesthesia.
 ■ Rifampin : May decrease serum chloramphenicol concentrations
 ■ Voriconazole : Chloramphenicol may increase voriconazole 
concentration.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ False positive glucosuria (glycosuria) has been reported, but the 
incidence is unknown.
Dosages
NOTE: Because of potential adverse effects in animals and human 
exposure concerns, chloramphenicol should only be used when 
other antimicrobial agents are not viable options.
DOGS:
Susceptible GI, pulmonary, and urinary  bacterial infections  
(label dosage; FDA-approved): 55 mg/kg PO every 6 hours14 
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 
a) 25 – 50 mg/kg PO every 6 to 8 hours, continuing for 3 to 
5 days after the animal has become free of clinical signs or 
afebrile24
b) 40 – 50 mg/kg PO, IV , SC, IM every 8 hours.25,26 Dosages up 
to 60 mg/kg PO every 8 hours may be necessary for some 
infections. IV doses should be administered over at least 1 
minute.
CATS:
Susceptible infections  (extra-label): 12.5 – 20 mg/kg every 12 
hours PO, IV , IM, or SC.25 Practically, it is often administered at 


===== BSAVA PDF 93 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
77
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
References
Dandrieux JRS, Noble PJM, Scase TJ et al . (2013) Comparison of a chlorambucil-
prednisolone combination with an azathioprine-prednisolone combination for treatment 
of chronic enteropathy with concurrent protein-losing enteropathy in dogs: 27 cases 
(2007–2010). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association  242, 1705–1714
Stein TJ, Pellin M, Steinberg H et al . (2010) Treatment of feline gastrointestinal small-cell 
lymphoma with chlorambucil and glucocorticoids. Journal of the American Animal 
Hospital Association  46, 413–417
Chloramphenicol
(Chloramphenicol*, Chlorogen*, Chloromycetin 
Ophthalmic Ointment*, Chloromycetin 
Redidrops*,  Kemicetine*, Minims*, Optrex*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 1 g powder for reconstitution. Topical: 
Ophthalmic 1% ointment; 0.5% solution. Oral: 250 mg capsules.
Action: Time-dependent antimicrobial that acts by binding to the 
50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible bacteria, preventing bacterial 
protein synthesis.
Use: Broad spectrum of activity against Gram-positive (e.g. 
Streptococcus, Staphylococcus), Gram-negative (e.g. Brucella, 
Salmonella, Haemophilus) and obligate anaerobic bacteria (e.g. 
Clostridium, Bacteroides fragilis). Other sensitive organisms include 
Chlamydia, Mycoplasma (unreliable in treatment of ocular 
mycoplasmosis) and Rickettsia. Resistant organisms include 
Nocardia and Mycobacterium. Acquired resistance may occur in 
Enterobacteriaceae. High lipid solubility makes it suitable for the 
treatment of intraocular infections. It will also access the CNS. 
However, due to concerns of resistance development and human 
toxicity, systemic use should be restricted to life-threatening 
infections resistant to other antimicrobials (e.g. meticillin-resistant 
staphylococci). Patients with hepatic or renal dysfunction may need 
adjustment to the dose. Use with caution or avoid in nursing bitches 
or queens as crosses into milk.
Safety and handling: Humans exposed to chloramphenicol may 
have an increased risk of developing a fatal aplastic anaemia. 
Products should be handled with care; use impervious gloves and 
avoid skin contact.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Reversible dose-related reversible bone 
marrow suppression can develop in all species. Unlike humans, the 
development of irreversible aplastic anaemia in veterinary species 
does not appear to be a significant problem. Owing to a reduced 
capacity to metabolize chloramphenicol, the cat is more susceptible 
to bone marrow suppression. Other adverse effects include nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhoea and anaphylaxis.
Drug interactions: Irreversible inhibition of hepatic cytochrome 
P450-dependent enzymes increases plasma levels of pentobarbital, 


===== BSAVA PDF 94 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
78
phenobarbital, propofol and oral hypoglycaemic agents. Recovery 
requires synthesis of new liver enzymes and can take up to 3 weeks. 
Rifampin accelerates the metabolism of chloramphenicol, thus 
decreasing serum levels. Chloramphenicol may inhibit activity of 
aminoglycosides and beta-lactams. May also competitively inhibit 
macrolide or lincosamide antimicrobials.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs:   
• Ophthalmic: 1 drop q4–8h; ointment q8–12h.
• Systemic: 40–50 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c., p.o. q8h.
• CNS infections: 10–15 mg/kg p.o. q4–6h is recommended in 
some texts.
Cats:
• Ophthalmic: 1 drop q4–8h; ointment q8–12h.
• Systemic: 10–20 mg/kg slow i.v., i.m., s.c., p.o. q12h.
Chlorhexidine
(Adaxio, Antisept, Clorexyderm shampoo, spray, 
gel, CLX wipes, Douxo Pyo, Ermidra foam, 
Hibiscrub, Iryplus eye wipes, Malaseb, Microbex, 
Otodine, Stomidine F, Corsodyl*, Savlon*, 
TrizChlor*) POM-V, GSL, general sale 
Formulations: Topical shampoo: 2% chlorhexidine + 2% 
miconazole (Malaseb); 31.2 mg/ml chlorhexidine (Microbex); 11.26 
mg/ml chlorhexidine + 17.37 mg/ml miconazole (Adaxio); 3% 
chlorhexidine + 0.5% climbazole + phytosphingosine (Duoxo Pyo 
shampoo/mousse/pads); 4% chlorhexidine (Clorexyderm 4% 
shampoo, spray, Ermidra foam); Cleansing solution: sodium acetate, 
chlorhexidine digluconate, acetic acid (antisept spray); Spot gel: 
chlorhexidine 4%, Triz-EDTA, polyvinylpyrrolidone, lanolin, glycerine 
(clorexyderm spot gel); 1.5% chlorhexidine + cetrimide (Savlon); 
Surgical scrub solution: 4% chlorhexidine + isopropyl alcohol 
(Hibiscrub); Mouthwash: 0.12% chlorhexidine (Chlorohex); Topical 
skin cleaner: chlorhexidine, Tris-EDTA, zinc gluconate, glycerine, 
climbazole, benzyl alcohol, propylene glycol (CLX wipes); Ear/
wound cleaner: 0.15% chlorhexidine + EDTA (TrizChlor); Ear cleaner: 
chlorhexidine, Tris-EDTA, lactic acid (Otodine); Toothpaste: 0.07% 
chlorhexidine, Tris-EDTA (Stomidine F).
Action: Chemical antiseptic that disrupts bacterial cell membrane.
Use:
• Topical treatment of bacterial, dermatophyte and Malassezia  skin 
infections in dogs as a shampoo (Adaxio, Douxo, Malaseb, 
Microbex). Concurrent systemic antibacterial therapy may be 
required when treating bacterial skin infections. Leave in contact 
with the skin for 5–10 minutes prior to washing off.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 95 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
79
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
• Local infection can be treated with mousse spray, gel or wipes 
(Douxo, CLX, Antisept, Clorexyderm).
• Ear flush for cleansing; Tris-EDTA and chlorhexidine have 
synergistic antimicrobial action. Chlorhexidine as a single agent 
is not consistently effective as a treatment for dermatophytosis.
• Washing surgical instruments, routine antisepsis for surgical 
operations (Savlon, Hibiscrub) and dental hygiene (Corsodyl).
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Do not instil into ears where the integrity of 
the tympanum is unknown. Do not use on eyes.
Adverse reactions: Ototoxic. May irritate mucous membranes.
Drug interactions: Not known.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: Antispetic: topical agents may be used daily to weekly.
References
Banovic F, Bozic F and Lemo N (2013) In vitro comparison of the effectiveness of 
polihexanide and chlorhexidine against canine isolates of Staphylococcus  
pseudintermedius , Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  and Malassezia pachydermatis . Veterinary 
Dermatology  24, 409–413
Clark SM, Loeffler A and Bond R (2015) Susceptibility in vitro of canine methicillin-
resistant and suceptiblestaphylococcal isolates to fusidic acid, chlorhexidine and 
miconazole: opportunities for topical therapy of canine superficial pyoderma. The 
Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy  70, 2048–2052Chlorphenamine  
(Chlorpheniramine)
(Piriton*) POM, GSL 
Formulations: Injectable: 10 mg/ml solution. Oral: 4 mg tablet, 
0.4 mg/ml syrup.
Action: Binds to H1 histamine receptors to prevent histamine 
binding.
Use:
• Management of allergic disease.
• Prevention and early treatment of anaphylaxis.
• Commonly used as premedication before transfusions and 
certain chemotherapeutic agents.
Specific doses for dogs and cats have not been determined by 
pharmacokinetic studies. Use with caution in cases with urinary 
retention, angle-closure glaucoma and pyloroduodenal obstruction.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: May cause mild sedation. May reduce seizure 
threshold.
Drug interactions: No information available.
