
===== Plumb PDF 406 =====
Diazepam   379
dosing. As compared with PO administration, diazepam is slowly and 
incompletely absorbed following IM administration. The rectal bio-
availability of diazepam (parent drug) in dogs is less than 10%, 6 but 
bioavailability increases to 50% to 80% when considering diazepam 
plus its metabolites (eg, desmethyldiazepam, oxazepam).6,7 Bioavail-
ability is ≈80% when diazepam is administered intranasally to dogs.8
Diazepam is highly lipid-soluble and is widely distributed 
throughout the body. It readily crosses the blood–brain barrier and 
is highly bound to plasma proteins. In horses, 87% of the drug is 
bound to plasma proteins when the diazepam serum concentration 
was 75 ng/mL.9 In humans, this value has been reported to be 98% 
to 99%.
Diazepam is metabolized in the liver to several metabolites, in -
cluding desmethyldiazepam (nordiazepam), temazepam, and oxaze-
pam, which are pharmacologically active. Diazepam metabolites are 
conjugated with glucuronide and eliminated primarily in urine in 
most species. 10 In horses, CYP3A is largely responsible for temaz -
epam formation.11 In 4-day-old foals, the diazepam half-life, clear -
ance, and volume of distribution were significantly lower as com -
pared with 21-day-old foals. 12 Because of the active metabolites, 
serum values of diazepam are not useful in predicting efficacy. 
Serum Half-Lives (Approximated) for Diazepam and Metabolites  
in Dogs, Cats, and Horses
Metabolite Dogs10,13,14 
(hours)
Cats10 
(hours)
Horses15 
(hours)
Humans 
(hours)
Diazepam 1-3.2 3.5-5.5 7-13 20-50
Nordiazepam 2-10 21.3 12 30-200
Temazepam 3 4.5 No data 
found
10-20
Oxazepam 3-6 No data 
found
18-28 3-21
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Diazepam should not be used in patients that are hypersensitive to 
it or that have severe hepatic disease.16 Fulminant hepatic failure has 
occurred in cats receiving oral diazepam, 17 and PO administration 
is best avoided in cats. Diazepam should be used cautiously, if at all, 
in aggressive patients and, if used, it should always be paired with 
another sedative drug (eg, alpha-2 agonist). Some clinicians believe 
that benzodiazepines are contraindicated in aggressive dogs, as anx-
iety may restrain the animal from aggressive tendencies; however, 
this remains controversial.18 Diazepam may impair the performance 
of working animals.
Caution is advised when using in animals that have hepatic or 
renal disease, that are comatose or in shock, that have respiratory 
depression, or that are debilitated, obese, or geriatric. Although un -
common, cardiovascular or respiratory support may be necessary if 
diazepam is being administered IV . 
Rapid injection of diazepam IV in small-sized animals or neo -
nates may cause hypotension or cardiotoxicity secondary to propyl-
ene glycol in the formulation. Slow IV injection is recommended, 
particularly when using a small vein for access or in small-sized ani-
mals, because diazepam may cause significant phlebitis. Intracarotid 
artery injections must be avoided.
Other than in debilitated patients, diazepam used as a premedi -
cant is unlikely to provide sedation and may cause paradoxical ex -
citement, especially in young healthy patients. Thus, if used as a pre-
medicant, diazepam should always be combined with an opioid or a 
true sedative. Diazepam is more commonly used during induction.
Long-term use of diazepam may induce physical dependence, 
and if the drug is to be discontinued, the dose must be gradually 
decreased (tapered) over several weeks.19
As compared with dosages for humans, diazepam dosages for 
dogs are very high; human pharmacists may be unaware that these 
are appropriate.
Using diazepam to control adverse effects related to toxicities 
should be approached with caution to avoid exacerbating clinical 
signs. It is recommended not to use diazepam for seizure control in 
cats exposed to chlorpyrifos because organophosphate toxicity may 
be potentiated.16 Animals with toxicity from ingesting amphetamines 
or human sleep aids, such as zolpidem ( Ambien®) or eszopiclone 
(Lunesta®), should not receive diazepam or other benzodiazepines to 
treat paradoxical CNS stimulation, as these drugs also increase GABA 
activity; IV phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine, chlorpromazine) or 
phenobarbital are recommended instead.
Do not confuse diazePAM with dilTIAZem or diaZOXide.
Adverse Effects 
Rapid IV administration of diazepam can potentially cause hypoten-
sion; IV administration should be done slowly (5 mg/minute), and 
the IV catheter should be flushed with fluids after administration to 
help prevent phlebitis. IM injection may cause pain at the injection 
site.
Adverse effects reported in dogs include sedation, increased appe-
tite, agitation, ataxia, and aggression. In addition, dogs may exhibit 
a contradictory response (eg, in ≈30% of dogs, CNS excitement was 
described as increased activity or agitation) following administra -
tion of diazepam; doses greater than or equal to 0.8 mg/kg are more 
likely to cause this effect. 20 Because sedation and tranquilization in 
dogs can be variable, diazepam may not be an ideal sedating agent, 
particularly when used alone. Diazepam used alone or in combina -
tion with ketamine increases intraocular pressure in dogs.21,22
Cats may exhibit changes in behavior (eg, irritability, depression, 
aberrant demeanor) after receiving diazepam. Anesthetic recovery 
from diazepam/ketamine was more active and unsettled as com -
pared with alfaxalone as a sole agent.23 There have been sporadic re-
ports of cats developing idiosyncratic hepatic failure after receiving 
oral (but not injectable) diazepam (not dose-dependent) for several 
days.17 Clinical signs (eg, anorexia, lethargy, increased ALT/AST, hy-
perbilirubinemia) occurred 5 to 11 days after beginning oral therapy, 
and 10 out of 11 patients died or were euthanized within 15 days. 
Slow biotransformation and inhibition of the efflux of bile, resulting 
in accumulation of bile acids in the hepatocytes, might contribute to 
the liver injury observed in cats that received repeated doses of oral 
diazepam.10 
In horses, diazepam may cause muscle fasciculations, weakness, 
and ataxia at doses sufficient to cause sedation. Doses greater than 
0.2 mg/kg may induce recumbency as a result of muscle relaxant 
properties and general CNS depressant effects. Diazepam is not rec-
ommended as a sole agent for sedation in this species.
Adverse effects can be reversed with flumazenil. See Flumazenil.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety 
In humans, diazepam has been implicated in causing congenital 
abnormalities when it is administered during the first trimester of 
pregnancy. Infants born to mothers who were given large doses of 
benzodiazepines shortly before delivery have been reported to suffer 
from apnea, impaired metabolic response to cold stress, difficulty in 
feeding, hyperbilirubinemia, and hypotonia. Withdrawal symptoms 
have occurred in infants whose mothers took benzodiazepines long-
term during pregnancy. The veterinary significance of these effects is 
unclear, but these agents should only be used during the first trimes-
ter of pregnancy when the benefits clearly outweigh the risks associ-
ated with their use. 
Benzodiazepines and their metabolites are distributed into milk 


===== Plumb PDF 407 =====
380    Diazepam
and may cause CNS effects in nursing neonates. In humans, diaze -
pam use is not recommended while breastfeeding.24
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 
When diazepam is administered alone, overdose effects are gen -
erally limited to significant CNS depression (eg, confusion, coma, 
decreased reflexes). In rare circumstances, hypotension, respiratory 
depression, and cardiac arrest have been reported in human patients.
Treatment of acute toxicity consists of standard protocols for re -
moving and/or binding the drug in the gut if diazepam is adminis -
tered orally; provide supportive systemic therapies as needed. Use of 
analeptic agents (ie, CNS stimulants such as caffeine) is generally not 
recommended. Flumazenil may be considered for adjunctive treat -
ment of benzodiazepine overdose.
Successful treatment of a cat with hepatic necrosis included the 
use of lactulose, metronidazole, vitamin K, N-acetylcysteine, and 
Sadenosylmethionine, along with supportive care.25
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions 
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving diazepam and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Amiodarone : Concurrent use may increase the bioavailability 
and pharmacologic effects of benzodiazepines; monitoring and 
adjustment of benzodiazepine dose are needed.
 ■ Antacids, Aluminum-, Calcium- And Magnesium-Con -
taining : May slow the rate, but not the extent, of oral absorption; 
administration 2 hours apart may avoid this potential interaction.
 ■ Antidepressants  (eg, amitriptyline, clomipramine, mir-
tazapine): Concurrent use increases the risk for CNS and/or re -
spiratory depression.
 ■ Antihypertensive Agents  (eg, amlodipine, atenolol, enal-
april): Concurrent use may increase the risk for hypotension and 
orthostasis. Blood pressure monitoring is necessary.
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole 11): Me-
tabolism of diazepam may be decreased, and excessive sedation 
may occur. 
 ■ Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors  (eg, acetazolamide, 
methazolamide): Benzodiazepines may interfere with the bene -
ficial effects of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors by inhibiting respi-
ratory responses to hypoxia; this combination should be avoided.
 ■ CNS Depressant Agents  (eg, barbiturates, opioids, anes -
thetics): Combination may increase the risk for CNS and/or re -
spiratory depression; monitoring and adjustment of dosages are 
needed. 
 ■ Digoxin : Serum levels may be increased; monitoring of serum 
digoxin levels and clinical signs of toxicity is needed.
 ■ Fluoxetine, Fluvoxamine : Increased benzodiazepine levels 
are possible.
 ■ Hepatic Enzyme Inducers  (eg, glucocorticoids, mitotane, ri-
fampin, phenobarbital26): Concurrent use may decrease benzo -
diazepine levels; monitoring of clinical response and adjustment 
of doses are necessary.
 ■ Hepatic Enzyme Inhibitors  (eg, cimetidine, isoniazid ): 
 Metabolism of diazepam may be decreased, and excessive seda -
tion may occur.
 ■ Ifosfamide : Concurrent use may increase the risk for ifosfa -
mide-induced neurotoxic effects. Careful monitoring is needed, 
and discontinuation of both drugs may be necessary if signs of 
encephalopathy occur.
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics  (eg, clarithromycin, erythromycin): 
Metabolism of diazepam may be decreased, and excessive seda -
tion may occur. 
 ■ Macrocyclic Lactones  (eg, ivermectin, milbemycin oxime): 
Benzodiazepine effects may be potentiated by concurrent macro-
cyclic lactone use.
 ■ Melatonin : Increased risk for CNS depression and prolonged 
diazepam effects
 ■ Non-Depolarizing Neuromuscular Blockers  (eg, atra-
curium, pancuronium): Concurrent use may potentiate, attenu-
ate, or have no effect; monitoring of respiratory status is necessary.
 ■ Propranolol : May slow diazepam metabolism 
 ■ Theophylline, Aminophylline : Concurrent use may de -
crease the concentrations and effectiveness of benzodiazepines. 
Withdrawing theophylline from a stable patient may increase the 
risk for benzodiazepine toxicity; monitoring for adverse effects is 
needed, and dosages must be adjusted accordingly.
 ■ Yohimbine : Limited data indicate that yohimbine may decrease 
the therapeutic effects of anxiolytic drugs.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Patients receiving diazepam may show false-negative urine glu-
cose results if Diastix® or Clinistix® tests are used. 
 ■ Secondary to propylene glycol in IV diazepam, patients may show 
a false-positive ethylene glycol test. 
 ■ Benzodiazepines may decrease the thyroidal uptake of I123 or I131.
Dosages
DOGS:
Cluster seizures or status epilepticus (extra-label): 
Rectal: Using diazepam parenteral solution, diazepam  
0.5 – 2 mg/kg rectally27,28; if the patient is receiving phenobarbital, 
diazepam 2 mg/kg rectally can be used.26 Administer at the onset 
of a seizure and up to 3 times in a 24-hour period.28 If the client is 
administering, they should stay with the dog for 1 hour after ad -
ministration. Because diazepam is inactivated by light and adheres 
to plastic, it is best to dispense the drug in the original glass vial 
and instruct the client to draw the required amount into a syringe 
when needed. A rubber catheter or teat cannula is then placed 
on the syringe for rectal administration. A study found that com-
pounded 2 mg rectal suppositories did not achieve plasma levels 
of diazepam/nordiazepam sufficient for emergency treatment of 
seizures in dogs.14 NOTE: Intranasal midazolam appears superior 
to rectal diazepam for controlling status epilepticus.4 
Intranasal: Based on a pharmacokinetic study, diazepam may 
also be given intranasally (at home or in the clinic) at 0.5 mg/kg. 
Dogs on chronic phenobarbital therapy may require higher doses 
(1 – 2 mg/kg).29 
IV (bolus): Diazepam 0.5 – 1 mg/kg IV; may be repeated every 10 
minutes up to 3 times16
IV (CRI) : Diazepam 0.1 – 2 mg/kg/hour IV CRI. Caution is ad -
vised, as diazepam can crystallize in solution and adsorb to PVC 
tubing. (See Compatibility/Compounding Considerations  and 
Storage/Stability)
Functional urethral obstruction/urethral sphincter hypertonus 
(extra-label): Diazepam 2 – 10 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO every 
8 hours30


===== Plumb PDF 408 =====
Diazepam   381
Short-term management of skeletal muscle spasms (extra-label): 
Diazepam 0.5 – 2 mg/kg IV31
Psychotherapeutic agent (extra-label): 
a) Situational anxiety: Diazepam 0.5 – 2 mg/kg PO PRN; prefer-
ably 30 minutes to 1 hour in advance of the anticipated event.32 
NOTE: As compared with humans, diazepam dosages for dogs 
are very high; human pharmacists may be unaware that these 
are appropriate.
b) In combination with fluoxetine and behavior modification 
therapy for anxiety-related disorders : Diazepam 0.3 mg/kg 
PO once daily for 4 weeks; it should be initiated at the same 
time as fluoxetine 1 mg/kg PO once daily.33
Adjunctive treatment of metronidazole toxicity (extra-label): 
0.43 mg/kg IV as an initial bolus, followed by 0.43 mg/kg PO ev -
ery 8 hours for 3 days34
Strychnine poisoning (extra-label): Diazepam 1 mg/kg IV slow-
ly, followed by 1 mg/kg IM35
Anesthetic premedication in combination with other sedatives 
(extra-label): Diazepam 0.1 – 0.5 mg/kg IV . Combination with 
opioids or alpha-2 agonists is highly recommended to decrease 
drug dosages, minimize paradoxical excitation, and achieve a 
more profound, predictable level of sedation and muscle relax -
ation.36 A slightly higher dose of diazepam 0.2 – 0.6 mg/kg IV is 
approved for products available in other countries.31,37 Diazepam 
is more commonly used as part of induction rather than as a pre-
medicant.
In combination with an induction agent for anesthesia  (extra- 
label): Diazepam 0.1 – 0.3 mg/kg IV . Can be combined with ket-
amine to counteract the muscle rigidity caused by ketamine and 
reduce the dose of ketamine. Diazepam is also used with propo -
fol or alfaxalone to reduce the amount of these induction agents, 
which decreases dose-dependent cardiovascular and respiratory 
depression caused by many induction drugs.38–42
CATS:
NOTE: Because of concerns associated with oral diazepam and rare 
idiosyncratic hepatic failure in cats, oral use in cats is not recom -
mended; safer alternatives are available.
Anesthetic premedication in combination with other sedatives 
(extra-label): Diazepam 0.1 – 0.3 mg/kg IV . Combination with 
opioids or alpha-2 agonists is highly recommended to decrease 
drug dosages, minimize paradoxical excitation, and achieve a 
more profound, predictable level of sedation and muscle re -
laxation. A slightly higher dose of diazepam (0.2 – 0.6 mg/kg  
IV) is approved in a UK product. 16,31 Diazepam 0.5 mg/cat  
(NOT mg/kg) in combination with ketamine 10 mg/cat (NOT 
mg/kg) given IV was deemed effective and safe to assist physical 
restraint for blood sampling.43 Diazepam is more commonly used 
as part of induction rather than as a premedicant.
In combination with an induction agent for anesthesia (ex-
tra-label): Diazepam 0.1 – 0.3 mg/kg IV . Can be combined with 
ketamine to counteract the muscle rigidity caused by ketamine 
and reduce the dose of ketamine. Diazepam is also used with 
propofol or alfaxalone to reduce the amount of these induction 
agents, which decreases dose-dependent cardiovascular and re -
spiratory depression caused by many induction drugs.38–42
EQUINE : 
Anticonvulsant in foals  (extra-label): 0.1 – 0.4 mg/kg slow IV 
and repeated as necessary17
Field anesthesia (extra-label):
a) The following protocol was used for field castration in po -
nies with good results: After premedication with detomidine  
20 μg/kg IV and phenylbutazone 4.4 mg/kg IV , anesthesia was 
induced with diazepam 0.06 mg/kg combined with ketamine 
2.2 mg/kg IV . Midazolam can be substituted for diazepam at 
the same dosage.44 
b) Preanesthetic: Diazepam 0.13 mg/kg IM 20 minutes prior to 
xylazine and ketamine37
c) Total IV anesthesia in mules: Following sedation with xylazine 
1.3 mg/kg IV , induce anesthesia with diazepam 0.03 mg/kg 
and ketamine 2.2 mg/kg IV , lateral recumbency and normal 
gait occurred at 1.8 and 32.8 minutes, respectively; duration of 
anesthesia was 15.3 minutes.45
d) Tranquilization in donkeys: Diazepam 0.1 mg/kg with ace -
promazine 0.1 mg/kg IV decreased the latency period and en-
hanced tranquilization compared with acepromazine alone.46
SHEEP/GOATS:
Sedation/tranquilization (extra-label): Diazepam 0.2 – 0.5 mg/kg 
IV or 0.5 – 1 mg/kg IM. 47 Lower doses (ie, 0.1 – 0.2 mg/kg IV)  
of diazepam have also been recommended.48,49
Anesthesia (extra-label): 
a) Diazepam 0.15 – 0.5 mg/kg IV in combination with ketamine 
5 – 10 mg/kg IV is one of the most common anesthetic proto-
cols.47,50–54
b) Diazepam 0.4 mg/kg IM in combination with ketamine  
22 mg/kg IM 55; however, this combination provided longer 
time to onset and inadequate anesthetic depth during the most 
painful portion of the surgery when compared to IM ketamine 
combined with xylazine.
NEW WORLD CAMELIDS :
Field anesthesia in alpacas  (extra-label): Diazepam 0.2 mg/kg 
with ketamine 4 mg/kg IV56 
BIRDS:
Adjunctive therapy of pain control (with analgesics);  (extra- 
label): Diazepam 0.5 – 2 mg/kg IV or IM57
Sedation/induction (extra-label): 
a) Diazepam 0.5 – 2 mg/kg IV or IM. Dosage applies to small 
pet birds and medium-sized parrots. Adjustments need to be 
made for large-sized parrots or wild species, such as raptors.58
b) Diazepam 0.5 mg/kg IM with ketamine 10 mg/kg IM as pre -
medication reduced induction time and sevoflurane require -
ments in parrots.59
c) Intranasal sedation with diazepam 13.6 mg/kg produced adequate 
sedation in budgerigars; midazolam had a faster onset (1.3 vs 2.8 
minutes, respectively) but shorter duration (71 vs 165 minutes).60
FERRETS :
Premedication/sedation (extra-label): 
Diazepam 0.5 mg/kg IM or IV (IV preferred)
Diazepam 0.2 mg/kg (IV assumed) if using in combination with 
ketamine 2 – 5 mg/kg58
RABBITS/RODENTS/SMALL MAMMALS  (extra-label): 
Rabbits: Sedation: Diazepam 0.5 – 2 mg/kg IV , IM, or intrana -
sally61,62 (IV preferred; intranasal may cause tissue irritation 
– midazolam is preferred for this route). Anesthesia: Diazepam  
0.5 – 1 mg/kg in combination with ketamine 20 – 35 mg/kg IM 
or IV58
Hedgehogs: Long anesthesia: Diazepam 0.5 – 2 mg/kg in combi -
nation with ketamine 5 – 20 mg/kg IM58
Hamsters, gerbils, mice, rats: Diazepam 3 – 5 mg/kg IM
Guinea pigs: Diazepam 0.5 – 3 mg/kg IM63
Monitoring 
 ■ CNS: signs of sedation or paradoxical excitement
 ■ Cardiovascular system: blood pressure—can cause hypotension if 
administered rapidly IV


===== Plumb PDF 409 =====
382    Diazoxide
 ■ Respiratory system: respiratory rate, ETCO2, and SpO2—mild re -
spiratory depression can occur, with a more moderate impact if 
other respiratory depressants (eg, opioids) are administered.
 ■ Horses should be observed carefully for ataxia. 
 ■ Clinical response to treatment
Client Information 
 ■ This medicine may cause sedation and/or disorientation, which 
may impair the performance of working animals.
 ■ When using this medicine for thunderstorm phobias or other 
triggers (eg, separation anxiety), give the medicine to your animal 
about an hour before the event or trigger.
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. If your animal 
vomits or acts sick after receiving the medication on an empty 
stomach, give the medicine with food or small treats. Contact 
your veterinarian if vomiting continues.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian immediately if your animal develops 
yellowing of the skin, gums, or whites of the eyes (jaundice).
 ■ Sleepiness is the most common side effect. This medicine can 
change your animal’s behavior (eg, hyperactivity, anxiety) in un-
expected ways.
 ■ This medicine may increase your animal’s appetite, especially in 
cats.
 ■ Contact your veterinarian immediately if your animal stops eat -
ing or seems depressed.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Diazepam, a benzodiazepine, is a white-to-yellow, practically 
odorless, crystalline powder with a melting point between 131°C 
(267.8°F) and 135°C (275°F) and pK a of 3.4. Diazepam is tasteless 
initially but develops a bitter aftertaste. One gram of diazepam is sol-
uble in 333 mL of water or 25 mL of alcohol and is sparingly soluble 
in propylene glycol. The pH of the commercially prepared injectable 
solution is 6.2 to 6.9. It consists of a 5 mg/mL solution with 40% pro-
pylene glycol, 10% ethanol, 5% sodium benzoate/benzoic acid buffer, 
and 1.5% benzyl alcohol as a preservative.
Diazepam may also be known as diazepamum, LA-III, NSC-
77518, or Ro-5-2807; many trade names are available. 
Storage/Stability 
Store all diazepam products at room temperature (15°C  to 30°C 
[59°F-86°F]). Keep the injection from freezing temperatures and 
protect from light. Store the oral forms (eg, tablets, capsules) in tight-
ly closed containers and protect them from light. 
Because diazepam may adsorb to plastic, it should not be stored 
in plastic syringes but can be drawn up in syringes if intended to be 
administered within 4 hours. The drug may also significantly adsorb 
to IV solution plastic (eg, PVC) bags and infusion tubing. This ad -
sorption appears to be dependent on several factors (eg, tempera -
ture, drug concentration, flow rates, line length). 
Consider the following to minimize the adsorption of diazepam. 
Use glass or polyolefin containers; if you use PVC bags, select the 
lowest possible surface:volume ratio and minimize the storage time. 
The use of non-PVC administration sets will reduce loss. If you use 
PVC tubing, it should be the shortest possible length with a small 
diameter, and the set should not contain a burette chamber. More 
rapid flow rates (consistent with safe clinical use) will also reduce the 
loss of diazepam. 64
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations 
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
The manufacturers of injectable diazepam do not recommend the 
drug be mixed with any other medication or IV diluent, and diluting 
for infusion cannot be recommended. Although some studies have 
shown that dilution in some IV solutions at low concentrations may 
not exhibit visible precipitates, microcrystal formation could not be 
ruled out. Because there is continued interest in IV infusions of di -
azepam, some studies indicate that diazepam injection may be com-
patible with various drugs and IV fluids (eg, diluted to a concentra-
tion of 5 mg/50 mL to 5 mg/100 mL with 0.9% sodium chloride, 5% 
dextrose, Ringer’s, or lactated Ringer’s injection).
Mixing ketamine with diazepam in the same syringe or IV bag has 
been suggested but is not recommended, as precipitation may occur. 
Although there are many anecdotal reports of mixing ketamine with 
diazepam in the same syringe just prior to injection, there does not 
appear to be any published information documenting the stability of 
the drugs after mixing. Use should be avoided if a visible precipitate 
forms.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE IN THE UNITED STATES  
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
The International Federation for Equestrian Sports (FEI) lists this 
drug as a prohibited substance–controlled substance. 
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Diazepam Injection: 5 mg/mL in 2 mL Carpuject® cartridges; gener-
ic; (Rx, C-IV) 
Diazepam Oral Tablets: 2 mg, 5 mg, and 10 mg; Valium®, generic; 
(Rx, C-IV)
Diazepam Oral Solution: 1 mg/mL in 500 mL, and 5 mg and 10 mg  
patient cups; generic; (Rx, C-IV); Concentrated oral solution:  
5 mg/mL in 30 mL with dropper; Diazepam Intensol®; (Rx, C-IV)
Diazepam Rectal Gel: 2.5 mg, 10 mg, and 20 mg; Diastat®, generic; 
(Rx, C-IV)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb  
Diazoxide
(di-az-ok-side) Proglycem®
Direct Vasodilator/Hyperglycemic 
Prescriber Highlights 
 ▶ Orally administered drug used in the management of insulino-
mas in small animal species
 ▶ Contraindications include functional hypoglycemia or 
hypoglycemia secondary to insulin overdose (diabetics) and 
hypersensitivity to thiazide diuretics.
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with congestive heart failure or 
renal insufficiency
 ▶ Most common adverse effects include anorexia, vomiting, 
and/or diarrhea (may be reduced by giving with food).
 ▶ Availability and expense may be problematic. May need to be 
compounded
 ▶ Bitter taste may make administration difficult.
Uses/Indications 
Oral diazoxide has been used for the treatment of hypoglycemia sec-
ondary to hyperinsulin secretion (eg, insulinoma) in patients refrac-
tory to glucocorticoid and dietary therapy.


===== Plumb PDF 410 =====
Diazoxide   383
Pharmacology/Actions 
Although related structurally to the thiazide diuretics, diazoxide 
does not possess any appreciable diuretic activity. By directly causing 
a vasodilatory effect on the smooth muscle in peripheral arterioles, 
diazoxide reduces peripheral resistance and blood pressure. 
Diazoxide exhibits hyperglycemic activity by directly inhibiting 
pancreatic insulin secretion, stimulating hepatic gluconeogenesis 
and glycogenolysis, and stimulating the beta-adrenergic system to 
cause epinephrine release and inhibit tissue use of glucose. Diazox -
ide’s inhibition of insulin release may be a result of the drug’s ability 
to decrease the intracellular release of ionized calcium, thus prevent-
ing release of insulin from beta cell insulin granules. Diazoxide does 
not apparently affect the synthesis of insulin, nor does it possess any 
antineoplastic activity. 
Pharmacokinetics 
The serum half-life of diazoxide has been reported to be ≈5 hours 
in dogs; other pharmacokinetic parameters in dogs appear to be un-
available. In humans, serum diazoxide levels (dosed at 10 mg/kg PO) 
peaked at ≈12 hours after dosing with capsules. It is unknown what 
blood levels are required to obtain hyperglycemic effects. Highest 
concentrations of diazoxide are found in the kidneys with high levels 
also found in the liver and adrenal glands. Approximately 90% of 
the drug is bound to plasma proteins and it crosses the placenta and 
into the CNS. It is not known if diazoxide is distributed into milk. 
Diazoxide is partially metabolized in the liver and is excreted as both 
metabolites and unchanged drug by the kidneys. Serum half-life of 
the drug is prolonged in patients with renal impairment.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Diazoxide should not be used in patients with functional hypogly -
cemia or for treating hypoglycemia secondary to insulin overdose in 
diabetic patients. Unless the potential advantages outweigh the risks, 
do not use in patients hypersensitive to thiazide diuretics.
Because diazoxide can cause sodium and water retention, use 
cautiously, and consider dose reductions in patients with congestive 
heart failure or renal insufficiency.
Do not confuse diaZOXide with DIAZepam or diltiazem.
Adverse Effects 
When used to treat insulinomas in dogs, the most common adverse 
effects include hypersalivation, anorexia, vomiting, and/or diarrhea. 
Other effects that may be seen include tachycardia, hematologic ab-
normalities (eg, agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, thrombocytope -
nia), pancreatitis, diabetes mellitus, cataracts, and sodium and water 
retention.
Administering the drug with meals or temporarily reducing the 
dosage may alleviate the GI side effects. Because diazoxide is metab-
olized in the liver, adverse effects may be more readily noted in dogs 
with concurrent hepatic disease.
Adverse effects reported in ferrets include inappetence, vomiting, 
diarrhea, malaise, and myelosuppression.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety 
Diazoxide crosses the placenta.1 Fetal islet cell degeneration has been 
demonstrated in animals. In addition, fetal resorption has been ob -
served in rats, and fetal skeletal and cardiac malformations or terato-
genicity have been observed in rabbits. Diazoxide may cause cessa -
tion of uterine contractions when administered during labor.
It is unknown if diazoxide enters milk. 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 
Oral doses of up to 500 mg/kg have been tolerated in dogs.1 The oral 
LD50 is over 5000 mg/kg in rats and 219 mg/kg in guinea pigs. An 
acute overdose may result in severe hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis. 
Treatment should include insulin (see specific Insulin monographs), 
fluids, and electrolytes. Intensive and prolonged monitoring is rec -
ommended.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions 
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving diazoxide and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Alpha-Adrenergic Agents  (eg, phenoxybenzamine): May 
decrease the effectiveness of diazoxide by increasing glucose levels
 ■ Glucocorticoids (eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one ): If 
used in combination with diazoxide, may enhance hyperglycemic 
effects
 ■ Hypotensive Agents, Other  (eg, amlodipine, hydralazine, 
prazosin, telmisartan): Diazoxide may enhance the hypotensive 
actions of other hypotensive agents. 
 ■ Phenothiazines  (eg, acepromazine, chlorpromazine): May 
enhance the hyperglycemic effects of diazoxide
 ■ Thiazide diuretics : May potentiate the hyperglycemic effects 
of oral diazoxide.1 Some clinicians have recommended using hy-
drochlorothiazide in combination with diazoxide, if diazoxide 
alone is ineffective to increase blood glucose levels. Caution: hy -
potension may occur.
Laboratory Considerations 
 ■ Diazoxide will cause a false negative insulin response to the glu-
cagon-stimulation test.
 ■ Diazoxide may displace bilirubin from plasma proteins.
Dosages
DOGS:
Adjunctive treatment of hypoglycemia secondary to insulin-  
secreting islet cell or non-islet cell tumors  (extra-label): Ini -
tially 5 mg/kg PO twice daily. 2 May gradually increase to effect 
up to a maximum dosage of 30 mg/kg PO twice daily. If diazox -
ide alone is ineffective, may consider using hydrochlorothiazide  
(1 – 2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours) in combination with diazoxide. 
FERRETS :
Hypoglycemia secondary to insulin-secreting islet cell tumors  
(extra-label): After surgical resection of pancreatic nodules or 
partial pancreatectomy: Prednisone 0.5 – 2 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours will usually control mild to moderate clinical signs. Begin 
at lowest dose and gradually increase as needed. Add diazoxide 
when clinical signs cannot be controlled with prednisone alone. 
Begin diazoxide 5 – 10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. Prednisone 
dosage may need to be lowered at the same time. If the initial dos-
age does not control clinical signs, the dosage can be gradually 
increased to a maximum of 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours.
SMALL MAMMALS :
Guinea pigs; Hypoglycemia secondary to insulin-secreting is -
let cell tumors (extra-label): Based on a single case report: Initial-
ly, 5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. Based on the blood glucose curve, 
dosage was gradually increased to 25 mg/kg PO every 12 hours.
Monitoring
 ■ Blood (serum) glucose. The goal of therapy is to identify a dosage 
