
===== Plumb PDF 477 =====
450   Enrofloxacin
target anti-Xa peak range of 0.5 to 1 IU/mL, extrapolated from hu-
man literature, has been suggested for use in dogs and cats. The sug-
gested thromboprophylactic range for horses is 0.1 – 0.2 IU/mL.15
NOTE: To measure peak anti-Xa activity, sample at 2 hours post-
dose for cats, 3 hours postdose for dogs, and 3 to 4 hours postdose 
for horses.16 If an anti-Xa assay is not available, consider activated 
clotting time, aPTT, thrombin generation, or viscoelastic tests to 
monitor anticoagulant treatment.1,17
Client Information 
 ■ This medicine must be injected subcutaneously (under the skin). 
Be sure you understand how to correctly give the injections. Sev-
eral injections a day may be required, and treatment can be very 
expensive. Administration of the injections may be painful for 
your animal.
 ■ Bleeding is not likely, but if it does occur, contact your veterinar-
ian immediately.
 ■ If your animal is very listless (lacking energy), appears to be hav-
ing trouble breathing, trouble walking, or loses the use of its rear 
legs, contact your veterinarian immediately, as it may mean blood 
clots have formed.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), enoxaparin sodium is 
obtained by alkaline depolymerization of heparin derived from pork 
intestinal mucosa. The average molecular weight is ≈4500 and rang-
es from 3500 to 5500 (heparin sodium has a molecular weight of 
≈12,000); 1 mg of enoxaparin is equivalent to 100 units of anti-factor 
Xa.
Enoxaparin sodium may also be known as Enoxaparinum natri -
cum, PK-10169, RP-54563, Clexane®, Decipar®, Klexane®, Lovenox®, 
Plaucina®, and Trombenox®.
Storage/Stability 
The commercially available injection should be stored at room 
temperature (25°C [77°F]); excursions permitted to 15°C  to 30°C 
(59°F-86°F).
One study showed that diluting the 100 mg/mL commercially 
available solution with sterile water to 20 mg/mL resulted in a prod-
uct that was stable for 4 weeks when stored in a glass vial or in plastic 
syringes at room temperature or refrigerated.18
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations 
Do not mix or coadminister enoxaparin with other medications.4
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status 
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE 
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Enoxaparin Sodium for Injection: 30 mg/0.3 mL, 40 mg/0.4 mL, 
60 mg/0.6 mL, 80 mg/0.8 mL, 100 mg/1 mL, 120 mg/0.8 mL, and 
150 mg/1 mL preservative-free in single-dose prefilled syringes;  
300 mg/3 mL containing 15 mg/mL benzyl alcohol in 3 mL multi -
dose vials; Lovenox®, generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
 
Enrofloxacin
(en-roe-flox-a-sin) Baytril®, Zobuxa®
Fluoroquinolone Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights 
 ▶ Effective against a variety of pathogens except for anaerobes 
 ▶ In dogs, oral bioavailability is greater and more predictable 
than with ciprofloxacin.
 ▶ When possible, use should be avoided in young, growing 
animals because of the potential negative impact on cartilage 
development. 
 ▶ Caution is advised in patients with hepatic or renal insufficien-
cy or dehydration. 
 ▶ Higher doses (greater than 5 mg/kg/day) not recommended in 
cats; may cause blindness
 ▶ Adverse effects include GI distress, CNS stimulation, crystal-
luria, or hypersensitivity. 
 ▶ Oral administration to dogs and cats ideally should be on an 
empty stomach (unless vomiting occurs).
 ▶ Many potential drug interactions
 ▶ FDA prohibits extra-label use in food animals.
Uses/Indications 
Enrofloxacin is FDA-approved for use in dogs (by oral 1 and IM 2 
routes) and cats (oral2 only) for the management of bacterial infec -
tions susceptible to enrofloxacin. Because of the feline dose restric -
tion (5 mg/kg/day) and because better options are usually available 
for cats, enrofloxacin is generally used in this species to treat only the 
most susceptible bacterial infections or if an injectable fluoroquino-
lone is needed and where enrofloxacin is the only injectable option.
Enrofloxacin is FDA-approved for use in beef and nonlactating 
dairy cattle for the treatment and control of bovine respiratory dis -
ease (BRD).3 It is conditionally approved for the treatment of clinical 
anaplasmosis associated with Anaplasma marginale in replacement 
dairy heifers under 20 months of age, in all classes of beef cattle ex -
cept beef calves less than 2 months of age, and in beef bulls of any age 
that are intended for breeding. 4 Enrofloxacin is also FDA-approved 
for use in pigs for the treatment and control of swine respiratory dis-
ease (SRD) and as second-line therapy for the control of colibacillo-
sis in groups or pens of weaned pigs.3
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated fluoro -
quinolones as Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobials 
for human medicine.5 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) 
has designated enrofloxacin as a Veterinary Critically Important An-
timicrobial (VCIA) Agent in veterinary species.6
Pharmacology/Actions 
Enrofloxacin has broad-spectrum coverage. Enrofloxacin has good 
activity against many gram-negative bacilli and cocci, including most 
species and strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella spp, Esch-
erichia coli, Enterobacter spp, Campylobacter spp, Shigella spp, Sal-
monella spp, Aeromonas spp, Haemophilus spp, Proteus spp, Yersinia 
spp, Serratia spp, and Vibrio spp. Other organisms that are generally 
susceptible include Brucella spp, Chlamydia trachomatis, staphylo-
cocci (including penicillinase-producing and methicillin-resistant 
strains), Mycoplasma spp, and some Mycobacterium spp (but not the 
etiologic agent for Johne’s disease). 
Fluoroquinolones have variable activity against most streptococci 
and are not usually recommended for use in these infections. En -
rofloxacin is contraindicated with Streptococcus canis infections (or 
when it has not been ruled out) because of the potential for drug-in-
duced necrotizing fasciitis. 7 This adverse effect does not appear to 
be a problem with other fluoroquinolones. Enrofloxacin has weak 
activity against enterococci and is not recommended in the treat -


===== Plumb PDF 478 =====
Enrofloxacin   451
ment of enterococcal infections. Enrofloxacin is generally ineffective 
in treating anaerobic infections.
Development of bacterial resistance is an ongoing concern with 
many different bacteria, particularly staphylococci, Enterobacterales 
(eg, E coli), and Pseudomonas spp. Resistance occurs by mutation, 
particularly with P aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter 
spp, and enterococci, but plasmid-mediated resistance is not thought 
to commonly occur. E coli resistance was demonstrated in enrofloxa-
cin-treated weaner pigs as well as untreated pigs housed with treated 
animals.8
The bactericidal activity of enrofloxacin is concentration-depen -
dent (antibacterial activity improves with high peak concentrations), 
and susceptible bacteria cell death occurs within 20 to 30 minutes of 
exposure. Enrofloxacin’s mechanism of action is believed to be in -
hibition of bacterial DNA gyrase (a type II topoisomerase), thereby 
preventing DNA supercoiling and DNA synthesis.
Enrofloxacin has demonstrated a significant postantibiotic effect 
for both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria and is active in 
stationary and growth phases of bacterial replication. In vitro kill 
assays for enrofloxacin and its active metabolite, ciprofloxacin, have 
demonstrated an additive response (effect equal to the combined ac-
tion of each of the drugs used separately) in dog and cat isolates of 
E coli, Staphylococcus pseudintermedius, and P aeruginosa.9 Methicil-
lin-resistant S pseudintermedius present within biofilm have higher 
MICs, indicating reduced susceptibility to enrofloxacin.10
In vitro synergic antibacterial effects were not observed when en-
rofloxacin was combined with amikacin.11
Pharmacokinetics 
Enrofloxacin is well absorbed after oral administration in most spe-
cies. In dogs, enrofloxacin’s bioavailability (≈80%) is approximately 
twice that of ciprofloxacin after oral administration. Oral bioavail -
ability in horses is between 60% and 80%. 12,13 Fifty percent of peak 
plasma concentration (Cmax) is reportedly attained within 15 minutes 
of administration and Cmax occurs within 1 hour of administration. 
In sheep, oral enrofloxacin bioavailability is ≈90% or higher 14 and 
83% after IM administration.15 Presence of food in the stomach gen-
erally delays the rate but not the extent of absorption; however, foods 
with increased divalent or trivalent cation concentrations (eg, milk) 
can reduce bioavailability. Enrofloxacin is rapidly absorbed after IM 
administration in dogs (peak concentrations in ≈30 minutes).2
Enrofloxacin is widely distributed throughout the body. Volume 
of distribution in dogs is ≈3 to 4 L/kg. Only ≈27% is bound to canine 
plasma proteins. Highest concentrations are found in the bile, kid -
ney, liver, lungs, and reproductive system (including prostatic fluid 
and tissue). Enrofloxacin reportedly concentrates in macrophages. 
Therapeutic concentrations are also attained in bone, synovial fluid, 
skin, muscle, aqueous humor, and pleural fluid. Low concentrations 
are found in the CSF; concentrations may only reach 6% to 10% of 
those found in serum. In hospitalized horses, volume of distribution 
was ≈1.25 L/kg. After mechanical disruption of the blood–aqueous 
humor barrier in horses, enrofloxacin (7.5 mg/kg IV) produced con-
centrations in the aqueous humor sufficient to treat Leptospira pomo-
na.16 Enrofloxacin concentration in bronchoalveolar fluid of calves 
was higher than plasma 1 hour and 2 hours after SC injection.17 After 
SC administration to steers, enrofloxacin penetrated GI tissue better 
than ciprofloxacin.18 The volume of distribution was 1.5 to 2.3 L/kg 
in sheep15 and ≈1.5 L/kg in cattle. 
Enrofloxacin is eliminated via renal and hepatic mechanisms. Ap-
proximately 15% to 50% of the drug is eliminated unchanged into 
the urine by tubular secretion and glomerular filtration. Enroflox -
acin is metabolized to various metabolites, most of which are less 
active than the parent compounds. Approximately 10% to 40% of 
circulating enrofloxacin is metabolized to ciprofloxacin in most spe-
cies, including, dogs, cats, adult horses, cattle, turtles, snakes, and 
humans. Foals, pigs, and some lizards convert little, if any, enroflox-
acin to ciprofloxacin. Enrofloxacin metabolites are eliminated in the 
urine and feces. Because of the dual elimination routes (renal and 
hepatic), dogs with moderately impaired renal function may have 
slightly prolonged half-lives and higher serum concentrations but 
may not require any dosage adjustment. Approximate elimination 
half-lives in various species are in dogs, 2 to 5 hours19,20; cats, 6 hours; 
calves, 9 hours18; sheep and goats, 1.5 to 4.5 hours15,21; horses, 5 to 10 
hours12,22; turtles, 18 hours; and alligators, 55 hours. After SC admin-
istration to calves, fecal enrofloxacin and ciprofloxacin concentra -
tions were ≈ 115 and ≈50 times higher than their respective plasma 
concentrations.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Enrofloxacin is labeled as contraindicated in patients that are hyper-
sensitive to it as well as in small- and medium-breed dogs aged 2 to 
8 months. Bubble-like changes in articular cartilage have been noted 
when the drug was given at 2  to 5 times the recommended dosage 
for 30 days, although clinical signs have only been seen at 5 times 
the recommended dosage. To avoid cartilage damage, treatment for 
large- and giant-breed dogs may need to wait until 12 and 18 months 
of age, respectively. Enrofloxacin at concentrations greater than 1 
mg/mL was toxic to equine chondrocytes.23 Enrofloxacin is not rec-
ommended in cats with impaired renal function or at doses above 5 
mg/kg/day due to increased risk for retinal degeneration.24
Because ciprofloxacin has occasionally been reported to cause 
crystalluria in humans, animals should not be allowed to become 
dehydrated during fluoroquinolone therapy. Enrofloxacin may cause 
CNS stimulation and should be used with caution in patients with 
seizure disorders. Patients with severe renal or hepatic impairment 
may require dosage interval adjustments to prevent drug accumu -
lation. 
Use of the canine injectable products in cats or dogs via non-FDA–
approved parenteral routes (eg, IV , SC) is controversial and may re-
sult in significant adverse effects. Because of the high pH (≈11) of the 
solution, SC administration in any species may cause pain and tissue 
damage. Rapid or undiluted IV administration to dogs increases risk 
for cardiac arrhythmias, hypotension, vomiting, and mast cell de -
granulation (ie, release of histamine and other inflammatory media-
tors). See Compatibility/Compounding Considerations.
Dilution and extra-label use of the large animal product  
(100 mg/mL; 10%) in small animal species via any route is strongly 
 discouraged. 
Enrofloxacin should not be used in foals, as they appear to be 
highly susceptible to the fluoroquinolone’s arthropathic effects. Al-
though there has been much discussion regarding the potential for 
cartilage abnormalities or other arthropathies in horses, objective 
data are lacking. In horses, IV administration should be slow as atax-
ia and other neurologic effects may occur when given rapidly. Intra-
uterine infusion and IM injections are not recommended in horses, 
as localized tissue reactions (eg, endometrial ulceration, necrosis, 
fibrosis, inflammation, hemorrhage) can occur.25 
Extra-label use of fluoroquinolones is prohibited in food animals.
Enrofloxacin and ciprofloxacin cannot be considered equivalent 
due to pharmacokinetic differences (see Pharmacokinetics).
Enrofloxacin should not be used in humans; it may cause halluci-
nations, vivid dreams, and/or headaches.
Adverse Effects 
When enrofloxacin is used as labeled, its adverse effect profile is usu-
ally limited to GI distress (eg, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia). In dogs, 
rare incidences of elevated hepatic enzymes, ataxia, seizures, depres-
sion, lethargy, and nervousness have also been reported1,2; dogs may 
vomit after IV administration. Hypersensitivity reactions or crystal-


===== Plumb PDF 479 =====
452   Enrofloxacin
luria could occur.
In cats, ocular toxicity has been reported, characterized by mydri-
asis, retinal degeneration, and blindness.24,26 These effects were gen-
erally seen at higher dosage ranges and have necessitated a maxi -
mum dosage of 5 mg/kg/day in cats. Mydriasis may be an indication 
of impending or existing retinal changes. Retinal toxicity in cats 
appears to be caused by amino acid changes in the ABCG2 trans -
porter in the blood–retina barrier, which allows photoreactive fluo -
roquinolones to accumulate in the feline retina.27 Other rare adverse 
effects seen in cats can include vomiting, anorexia, elevated hepatic 
enzymes, diarrhea, ataxia, seizures, depression/lethargy, vocaliza -
tion, and  aggression.
Articular cartilage abnormalities have been noted in young, rap -
idly growing animals given fluoroquinolones (see Contraindica-
tions/Precautions/Warnings).1,2,4 
Fluoroquinolones may cause photosensitization and prolonged 
exposure of bare skin (eg, nose) to direct sunlight should be avoided.
Enrofloxacin 100 mg/mL injection can be irritating to the mouth 
when given orally to horses. This effect may be alleviated by coat -
ing the liquid with molasses or preparing a gel (see Compatibility/
Compounding Considerations) and rinsing the horse’s mouth with 
water after administration. The prevalence of antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea due to enrofloxacin use in horses is ≈5%.28 
In humans, fluoroquinolones may alter cardiac conduction and 
cause prolongation of the QT interval, especially in those with a his-
tory of QT interval prolongation, electrolyte disorders, cardiac dis -
ease, or are taking other QT interval prolonging medications.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety 
The safety of enrofloxacin use in pregnant dogs has been inves -
tigated; breeding, pregnant, and lactating dogs receiving up to  
15 mg/kg/day have demonstrated no treatment-related adverse ef -
fects.1,2 However, because of the risk for cartilage abnormalities in 
young animals, fluoroquinolones are not generally recommended 
for use during pregnancy unless the benefits of therapy clearly out -
weigh the risks. Limited studies in male dogs at various dosages have 
indicated no effects on male breeding performance. 
Safety in breeding, pregnant, or lactating cats has not been 
 established.1
Enrofloxacin administration to mares during pregnancy resulted 
in detectable concentrations of enrofloxacin and ciprofloxacin in fe-
tal fluids and cartilage.29 Fetal abnormalities were not detected after 
enrofloxacin administration to pregnant mares for 2 weeks during 
early pregnancy (gestation days 46 to 60). 30 Enrofloxacin adminis -
tration during late pregnancy did not result in clinical lameness or 
cartilage lesions in the foals 31; however, the small sample sizes (6 or 
7 horses per treatment arm) of these studies cannot be taken as an 
indication of no risk to the fetus.
The effects of enrofloxacin on cattle and swine reproductive per-
formance, pregnancy, and lactation have not been adequately de -
termined. Enrofloxacin and its metabolite ciprofloxacin are actively 
secreted into bovine milk.32
No teratogenic effects were observed in rabbits given a dose of  
25 mg/kg or rats given a dose of 50 mg/kg.3 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 
The oral LD 50 for enrofloxacin in laboratory rats was greater than 
5000 mg/kg. Dogs receiving 50 mg/kg/day for at least 14 days de -
veloped only vomiting and anorexia, but signs associated with an 
overdosage of 125 mg/kg/day for 11 days (in decreasing frequency) 
included vomiting, anorexia, depression, difficult locomotion, and 
death.1,2 
In cats, an overdose can be serious (eg, blindness, seizures); a dose 
of 20 mg/kg or more can cause retinopathy and blindness, 1 which 
can be irreversible. Enrofloxacin 20 or 50 mg/kg/day for 3 weeks re-
sulted in salivation, vomiting, and depression.1
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions 
In pigs, enrofloxacin induced expression and activity of CYP1A2 
and inhibited CYP2E1 and CYP3A4.33 In hepatic microsomes from 
healthy beagles, enrofloxacin and ciprofloxacin inhibited CYP1A 
activity, but clinically relevant drug interactions were more likely 
with ciprofloxacin than with enrofloxacin.34 The following drug in -
teractions have either been reported or are theoretical in humans or 
animals receiving ciprofloxacin or enrofloxacin and may be of signif-
icance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks must be 
weighed, and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
 ■ Aluminum-, Calcium-, and Magnesium-Containing 
Oral Products : May bind to enrofloxacin and prevent its oral 
absorption; doses of these products should be separated from en-
rofloxacin by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Antibiotics, other  (eg, aminoglycosides, third-generation 
cephalosporins [eg, cefpodoxime, ceftiofur ], doxycycline, ex -
tended-spectrum penicillins ): Synergism may occur against 
some bacteria (particularly Pseudomonas aeruginosa), but this is 
unpredictable.35 Although enrofloxacin and ciprofloxacin have 
minimal activity against anaerobes, in vitro synergy has been 
reported when these drugs are used with clindamycin against 
strains of Peptostreptococcus spp, Lactobacillus spp, and Bacteroi-
des fragilis.
 ■ Blood Glucose Lowering Agents (eg, insulins, sulfony-
lureas [eg, glipizide, glyburide]): Fluoroquinolones may en -
hance the hypoglycemic effect of blood glucose lowering agents. 
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one): Con-
comitant use with fluoroquinolones may increase risk for tendon-
itis and tendon rupture.
 ■ Cyclosporine, Systemic : Fluoroquinolones may exacerbate 
nephrotoxicity and reduce the metabolism of cyclosporine.
 ■ Doxorubicin : Enrofloxacin may increase doxorubicin expo -
sure.
 ■ Flunixin : In dogs, flunixin has been shown to increase the area 
under the curve (AUC) and elimination half-life of enrofloxacin, 
and enrofloxacin increases the AUC and elimination half-life of 
flunixin; it is unknown whether other NSAIDs interact with en -
rofloxacin in dogs.
 ■ Iron, Zinc  (oral): Concomitant administration may decrease 
fluoroquinolone absorption; doses should be separated by at least 
2 hours.
 ■ Levothyroxine : Ciprofloxacin may decrease levothyroxine ef-
ficacy.
 ■ Mycophenolate Mofetil : Ciprofloxacin may decrease myco-
phenolic acid exposure.
 ■ Methotrexate (MTX) : Concomitant administration may in -
crease MTX concentrations and increase risk for toxicity.
 ■ Nitrofurantoin : May antagonize the antimicrobial activity of 
fluoroquinolones; concomitant use of these drugs is not recom -
mended.
 ■ Probenecid : May block renal tubular secretion of ciprofloxacin 
and may increase ciprofloxacin serum concentration and elimina-
tion half-life; monitor for increased enrofloxacin adverse effects 
(nausea, diarrhea)


===== Plumb PDF 480 =====
Enrofloxacin   453
 ■ QT Interv al Prolongation Drugs  (eg, azithromycin, chlor-
promazine, cisapride, fluconazole, fluoxetine, ketoconazole, 
methadone, ondansetron, quinidine, sotalol ): Combination 
with ciprofloxacin may increase risk for QT prolongation; con -
current use of cisapride and ciprofloxacin is contraindicated in 
humans. These interactions may also apply to enrofloxacin.
 ■ Sildenafil : Concomitant use with ciprofloxacin may increase 
sildenafil serum concentrations and adverse effects. 
 ■ Sucralfate : In dogs, sucralfate can affect absorption of cipro -
floxacin but does not appear to affect enrofloxacin absorption.36
 ■ Theophylline, Aminophylline : Enrofloxacin may increase 
theophylline blood concentrations; in dogs, theophylline concen-
trations may be increased by ≈30% to 50%.37
 ■ Tilmicosin : May decrease enrofloxacin metabolism38
 ■ W arfarin : Concomitant use may increase anticoagulant effects 
of warfarin. 
Laboratory Considerations 
 ■ Enrofloxacin may cause false positive urine glucose determina-
tions when cupric sulfate solution (Benedict’s solution, Clinitest®) 
is used. Tests using glucose oxidase (Tes-Tape®, Clinistix®) are not 
affected by enrofloxacin.
 ■ In some humans, fluoroquinolones caused increases in liver en-
zymes, BUN, and serum creatinine and decreases in hematocrit. 
The clinical relevance of these changes in veterinary patients is 
unknown.
Dosages
DOGS:
Susceptible infections (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
Oral tablets: 5 – 20 mg/kg PO once daily for at least 2 to 3 days 
beyond resolution of clinical signs.1 Selection of a dose from this 
range is based on clinical experience, severity of infection, suscep-
tibility of the pathogen. If no improvement is seen within 5 days, 
diagnosis should be reevaluated. Maximum duration of therapy 
is 30 days. 
Injectable solution 2.27% (22.7 mg/mL) : 2.5 mg/kg IM once, 
followed by oral enrofloxacin therapy2 
Susceptible infections (extra-label): Using the 2.27%  
(22.7 mg/mL) injection, 10 – 20 mg/kg every 24 hours IM, SC 
(must be diluted), or slow IV based on the susceptibility, site, 
and severity of the infection. See Compatibility/Compounding 
 Considerations. 
Lower UTIs (extra-label):
a) 10 – 20 mg/kg PO every 24 hours. Use of this drug should be 
reserved for cystitis cases caused by bacteria resistant to other 
antibiotics (eg, amoxicillin). Enrofloxacin has limited efficacy 
against Enterococcus spp.39
b) Sporadic bacterial cystitis: 18 – 20 mg/kg PO every 24 hours 
for 3 days was shown to be as effective as a 14-day treatment 
with amoxicillin plus clavulanate.40
Pyelonephritis (extra-label): 20 mg/kg PO every 24 hours; good 
first-line choice for treatment of pyelonephritis39
Enteric infections (extra-label): 
a) Enrofloxacin-sensitive E coli in dogs with granulomatous 
colitis (extra-label): 10 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for 8 weeks41
b) Campylobacteriosis: 10 mg/kg PO every 24 hours. Resistance 
can develop during treatment.42 
Bacterial skin infections (extra-label): 5 – 20 mg/kg PO every 24 
hours.43 Administration of this drug at the high end of the dose 
range may be required for treatment of Pseudomonas spp infec -
tions. Most clinicians consider enrofloxacin to be a second-line 
drug for the treatment of deep pyoderma in dogs; use is only rec-
ommended if culture and susceptibility results indicate first-line 
drugs will not be effective.
CATS:
Susceptible infections  (label dosage; FDA-approved): 5 mg/kg 
PO every 24 hours or divided and given every 12 hours; contin -
ue for at least 2 or 3 days beyond cessation of clinical signs to a 
maximum of 30 days.1 NOTE: Because enrofloxacin is a concen-
tration-dependent antibiotic, once-daily administration is recom-
mended. For serious infections that require a higher dose, consid-
er using a different fluoroquinolone (eg, pradofloxacin).
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 5 mg/kg (or less) every 
24 hours IM or IV using the canine injectable product (2.27%,  
22.7 mg/mL). For IV administration, see Compatibility/Com-
pounding Considerations.
HORSES : 
Susceptible infections (extra-label):
a) 5 – 7.5 mg/kg PO or IV every 24 hours. 44 Respiratory infec -
tions should be treated with the high end of the dose range.45
b) 7.5 mg/kg PO as a compounded gel every 24 hours. See Com-
patibility/Compounding Considerations. Horses should have 
feed withheld for 11 to 14 hours before and 1 to 2 hours after 
administration. The horse’s mouth should be rinsed with water 
after administration to reduce the risk for oral ulceration.46
CATTLE:
Single day treatment of bovine respiratory disease (BRD) as -
sociated with Mannheimia haemolytica, Pasteurella multocida, 
Histophilus somni, and Mycoplasma bovis in beef and nonlac -
tating dairy cattle (label dosage; FDA-approved): 7.5 – 12.5 mg/kg  
SC once.3
Multiple day treatment of BRD associated with M haemolytica, 
P multocida, H somni, and M bovis in beef and nonlactating 
dairy cattle (label dosage; FDA-approved): 2.5 – 5 mg/kg SC ev -
ery 24 hours for 3 days; additional daily treatments may be given 
to animals that have shown improvement but not complete re -
covery.3
Control of BRD in beef and nonlactating dairy cattle at high 
risk for developing BRD associated with M haemolytica, P 
multocida, H somni, and M bovis (label dosage; FDA-approved):  
7.5 – 12.5 mg/kg SC once3
Clinical anaplasmosis associated with Anaplasma marginale in 
replacement dairy heifers under 20 months of age, all classes 
of beef cattle except beef calves less than 2 months of age, and 
beef bulls (of any age) intended for breeding (label dosage; con-
ditionally approved by FDA): 12.5 mg/kg SC once; do not admin-
ister more than 20 mL per injection site.4
NEW WORLD CAMELIDS :
Susceptible infections in alpacas  (extra-label): 5 mg/kg SC or  
10 mg/kg PO every 24 hours47
SWINE: 
Treatment and control of swine respiratory disease (SRD) as -
sociated with Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae, P multocida , 
Haemophilus parasuis, Streptococcus suis, Bordetella bronchi -
septica, and Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae and control of coli -
bacillosis in groups or pens of weaned pigs where colibacil -
losis associated with E coli has been diagnosed (label-dosage; 
FDA-approved): 7.5 mg/kg IM or SC (behind the ear) once; do 
not administer more than 5 mL per injection site.3
BIRDS:
NOTE: Compounding the liver-flavored tablets with grape syrup 


===== Plumb PDF 481 =====
454   Enrofloxacin
(Syrpalta®) may improve acceptance when enrofloxacin is admin-
istered PO.48
Susceptible gram-negative infections in Psittacines (extra-label):
a) Stable, immune-competent birds: 20 mg/kg PO every 24 hours 
b) Debilitated, immune-competent birds: 15 – 20 mg/kg SC in 
fluid pocket every 24 hours 
c) Debilitated, immunocompromised birds: 15 – 20 mg/kg SC in 
fluid pocket every 12 hours 
FERRETS :
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 10 – 20 mg/kg PO, IM, or SC 
every 24 hours.49 NOTE: If parenteral administration is required, 
it is recommended to dilute the solution to avoid injection site 
tissue necrosis.
RABBITS, RODENTS, & SMALL MAMMALS :
NOTE: All dosages are extra-label.
Rabbits: 
a) For Pasteurella spp upper respiratory infection: 15 – 20 mg/kg 
PO every 12 hours for a minimum of 14 days in mild cases and 
up to several months for chronic infections; first dose may be 
given SC. Subsequent doses should NOT be given SC, as severe 
tissue reactions can occur.50
b) 5 mg/kg PO, SC, IM, or IV every 12 hours for 14 days. En -
rofloxacin is the drug of choice for treatment of Pasteurella 
spp infections. Dilution is suggested if administering SC, as 
skin may slough. Injectable product should not be given PO 
because it is unpalatable. 51 See Compatibility/Compounding 
Considerations.
Hedgehogs: 5 – 10 mg/kg PO or SC every 12 hours52
Chinchillas: 5 – 10 mg/kg PO or IM every 12 hours53
Chinchillas, gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, mice, rats :  
5 – 10 mg/kg PO or IM every 12 hours or 5 – 20 mg/kg PO or SC 
every 24 hours. 50 – 200 mg/L for 14 days in drinking water. Not 
for use in young animals54 
Rats: Chronic respiratory disease: 10 – 25 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours55
REPTILES :
Susceptible respiratory infections for most species (extra-label): 
5 mg/kg IM every 5 days for 25 days
Chronic respiratory infections (extra-label):
a) Tortoises: 15 mg/kg IM every 72 hours for 5 to 7 treatments56 
b) Bearded dragons: 10 mg/kg IM once blood concentrations are 
high enough to kill susceptible bacteria57  
Monitoring 
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ In cats, mydriasis and/or retinal changes may indicate retinal tox-
icity.
Client Information 
 ■ Enrofloxacin is best given on an empty stomach without food; 
however, if your animal vomits or acts sick, give with food or a 
small treat (no dairy products, antacids, or anything containing 
iron). If vomiting continues, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ Do not crush film-coated tablets, as the drug is bitter, which may 
cause difficulty when getting your animal to take it. 
 ■ Do not give this medicine at the same time with other drugs or 
vitamins that contain certain minerals (eg, calcium, iron, magne-
sium, aluminum, zinc), as these products can reduce the amount 
of drug absorbed.
 ■ This medicine may cause joint abnormalities if used in young, 
pregnant, or nursing animals.
 ■ Most common side effects are vomiting, nausea, or diarrhea. 
 ■ Do not exceed prescribed dose in cats, as blindness can result. If 
your cat develops large pupils, contact your veterinarian imme -
diately.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Enrofloxacin, a fluoroquinolone antibiotic, occurs as a pale-yellow 
crystalline powder. It is slightly soluble in water, but solubility is 
pH-dependent and altering the pH of the commercially available in-
jections can cause precipitation. Enrofloxacin is related structurally 
to the human FDA-approved drug ciprofloxacin (enrofloxacin has 
an additional ethyl group on the piperazinyl ring).
Enrofloxacin may also be known as enrofloksasiini, enrofloxa -
cine, enrofloxacino, enrofloxacinum, Bay-Vp-2674, Baytril®, Baytril® 
100, Baytril® 100-CA1, Enroflox®, Enroflox®-100, Enroquin®, Enrosite®, 
or Zobuxa®.
Storage/Stability 
Unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer, enrofloxacin tablets 
should be stored in tight containers at temperatures less than 25°C 
(77°F); excursions to 30°C (86°F) may be permitted for some products. 
The canine FDA-approved injectable solution (2.27%) for IM 
injection should be stored protected from light at or below 25°C 
(77°F)2; do not freeze. Discard unused product 90 days from first vial 
puncture or after puncturing vial a maximum of 20 times.
The FDA-approved injectable solution (10%) for cattle and swine 
should be stored protected from sunlight at 20°C to 30°C (68°F-86°F), 
with excursions permitted to 40°C (104°F).3,4 It should not be refrig-
erated or frozen. If exposed to cold temperatures, precipitation may 
occur; to redissolve, warm the solution, then shake the vial. Discard 
unused solution 30 days after first vial puncture, or after vial is punc-
tured a maximum of 30 times with a needle or 4 times with a dosage 
delivery device. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations 
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Enrofloxacin 100 mg/mL injection may be diluted with sterile 
water for injection prior to IM or SC administration; use diluted 
solution within 24 hours of mixing. 3 Injectable enrofloxacin (both  
22.7 mg/mL and 100 mg/mL) has been demonstrated to be physical-
ly incompatible with 1:1 dilution with 0.9% sodium chloride, lac -
tated Ringer’s solution (LRS), Plasma-Lyte® A, hydroxyethyl starch 
(HES) 6%, and potentially any drugs that have been reconstituted 
or diluted with those solutions (eg, ampicillin/sulbactam). 58 It must 
NOT be mixed with or come into contact with any IV solution con-
taining calcium or magnesium (eg, Normosol®-R, Plasma-Lyte®-R, 
-A, or -56); morbidity and mortality secondary to microprecipitants 
lodging in patients’ lungs have been reported. 
Because physical incompatibilities may not be readily apparent to 
the naked eye or may develop 15 to 60 minutes after admixture or 
dilution (ie, during an infusion), it has been recommended to ad -
minister enrofloxacin injection only via labeled routes. If IV route 
must be used and suitable alternatives to enrofloxacin are not avail-
able, consider administration of undiluted enrofloxacin through a 
separate line.
For horses, an oral gel formulated from the bovine injectable 
product has been described46: 100 mL of the 100 mg/mL bovine in -
jection (Baytril®100) is used. Stevia (0.35 g) is mixed with ≈15 mL 
of liquid enrofloxacin until dissolved. Apple flavoring (0.6 mL) is 
added until dissolved. Sodium carboxymethylcellulose (2 g) should 
be sprinkled over the mixture and stirred until incorporated, with 
immediate gradual addition of the remaining enrofloxacin (85 mL)  


===== BSAVA PDF 163 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
147
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Enrofloxacin
(Baytril, Enrocare, Enrotron, Enrox, Enroxil, 
Fenoflox, Floxabactin, Powerflox, Quinoflox, 
Xeden, Zobuxa) POM-V 
Formulations: Injectable: 25 mg/ml, 50 mg/ml. Oral: 15 mg, 50 
mg, 100 mg, 150 mg, 200 mg, 250 mg tablets; 25 mg/ml solution.
Action: Enrofloxacin is a concentration-dependent antimicrobial 
which inhibits bacterial DNA gyrase. Pulse dosing regimens may be 
effective, particularly against Gram-negative bacteria.
Use: Ideally fluoroquinolone use should be reserved for infections 
where culture and sensitivity testing predicts a clinical response 
and where lower tier antimicrobials would not be effective. Active 
against Mycoplasma  and many Gram-positive and Gram-negative 
organisms, including Pasteurella , Staphylococcus , Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa , Klebsiella , Escherichia coli , Mycobacterium , Proteus 
and Salmonella . Relatively ineffective against obligate anaerobes. 
Fluoroquinolones are highly lipophilic drugs that attain high 
concentrations within cells in many tissues and are particularly 
effective in the management of soft tissue, urogenital (including 
prostatic) and skin infections. For the treatment of non-tubercular 
mycobacterial disease, enrofloxacin can be combined with 
clarithromycin and rifampin. Administration by i.v. route is not 
authorized but has been used in cases of severe sepsis. If this  
route is used, dilute to 10 times the volume in 0.9% sodium 
chloride and administer slowly as the carrier contains potassium 
(ideally 35–45 minutes).
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Fluoroquinolones are relatively 
contraindicated in growing dogs, as cartilage abnormalities have 
been reported in young dogs (but not cats). Enrofloxacin is not 
authorized in cats <8 weeks of age; dogs <1 year of age; large-breed 
dogs <18 months of age.
Adverse reactions: In cats, irreversible retinal blindness has 
occurred at dosing rates higher than those currently recommended, 
although at least one case reported in the literature was being dosed 
within the 5 mg/kg q24h rate. Enrofloxacin should be used with 
caution in epileptic animals until further information is available, as 
in humans they potentiate CNS adverse effects when administered 
concurrently with NSAIDs. Careful dosing in cats is facilitated by 
accurate body weight and use of a 1 ml syringe, and doses higher 
than 5 mg/kg/day are not recommended in cats.
Drug interactions: Absorbents and antacids containing cations 
(Mg2+, Al3+) may bind fluoroquinolones, preventing their absorption 
from the GI tract. Their absorption may also be inhibited by 
sucralfate and zinc salts; separate dosing by at least 2 hours. 
Fluoroquinolones increase plasma theophylline concentrations. 


===== BSAVA PDF 164 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
148
Cimetidine may reduce the clearance of fluoroquinolones and so 
should be used with caution with these drugs. Some 
fluoroquinolones may decrease the metabolism and increase 
nephrotoxicity of ciclosporin and tacrolimus in humans and 
therefore concurrent use in animals is best avoided until more 
research has been performed. May increase the action of orally 
administered anticoagulants.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs: 5 mg/kg s.c. q24h. Higher doses (10 mg/kg q24h) should be 
considered for certain sites, including prostatitis. Even higher doses 
may be necessary for certain isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa . 
Contact the manufacturer to discuss individual cases.
Cats: 5 mg/kg s.c. q24h; 2.5 mg/kg p.o. q12h or 5 mg/kg p.o. q24h.
References
Cummings KJ, Aprea VA and Altier C (2015) Antimicrobial resistance trends among 
canine Escherichia coli isolates obtained from clinical samples in the northeastern USA, 
2004–2011. Canadian Veterinary Journal  56, 393–398
Federico S, Carrano R, Capone D et al . (2006) Pharmacokinetic interaction between 
levofloxacin and ciclosporin or tacrolimus in kidney transplant recipients: ciclosporin, 
tacrolimus and levofloxacin in renal transplantation. Clinical Pharmacokinetics 45, 169–175
Ford MM, Dubielzig RR, Giuliano EA et al . (2007) Ocular and systemic manifestations 
after oral administration of a high dose of enrofloxacin in cats. American Journal of 
Veterinary Research  68, 190–202
Ephedrine
(Enurace, Ephedrine hydrochloride*) POM-V, POM 
Formulations: 10 mg, 15 mg, 30 mg, 50 mg tablets; 3 mg/ml, 30 
mg/ml solutions for injection; 0.5% and 1% nasal drops.
Action: Non-catecholamine sympathomimetic stimulates  
alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors directly, and indirectly 
through endogenous release of noradrenaline. Also causes 
contraction of internal urethral sphincter muscles and relaxation  
of bladder muscles. Compared with more powerful 
sympathomimetics, e.g. oxymetazoline and xylometazoline,  
there is less of a rebound effect.
Use:
• Treatment of hypotension during anaesthesia. As well as 
constricting peripheral vessels, it has a positive inotropic effect 
and accelerates heart rate, therefore assisting in bradycardia. 
Effects tend to wane after 2–3 doses have been administered, 
due to exhaustion of endogenous noradrenaline stores. 
• Also used orally in the treatment of urinary incontinence. Can be 
used in conjunction with phenylpropanolamine. Polyuria should 
be excluded before treatment is given for urinary incontinence, 
as many conditions that cause polyuria would be exacerbated  
by ephedrine.
• Proposed for treatment of nasal congestion (and may be of 
some benefit in cat ‘flu’).
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 165 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
149
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Use with caution in dogs and cats with cardiovascular disease, partial 
urethral obstruction, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, 
hyperadrenocorticism, hyperthyroidism or other metabolic disorders.
Safety and handling: Pregnant women should take particular 
care to wear gloves for administration.
Contraindications: Do not use in pregnant or lactating patients 
or those with glaucoma.
Adverse reactions: Even at recommended therapeutic doses may 
cause more generalized sympathetic stimulation (panting, mydriasis, 
CNS stimulation) and cardiovascular effects (tachycardia, atrial 
fibrillation and vasoconstriction). May also cause reduction of the 
motility and tone of the intestinal wall.
Drug interactions: Synergistic with other sympathomimetics. 
Volatile anaesthetics will enhance the sensitivity of the myocardium 
to the effects of ephedrine. Concomitant use with cardiac 
glycosides (digoxin) and tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline) can 
cause arrhythmias. Will enhance effects of theophylline and may 
cause hypertension when given with MAO inhibitors (e.g. selegeline).
DOSES
Dogs: 
• Hypotension: 0.05–0.2 mg/kg i.v.; repeat as necessary; duration 
of effect is short (5–15 min). Effects tend to wane after 2–3 
doses have been administered.
• Urinary incontinence: 1 mg/kg p.o. q12h. Dose should be 
adjusted according to effect but there is a maximum dose of 2.5 
mg/kg p.o. q12h.
• Nasal congestion: No dose determined. Suggest start at 1 drop 
of 0.5% solution intranasally q12h. If giving orally, suggest 0.5 
mg/kg p.o. q12h.
Cats:   
• Hypotension: 0.05–0.1 mg/kg i.v.; repeat as necessary; duration 
of effect is short (5–15 min). Effects tend to wane after 2–3 
doses have been administered.
• Nasal congestion: 1 drop of 0.5% solution intranasally q12h. Oral 
formulations not convenient for administration to most cats.
Epinephrine see Adrenaline
Epirubicin (4’-Epi-doxorubicin)
(Epirubicin*, Pharmorubicin*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 10 mg, 20 mg, 50 mg powder for 
reconstitution; 2 mg/ml solution.
Action: Epirubicin is a semisynthetic stereoisomer of doxorubicin. 
Intracellularly its metabolism results in production of cytotoxic free 
radicals. It also binds irreversibly to DNA, thereby preventing 
