
===== Plumb PDF 1033 =====
1006   Phenobarbital
may get sick if they eat horse feed mixed with this medicine.
 ■ Decreased appetite is the most common side effect seen with this 
medicine.
 ■ Watch for unpredictable behavior and colic while your horse is 
taking this medicine. Contact your veterinarian if you have any 
concerns.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your horse while it is tak-
ing this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Pergolide is an ergot derivative that occurs as white to off-white pow-
der and is slightly soluble in water, dehydrated alcohol, or chloro -
form. It is very slightly soluble in acetone, practically insoluble in 
ether, and sparingly soluble in methyl alcohol.
Pergolide mesylate may also be known as LY-127809, pergolide 
mesilate, pergolidi mesilas, Prascend®, Celance®, Nopar ®, Parkotil®, 
Parlide®, or Pharken®.
Storage/Stability
Store pergolide tablets in tight containers at room temperature (25°C 
[77°F]); excursions permitted to 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
FDA-approved products should be the first choice when prescribing 
pergolide for pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID). Com -
pounded products are available; however, because of concerns re -
garding stability, the use of this product is questionable when the 
approved product is accessible. 
A 1 mg/mL oral suspension of pergolide mesylate was prepared 
using bulk powder obtained from a commercial supplier. 20 mg of 
pergolide mesylate was added to the plunger of a 35 mL Luer-lock 
syringe containing 10 mL of Ora-Plus® suspending liquid. The 35 mL 
syringe was connected to an empty 35 mL Luer-lock syringe using a 
fluid-dispensing connector. Using the plunger of the original 35 mL 
syringe, the suspension was mixed by depressing the plungers back 
and forth for a total of 50 depressions (or until uniformly mixed).  
10 mL of OraSweet® was added to the suspension and mixed in a 
similar manner for a final suspension volume of 20 mL. The suspen-
sion was found to be stable for 30 days when protected from light 
and stored under refrigeration (2°C-8°C [36°F-46°F]). Formulations 
that have undergone a color change should be considered unstable 
and discarded. NOTE: The use of a mortar and pestle to prepare this 
suspension is not recommended, as it has resulted in a loss of sus -
pending vehicle that caused a 20% increase in final concentration. 
Proper precautions to prevent eye and skin irritation from exposure 
to free powder should be taken.8
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Pergolide Mesylate Tablets: 1 mg; Prascend®; (Rx) FDA-approved for 
use in horses. NADA# 141-331. Do not use this product in horses 
intended for human consumption.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
Because of an increased potential for heart valve damage associat -
ed with pergolide use in humans, all dosage forms were withdrawn 
from the United States market in the spring of 2007. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Phenobarbital
Phenobarbitone
 (fee-noe-bar-bi-tal) 
Barbiturate
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used primarily as an antiseizure medication
 ▶ Contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity, 
severe liver disease, severe respiratory distress, or nephritis 
(with large doses). Phenobarbital should be used with caution 
in patients with hypovolemia, anemia, borderline hypoadrenal 
function, or severe cardiac or respiratory disease.
 ▶ Cats are more sensitive to respiratory depression when receiv-
ing phenobarbital at high doses.
 ▶ Adverse effects in dogs include anxiety/agitation or lethargy 
(when treatment is initiated); profound depression is possible 
even at low doses. Sedation, ataxia, polyuria/polydipsia, and 
polyphagia can be seen at moderate to high serum phenobar-
bital concentrations. An increase in liver enzymes (ALP more 
so than ALT) is common; however, overt hepatotoxicity is not. 
Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia are rarely seen.
 ▶ Adverse effects in cats include ataxia, lethargy, facial pruri-
tus, polyphagia with weight gain, and polyuria/polydipsia. 
Immunemediated reactions and bone marrow hypoplasia are 
rare. Hepatotoxicity has not been reported in cats.
 ▶ Should be given slowly when administered IV; should not 
be administered SC or perivascularly, as it can cause severe 
irritation
 ▶ Drug and drug–laboratory test interactions are possible.
 ▶ When therapy is discontinued, phenobarbital doses should be 
tapered over several weeks (see Dosages).
 ▶ DEA Schedule IV (C-IV) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Based on its efficacy, relative safety, and reasonable dose frequency 
(every 12 hours), phenobarbital is considered a first-line treatment 
for epilepsy in dogs and cats. 1,2 Phenobarbital has a slower onset of 
action than benzodiazepines, which should be used first to manage 
status epilepticus. Phenobarbital is generally used for long-term 
control to prevent seizure recurrence in dogs, cats, and horses. In a 
study, more dogs receiving phenobarbital were seizure-free as com-
pared with those receiving potassium bromide (85% vs 52%); phe -
nobarbital reduced seizure duration more than potassium bromide.3 
Phenobarbital may also be useful in controlling excessive drool -
ing (ie, sialadenosis) in horses4 and dogs.5–9 Phenobarbital improves 
clinical signs in dogs with orthostatic tremor; however, most re -
sponses were partial rather than complete.10
In cattle, it has been suggested that the microsomal–enzyme-stim-
ulating properties of phenobarbital increase the detoxification pro -
cess of organochlorine (ie, chlorinated hydrocarbon) insecticide 
poisoning.
Phenobarbital has also been used in the treatment and preven -
tion of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in human infants. It is unknown 
if phenobarbital effectively treats hyperbilirubinemia in veterinary 
patients.
Pharmacology/Actions 
Although barbiturates are nonselective CNS depressants, they can 
invoke all levels of CNS mood alteration, from paradoxical excite -
ment to deep coma and death. The exact mechanisms of the CNS 
effects caused by barbiturates are unknown. Barbiturates have been 
shown to inhibit the release of acetylcholine, norepinephrine, and 
glutamate; they also have effects on gamma-aminobutyric acid 


===== Plumb PDF 1034 =====
Phenobarbital   1007
(GABA). At high anesthetic doses, barbiturates have been demon -
strated to inhibit the uptake of calcium at nerve endings. The seizure 
threshold is raised, and the spread of seizures is limited. In humans, 
selective anticonvulsant activity of phenobarbital is independent of 
the degree of sedation produced.
The degree of CNS depression produced is dependent on the 
dose, route of administration, the pharmacokinetics of the drug, and 
species treated. In addition, patient age, physical condition, and/or 
concurrent use of other drugs can alter drug effects. Barbiturates 
may depress the sensory cortex, lessen motor activity, and produce 
sedation at low doses. In humans, barbiturates have been shown to 
reduce the rapid eye movement (REM) stage of sleep. Barbiturates 
have no true intrinsic analgesic activity.
In most species, barbiturates can cause dose-dependent respira -
tory depression and, in some species, can cause slight respiratory 
stimulation. At sedative/hypnotic doses, respiratory depression is 
similar to that during normal physiologic sleep. As doses increase, 
the medullary respiratory center is progressively depressed, with re-
sultant decreases in rate, depth, and volume. Respiratory arrest can 
occur at doses 4 times lower than those that can cause cardiac arrest. 
Barbiturates must be used very cautiously in cats, as cats are particu-
larly sensitive to their respiratory depressant effects.
Barbiturates can cause reduced tone and motility of the intestinal, 
uterine, ureteral, and bladder musculature, likely secondary to their 
central depressant action. Barbiturates can reduce the sensitivity of 
the motor endplate to acetylcholine, thereby slightly relaxing the 
skeletal muscle. 
Liver function is not directly affected when barbiturates are used 
short-term, but hepatic microsomal enzyme induction is well doc -
umented with extended barbiturate administration, 11–14 particularly 
with phenobarbital, and may persist for up to 4 weeks after discon -
tinuation.11 Although barbiturates reduce oxygen consumption in all 
tissue, no change in metabolic rate is measurable when barbiturates 
are administered at sedative doses; however, basal metabolic rates 
may be reduced with resultant decreases in body temperature when 
barbiturates are administered at anesthetic doses.
Pharmacokinetics
Phenobarbital is slowly absorbed from the GI tract. Bioavailability 
ranges from 70% to 90% in humans and ≈90% in dogs. 15,16 Absorp-
tion is practically complete in cats17 and adult horses.18 Peak concen-
trations occur 4 to 8 hours after oral administration in dogs 19 and 8 
to 12 hours in humans. One study in cats showed that phenobarbi -
tal compounded in PLO gel and applied transdermally to the pinna 
twice daily achieved steady-state serum concentrations within the 
therapeutic range in some cats; more individual variation was seen 
when Lipoderm ActiveMax® was used instead of PLO.20
Phenobarbital is widely distributed throughout the body, but be-
cause of its lower lipid solubility, it does not distribute as rapidly into 
the CNS as compared with most other barbiturates. In humans, peak 
drug concentration in the CNS may be delayed up to 15 minutes after 
IV administration. In humans, the amount of phenobarbital bound 
to plasma proteins has been reported to be 40% to 60%. The report-
ed apparent volumes of distribution are ≈0.8 to 1 L/kg in horses, 21,22 
≈0.86 L/kg in foals, ≈0.7 L/kg in cats, 23 and ≈0.75 L/kg in dogs. 24
The drug is metabolized in the liver primarily by hydroxylated 
oxidation to p-hydroxyphenobarbital; sulfate and glucuronide con -
jugates are also formed. In humans, elimination half-life ranges 
from 2 to 6 days compared to 12 to 125 hours (average of ≈2 days) 
in dogs. 16,19,24 Elimination half-life in dogs fed protein- or fat-re -
stricted diets appears to be shorter (26 and 24 hours, respectively).25 
Because of phenobarbital’s ability to induce the hepatic enzymes 
used to metabolize itself and other drugs, elimination half-life may 
decrease with time, along with concomitant reductions in serum 
concentrations. The half-life of phenobarbital may be less than 24 
hours in some dogs that may require 3 times daily administration 
for maximal control.26 An elimination half-life of 34 to 43 hours has 
been reported in cats.23 Elimination half-life in horses is considerably 
shorter, with reported values of ≈13 hours in foals and 10 to 12 hours 
in adult horses with chronic administration.21,22 Approximately 25% 
of a dose is excreted unchanged by the kidney; alkalinizing urine 
and/or substantially increasing urine flow increases phenobarbital 
excretion rates. The remaining 75% of a dose is renally excreted as 
metabolites. Anuric or oliguric patients may accumulate the unmet-
abolized drug; dose adjustments may be required.
In dogs, changes in diet, body weight, and body composition may 
alter the pharmacokinetics of phenobarbital and necessitate dosage 
adjustment.
In goats given phenobarbital 10 mg/kg IV and PO, bioavailability 
was ≈25%, and half-life was ≈4 hours for both routes. 27
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Barbiturates are contraindicated in patients that have severe liver 
disease, severe respiratory distress, or those that have demonstrat -
ed previous hypersensitivity reactions to these drugs. 28 Large doses 
are contraindicated in patients with nephritis.29 Barbiturates should 
be used cautiously in patients with hypovolemia, anemia, border -
line hypoadrenal function, and/or cardiac or respiratory disease. 
Dose reductions may be necessary in patients with significant renal 
 impairment.
The drug should be given slowly (not more than 1 – 2 mg/kg per 
minute) when administered IV; IV administration that is too rapid 
can cause respiratory depression. Commercially available injectable 
preparations are very alkaline and must not be administered SC, in-
traarterially, or perivascularly, as significant pain, tissue irritation, 
and possible necrosis can result. 29 Extreme care should be taken to 
avoid extravasation. Applications of moist heat and local infiltration 
of 0.5% procaine solution have been recommended to treat extrava-
sation reactions.
In humans, IM injection is limited to a total volume of 5 mL and 
injected into a large muscle to avoid tissue irritation.29
PHENobarbital should not be confused with PENTobarbital.
Adverse Effects
Dogs may exhibit increased clinical signs of anxiety/agitation or 
lethargy when therapy is initiated. These effects are generally transi-
tory in nature. Occasionally, dogs will exhibit profound depression at 
lower doses (and plasma concentrations). Decreased physical activ -
ity levels have been observed in dogs receiving phenobarbital-con -
taining antiepileptic drug combinations.30
Polydipsia, polyuria, and polyphagia are also commonly observed; 
these signs usually begin 2 to 3 weeks after initiating phenobarbital 
therapy. Sedation and/or ataxia often become significant concerns 
as serum phenobarbital concentrations reach the higher ends of the 
therapeutic range. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and/or neutropenia 
occur rarely and are reversible if detected early. 31–33 Increased tri -
glycerides34 and pancreatic lipase activity 35,36 have been reported in 
dogs. 
Increases in liver enzymes with phenobarbital in dogs are well de-
scribed37–39 and are not necessarily indicative of liver dysfunction but 
should raise concern if serum ALT or ALP is more than 4 to 5 times 
the upper limit of normal or if any elevation in gamma-glutamyl -
transferase (GGT) is noted. Of note, in a study, serum ALP was high-
er in dogs receiving phenobarbital and fed protein- or fat-restricted 
diets as compared with dogs receiving a maintenance diet.25 Pheno-
barbital should generally be discontinued if any increases in serum 
bilirubin, total serum bile acids, or hypoalbuminemia are detected. If 
phenobarbital needs to be discontinued yet antiepileptic medication 
is required, alternative antiepileptic therapy (eg, potassium bromide, 


===== Plumb PDF 1035 =====
1008    Phenobarbital
levetiracetam) should be started immediately. Frank hepatic failure 
is uncommon and is usually associated with higher serum pheno -
barbital levels (greater than 30 to 40 µg/mL). 39 In a study, hemato -
logic abnormalities occurred within the first 3 months of therapy in 
4.2% of dogs treated with standard doses.40
In dogs, phenobarbital rarely causes superficial necrolytic der -
matitis (SND) associated with changes in hepatocytes (ie, severe pa-
renchymal collapse with glycogen-laden hepatocytes and moderate 
fibrosis sharply demarcated by nodules of normal hepatic parenchy-
ma)41 distinct from that seen with phenobarbital hepatotoxicity (ie, 
chronic hepatic fibrosis with nodular regeneration [cirrhosis]). 39 A 
presumed case of Stevens-Johnson syndrome in a dog has also been 
reported.42 
Phenobarbital may increase the metabolism of cortisol and has 
been implicated in contributing to relative adrenal insufficiency, 43 
including a case of Addisonian crisis in an Irish setter.44 Pseudolym-
phoma has been documented or suspected in at least 1 dog 45 and 2 
cats.46,47
Cats may develop ataxia, persistent sedation and/or lethargy, 
 facial pruritus, polyphagia/weight gain, and/or polydipsia/polyuria. 
Rarely, immune-mediated reactions and bone marrow hypoplasia 
(eg, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia) may be seen. 48 A presumed 
case of phenobarbital-induced fever has been reported in a cat. 49 
Phenobarbital-induced anticonvulsant hypersensitivity syndrome 
has also been reported. In 1 cat, tachypnea, hyperthermia, high se -
rum amyloid A, and abdominal lymph node enlargement were seen 
8 days after initiation of phenobarbital.50 Another cat presented im-
mune-mediated anemia 2 weeks after starting phenobarbital.51 
Cats, unlike dogs, do not develop increased liver enzymes; in -
creases in liver enzymes in cats on phenobarbital should prompt fur-
ther investigation. High doses (ie, 10 – 40 mg/kg/day) have caused 
coagulopathies in cats.52,53 
Although there is much less information regarding phenobarbital 
use in horses (and foals in particular), cattle, goats, and ferrets, it 
would generally be expected for adverse effects to mirror those seen 
in other species.
In humans, phenobarbital can cause rare, possibly fatal, hypersen-
sitivity reactions, including exfoliative dermatitis and Stevens-John-
son syndrome. 28 It is recommended to discontinue use whenever 
dermatologic reactions occur.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Barbiturates readily cross the placenta. 28,29 Phenobarbital has been 
associated with rare congenital defects and bleeding problems in 
newborns but may be safer than other anticonvulsants. Clinical signs 
related to withdrawal can occur in offspring born to dams receiving 
phenobarbital.
Caution should be used when administering to a nursing dam, as 
small amounts are excreted in maternal milk. Drowsiness in nursing 
offspring has been reported. A foal born to a mare receiving phe -
nobarbital reportedly had a serum phenobarbital concentration of  
12.2 µg/mL, and the concentration in the mare’s milk was  
7.5 µg/mL.54
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Clinical signs caused by overdoses of phenobarbital are an extension 
of its adverse effect profile. Animals may present with ataxia, lethar-
gy/sedation, hypothermia, recumbency, and mydriasis (cats). 
Barbiturates have no direct effect on the kidneys, but severe renal 
impairment can occur secondary to hypotensive effects in overdose 
situations.
Treatment of phenobarbital overdose consists of GI decontami -
nation, if appropriate, and respiratory and cardiovascular support. 
Activated charcoal has been shown to be of considerable benefit in 
enhancing the clearance of phenobarbital even when the drug was 
administered parenterally. Charcoal acts as a sink for the drug to dif-
fuse from the vasculature back into the gut. Forced alkaline diure -
sis can also be of substantial benefit in augmenting the elimination 
of phenobarbital in patients with normal renal function. Peritone -
al dialysis or hemodialysis can be helpful in severe intoxications or 
anuric patients.55
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
In humans, phenobarbital induces CYP 3A strongly and most other 
CYP isoenzymes to a lesser degree; it is a substrate of CYP 2C19. The 
following drug interactions have either been reported or are theoret-
ical in humans or animals receiving phenobarbital and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Acetaminophen : Increased risk for hepatotoxicity, particularly 
when large or chronic doses of barbiturates are administered
 ■ Alpha-2 Agonists (eg, dexmedetomidine, xylazine): Concur-
rent use may result in additive respiratory depression. 
 ■ Antihistamines (eg, diphenhydramine): May increase the ef -
fects of phenobarbital
 ■ Benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam, midazolam): Concurrent use 
may result in additive respiratory depression.
 ■ Bromides : Synergistic efficacy and toxicity 
 ■ Carprofen : There may be an increased risk for hepatotoxicity 
secondary to carprofen metabolites. One source states that pa -
tients should not receive phenobarbital or other hepatic drug-me-
tabolizing enzyme inducers when receiving carprofen.56
 ■ Chloramphenicol : May increase the effects of phenobarbital
 ■ Cholestyramine : May reduce phenobarbital absorption and/
or levels. Should be administered separately
 ■ CNS Depressants (eg, methocarbamol, mirtazapine, tra-
zodone): Concurrent use may result in additive respiratory and 
CNS depression.
 ■ Felbamate : May increase the effects of phenobarbital
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors  (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, sele-
giline): May prolong phenobarbital effects
 ■ Opioids (eg, buprenorphine, hydrocodone, morphine, trama-
dol): Concurrent use may result in additive respiratory and CNS 
depression.
 ■ Phenothiazines  (eg, acepromazine): May increase the effects 
of phenobarbital
 ■ Rifampin : May induce enzymes that increase the metabolism of 
barbiturates
 ■ Urinary Acidifiers  (eg, ammonium chloride ): Unchanged 
phenobarbital elimination in urine may be decreased and cause 
an increase in serum half-life.57
Phenobarbital (particularly after chronic therapy) may decrease the 
effects of the following drugs/drug classes by lowering their serum 
concentrations; effects may persist for several weeks after pheno -
barbital is discontinued 11; these drugs may require initial or main -
tenance doses that are at or above the higher end of the dosing range, 
and doses of these drugs may need to be reduced when phenobarbi-
tal is being discontinued:


===== Plumb PDF 1036 =====
Phenobarbital   1009
 ■ Azole Antifungals (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole, 
voriconazole): Phenobarbital levels may be increased, and anti -
fungal levels may be decreased. Concurrent use is contraindicated 
in humans.
 ■ Benzimidazoles (eg, albendazole, fenbendazole): May reduce 
active metabolite concentration
 ■ Benzodiazepines ( eg, clorazepate, diazepam)58
 ■ Buspirone
 ■ Chloramphenicol : Concurrent use also may increase the risk 
for phenobarbital toxicity.
 ■ Clarithromycin
 ■ Clindamycin
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, methylprednisolone, 
prednis[ol]one)
 ■ Cyclosporine 59
 ■ Digoxin 60
 ■ Doxorubicin
 ■ Doxycycline
 ■ Estrogens (eg, diethylstilbestrol [DES], estriol)
 ■ Felbamate : Phenobarbital concentrations may increase, and fel-
bamate concentrations may decrease.
 ■ Griseofulvin
 ■ Ivermectin
 ■ Levetiracetam : Levetiracetam dosage requirements are in -
creased by phenobarbital. In dogs receiving immediate-release 
levetiracetam, phenobarbital therapy reduced levetiracetam 
elimination half-life by ≈35% to 50%. 61 In dogs receiving extend-
ed-release levetiracetam, phenobarbital reduced levetiracetam 
peak concentration and increased clearance, although half-life 
appeared to be unaffected.62
 ■ Levothyroxine
 ■ Methadone
 ■ Metoprolol
 ■ Metronidazole
 ■ Quinidine
 ■ Paroxetine
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine)
 ■ Praziquantel
 ■ Progestins (eg, medroxyprogesterone)
 ■ Sulfonamides 14
 ■ Tacrolimus
 ■ Theophylline, Aminophylline
 ■ Topiramate
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants
 ■ Urinary Alkalinizers  (eg, potassium citrate ): Unchanged 
phenobarbital elimination in urine may be increased and cause a 
decrease in serum half-life.57
 ■ Verapamil
 ■ Vincristine
 ■ Vitamin D
 ■ W arfarin
 ■ Zonisamide 63
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Barbiturates may cause increased retention of bromosulfophtha-
lein (BSP; sulfobromophthalein) and give falsely elevated results. 
It is recommended that barbiturates not be administered within 
the 24 hours before a BSP retention test is performed or, if they 
must be administered (eg, for seizure control), the results be in -
terpreted accordingly.64,65
 ■ Phenobarbital can alter the results of thyroid testing. Decreased 
total and free thyroxine (T 4), normal triiodothyronine (T 3), and 
either normal or increased thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 
have been reported. It has been suggested to wait at least 4 weeks 
after discontinuing phenobarbital to perform thyroid testing.38,66
 ■ In some dogs, phenobarbital may cause a false-positive low dose 
dexamethasone suppression test by increasing the clearance of 
dexamethasone. Phenobarbital apparently has no effect either on 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation tests or on the 
hormonal equilibrium of the adrenal axis. Because phenobarbital 
can potentially increase the metabolism of cortisol, it has been 
implicated in contributing to relative adrenal insufficiency.
Dosages
DOGS:
Idiopathic epilepsy (extra-label): Initially, 2.5 – 3 mg/kg PO ev -
ery 12 hours is commonly recommended, although starting dos -
ages may vary. To achieve therapeutic phenobarbital concentra -
tions sooner in phenobarbital-naïve dogs, some clinicians suggest 
an initial loading dose of 12 – 20 mg/kg (total dose); this dose 
can be administered as a single, slow (over at least 5 minutes) IV 
injection but may cause profound sedation and respiratory de -
pression.67 To minimize these effects, the total dose can be divided 
into increments of 3 – 4 mg/kg IV every 1 to 4 hours; the degree 
of sedation and respiratory depression during administration 
should be monitored, and subsequent doses should be adjusted 
accordingly. Doses should be adjusted based on phenobarbital 
concentrations, efficacy, and adverse effects. Administration of 
3 – 5.6 mg/kg PO every 8 hours in dogs with a shorter pheno -
barbital elimination half-life appeared safe and improved seizure 
management in some patients.26 Combination with other anticon-
vulsants is common. 
Adjunctive treatment of status epilepticus  (extra-label): After 
use of benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam, midazolam), phenobarbital 
4 – 8 mg/kg IV slow (over at least 5 minutes) can be administered. 
If seizure activity continues, additional increments of phenobar -
bital can be administered at 4 mg/kg IV every 20 to 30 minutes 
with a maximum total phenobarbital dose of 20 – 24 mg/kg IV .67,68 
Once seizure activity has diminished and the patient is alert, the 
patient can be transitioned to oral phenobarbital, as noted above.
Sialadenosis (extra-label): In case reports, 1 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours appears to be most common, although dosages up to  
2.5 mg/kg PO twice daily have been noted. 69 In one case, 5  
6 mg/kg IM every 12 hours was initially prescribed. In several but 
not all cases, dogs were slowly weaned off phenobarbital without 
relapse.5,6,9,70
Discontinuing phenobarbital therapy (taper guidelines) : Ta-
pering guidelines may vary and are anecdotal. In general, for 
patients stabilized on another anticonvulsant, a typical tapering 
schedule involves reducing the phenobarbital dose by 25% every 
2 weeks. Smaller dose decreases (eg, 10% to 20%) or longer inter-
vals between reductions (eg, every 3 to 4 weeks) can be consid -
ered. Available tablet size may dictate actual dose decrease. Re -
ductions can be made more rapidly (eg, every 7 days) if necessary 
(eg, fulminant phenobarbital hepatotoxicity); because seizure 
activity may increase during a rapid taper, concurrently initiat -
ing another anticonvulsant is recommended. Doses of other anti-
convulsants may need to be reduced as phenobarbital’s effects on 
CYP enzyme induction wane, which may take several weeks after 
discontinuation.
CATS:
Idiopathic epilepsy (extra-label): Initially, 1 – 3 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours is commonly recommended, although starting dosages 
may vary. Cats receiving phenobarbital 2.5 – 8.6 mg/kg/day PO 


===== Plumb PDF 1037 =====
1010   Phenobarbital
had a therapeutic serum phenobarbital concentration between 15 
and 45 µg/mL; seizure control can be achieved in most cats in 
this range regardless of the cause of the seizures. 71 Practically, ½ 
to one 15 mg tablet/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 12 hours is used. 
To achieve therapeutic phenobarbital concentrations sooner in 
phenobarbital-naïve cats, some suggest an initial phenobarbi -
tal loading dose of 12 – 24 mg/kg IV given in increments of 3 to  
4 mg/kg IV every 2 to 6 hours. The dose should be adjusted based 
on phenobarbital concentrations, efficacy, and adverse effects. 
Transdermal phenobarbital compounded in PLO (extra-label): 
9 mg/kg applied to the inside of the pinna every 12 hours  
(18 mg/kg/day). Therapeutic concentrations may be achieved in 
some cats, and consistent monitoring is recommended. 20,72 Fur-
ther study is warranted to prove this route effectively controls 
 seizures.
Adjunctive treatment of status epilepticus  (extra-label): After 
use of benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam, midazolam), phenobarbi -
tal 3 mg/kg IV can be administered. Phenobarbital can be repeat-
ed every 20 minutes up to 24 mg/kg in a 24-hour period or given 
as loading of 10 mg/kg IV bolus.67,68,73
Discontinuing phenobarbital therapy (taper guidelines) : In 
patients stabilized on another anticonvulsant, a typical tapering 
schedule involves reducing the phenobarbital dose by 25% every 2 
weeks. Smaller dose decreases (eg, 10% to 20%) or longer intervals 
between reductions (eg, every 3 to 4 weeks) can be considered. 
Available tablet size may dictate actual dose decrease. Reductions 
can be made more rapidly (eg, every 7 days) if necessary; because 
seizure activity may increase during a rapid taper, concurrently 
initiating another anticonvulsant is recommended. Doses of other 
anticonvulsants may need to be reduced as phenobarbital’s effects 
on CYP enzyme induction wane, which may take several weeks 
after discontinuation.
HORSES : 
Seizure control (extra-label): 
a) Adult horses: Loading dose of 16 – 20 mg/kg IV once; mainte-
nance dose of 1 – 5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours
b) Foals: Loading dose of 16 – 20 mg/kg IV once; maintenance 
dose of 100 – 500 mg/foal (NOT mg/kg) PO every 12 hours74,75
CATTLE:
Enzyme induction in organochlorine toxicity  (extra-label):  
5 g/animal (NOT mg/kg) PO for 3 to 4 weeks, off 3 to 4 weeks, 
then repeat for 3 to 4 more weeks76
FERRETS :
Seizure control (extra-label): Loading dose of 16 – 20 mg/kg IV 
once; maintenance dose of 1 – 2 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours74,75
Monitoring
 ■ Anticonvulsant efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, CNS related, polyuria/polydipsia, weight 
gain)
 ■ Serum phenobarbital concentration:
• After initiation of therapy or dosage change: 
 ■ If a loading dose of phenobarbital was not administered, 
at least 5 to 6 half-lives (dogs, ≈12 to 14 days; cats, 9 to 10 
days) should be allowed to pass before measuring serum 
phenobarbital concentrations to confirm that therapeutic 
levels have been reached; on the day of sampling, the time 
between drug administration sampling does not appear to 
be significant.77,78 
 ■ Re-measure at 6 weeks postinitiation of phenobarbital to 
determine the patient’s steady-state concentration and the 
extent of autoinduction of phenobarbital metabolism.2 
• Once steady-state is achieved and the patient’s clinical con -
dition is controlled with a maintenance dose: measure serum 
phenobarbital concentrations every 6 months in dogs and cats. 
Rechecking concentration more often should be considered 
when efficacy is reduced or adverse effects are suspected.
• Dogs: Serum phenobarbital concentrations of 15 to 35 µg/mL 
(86 to 150 mmol/L) have been recommended, with the high 
end of the range reflecting suggested changes to minimize the 
potential for hepatotoxicity.2 Approximately ⅓ of dogs receiv -
ing phenobarbital with bromides may require lower phenobar-
bital doses and serum concentrations that are ≈33% less for 
seizure control.79 
• Cats: In a retrospective study of 30 cats, 93% of cats had sei -
zures controlled with serum phenobarbital concentrations be-
tween 15 and 45 µg/mL. 71 Optimum therapeutic levels of 23 
to 30 µg/mL (100 to 130 mmol/L) have been recommended in 
cats in an attempt to maximize seizure control with the lowest 
potential for adverse effects.80 Cats being treated with a trans -
dermal formulation will require more frequent monitoring.
 ■ If phenobarbital is used long term, routine CBC and comprehen-
sive serum chemistry profile are recommended at least every 6 
months.
 ■ If results of routine serum chemistry profile suggest possible hep-
atotoxicity, bile acids and abdominal ultrasonography should be 
considered for further evaluation.
Client Information
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. If your ani -
mal vomits or acts sick after getting it on an empty stomach, give 
it with food or a small treat. If vomiting continues, contact your 
veterinarian.
 ■ Do not skip doses. Try to give doses at the same time each day. Do 
not suddenly stop giving this medicine to your animal.
 ■ Do not change the amount you are giving your animal without 
first talking with your veterinarian.
 ■ Sleepiness, lack of energy, greater thirst, appetite, and increased 
need to urinate commonly occur when starting therapy.
 ■ Liver problems can occur in dogs. Contact your veterinarians if 
your animal has any vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, loss of appe -
tite, or swollen abdomen. Y our veterinarian will need to perform 
examinations and blood work on your dog while it is taking this 
medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
 ■ Phenobarbital is classified as a schedule-IV controlled drug by the 
federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA). The use of this medi -
cation in animals or humans other than those for whom they are 
prescribed is illegal.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Phenobarbital, a barbiturate, occurs as glistening, odorless, small, 
white crystals or a white crystalline powder with a melting point of 
174°C to 178°C (345.2°F-352.4°F) and a p Ka of 7.41. One gram is 
slightly soluble in ≈1000 mL of water and freely soluble in 10 mL of 
alcohol. Compared with other barbiturates, it has a low lipid solu -
bility.
Phenobarbital sodium occurs as bitter-tasting, odorless, flaky, 
white crystals, crystalline granules, or powder. It is very soluble in 
water, soluble in alcohol, and freely soluble in propylene glycol. The 
injectable product has a pH of 8.5 to 10.5.
SI units (mmol/L) are multiplied by 0.232 to convert phenobar -
bital levels to conventional units (µg/mL); conversely, conventional 
units are multiplied by 4.31 to obtain SI units.
Phenobarbital may also be known as fenobarbital, phenemalum, 
phenobarbitalum, phenobarbitone, phenylethylbarbituric acid, pheny-
lethylmalonylurea, Luminal Sodium®, or Solfoton®.


===== BSAVA PDF 51 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
35
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
tubocurarine). Hepatic enzyme induction by phenobarbital may 
increase the rate of metabolism of atenolol. The bronchodilatory 
effects of theophylline may be blocked by atenolol. Atenolol may 
enhance the hypoglycaemic effect of insulin.
DOSES
Dogs: 0.2–2 mg/kg p.o. q12h; a lower dose is often used initially 
with gradual titration upwards if necessary.
Cats: 6.25–12.5 mg/cat p.o. q12–24h; a lower dose is often used 
initially with gradual titration upwards if necessary. If using the oral 
liquid doses of 0.2–2 mg/kg p.o. q12h can be used, with gradual 
titration upwards as necessary. 
References
Schober KE, Zientek J, Li X et al . (2013) Effect of treatment with atenolol on 5-year 
survival in cats with preclinical (asymptomatic) hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Journal of 
Veterinary Cardiology  15, 93–104
Atipamezole
(Alzane, Antisedan, Atipam, Revertor, Sedastop, 
Tipafar) POM-V 
Formulations: Injectable: 5 mg/ml solution.
Action: Selective alpha-2 adrenoreceptor antagonist.
Use: Reverses the sedative effects of medetomidine or 
dexmedetomidine; will also reverse other alpha-2 agonists to provide 
a quick recovery from anaesthesia and sedation. It also reverses other 
effects such as the analgesic, cardiovascular and respiratory effects 
of alpha-2 agonists. Atipamezole does not alter the metabolism of 
medetomidine or dexmedetomidine but occupies the alpha-2 
receptor preventing binding of the drug. The duration of action of 
atipamezole and medetomidine or dexmedetomidine are similar, so 
resedation is uncommon. Atipamezole should not be administered 
until at least 30 minutes after medetomidine/ketamine combinations 
have been given to cats, to avoid CNS excitation in recovery. Routine 
administration of atipamezole i.v. is not recommended because the 
rapid recovery from sedation is usually associated with excitation, 
although i.v. administration may be indicated in an emergency (e.g. 
excessive sedation from medetomidine or dexmedetomidine or 
cardiovascular complications).
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed. In 
particular, skin contact with atipamezole should be avoided and 
impervious gloves should be worn during administration.
Contraindications: Atipamezole has been administered to a 
limited number of pregnant dogs and cats and therefore cannot be 
recommended in pregnancy.
Adverse reactions: Transient over-alertness and tachycardia may 
be observed after overdosage. This is best handled by minimizing 
external stimuli and allowing the animal to recover quietly.


===== BSAVA PDF 52 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
36
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs:
• 5 times the previous medetomidine dose or 10 times the 
previous dose of dexmedetomidine (0.5 mg/ml solution) i.m. 
(i.e. equal volume of solution to medetomidine or 
dexmedetomidine 0.5 mg/ml solution given).  When 
medetomidine or dexmedetomidine has been administered at 
least an hour before, the dose of atipamezole can be reduced 
by half and repeated if recovery is slow.
• Amitraz toxicity: 25 μg (micrograms)/kg i.m. but if there is no 
benefit within 30 minutes this can be repeated or incrementally 
increased every 30 minutes up to 200 μ g/kg.
Cats: 2.5 times the previous medetomidine or 5 times the previous 
dose of dexmedetomidine (0.5 mg/ml solution) i.m. (i.e. half the 
volume of medetomidine or dexmedetomidine 0.5 mg/ml solution 
given). When medetomidine or dexmedetomidine has been 
administered at least an hour before, the dose of atipamezole can be 
reduced by half and repeated if recovery is slow. 
References
Ambrisko TD and Hikasa Y (2003) The antagonistic effects of atipamezole and 
yohimbine on stress-related neurohormonal and metabolic responses induced by 
medetomidine in dogs. Canadian Journal of Veterinary Research  67, 64–67
Granholm M, McKusick BC, Westerholm FC et al . (2007) Evaluation of the clinical 
efficacy and safety of intramuscular and intravenous doses dexmedetomidine in dogs 
and their reversal with atipamezole. Veterinary Record 160 , 891–897
Atracurium
(Tracrium*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 10 mg/ml solution.
Action: Inhibits the actions of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular 
junction by binding competitively to the nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor on the post-junctional membrane.
Use:
• Neuromuscular blockade during anaesthesia.
• To improve surgical access through muscle relaxation, to 
facilitate positive pressure ventilation or for intraocular surgery.
Atracurium has an intermediate duration of action (15–35 min) and is 
non-cumulative due to non-enzymatic (Hofmann) elimination. It is 
therefore suitable for administration to animals with renal or hepatic 
disease. Monitoring (using a nerve stimulator) and reversal of the 
neuromuscular blockade is recommended to ensure complete 
recovery before the end of anaesthesia. Hypothermia, acidosis and 
hypokalaemia will prolong the duration of action of neuromuscular 
blockade. Use the low end of the dose range in patients with 
myasthenia gravis and ensure that neuromuscular function is 
monitored during the period of the blockade and recovery using 
standard techniques.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 53 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
37
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Safety and handling: Store in refrigerator.
Contraindications: Do not administer unless the animal is 
adequately anaesthetized and facilities to provide positive pressure 
ventilation are available.
Adverse reactions: Can precipitate the release of histamine after 
rapid i.v. administration, resulting in bronchospasm and hypotension. 
Diluting the drug in normal saline and giving the drug slowly i.v. 
minimizes these effects.
Drug interactions: Neuromuscular blockade is more prolonged 
when atracurium is given in combination with volatile anaesthetics, 
aminoglycosides, clindamycin or lincomycin.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: 0.2–0.5 mg/kg i.v. initially, followed by increments of 
0.2 mg/kg. 
References
Kastrup MR, Marsico FF, Ascoli FO et al . (2005) Neuromuscular blocking properties of 
atracurium during sevoflurane or propofol anaesthesia in dogs. Veterinary Anaesthesia 
and Analgesia  32, 222–227
Atropine
(Atrocare, Atropine) POM-V 
Formulations: Injectable: 0.6 mg/ml. Ophthalmic: 1% solution in 
single-use vials, 10 ml bottle.
Action: Blocks the action of acetylcholine at muscarinic receptors 
at the terminal ends of the parasympathetic nervous system, 
reversing parasympathetic effects and producing mydriasis, 
tachycardia, bronchodilation and general inhibition of GI function.
Use:
• Prevent or correct bradycardia and bradyarrhythmias.
• To dilate pupils.
• Management of organophosphate and carbamate toxicities.
• In conjunction with anticholinesterase drugs during antagonism 
of neuromuscular blockade.
Routine administration prior to anaesthesia as part of premedication 
is no longer recommended; it is better to monitor heart rate and 
give atropine to manage a low heart rate if necessary. Atropine has a 
slow onset of action (10 min i.m., 2–3 min i.v.); therefore, it is 
important to wait for an adequate period of time for the desired 
effect before redosing. The ophthalmic solution tastes very bitter 
and can cause hypersalivation in cats (and in some dogs). 
Safety and handling: The solution does not contain any 
antimicrobial preservative, therefore, any remaining solution in the 
vial should be discarded after use. The solution should be protected 
from light.
