
===== Plumb PDF 595 =====
568    Gabapentin
Furosemide is reported to be physically  incompatible with the 
following agents: ascorbic acid solutions, atracurium, butorphanol 
tartrate, ciprofloxacin, diazepam, diphenhydramine, dobutamine 
HCl, esmolol, gentamicin sulfate, glycopyrrolate, hydralazine, ket -
amine, metoclopramide, mycophenolate mofetil, ondansetron, 
pantoprazole, potassium phosphates, thiamine, and tetracyclines. It 
should generally not be mixed with antihistamines, local anesthetics, 
alkaloids, hypnotics, or opiates.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
NOTE: Consult applicable local, state, and/or federal rules prior to 
competition, as some United States tracks may have restrictions on 
the use of this drug in racing animals.
Furosemide Tablets: 12.5 mg and 50 mg; Salix®, Disal®, generic; (Rx). 
Products may be FDA-approved for use in dogs and cats. Additional 
tablet strengths may be available in other countries. 
Furosemide Oral Solution (Syrup): 10 mg/mL in 60 mL; generic; 
(Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs
Furosemide for Injection: 50 mg/mL (5%) in 50 mL and 100 mL 
 vials; Disal® Injection, Salix® Injection, generic; (Rx). Products may 
be FDA-approved for use in dogs, cats, horses, and cattle. Not for use 
in horses intended for human consumption. FDA milk/meat with -
drawal periods in cattle are 48 hours; slaughter withdrawal for cattle 
is 28 days in the United Kingdom.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Furosemide Oral Tablets: 20 mg, 40 mg, and 80 mg; Lasix®, generic; (Rx)
Furosemide Oral Solution: 10 mg/mL and 40 mg/5 mL (8 mg/mL); 
generic; (Rx)
Furosemide Injection: 10 mg/mL in 2 mL (20 mg), 4 mL (40 mg), and 
10 mL (100 mg) single-dose vials or prefilled syringes; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Gabapentin
(gab-ah-pen-tin) Neurontin®
Anticonvulsant; Anxiolytic; Neuropathic Pain Analgesic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ May be useful in dogs and cats as adjunctive therapy for 
refractory or complex partial seizures and in many species for 
the treatment of chronic pain (especially neuropathic pain)
 ▶ Appears beneficial in cats for reducing fear responses associ-
ated with handling and examination, and in dogs for storm 
phobia
 ▶ Use of xylitol-containing oral liquid should be avoided in dogs.
 ▶ Sedation or ataxia are the most likely adverse effects in small 
animal species.
 ▶ Administration 3 times a day (ie, every 8 hours) in dogs or cats 
is likely the most effective regimen but may be problematic for 
pet owners.
Uses/Indications
Gabapentin may be useful as adjunctive therapy for refractory 
or complex partial seizures. As an analgesic, gabapentin has been 
demonstrated to be useful in treating chronic pain, particularly neu-
ropathic pain, in small animals. Gabapentin has improved the qual-
ity of life in dogs1 (but not in cats2) with chronic pain conditions. In 
the cat study, quality of life deteriorated in both the gabapentin and 
placebo group, leading the authors to state that the osteoarthritis in 
all cats was likely worsening.2 Cats receiving gabapentin did have im-
proved owner-identified impaired activities.
Gabapentin does not appear to be effective for treating acute pain, 
but it may be of benefit when given preemptively (eg, before sur -
gery) for acute pain when it is used with other analgesics. 3 Research 
has shown that, when used preoperatively, gabapentin reduced the 
amount of opioids needed postoperatively in dogs undergoing mas-
tectomy.4 Gabapentin has been proposed for further study in hors -
es to determine its efficacy as an adjunctive treatment for laminitis 
pain5 and in cattle for treating neuropathic pain.6
Gabapentin has been used in cats to decrease fear responses and 
anxiety associated with transport and veterinary examinations7–9 and 
in dogs for control of storm phobia.10
It appears that when used in combination with meloxicam, gab -
apentin can reduce the severity of lameness in calves.11
Pharmacology/Actions
Gabapentin has analgesic effects and can prevent allodynia (ie, sen -
sation of pain resulting from a normally non-noxious stimulus) or 
hyperalgesia (ie, exaggerated response to painful stimuli). It also has 
anticonvulsant activity. The mechanism of action of gabapentin for 
either its anticonvulsant, analgesic, or anxiolytic actions is not fully 
understood, but it appears to bind to CaV alpha2delta, a subunit of 
the voltage-gated calcium channels. By decreasing calcium influx, 
the release of excitatory neurotransmitters (eg, substance P , gluta -
mate, norepinephrine) is inhibited. Although gabapentin is structur-
ally related to gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABA), it does not 
appear to alter GABA binding, reuptake, or degradation or to serve 
as a GABA agonist in vivo.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, oral bioavailability is ≈80% at a dose of 50 mg/kg. Peak 
plasma concentrations occur ≈1 to 2 hours after administration. 
Thirty-four percent of a gabapentin dose is metabolized to N-meth-
yl-gabapentin; elimination is primarily via renal routes. Elimination 
half-life is ≈2 to 4 hours.12–14 
In cats, gabapentin bioavailability was 90% to 95% after oral ad -
ministration, with significant interpatient variation (50% to 120%) 
possible. Peak concentrations occurred 65 to 100 minutes after a sin-
gle dose and at 45 minutes with repeated doses. Apparent volume of 
distribution at steady state was relatively low at 0.65 L/kg. Clearance 
was 2.7 to 3 mL/minute/kg, and the mean elimination half-life of 2.8 
to 3.7 hours was similar to that of dogs. 15,16 Cats with IRIS stage 2 
or 3 CKD had significantly higher serum gabapentin concentrations 
than healthy cats; gabapentin concentration correlated with serum 
creatinine and symmetric dimethylarginine.17 
In 4 horses given single oral doses of 5 mg/kg, gabapentin was 
rapidly absorbed, with peak concentrations noted within 2 hours 
(mean, 1.4 hours). Plasma elimination half-life was ≈3.4 hours.18 An-
other study in 6 horses showed that oral gabapentin had a low bio -
availability (≈16%), and peak concentrations occurred ≈1 hour after 
administration. Elimination half-life was ≈7 to 8 hours. Gabapentin 
is cleared almost entirely by the kidneys.19
In ruminating calves, oral gabapentin (with or without meloxi -
cam) at 10 or 15 mg/kg yielded plasma gabapentin concentrations of 
more than 2 µg/mL for up to 15 hours. The elimination half-life was 
≈8 to 10 hours; the authors speculated that a decreased rate of oral 
absorption in ruminant calves prolonged half-life.6
One study in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots showed oral bioavail-
ability of 80% to 89%. 20 IV half-life was 2.9 hours and oral half-life 
was 7.7 hours.20
In humans, gabapentin bioavailability decreases as dosage in -
creases.21 For example, at dosages of 900 mg/day, 60% of the dose 
is absorbed; however, at 4800 mg/day, only a minimum of 27% of 
the dose is absorbed. Limited data suggest that this effect may occur 
in dogs14 and horses,22 but it did not occur in Hispaniolan Amazon 


===== Plumb PDF 596 =====
Gabapentin   569
parrots.20 The presence of food only marginally alters absorption rate 
and extent of absorption.21 Gabapentin is only minimally bound to 
plasma proteins; CSF concentrations are ≈20% of those in plasma. 
The drug is not significantly metabolized and is almost exclusively 
excreted unchanged in the urine. Elimination half-lives in humans 
are ≈5 to 7 hours.
An extended-release tablet formulation (gabapentin enacarbil) is 
available for humans, but no pharmacokinetic information for this 
product is noted for veterinary species.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Gabapentin is considered contraindicated in patients that are hy -
persensitive to it. Because gabapentin is eliminated via renal routes 
(practically 100% in humans), it should be used with caution in pa -
tients with renal insufficiency; if required, dosage adjustment should 
be considered. In dogs, the drug is also metabolized (30% to 40% of 
a dose), so dosage adjustment may not be required in dogs with mild 
to moderate renal dysfunction. However, one reference recommends 
that dosages be reduced and/or dose intervals increased in dogs and 
cats when serum creatinine clearance is 0.7 mL/kg/minute or less.23
In general, use of commercially available human oral solutions 
containing xylitol should be avoided in dogs. Because the threshold 
dose of xylitol that can cause hypoglycemia in dogs is ≈100 mg/kg, 
doses of gabapentin up to 15 mg/kg in dogs using the solution should 
be safe, but further data are needed to confirm this. In addition, xy -
litol may be hepatotoxic in dogs. Doses of 500 mg/kg of xylitol are 
currently thought to be the threshold for this toxicity, but there have 
been anecdotal reports of it occurring at much lower doses. In cats, 
at the dosages presently used for gabapentin oral solution, xylitol 
toxicity does not appear to be a problem, but the solution should be 
used with caution.24
Abrupt discontinuation of the drug after chronic use has led to 
withdrawal-precipitated seizures. In humans, it is recommended to 
wean off the drug when it is used for epilepsy treatment, and similar 
advice for animal patients seems prudent. 
Adverse Effects
Sedation and ataxia are the most likely adverse effects seen in small 
animals. Starting the dose at the lower end of the range and increas-
ing with time may alleviate these effects. One study in cats noted 
hypersalivation and vomiting, both of which resolved within 8 hours 
of administration. 8 In humans, the most common adverse effects 
associated with gabapentin therapy are dizziness, somnolence, and 
peripheral edema.21
Gabapentin was associated with an increased rate of pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma in male rats.21 It is unknown if this effect occurs in 
other species.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
At high doses (ie, at or above human maximum doses), gabapentin 
was associated with a variety of fetotoxic and teratogenic effects (eg, 
delayed ossification, hydronephrosis, fetal loss) in rats, mice, and 
rabbits.21
Gabapentin enters maternal milk. It has been calculated that a 
nursing human infant could be exposed to a maximum dosage of 
1 mg/kg/day. This is 5% to 10% of the usual pediatric (older than 3 
years) therapeutic dose. In veterinary patients, this appears unlikely 
to be of significant clinical concern.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In humans, doses up to 49 g have been reported without fatality. The 
most likely effects include ataxia, lethargy, somnolence, and diar -
rhea.21 Common clinical signs associated with gabapentin overdose 
include ataxia, lethargy, and vomiting; cats may present with lethar-
gy, sedation, and/or ataxia.
The commercially available oral solution contains xylitol  
300 mg/mL; xylitol-containing gabapentin solution dosages of  
0.33 mL/kg may cause hypoglycemia or liver toxicity in dogs.
Treatment is supportive, with general decontamination proce -
dures including emesis, activated charcoal, and cathartics. Gabapen-
tin can be removed with hemodialysis. If xylitol toxicity is suspect -
ed, secondary to the human-labeled liquid formulation, an animal 
poison control center should be contacted for further guidance. See 
Appendix.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving gabapentin and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks 
should be weighed and additional monitoring performed when ap -
propriate. 
 ■ Antacids (Aluminum-, Magnesium-, Calcium-Contain -
ing) : Oral antacids given concurrently with gabapentin may de -
crease oral bioavailability by 20%; if antacids are required, admin-
istration should be separated from gabapentin administration by 
at least 2 hours. High doses of IV or epidural magnesium may 
increase the risk for sedation associated with gabapentin.
 ■ Cannabidiol : May result in an increased risk for sedation
 ■ Hydroxyzine : May result in an increased risk for sedation
 ■ Minocycline : May result in an increased risk for sedation 
 ■ Mirtazapine : May result in an increased risk for sedation
 ■ Opioid Analgesics : May result in an increased risk for seda -
tion. Concurrent administration of gabapentin and hydrocodone 
may increase the area under the curve (AUC) of gabapentin and 
increase its efficacy and/or adverse effects. Gabapentin can reduce 
the AUC of hydrocodone, potentially reducing the drug’s effec -
tiveness. Morphine may increase gabapentin concentrations.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ There are reports of gabapentin causing false positive urine protein 
readings on Ames N-Multistix® SG dipstick tests in humans. Use of a 
sulfosalicylic acid precipitation test to determine presence of urine 
protein is recommended for patients receiving gabapentin.
Dosages
DOGS:
Ancillary therapy of refractory seizures (extra-label): 
a) Evidence to support use is relatively weak; suggested dosages 
range from 10 – 20 mg/kg PO every 8 hours. Some clinicians 
recommend starting therapy at 10 mg/kg PO every 8 hours to 
reduce potential for oversedation; some clinicians suggest that 
dosages up to 30 mg/kg PO every 8 hours or administration 
every 6 hours may be required for efficacy. 
b) A study in dogs with uncontrolled seizures (at least 2 per 
month and at least 6 over the past 3 months) when pheno -
barbital and potassium bromide concentrations were thera -
peutic or subtherapeutic but had unacceptable adverse effects. 
Dogs received gabapentin at ≈10 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for 
3 months. Six of 11 dogs had a minimum of 50% reduction in 
seizures per week.25
Adjunctive analgesic (extra-label): Evidence to support use has 
strengthened in recent years, and the drug may be effective in 
some dogs, particularly for treatment of chronic pain conditions 


===== Plumb PDF 597 =====
570   Gabapentin
with a neuropathic component. Dosage recommendations are 
10 – 20 mg/kg PO every 12 hours, but similar doses as for sei -
zures (10 – 20 mg/kg PO every 8 hours) may be considered. Based 
on pharmacokinetics, dosing every 8 hours is likely more effec -
tive than twice daily dosing. 26 A single oral dose of gabapentin 
20 mg/kg 2 hours prior to isoflurane anesthesia produced a 20% 
MAC-sparing effect.27
Storm phobia (extra-label): 25 – 30 mg/kg PO administered 90 
minutes before exposure reduced fear behavior.10
CATS:
Ancillary therapy of refractory seizures  (extra-label): Evidence 
to support use is weak, but anecdotal initial dosages of 5 – 10 mg/kg  
PO every 8 to 12 hours have been noted. A recently published 
review article on epilepsy in cats lists an anecdotal dosage of  
5 – 20 mg/kg PO every 6 to 12 hours. 28 Some clinicians have sug-
gested initially giving the drug every 24 hours and then giving 
more often as necessary.
Adjunctive analgesic  (extra-label): Evidence to support use is 
weak, but anecdotally it has been reported to be effective in some 
cats, particularly for chronic pain conditions with a neuropath -
ic component. There is no strong evidence to support one dos -
age recommendation over another, and suggested initial dosages 
range from 3 mg/kg PO every 24 hours titrated up to 5 – 10 mg/kg  
PO every 12 hours (if required). Others start at 5 – 10 mg/kg PO 
every 8 to 12 hours. Based on pharmacokinetics, dosing every 8 
hours is likely more effective than twice daily dosing.26
Transdermal analgesia (extra-label): 10 mg/kg transdermally to 
the pinna every 8 hours. Gabapentin was compounded in the pro-
prietary base Lipoderm®; the drug was measurable in the serum, 
and lower pain scores were documented at some, but not all, study 
points.29 
Postoperative analgesia following ovariohysterectomy (ex-
tra-label): 50 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO 12 hours and 1 hour prior 
to surgery in addition to buprenorphine at the time of induction3
Osteoarthritis (extra-label): 10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours im -
proved osteoarthritic cats overall as assessed by accelerometer 
and client questionnaire; quality of life was not changed as com -
pared with placebo.2
Reduce fear responses and anxiety associated with veterinary 
examinations (extra label):  50 – 200 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO 
(equating to 9 to ≈48 mg/kg) reduced fear responses in confined 
community cats without measurable sedation over 3 hours post -
administration.7–9 In cats with IRIS stage 2 or 3 CKD, 10 mg/kg 
PO resulted in improved compliance with handling 3 hours after 
administration.17
BIRDS:
Adjunctive analgesic for neuropathic pain in Hispaniolan Am-
azon parrots (extra-label): One study suggested 15 mg/kg PO ev-
ery 8 hours as a reasonable starting point.20
Monitoring
NOTE: Gabapentin serum concentrations are usually not monitored; 
therapeutic concentrations are thought to be 4 – 16 μg/mL. When 
monitoring concentrations in dogs, samples should be taken when 
peak concentrations occur (≈2 hours postdose). Subsequent concen-
trations should be drawn at consistent times after administration.
 ■ Clinical efficacy and adverse effects
Client Information
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. If your ani -
mal vomits or acts sick after receiving the medicine on an empty 
stomach, give it with food or a small treat. If vomiting continues, 
contact your veterinarian.
 ■ Drowsiness and loss of coordination are the most common side 
effects.
 ■ The oral liquid made for humans should not be given to dogs as it 
contains xylitol, which is toxic to dogs. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Gabapentin occurs as a white to off-white crystalline solid that is 
freely soluble in water. It has a p Ka1 of 3.7 and a p Ka2 of 10.7. It is 
structurally related to GABA.
Gabapentin may also be known as CI-945, GOE-3450, Aclonium®, 
Equipax®, Gantin®, Gabarone®, Neurontin®, Neurostil®, and Progresse®.
Storage/Stability
The commercially available capsules and tablets should be stored at 
room temperature (25°C [77°F]); excursions are permitted between 
15°C and 30°C (59°F-86°F). The oral liquid should be stored in the 
refrigerator between 2°C and 8°C (36°F-46°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compounded preparation stability : Commercially available gab -
apentin solutions contain xylitol, which may be toxic to canine pa -
tients. Gabapentin oral suspension compounded from commercial-
ly available tablets has been published. 30 Triturating 20 gabapentin  
600 mg tablets with 60 mL of Ora-Plus® and qs ad to 120 mL with 
Ora-Sweet® (or Ora-Sweet® SF) yields a 100 mg/mL oral suspension 
that retains more than 90% potency for 56 days stored at both 4°C 
(39.2°F) and 25°C (77°F). Liquid formulations of gabapentin are 
most stable in the pH range of 5.5 to 6.5.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 4 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Gabapentin Oral Capsules and Tablets: 100 mg, 300 mg, and 400 mg; 
600 mg and 800 mg (film-coated); Neurontin®, generic; (Rx)
Gabapentin Oral Solution: 250 mg/5 mL (50 mg/mL) in 470 mL; 
Neurontin®, generic; (Rx).  NOTE: May contain xylitol; label should 
be checked, and drug should be used cautiously in dogs.
Gabapentin Enacarbil Oral Extended-Release Tablets: 300 mg and 
600 mg; Horizant®; (Rx). NOTE: No information on pharmacokinet-
ics or clinical usage in dogs and cats is noted. 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
 


===== Plumb PDF 598 =====
Gamithromycin   571
Gamithromycin
(gah-mith-roe-my-sin) Zactran® 
Macrolide (Azalide) Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Injectable azalide-class macrolide antibiotic FDA-approved for 
treatment of BRD in beef and nonlactating dairy cattle; poten-
tially useful in horses, foals, swine, and goats 
 ▶ Not for use in female dairy cattle 20 months of age or older or 
in calves to be processed for veal
 ▶ Most common adverse effect is pain and swelling at injection 
site; colic and lameness have been reported in foals
 ▶ 35-day slaughter withdrawal (United States label)
Uses/Indications
Gamithromycin is FDA-approved for the treatment of bovine respi-
ratory disease (BRD) associated with Mannheimia haemolytica, Pas-
teurella multocida, Histophilus somni, and Mycoplasma bovis in beef 
and nonlactating dairy cattle. 1 It is also indicated for the control of 
respiratory disease in beef and nonlactating dairy cattle at high risk 
for developing BRD associated with Mannheimia haemolytica and 
Pasteurella multocida.
Gamithromycin could be useful in other species as well. One 
study in foals showed that IM doses of 6 mg/kg every 7 days would 
maintain pulmonary epithelial lining fluid (PELF) concentrations 
above the MIC90 for susceptible isolates of Streptococcus equi subsp 
zooepidemicus and phagocytic cell concentrations above the MIC 90 
for susceptible isolates of Rhodococcus equi.2 
A single IM gamithromycin dose is effective for the treatment of 
swine respiratory disease (SRD) and infectious pododermatitis (foot 
rot) in sheep.3
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated gami -
thromycin as a Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobial 
for human medicine.4 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) 
Antimicrobial Classification has designated gamithromycin as a Vet-
erinary Critically Important antimicrobial for bovines.5
Pharmacology/Actions
Like other macrolides, gamithromycin penetrates bacterial cell 
membranes and binds to the 50s ribosomal subunit, thereby inhib -
iting protein synthesis. It inhibits the translocation process between 
30S and 50s ribosomes, causing premature detachment of incom -
plete peptide chains.
The macrolide antimicrobials, as a class, are weak bases and as 
such, concentrate in some cells (such as pulmonary leukocytes). 
Prolonged exposure of extracellular pulmonary pathogens to mac -
rolides appears to reflect the slow release of drug from its intracel -
lular reservoir to the site of action, the pulmonary epithelial lining 
fluid (PELF). It is the drug concentration in the PELF that is relevant 
to the successful treatment and control of BRD. Gamithromycin is 
primarily bacteriostatic at therapeutic concentrations. Macrolides 
typically exhibit substantially higher concentrations in the alveolar 
macrophages and PELF as compared to concentrations observed in 
plasma.1 Gamithromycin concentrations in the PELF and PELF cells 
exceed the concentrations observed in the plasma.
Significant increases in MIC can occur in P multocida and M hae-
molytica with the msr(E)-mph(E) gene.6
Pharmacokinetics
In cattle, after a 6 mg/kg SC (in neck) dose, gamithromycin absorp-
tion is complete and peak plasma concentrations occur in ≈1 hour. 
Volume of distribution is very high (≈25 L/kg) and only 26% of drug 
in plasma is bound to plasma proteins. Based on plasma and lung 
homogenate data, the terminal half-life (T 1/2) of gamithromycin is 
≈3 days. Clearance is 712 mL/kg/hour and elimination half-life is 
≈51 hours. The primary route of elimination is biliary excretion of 
unchanged drug. After a single (6 mg/kg) dose, gamithromycin con-
centrations in PELF , bronchiolar lavage fluid (BAL) cells, and lung 
tissue can persist above reported MIC 90 for labeled organisms for 7 
days (PELF) to 10 to 15+ days (BAL cells and lung tissue).7–10
In foals after a 6 mg⁄kg IM dose, peak plasma concentrations 
occur in ≈1 hour and elimination half-life is ≈39 hours. Gamithro -
mycin concentrations in PELF were above the MIC90 for susceptible 
isolates of S zooepidemicus and phagocytic cell concentrations above 
the MIC90 for susceptible isolates of R equi for ≈7 days.2
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Gamithromycin is contraindicated in animals that are hypersensitive 
to it. Potentially, animals hypersensitive to other azalide or macro -
lide antibiotics could also react to gamithromycin. Subcutaneous in-
jection may cause a temporary local tissue reaction in some animals 
that may result in trim loss of edible tissues at slaughter.
Cross-resistance may occur with other macrolide/azalide antibi -
otics (eg, tulathromycin, tilmicosin).
Adverse Effects
Pain and swelling at the injections site are common. Swelling and 
local inflammation at injection site usually resolves within 3 to 14 
days but has been reported to persist up to 35 days postinjection.3
In foals being treated for bronchopneumonia with IM gamithro-
mycin, colic and hind limb lameness were observed in 45% and 40% 
of foals, respectively.11
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Although gamithromycin is not labeled for use in pregnant animals, 
the product’s material safety data sheet (MSDS) notes that none of 
the ingredients are considered to be a reproductive, teratogenic, or 
developmental toxin. The UK label reads: Based on laboratory animal 
data, gamithromycin has not produced any evidence of selective devel-
opmental or reproductive effects. The safety of gamithromycin during 
pregnancy and lactation has not been evaluated in cattle. Use only ac-
cording to the risk-benefit assessment by the responsible veterinarian.3 
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Subcutaneous injections of gamithromycin 18 mg/kg and 30 mg/kg 
(3 times and 5 times the label dose, respectively) given every 5 days 
for 3 doses to 6-month-old beef cattle caused swelling and pain at 
the injection site (neck twisting, attempts to scratch or lick the in -
jection site, and pawing at the ground). 12 Other clinically relevant 
treatment-related effects were not observed.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving gamithromycin and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Rifampin:  Decreased gamithromycin clearance and increased 
gamithromycin exposure (AUC) in foals13
Laboratory Considerations
None noted


===== Plumb PDF 599 =====
572   Gemcitabine
Dosages
HORSES :
Mild-moderate bronchopneumonia due to Rhodococcus equi  
(extra-label): 6 mg/kg bodyweight IM in the semimembranosus/
semitendinosus muscles once a week for a minimum of 40 days; 
efficacy was similar to the combination of azithromycin with 
rifampin but had a much higher frequency of adverse effects. 14 
Criteria for discontinuation of treatment were resolution of clin-
ical signs and no evidence of consolidation upon thoracic ultra -
sonography for 2 consecutive weeks after a minimum of 40 days 
of treatment. The use of a diluted, IV administration of gamithro-
mycin (6 mg/kg diluted with water to 50 mL final volume and 
injected IV over 2 to 3 minutes) has been reported.15
CATTLE:
Treatment of bovine respiratory disease (BRD) associated with 
Mannheimia haemolytica, Pasteurella multocida,  Histophilus 
somni, and Mycoplasma bovis in beef and nonlactating dairy 
cattle; also indicated for the control of respiratory disease in 
beef and nonlactating dairy cattle at high risk for developing 
BRD associated with Mannheimia haemolytica and Pasteurel-
la multocida (label dosage; FDA-approved): 6 mg/kg (2 mL/110 
lb) bodyweight (BW) SC in the neck (in front of the shoulder) 
once.1 If the total dose exceeds 10 mL, divide the dose so that no 
more than 10 mL is administered at each injection site. Animals 
should be appropriately restrained to achieve the proper route of 
 administration. 
SHEEP:
Elimination of footrot due to Dichelobacter nodosus (extra- 
label): 6 mg/kg SC administered cranial to the shoulder 3, or in 
the axilla16
GOATS:
Naturally occurring pneumonia in kids  (extra-label): 6 mg/kg 
IM once17
SWINE:
Bacterial swine respiratory disease (extra-label): 6 mg/kg IM 
once in the neck3,18,19
Bordetella bronchiseptica-associated respiratory disease in pig-
lets (extra-label): 6 mg/kg IM once20
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical response: In field trials, animals that responded to thera-
py did so within 24 hours of injection.
Client Information
 ■ Understand and follow use restrictions and withdrawal times for 
food animals.
 ■ Reactions (pain, swelling) at the administration site are common 
but usually resolve within a few days.
 ■ Humans with a known drug allergy to macrolide antibiotics (eg, 
erythromycin, clarithromycin) should avoid contact with this 
medicine.
 ■ In case of skin or eye exposure, wash and flush area with clean wa-
ter. If accidental self-injection, seek medical advice immediately 
and show the product label to the physician.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Gamithromycin is a 7a-azalide macrolide antibiotic (CAS Registry: 
145435-72-9). It differs structurally from other macrolides by having 
a 15-membered semisynthetic lactone ring with an alkylated nitro -
gen at the 7a-position. The commercially available injectable solu -
tion contains per mL: 150 mg of gamithromycin as the free base, 
1 mg of monothioglycerol, and 40 mg of succinic acid in a glycerol 
formal vehicle.
Gamithromycin may also be known as ML-1,709,460 or UNII-
ZE856183S0. A trade name is Zactran®.
Storage/Stability
The injection should be stored at or below 25°C (77°F) with excur -
sions permitted between 15°C and 30°C (59°F-86°F). Use within 
18 months of first puncture (United States label); once opened, use 
within 28 days (UK label). Viscosity of the injectable solution may 
increase at sub-freezing temperatures but should not affect syring -
ability.7
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
No information was noted on the label (United States) or in other 
references, but the UK label states: Do not mix with any other veter-
inary medicinal product. In one study, gamithromycin injection was 
diluted with water to a final volume of 50 mL immediately prior to 
IV administration (over 2 to 3 minutes).15
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Solution for Injection: 150 mg/mL in 100 mL, 250 mL, and 500 mL 
bottles. Zactran®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in beef and nonlactat-
ing dairy cattle. NADA #141-328
Withdrawal times/restrictions in the United States : Do not treat 
cattle within 35 days of slaughter. Do not use in female dairy cattle 20 
months of age or older, or in calves to be processed for veal. 
Withdrawal times/restrictions in the UK : Meat and offal with -
drawal period: cattle, 64 days; sheep, 29 days; swine, 16 days. Not 
authorized for use in lactating animals producing milk for human 
consumption. In pregnant animals which are intended to produce 
milk for human consumption, do not use within 2 months (cows, 
heifers) or 1 month (sheep) of expected parturition.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
 
Gemcitabine
(jem-site-ah-ben) Gemzar®
Antineoplastic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Antineoplastic agent potentially useful for treatment of 
several cancer types in dogs and cats as a single agent or part 
of chemotherapy protocol, or for tumors in which standard of 
care has not been definitively established
 ▶ Adverse effects: GI effects and myelosuppression (neutrope-
nia) are most likely.
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies gemcitabine as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Gemcitabine is an antineoplastic agent that has demonstrated lim -
ited clinical efficacy when used as a single agent in dogs with solid 
tumors.1,2 However, no benefit was found when it was used in dogs 
with lymphoma3 or nonresectable hepatocellular carcinoma, 4 or as 
an adjuvant to surgical removal of aggressive malignant mammary 
tumors.5 The assessment of gemcitabine’s additive or synergistic ac-
tivities in combination have not been definitively confirmed. Simi -


===== BSAVA PDF 195 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
179
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Gabapentin (Gabapentinum)
(Neurontin*) POM CD Schedule 3
Formulations: Oral: 100 mg, 300 mg, 400 mg capsules; 600 mg, 
800 mg film-coated tablets; 50 mg/ml solution.
Action: The precise mechanism of action of gabapentin is unknown 
but it appears to bind to a specific modulating protein of the voltage-
gated calcium channels resulting in a decreased release of excitatory 
neurotransmitters. Gabapentin is structurally related to gamma-
aminobutyric acid (GABA) and does increase levels of GABA in the 
CNS but does not appear to alter GABA binding, uptake or release. 
The mode of action of the analgesic effect may be due to down-
regulation of excitatory neurotransmitter in the dorsal horn of the 
spinal cord or its inhibitory effect on dorsal horn NMDA receptors.
Use:
• Adjunctive therapy in the treatment of seizures refractory to 
treatment with conventional therapy although the supporting 
evidence in dogs is weak.
• Treatment of chronic pain states, such as neuropathic pain and 
possibly postoperative pain.
• Recent studies have shown it to be effective in improving quality 
of life in dogs with syringomyelia and effective in reducing the 
amount of opioid required in dogs postoperatively.
Recent studies have shown it to be effective in improving quality of life 
in dogs with syringomyelia and effective in reducing the amount of 
opioid required in dogs postoperatively. After multiple dosing, peak 
plasma concentrations of gabapentin are usually achieved within 2 
hours of a dose, and steady state achieved within 1–2 days. It is 
partially metabolized by the liver before renal excretion and has an 
elimination half-life of 3–4 hours. Abrupt discontinuation of the drug 
has precipitated seizures in humans; therefore, tapered withdrawal is 
recommended. Monitoring of serum levels in dogs and in human 
patients does not appear useful. Use with caution in patients with 
renal impairment, behavioural abnormalities or severe hepatic disease.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Avoid oral solutions containing xylitol which 
may be toxic to dogs at higher doses.
Adverse reactions: The most commonly reported adverse effect 
in dogs is mild sedation and ataxia. False-positive readings have 
been reported with some urinary protein tests in human patients 
taking gabapentin. Hepatic toxicity has been reported as a rare side 
effect in human patients.
Drug interactions: The absorption of gabapentin from the GI 
tract is reduced by antacids containing aluminium with magnesium; 
it is recommended that gabapentin is taken at least 2 hours after the 
administration of such an antacid. Cimetidine has been reported to 
reduce the renal clearance of gabapentin but the product 
information does not consider this to be of clinical importance.


===== BSAVA PDF 196 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
180
DOSES
Dogs: 10–20 mg/kg p.o. q6–8h (starting dose; incremental dose 
increases are recommended).
Cats: 5–10 mg/kg p.o. q8–12h (starting dose; incremental dose 
increases are recommended).
References
Kukanich B (2013) Outpatient oral analgesics in dogs and cats beyond nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs: an evidence-based approach. Veterinary Clinics of North 
America: Small Animal Practice  43, 1109–1125
Muñana KR (2013) Management of refractory epilepsy. Top Companion Animal Medicine   
28, 67–71
Ganciclovir
(Virgan*) POM 
Formulations: Topical: 0.15% eye gel in 5 g tube.
Action: Inhibits viral replication (viral DNA polymerase); depends 
on viral thymidine kinase for phosphorylation.
Use:
• Management of ocular feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) infections.
In vitro studies show that ganciclovir is at least 10 times more 
effective against FHV-1 than aciclovir. Anecdotal reports of its topical 
use are promising, but neither the safety nor the pharmacokinetics 
has been reported in cats. Cannot eradicate latent viral infection. In 
refractory and severe cases of FHV-1 ulceration, combined therapy, 
including topical or systemic antiviral medication can be used.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Ocular irritation may occur and the frequency 
of application should be reduced if this develops. Treatment should 
not be continued for >3 weeks.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs: No information available.
Cats: Apply small amount to affected eye q4–6h (maximum 3 weeks). 
References
Thomasy SM and Maggs DJ (2016) A review of antiviral drugs and other compounds with 
activity against feline herpesvirus type 1. Veterinary Ophthalmology  19(S1), 119–130
Gelatine (Oxypolygelatine, Polygeline)
(Gelofusine, Haemaccel) POM-V 
Formulations: Injectable: 4% solution of succinylated gelatine in 
0.7% sodium chloride (Gelofusine); 35 g/dl degraded urea-linked 
gelatine with NaCl, KCl, CaCl 2 (Haemaccel).
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 197 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
181
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Action: Promotes retention of fluid within the vascular system 
through the exertion of oncotic pressure.
Use:
• The expansion and maintenance of blood volume in various 
forms of shock, including hypovolaemic and haemorrhagic shock.
The main difference between gelatine-based solutions and other 
synthetic colloids is that they have lower molecular weights (and 
hence are excreted rapidly), appear to have few antigenic or 
anticoagulative effects. The plasma half-life of most gelatines is 
approximately 8 hours (oxypolygelatine 2–4 hours), so that the 
duration of plasma expansion is much shorter than with 
hydroxyethyl starch. There appears to be little effect on 
coagulation or blood loss following gelatine administration. Use 
with caution in animals with congestive heart failure or renal 
insufficiency as will increase risk of circulatory overload.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Anaphylactoid reactions to gelatine solutions 
are rare; it is uncertain whether these reactions represent a specific 
immune response. In human medicine there are concerns over  
the safety of these solutions when used in patients with kidney 
disease.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: Plasma volume expander: 10–20 ml/kg i.v. bolus. In 
normal circumstances do not exceed replacement of >25% of 
circulating blood volume with gelatines in a 24-hour period. 
References
Glowaski MM, Moon-Passat PF, Erb HN et al . (2003) Effects of oxypolygelatin and dextran 
70 on hemostatic variables in dogs. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 30 , 202–210
Gemcitabine
(Gemzar*) POM
Formulations: Injectable: Lyophilized powder for reconstitution 
before use. 200 mg (in 10 ml vials) and 1 g (in 50 ml vials).
Action: Metabolites of the drug inhibit the enzyme ribonucleotide 
reductase and compete with endogenous nucleotides for 
incorporation into DNA strands, thereby inhibiting DNA synthesis. 
Acts primarily in S phase.
Use:
• Used in dogs with bladder urothelial carcinoma, lymphoma and 
various carcinomas. 
• Described for use in cats with exocrine pancreatic carcinoma. 
• May also be useful as a radiosensitizer for some tumours.  
