
===== Plumb PDF 71 =====
44   Aluminum Hydroxide
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Altrenogest 0.22% (2.2 mg/mL) in oil solution in 150 mL and  
1000 mL bottles; Regu-Mate®, generic (Rx). FDA-approved for use in 
horses that are not intended for food. This medication is banned in 
racing animals in some countries.
Altrenogest 0.22% (2.2 mg/mL) in 1000 mL bottles; Matrix®, generic; 
(OTC). FDA-approved for use in sexually mature gilts that have had 
at least 1 estrous cycle. Gilts must not be slaughtered for human con-
sumption for 21 days after the last treatment. The FDA prohibits the 
extra-label use of this medication, including to enhance food and/or 
fiber production in animals.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Aluminum Hydroxide
(ah-loo-min-um hye-droks-ide) Amphojel®
Oral Antacid/Phosphate Binder
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat hyperphosphatemia in small animals and some-
times as an antacid for gastric ulcers
 ▶ Chronic use may lead to electrolyte abnormalities; possible 
aluminum toxicity.
 ▶ Many potential drug interactions
 ▶ Bulk dried powder available from several sources
Uses/Indications
Orally administered aluminum hydroxide is used to reduce hyper -
phosphatemia in patients with chronic kidney disease when dietary 
phosphorus restriction fails to maintain serum phosphorus concen-
trations in the normal range. Occasionally, it has been used as an oral 
antacid in veterinary patients, although its short duration of action 
for this purpose may make its use less practical. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Aluminum salts reduce the amount of phosphorus absorbed from 
the intestine by physically binding to dietary phosphorus to form 
insoluble aluminum phosphate, which is then excreted in the feces. 
When used as an antacid, the hydroxyl ion interacts with hydrogen 
ions in the stomach to increase gastric/abomasal pH.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Aluminum-containing antacids may inhibit gastric emptying; use 
cautiously in patients with gastric outlet obstruction. Also, use with 
caution in patients prone to developing constipation. Aluminum 
may accumulate in patients with renal failure.
Adverse Effects
In small animals, the most likely adverse effect of aluminum hydrox-
ide is constipation. Hypophosphatemia can develop if the patient is 
receiving a low phosphate diet and chronically receives aluminum 
antacids.
Potentially, aluminum toxicity could occur with prolonged use. 
Although previously believed unlikely to occur in small animals, 
at least 2 dogs with renal failure have developed aluminum toxici -
ty after receiving aluminum-containing phosphate binders. 1 Osteo-
malacia related to hypophosphatemia or aluminum accumulation 
is also possible with chronic use. Aluminum-containing and calci -
um-containing phosphate binders may be used in combination to 
reduce the dose of each and reduce the risk for aluminum toxicity 
or  hypercalcemia.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Use during pregnancy and lactation has not been studied; however, it 
is considered generally safe since oral absorption of this drug is poor.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdosage/Acute Toxicity
Acute toxicity is unlikely with an oral overdose. If necessary, GI ef -
fects (eg, constipation) and electrolyte imbalances that may occur 
with acute or chronic overdose should be treated based on clinical 
presentation.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged to consult with one of 
the 24-hour poison consultation centers that specialize in providing 
information specific for veterinary patients. For general information 
related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact informa-
tion for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions with aluminum hydroxide have ei -
ther been reported or are theoretical in humans or animals and may 
be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Diazepam : Concurrent aluminum may increase diazepam 
 absorption.
 ■ Quinidine:  Increased gastric pH caused by aluminum hydrox -
ide can potentially increase the absorption of basic drugs such as 
quinidine; separate from aluminum hydroxide by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Vitamin D Analogues (eg, calcitriol, ergocalciferol): May in-
crease aluminum absorption. Avoid combination.
Aluminum hydroxide can decrease the amount absorbed (orally) or 
the pharmacologic effect of the drugs listed below; separate oral dos-
es of aluminum hydroxide and these drugs by at least 2 hours to help 
reduce the potential for this interaction.
 ■ Allopurinol
 ■ Aspirin
 ■ Azole Antifungals (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole)
 ■ Cefpodoxime
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one)
 ■ Digoxin
 ■ Ethambutol
 ■ Fexofenadine
 ■ Fluoroquinolones (eg, enrofloxacin, marbofloxacin)
 ■ Gabapentin
 ■ H2 Antagonists (eg, famotidine, ranitidine)
 ■ Iron Salts (eg, ferrous sulfate)
 ■ Isoniazid (INH)
 ■ Mycophenolate
 ■ Penicillamine
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine, chlorpromazine)
 ■ Phenytoin
 ■ Sotalol
 ■ Tetracyclines (eg, doxycycline, minocycline)
 ■ Thyroid Hormones
Doses
NOTE: All dosages are extra-label.
DOGS/CATS:
Hyperphosphatemia secondary to chronic kidney disease 
(extra-label): 30 – 100 mg/kg per day as adjunct to reduced di -
etary phosphorus. 2-4 Aluminum hydroxide gel powder (USP) 


===== Plumb PDF 72 =====
Amantadine   45
is preferred, as it can be mixed with food and is tasteless. Dose 
is divided and mixed with each meal. Start at low end of dosage 
range and adjust upward every 4 to 6 weeks until desired serum 
phosphorus is attained (see Monitoring). If a reduced-phosphorus 
diet and higher dosages of aluminum hydroxide do not adequate-
ly control serum phosphorus, consider adding a lanthanum- or 
calcium-based (eg, calcium acetate, calcium carbonate) phosphate 
binder to reduce the chances for aluminum toxicity.
RABBITS/RODENTS/SMALL MAMMALS: 
Hyperphosphatemia in chinchillas (extra-label): Aluminum hy-
droxide gel: 1 mL/animal (NOT mL/kg) PO as needed
Hyperphosphatemia in Guinea pigs (extra-label): 0.5 – 1 mL per 
animal (NOT mL/kg) PO as needed5
REPTILES: 
Hyperphosphatemia (extra-label): 100 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 
hours6
CATTLE:
Antacid (extra-label): 15 – 60 mg/kg PO every 8 – 24 hours. 7 Ef-
ficacy in adult cattle is questionable since the drug becomes dilut-
ed in the rumen and may not provide therapeutic benefit in the 
abomasum.
Abomasal ulcers in calves using a combination of aluminum 
hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide (extra-label): 25 mL (each 
mL contains aluminum hydroxide 0.1 g/mL and magnesium hy -
droxide 0.09 g/mL) PO every 8 hours.8 NOTE: this study was done 
in healthy calves; based on the results from this study, this dose is 
expected to be beneficial for ill calves with abomasal ulcers. 
HORSES:
Adjunctive gastroduodenal ulcer therapy in foals (extra-label): 
Aluminum/magnesium hydroxide suspension: 15 mL (total dose) 
4 times a day9
Monitoring
 ■ After beginning therapy, check serum phosphorus (after a 12-
hour fast) every 4 to 6 weeks until target phosphorous levels are 
attained. Once phosphorous levels are stable, check phosphorous 
levels at the time of renal chemistry rechecks (eg, every 12 weeks). 
For chronic kidney disease (CKD), the International Renal Inter-
est Society (IRIS) recommends a target phosphorous range for 
dogs and cats at each stage:
• Stage 2 CKD target phosphorous levels: greater than 2.7 and 
less than 4.6 mg/dL (0.9 – less than 1.5 mmol/L)
• Stage 3 CKD target phosphorous levels: greater than 2.7 and 
less than 5.0 mg/dL (0.9 – less than 1.6 mmol/L)
• Stage 4 CKD target phosphorous levels: greater than 2.7 and 
less than 6.0 mg/dL (0.9 – less than 1.9 mmol/L)
 ■ To monitor for aluminum toxicity, watch for development of neu-
romuscular effects, progressive decreases in mean cell volume 
(MCV), and microcytosis.
Client Information
 ■ Oral aluminum hydroxide products are available without pre -
scription (OTC) but should be used under the supervision of your 
veterinarian.
 ■ Bulk powder or compounded capsules are easier to administer 
than liquids or suspensions. Shake the suspension thoroughly 
prior to administration.
 ■ Must be given either just before feeding or mixed in food to be 
effective.
 ■ Can cause constipation or decreased appetite 
 ■ Report to your veterinarian any unusual signs, such as weakness, 
difficulty walking, or stumbling.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Dried Aluminum Hydroxide Gel (CAS Registry: 21645-51-2) occurs 
as a white, odorless, tasteless, amorphous powder. It is insoluble in 
water or alcohol. The USP 36 standard allows varying amounts of 
basic aluminum carbonate and bicarbonate, but it must contain no 
less than 76.5% of Al(OH)3.
Aluminum hydroxide may also be known as aluminium hydrox-
ide.
Storage/Stability
Store powder forms in airtight containers. Liquid formulations 
should not be allowed to freeze.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Because aluminum hydroxide powder USP can vary in the concen -
tration of aluminum hydroxide (must be 76.5% or greater) and pow-
ders can vary in density, volume measurements can only approxi -
mate actual weight. However, ¼ teaspoonful (1.25 mL) of the dried 
USP powder has been reported to contain ≈300 mg of aluminum 
hydroxide.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Aluminum Hydroxide Concentrated Gel Suspension/Liquid (NOTE: 
These products are usually flavored (mint) and not well accepted by 
dogs or cats): 320 mg/5 mL in 473 mL; UD 15 mL and 30 mL; ge -
neric; (OTC)
Aluminum Hydroxide Gel, Dried Powder, USP; bulk powder is avail-
able from a variety of sources including many compounding phar -
macies. See: http://goo.gl/1lYJk for additional source information.
NOTE: There are also many products available that have aluminum 
hydroxide and a magnesium or calcium salt (eg, Maalox®) that are 
used as antacids. All oral aluminum and magnesium hydroxide 
preparations are OTC.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Amantadine
(a-man-ta-deen) Symmetrel® 
Antiviral; NMDA Antagonist
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Limited published efficacy or safety data, although clinical 
experience suggests it is useful in adjunctive treatment for 
chronic pain in small animal species
 ▶ Historically dosed every 24 hours; however, based on pharma-
cokinetic data, the same dose given every 12 hours may be 
more effective
 ▶ Dogs may exhibit agitation and GI effects, especially early in 
treatment.
 ▶ Large interpatient variations of pharmacokinetics in horses 
limit its therapeutic usefulness.
 ▶ Overdoses are potentially very serious; it may need to be com-
pounded to accurately dose small animals.
 ▶ Extra-label use is prohibited by the FDA in chickens, turkeys, 
and ducks.
Uses/Indications
Although amantadine may have efficacy and clinical usefulness 
against some veterinary viral diseases, presently the greatest interest 
for its use in small animal species is in the adjunctive treatment of 


===== Plumb PDF 73 =====
46    Amantadine
neuropathic1 or chronic pain,2 often in those in which opioids do not 
provide adequate analgesia or who are intolerant of higher opioid 
doses. It is generally considered ineffective when used alone 3; use 
in combination with an NSAID, opioid, or gabapentin/pregabalin is 
typical.1,4 Several weeks may be required to break a pain cycle. 5,6 It 
has been suggested for use as an early intervention in the treatment 
of pain associated with osteosarcomas.7
Amantadine has also been investigated for treatment of equine-2 
influenza virus in a horse8; however, because of expense, interpatient 
variability in oral absorption and other pharmacokinetic parame -
ters, and the potential for causing seizures after IV dosing, it is not 
commonly used for treatment.
In humans, amantadine is used for parkinsonian syndrome and 
drug-induced extrapyramidal effects; its use for the treatment and 
prophylaxis of influenza A is no longer recommended. 9 As in vet -
erinary medicine, the effect of amantadine on NMDA receptors in 
humans is of active interest, particularly its use as a coanalgesic with 
opioids and in the reduction of opioid tolerance development.
Pharmacology/Actions
Like ketamine, dextromethorphan, and memantine, amantadine in-
hibits the NMDA receptor by stabilizing it in the closed state.10 With-
in the CNS, chronic pain can be maintained or exacerbated when 
glutamate or aspartate bind to this receptor. It is believed that this 
receptor is particularly important in allodynia (ie, sensation of pain 
resulting from a normally non-noxious stimulus). Amantadine is ex-
pected to produce analgesic effects when pain or CNS sensitization 
is already present. Although there is limited evidence that amanta -
dine alone provides analgesia,2 it is thought that it may help alleviate 
chronic pain when used in combination with other analgesics (eg, 
opioids, NSAIDs).3
Amantadine’s antiviral activity is limited to strains of influenza A. 
Although its complete mechanism of action is unknown, it inhibits 
viral replication by interfering with influenza A virus M2 protein, 
preventing release of viral RNA into the host cell, and possibly in -
hibiting viral replication. Influenza A variants have demonstrated 
resistance to amantadine’s antiviral action, and it is currently not 
recommended for the treatment or prophylaxis of influenza A.9
Amantadine’s antiparkinsonian activity is not well understood, 
but it apparently increases dopamine concentrations in the brain. 
The drug appears to have potentiating effects on dopaminergic neu-
rotransmission in the CNS, is an NMDA antagonist, and has anti -
cholinergic activity.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, oral bioavailability of amantadine is reportedly very high. 11 
A study in nonfasted greyhounds showed an oral dose of 2.8 mg/kg 
was well tolerated, and maximum concentration, time to maximum 
concentration, and terminal half-life were 271 ng/mL, 1 to 4 hours, 
and 4.9 hours respectively. This study also suggested that the “every 
24-hour dose interval” should be re-evaluated.12 The drug is renally 
eliminated.11
In cats, bioavailability was very high after oral administration, and 
peak levels occurred ≈2 hours after dosing. After IV administration, 
the steady-state volume of distribution was ≈4.3 L/kg and clearance 
(mean) was 8.2 mL/minute/kg. 13 Elimination half-life was 5.5 to 6 
hours.
In horses, amantadine had a very wide interpatient variability of 
absorption after oral dosing (10 – 20 mg/kg); bioavailability ranged 
from 40% to 60% and was not affected by feed.8 The elimination half-
life in horses was ≈3.5 hours, and the steady-state volume of distri -
bution was ≈5 L/kg.
In Amazon parrots, the time to maximum concentration was ≈3 
to 4 hours, and half-life was 21 to 23 hours.14
In humans, amantadine was well absorbed after oral adminis -
tration with peak plasma concentrations occurring ≈3 hours after 
dosing.15 Volume of distribution was 3 to 8 L/kg, and protein bind -
ing was ≈67%. Amantadine is primarily eliminated via renal mech -
anisms. Oral clearance was ≈0.28 L/hour/kg and half-life was ≈16 
hours. Clearance is reduced in patients with renal impairment, and 
half-life may double.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
In humans, amantadine is contraindicated in patients with known 
hypersensitivity to it 15 or to rimantadine, and in those with end-
stage renal disease. It should be used with caution in patients with 
hepatic disease, renal disease (dosage adjustment may be required), 
congestive heart failure, active psychoses, eczematoid dermatitis, sei-
zure disorders, or untreated angle-closure glaucoma. The drug is no 
longer recommended for the treatment or prevention of influenza A 
in humans due to high levels of amantadine resistance among circu-
lating influenza strains.9 In 2006, the FDA banned the use of aman -
tadine and other influenza antivirals in chickens, turkeys, and ducks.
The human liquid dosage form has an unpleasant taste.
Do not confuse AMANTadine with RIMantadine, AMIOdarone, 
or RANITidine.
Adverse Effects
Experience with amantadine in domestic animals is limited, and its 
adverse effect profile is not well described. It has been reported that 
dogs given amantadine occasionally develop agitation, flatulence, 
loose stools, or diarrhea, particularly early in treatment. Experience 
in cats is limited, and an adverse effect profile has yet to be fully elu-
cidated, but some clinicians report that GI effects are more likely 
than in dogs. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
In rats, amantadine 50 – 100 mg/kg/day PO (ie, ≈1.5 to 3 times 
the maximum recommended human dose) throughout pregnancy 
was embryotoxic and caused fetal malformations and reduced fe -
tal weight. 15 Fertility was slightly impaired in rats that were given  
32 mg/kg/day.
Amantadine is excreted into maternal milk; its use is not recom -
mended in nursing women.16 Veterinary significance is unclear.
Because safety has not been established, this drug should only be 
used when the maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to off-
spring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The oral LD 50 in mice and rats is 700 to 800 mg/kg and 25 to  
50 mg/kg in humans.17 The toxic amantadine dose reported for cats 
is 30 mg/kg 18; behavioral effects may be noted at 15 mg/kg in dogs 
and cats.
Clinical signs associated with overdose in dogs include tremors, 
anxiety, ataxia, hypersalivation, and/or vomiting.
In humans, overdoses as low as 1 gram (total dose) have been as-
sociated with fatalities. Cardiac dysfunction (eg, arrhythmias, hyper-
tension, tachycardia), pulmonary edema, CNS toxicity (eg, tremors, 
seizures, psychosis, agitation, coma), hyperthermia, renal dysfunc -
tion, and respiratory distress syndrome have all been document -
ed. There is no known specific antidote for amantadine overdose. 
Treatment should consist of GI decontamination when appropriate, 
intensive monitoring (including ECG), and supportive therapy. Hy-
dration and urinary acidification, with or without diuresis, may in -
crease renal amantadine excretion. The drug is poorly removed by 
hemodialysis. Physostigmine has been suggested for cautious use in 
treating CNS effects.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 


===== Plumb PDF 74 =====
Amikacin, Systemic   47
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions with amantadine have either been 
reported or are theoretical in humans or animals and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Anticholinergic Drugs (eg, atropine, glycopyrrolate, oxy-
butynin): Amantadine may enhance anticholinergic effects. 
 ■ Antihistamines (eg, diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine): Aman-
tadine may enhance anticholinergic effects. 
 ■ Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors (eg, acetazolamide): May 
increase amantadine concentration
 ■ CNS Stimulants  (eg, caffeine, methylphenidate, selegiline ): 
Concomitant use with amantadine may increase the drug’s CNS 
stimulatory effects.
 ■ Glucagon: Amantadine’s anticholinergic effects may increase 
GI adverse effects of glucagon.
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine ): Amantadine may en -
hance anticholinergic effects. 
 ■ Quinidine, Quinine: Renal clearance of amantadine may be 
reduced. 
 ■ QT Prolonging Drugs (eg, amiodarone, cisapride, procain-
amide, sotalol): May increase the risk for arrhythmias
 ■ Sulfa-/Trimethoprim: May decrease the excretion of amanta-
dine, yielding higher blood concentrations of amantadine
 ■ Tramadol:  Concomitant use with amantadine may increase the 
risk for seizures because tramadol at high doses has caused sei -
zures in humans19 and amantadine can lower the seizure thresh -
old15; however, an increased risk for seizures with this drug com-
bination appears unlikely in a clinical setting at recommended 
dosages. Monitor for sedation or other neurologic adverse effects 
if using this combination.
 ■ Triamterene:  May decrease the excretion of amantadine, yield-
ing higher blood concentrations of amantadine
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline, clomip -
ramine): May enhance the anticholinergic effects of amantadine
 ■ Urinary Acidifiers  (eg, methionine, ammonium chloride, 
ascorbic acid): May increase the excretion of amantadine
 ■ Urinary Alkalinizers (eg, sodium bicarbonate, potassium 
citrate): May decrease the excretion of amantadine
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No laboratory interactions identified
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Adjunctive analgesia, including neuropathic pain and to pre -
vent “wind-up” pain (extra-label): 3 – 5 mg/kg PO once daily. 1,4 
Anecdotally, it is suggested to start at the lower end of the dos -
ing range and increase slowly, if needed. Pharmacokinetic studies 
suggest administration every 12 hours may be needed.3,12,13
Monitoring
 ■ Adverse effects (ie, GI effects, anxiety, restlessness, dry mouth)
 ■ Efficacy
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine as directed by your veterinarian. The benefits 
of this medicine may take a week or more to be seen.
 ■ Gastrointestinal effects (eg, loose stools, gas, diarrhea) or some 
agitation may occur, particularly early in treatment. Contact your 
veterinarian if these become serious or persist.
 ■ Overdoses with this medication can be serious. Be sure to keep 
this medicine out of reach of other pets and children.
Chemistry/Synonyms
An adamantane class antiviral agent with NMDA antagonist prop -
erties, amantadine HCl occurs as a white to off-white, bitter crys -
talline powder that is freely soluble in water and soluble in alcohol. 
Commercial dosage forms contain amantadine HCl, and strength is 
expressed and calculated as amantadine base. 1.24 mg amantadine 
HCl contains 1 mg amantadine.
Amantadine HCl may also be known as adamantanamine HCl, 
Endantadine®, GOCOVRI®, Osmolex®, and Symmetrel®.
Storage/Stability
Tablets, capsules, and the oral solution should be stored in tight, 
light-resistant containers at room temperature 20°C to 25°C 
(68°F-77°F), with excursions permitted to 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F). 
Avoid freezing the liquid.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information is noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
The International Federation for Equestrian Sports lists this drug as 
a “prohibited substance – controlled medication. ”20 Use of this drug 
may not be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and 
regulations before entering in a competition while this medication 
is being administered. Contact local racing authorities for further 
guidance.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Amantadine HCl Oral Tablets and Capsules: 100 mg; generic; (Rx)
Amantadine HCl Oral Solution/Syrup: 50 mg/5mL (10 mg/mL) in 
480 mL; generic; (Rx). NOTE: It is reported that the oral liquid has a 
bad taste and may not be accepted by veterinary patients.
Amantadine HCl extended-release oral tablets and capsules ( Os-
molex® ER, GOCOVRI®) are available. They are not directly equivalent 
to immediate-release amantadine capsules and have not been studied 
in veterinary patients.
In 2006, the FDA banned the extra-label use of amantadine and oth-
er influenza antivirals in chickens, turkeys, and ducks.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Amikacin, Systemic
(am-i-kay-sin) Amikin®, Amiglyde-V®
Aminoglycoside Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Parenteral aminoglycoside antibiotic that has good activity 
against a variety of bacteria, predominantly gram-negative 
aerobic bacilli and staphylococci; ineffective against anaerobic 
bacteria
 ▶ Adverse effects include nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity, and neuro-
muscular blockade.
 ▶ Cats may be more sensitive to toxic effects.
 ▶ Risk factors for toxicity include pre-existing renal disease, age 
(both neonatal and geriatric), fever, sepsis, and dehydration.
Uses/Indications
Although parenteral use of amikacin is only FDA approved in dogs, it is 
often used in most species for treatment of serious gram-negative and 


===== Plumb PDF 75 =====
48    Amikacin, Systemic
staphylococcal infections when the adverse effects of other amino -
glycosides are a concern. Because aminoglycosides have an inherent 
toxicity and should be administered parenterally, use should be lim-
ited to treatment of serious infections with either a documented lack 
of susceptibility to other, less toxic antibiotics or in cases in which 
the clinical situation dictates immediate treatment of a presumed 
gram-negative infection before culture and susceptibility results are 
reported.
It is widely accepted that aminoglycosides should be given once a 
day in most patients (mammals). This dosing regimen yields high -
er peak concentrations with resultant greater bacterial kill. Because 
aminoglycosides exhibit a postantibiotic effect, surviving susceptible 
bacteria generally do not replicate as rapidly, even when antibiotic 
concentrations are below the MIC. Periods in which antibiotic con-
centrations are low may also decrease the “adaptive resistance” (ie, 
bacteria take up less drug in the presence of continuous exposure) 
that can occur.
Amikacin is also FDA-approved for intrauterine infusion in mares 
and is used via intraarticular injection (extra-label) in foals to treat 
gram-negative septic arthritis. In horses with septic arthritis, intra -
venous regional limb perfusion (IVRLP) using amikacin is actively 
being researched.1-3 
Amikacin is also used topically for treatment of otitis externa in 
dogs—often in combination with EDTA-Triz 4—and may be impreg -
nated in materials (eg, PMMA beads, gels) for local treatment of in-
fections, particularly implant-associated surgical site infections.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated amika -
cin as a Critically Important, High Priority antimicrobial for human 
medicine.5
Pharmacology/Actions
Similar to other aminoglycoside antibiotics, amikacin acts on sus -
ceptible bacteria by irreversibly binding to the 30S ribosomal sub -
unit, thereby, inhibiting protein synthesis.6 Amikacin is considered a 
bactericidal, concentration-dependent antibiotic. 
Amikacin’s spectrum of activity includes coverage against many 
aerobic gram-negative and some aerobic gram-positive bacteria, in-
cluding Escherichia coli and most species of Klebsiella spp, Proteus 
spp, Pseudomonas spp, Salmonella spp, Enterobacter spp, Serratia 
spp, Shigella spp, Mycoplasma spp, and Staphylococcus spp. Several 
strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus spp, and Serratia spp that 
are resistant to gentamicin will be killed by amikacin. Amikacin is 
ineffective against anaerobic bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa.
In an in vitro study with canine E coli isolates, amikacin demon-
strated additive or synergistic antimicrobial activity when given in 
combination with ceftazidime and amoxicillin/clavulanate but not in 
combination with enrofloxacin or marbofloxacin.7 
Antimicrobial activity of aminoglycosides is enhanced in an al -
kaline environment but inhibited by the presence of pus or organic 
debris.
Pharmacokinetics
Amikacin, like the other aminoglycosides, is not appreciably ab -
sorbed after oral, dermal, or intrauterine administration or urinary 
bladder irrigations but is absorbed when used in irrigations during 
surgical procedures or in regional limb perfusion. Systemic absorp -
tion of amikacin from impregnated beads is not described; plasma 
amikacin concentration was undetectable 24 hours after SC place -
ment of an amikacin-impregnated dextrose cross-linked gel 8 but is 
minimal for gentamicin in PMMA beads on dogs 9 and in calcium 
sulfate beads in goats. 10 With IM administration in dogs and cats, 
peak concentrations occur after 30 to 60 minutes. SC injection re -
sults in slightly delayed peak concentrations and more variability 
than after IM injection. Bioavailability from extravascular injection 
(IM or SC) is greater than 90%. 
After absorption, aminoglycosides are distributed primarily in the 
extracellular fluid and are found in ascitic, pleural, pericardial, peri-
toneal, synovial, and abscess fluids; high levels are found in sputum, 
bronchial secretions, and bile. Aminoglycosides are minimally pro -
tein bound (ie, less than 20%) to plasma proteins.11 Aminoglycosides 
do not readily cross the blood-brain barrier and do not penetrate 
ocular tissue. CSF concentrations are unpredictable and range from 
0% to 50% of those found in the serum. Therapeutic concentrations 
are found in bone, heart, gallbladder, and lung tissues after parenter-
al administration. Prostate concentrations have not been adequate -
ly assessed in animals, but amikacin has been shown to be effective 
for the treatment of chronic bacterial prostatitis in humans when 
fluoroquinolones cannot be used.12 A maximum distal interphalan -
geal joint synovial fluid concentration of 600 µg/mL was reached 
15 minutes after intravenous regional limb perfusion (IVRLP) in 
healthy adult horses; however, significant interpatient variability 
was noted. A maximum serum amikacin concentration of 19 µg/mL 
was reached 25 minutes after IVRLP .13 Aminoglycosides tend to ac-
cumulate in certain tissues (eg, inner ear, kidneys), contributing to 
the toxicity seen in those tissues. Volumes of distribution have been 
reported to be 0.15 to 0.3 L/kg in adult cats and dogs, and 0.26 to  
0.58 L/kg in horses. Volumes of distribution may be significantly 
larger in neonates and juvenile animals due to their higher extra -
cellular fluid fractions. Aminoglycosides cross the placenta; fetal 
concentrations range from 15% to 50% of those found in maternal 
serum.
Elimination of aminoglycosides after parenteral administration 
occurs almost entirely by glomerular filtration. The approximate 
elimination half-life for amikacin has been reported to be 5 hours in 
foals, 1.14 to 2.3 hours in adult horses, 2.2 to 2.7 hours in calves, 1 
hour in cows, 1.5 hours in sheep, and 0.5 to 2 hours in dogs and cats. 
Patients with decreased renal function can have a significantly pro -
longed half-life. In humans with normal renal function, elimination 
rates can be highly variable with aminoglycoside antibiotics.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Aminoglycosides are contraindicated in animals that are hypersen -
sitive to them. Often, these drugs are the only effective agents in 
treating severe gram-negative or multidrug resistant staphylococcal 
infections; thus, there are no absolute contraindications to their use. 
However, these drugs should be used with extreme caution in ani -
mals with pre-existing renal disease; concomitant monitoring and 
dosage interval adjustments should be used as needed. Other risk 
factors for the development of toxicity include patient age (neonatal 
and geriatric patients), fever, sepsis, and dehydration.
Aminoglycosides can cause irreversible ototoxicity, so they 
should be used with caution, especially in working and guide dogs, 
and should be avoided when treating otitis if an intact tympanic 
membrane cannot be confirmed. Amikacin is considered less oto -
toxic than gentamicin or streptomycin.14
Aminoglycosides should be used with caution in animals with 
neuromuscular disorders (eg, myasthenia gravis) because of the 
drug’s neuromuscular blocking activity.
Sight hounds may require reduced dosages of aminoglycosides, as 
they have significantly lower volumes of distribution.
Aminoglycosides are eliminated primarily through renal mecha -
nisms and should be used cautiously in neonatal or geriatric animals; 
consider periodic therapeutic drug monitoring and serum chemistry 
profiles with dosage adjustments as needed.
Adverse Effects
Aminoglycosides can be nephrotoxic and ototoxic. The nephrotoxic 
(ie, tubular necrosis) mechanisms are not completely understood but 
are probably related to interference with phospholipid metabolism 
in the lysosomes of proximal renal tubular cells, resulting in leakage 


===== BSAVA PDF 29 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
13
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
useful in companion animals, but may result in temporary sedation. 
As imepitoin is now licensed for use in the treatment of fears in 
dogs, if a benzodiazepine is indicated, it is preferable to use this. 
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Hypersensitivity to benzodiazepines, 
glaucoma, significant liver or kidney disease, although appears to be 
less hepatotoxic than diazepam or clorazepate. Not recommended 
in pregnant or lactating animals. There is concern over its use with 
anxiously aggressive animals due to the potential for disinhibition. 
Adverse reactions: Drowsiness and mild transient incoordination 
may develop. A general concern with benzodiazepines concerns 
disinhibition and the subsequent emergence of aggression. 
Idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity associated with benzodiazepines 
(largely diazepam, but not alprazolam) has been reported in the cat.
Drug interactions: Caution is advised if used in association with 
antifungals such as itraconazole, which inhibit its metabolism.
DOSES
Dogs: For anxiolysis an initial dose within the range of 0.01–0.1 mg/
kg p.o. as needed up to 4 times a day is recommended; the dose can 
be titrated up or down to the minimum effective dose, which may be 
below this level. 
Cats: For anxiolysis an initial dose in the range of 0.125–0.25 mg/kg 
p.o. as needed up to twice a day is suggested, but doses as low as 
0.25 mg/cat p.o. q8–12h and as high as 0.6 mg/kg p.o. have been 
reported. After initial medication, the dose should be titrated down 
to the minimum effective dose.
References
Crowell-Davis SL, Seibert LM, Sung W et al . (2003) Use of clomipramine, alprazolam, and 
behavior modification for treatment of storm phobia in dogs. Journal of the American 
Veterinary Medical Association  222, 746–748
Dale AR, Walker JK, Farnworth MJ et al . (2010) A survey of owners’ perceptions of fear of 
fireworks in a sample of dogs and cats in New Zealand. New Zealand Veterinary Journal 
58, 286–291
Aluminium antacids  
(Aluminium hydroxide)
(Alucap*. With alginate: Acidex*, Gastrocote*, 
Gaviscon Advance*, Peptac*. With magnesium 
salt: Asilone*, Maalox*, Mucogel*) P, GSL  
Formulations: Oral: Aluminium hydroxide is available as a dried 
gel. Other products are composite preparations containing a variety 
of other compounds including magnesium oxide, hydroxide or 
trisilicate, potassium bicarbonate, sodium carbonate and 
bicarbonate, alginates and dimeticone. Aluminium hydroxide 
content varies.


===== BSAVA PDF 30 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
14
Action: Neutralizes gastric acid. May also bind bile acids and pepsin 
and stimulate local prostaglandin (PGE-1) production. Also binds 
inorganic phosphate in the GI tract, making it unavailable for 
absorption.
Use:
• Management of gastritis and gastric ulceration. Frequent 
administration is necessary to prevent rebound acid secretion.
• In kidney disease, to lower serum phosphate levels in cats and 
dogs with serum phosphate above recommended target 
according to IRIS stage. Phosphate-binding agents are usually 
only used if low-phosphate diets are unsuccessful. Monitor 
serum phosphate levels at 14–28 day intervals and adjust dosage 
accordingly if trying to normalize serum concentrations.
Thoroughly mix the drug with food to disperse it and to increase its 
palatability.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Constipation may occur. This is an effect of 
the aluminium compound and is counteracted by inclusion of a 
magnesium salt. Hypophosphataemia can develop. Long-term use 
(many years) of oral aluminium products in humans has been 
associated with aluminium toxicity and possible neurotoxicity. This is 
rarely a problem in veterinary medicine but is reported.
Drug interactions: Do not administer allopurinol, digoxin, 
fluoroquinolones, gabapentin, H2 antagonists, iron salts, 
itraconazole, mycophenolate, tetracyclines, or thyroid hormones 
orally within 2 hours of aluminium salts as their absorption may be 
impaired.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: All uses: Initially 10–30 mg/kg p.o. q6–8h (tablets) or 
0.5–1.0 ml/kg (2–30 ml) p.o. q6–8h (gel) with or immediately after 
meals. Dosages are empirical; none have been properly defined in 
dogs or cats.
References 
Marks SL, Kook PH, Papich MG et al . (2018) ACVIM consensus statement: support for 
rational administration of gastrointestinal protectants to dogs and cats. Journal of 
Veterinary Internal Medicine  32, 1823–1840
Aluminium hydroxide see Aluminium 
antacids
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 31 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
15
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Amantadine
(Lysovir*, Symmetrel*) POM 
Formulations: Oral: 100 mg capsule; 10 mg/ml syrup.
Action: Provides analgesia through NMDA antagonist action which 
may potentiate the effects of other analgesics.
Use:
• Adjunctive analgesic in animals that are unresponsive to opioids, 
or that require chronic pain relief in a home environment (e.g. 
osteoarthritis or cancer pain).
• In dogs with osteoarthritis that were refractory to an NSAID 
physical activity was improved, suggesting that amantadine 
might be a useful adjunct in the clinical management of canine 
osteoarthritic pain.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: In humans, minor GI and CNS effects have 
been reported, although these have not been reported in animals. 
Amantadine is renally excreted and is likely to accumulate in animals 
with renal dysfunction and therefore should be used cautiously in 
this patient population.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs: 3.0–5.0 mg/kg p.o. q24h.
Cats: 1.0–4.0 mg/kg p.o. q24h; start at the lowest dose and increase 
slowly. This dose recommendation is anecdotal and is not based on 
evidence from clinical research. 
References
Lascelles BD, Gaynor JS, Smith ES et al . (2008) Amantadine in a multimodal analgesic 
regimen for alleviation of refractory osteoarthritis pain in dogs. Journal of Veterinary 
Internal Medicine  22, 53–59
Amethocaine see Tetracaine
Amikacin
(Amikacin*, Amikin*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 50 mg/ml, 250 mg/ml solutions.
Action: Aminoglycosides inhibit bacterial protein synthesis with a 
concentration-dependent mechanism of killing, leading to a marked 
post-antibiotic effect, allowing prolonged dosing intervals (which 
may reduce toxicity).
Use: Active against many Gram-negative bacteria, Staphylococcus  
aureus and Nocardia spp., including some that may be resistant to 
