
===== Plumb PDF 823 =====
796    Marbofloxacin 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Marbofloxacin 
(mar-boe-flox-a-sin) Zeniquin®
Fluoroquinolone Antibiotic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Veterinary oral fluoroquinolone antibiotic effective against a 
variety of bacterial pathogens
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity to fluoroquinolo-
nes, cats younger than 12 months, and immature dogs during 
the rapid growth phase.
 ▶ May produce erosions of cartilage in weight-bearing joints 
and other signs of arthropathy in immature animals of various 
species
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with hepatic or renal insufficien-
cy or dehydration, in those that are prone to seizures, and in 
immature dogs and cats during the rapid growth phase.
 ▶ Adverse effects include GI distress; marbofloxacin has not 
been proven to cause ocular toxicity in cats or predispose to 
Streptococcus canis necrotizing fasciitis.
 ▶ Many drug interactions
 ▶ Prohibited for extra-label use in food animals in the United 
States
Uses/Indications
Marbofloxacin is labeled for treatment of susceptible bacterial in -
fections in dogs and cats. It is recommended that marbofloxacin be 
reserved for cases of bacterial cystitis with documented resistance to 
first-line agents (eg, amoxicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid); however, 
it is a good first-line choice for pyelonephritis or prostatic infections.1 
Fluoroquinolones are considered second-tier drugs for treatment of 
bacterial folliculitis.2 In dogs, marbofloxacin appears to have some 
efficacy for treating the clinical signs associated with canine leish -
maniasis.3 Broad-spectrum antibacterial coverage can be achieved by 
combining marbofloxacin with an antibiotic with gram-positive and 
anaerobic activity (eg, clindamycin, ampicillin/amoxicillin).
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated fluoro -
quinolones as Critically Important, Highest Priority antimicrobials 
for human medicine.4 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) 
has designated second-generation quinolones as Veterinary Critical-
ly Important Antimicrobial (VCIA) Agents in avian, bovine, equine, 
lagomorph, and swine species.5
Pharmacology/Actions
Marbofloxacin is a third-generation, concentration-dependent, bac-
tericidal fluoroquinolone. It acts by inhibiting bacterial DNA-gyrase 
(type-II topoisomerase), thus preventing DNA supercoiling and 
DNA synthesis, with susceptible bacteria cell death occurring within 
20 to 30 minutes of exposure. Like other fluoroquinolones, marbo -
floxacin has demonstrated a significant postantibiotic effect for both 
gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria and is active in both sta -
tionary and growth phases of bacterial replication. Clinical efficacy 
is associated with achieving a peak marbofloxacin concentration 10 
times greater than bacterial MIC.6,7
Marbofloxacin has a similar spectrum of activity as the other vet-
erinary commercially available fluoroquinolones, although marbo -
floxacin is considered more active against Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
as compared with enrofloxacin.8 Fluoroquinolone agents have good 
activity against many gram-negative bacilli and cocci, including 
most species and strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella spp, 
Escherichia coli, Enterobacter spp, Campylobacter spp, Shigella spp, 
Salmonella spp, Aeromonas spp, Haemophilus spp, Pasteurella spp, 
Proteus spp, Yersinia spp, Serratia spp, and Vibrio spp. Other organ-
isms that are generally susceptible include Brucella spp, Chlamydia 
trachomatis, Staphylococcus spp (including penicillinase-producing 
and methicillin-resistant strains), Mycoplasma spp, and some Myco-
bacterium spp. Bordetella bronchiseptica was susceptible, and a sig -
nificant postantibiotic effect was demonstrated ex vivo.9
Fluoroquinolones have variable activity against most streptococci 
and are not usually recommended to treat these infections. Marbo -
floxacin is ineffective in treating anaerobic infections. Fluoroquino-
lones are ineffective against viral, protozoal, or fungal infections.
Resistance can occur by mutation, particularly with Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter spp, Staphylococcus 
spp, and enterococci, but plasmid-mediated resistance is thought to 
occur only rarely.
Marbofloxacin’s leishmanicidal activity is via the TNF-alpha and 
nitric oxide synthase pathways.3
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, marbofloxacin is rapidly absorbed after oral administration 
and has a bioavailability of 94%. 10 Mean peak plasma concentra -
tions in dogs given 2.75 mg/kg or 5.5 mg/kg PO were 2 µg/mL and  
4.2 µg/mL, respectively. Peak concentrations occur in ≈1.5 hours. 
Protein binding is low, and the apparent volume of distribution is 
1.2 to 1.9 L/kg. Marbofloxacin is widely distributed in canine tissues, 
and relatively high concentrations can be found in prostatic fluid. 
Elimination half-life averages 9 to 12 hours.11,12 The drug is eliminat-
ed unchanged in the urine (40%) and bile/feces. 11 Only ≈15% of a 
dose is metabolized in the liver. Mild to moderate renal impairment 
does not significantly alter dose requirements in dogs.13
In cats, absorption after oral administration is nearly complete 
and peak serum concentrations occur ≈1 to 2 hours post-adminis -
tration.10,14 Mean peak plasma concentrations in cats given 5.5 mg/kg  
PO were 4.8 µg/mL. Terminal elimination half-life is ≈13 hours, with 
≈70% of a dose excreted in the urine mostly as unchanged drug.
In rabbits, 5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours produced a peak plasma 
concentration of 1.7 µg/mL 24 hours after the first administration 
and 2.6 µg/mL after the tenth daily dose. Elimination half-life was 4 
to 8 hours.15
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Marbofloxacin is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it or 
other fluoroquinolones. Fluoroquinolones may cause cartilage ero -
sions in weight-bearing joints in immature animals; dogs appear to 
be more susceptible to this effect.10 To avoid cartilage damage, mar-
bofloxacin is contraindicated in immature dogs during the rapid 
growth phase (small- and medium-breed dogs up to 8 months of 
age, large breeds to 12 months of age, and giant breeds to 18 months 
of age). It is also contraindicated in cats younger than 12 months. 
Marbofloxacin can (rarely) cause CNS stimulation and should be 
used with caution in patients with seizure disorders. Patients with 
severe renal or hepatic impairment may require dosage adjustments 
(eg, increased dosing interval) to prevent drug accumulation. 
Fluoroquinolones may cause photosensitization, and prolonged 
exposure of bare skin (eg, nose) or thinly haired skin to direct sun -
light should be avoided.10
The FDA has prohibited the extra-label use of this drug in 
food-producing animals.
Adverse Effects
With the exception of potential cartilage abnormalities in young an-
imals (see Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings), the adverse 
effect profile of marbofloxacin is usually limited to GI distress (eg, 
vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea) and decreased activity.
Other fluoroquinolones have, in rare incidences, caused elevated 
hepatic enzymes, ataxia, seizures, depression, lethargy, and nervous-


===== Plumb PDF 824 =====
Marbofloxacin    797
ness in dogs. Hypersensitivity reactions or crystalluria could occur.
Although unlikely to occur, the FDA ’s Adverse Drug Reaction da-
tabase has received some reports of blindness associated with mar -
bofloxacin. Unlike enrofloxacin, causal effect of ocular toxicity has 
not yet been proven with marbofloxacin, but higher dosages should 
be used carefully.
Induction of Streptococcus canis necrotizing fasciitis, which can be 
seen with enrofloxacin, does not appear to be a problem with mar -
bofloxacin.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
The safety of marbofloxacin in pregnant or lactating animals or 
those used for breeding purposes has not been demonstrated.10 Flu-
oroquinolones should be used cautiously in pregnant animals due to 
their adverse effects on cartilage.
In cattle, marbofloxacin distributes into milk, attaining milk con-
centration similar to that of plasma.16
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
It is unlikely that an acute overdose of marbofloxacin would result 
in signs more serious than either anorexia or vomiting, but the ad -
verse effects noted previously could occur. Dogs receiving 55 mg/kg  
per day PO for 12 days have developed anorexia, vomiting, dehydra-
tion, tremors, red skin, facial swelling, lethargy, and weight loss.10 All 
large-breed, 3- to 4-month-old puppies given 11 mg/kg/day devel -
oped marked lameness due to articular cartilage lesions. Increased 
salivation, vomiting, and redness of the pinnae occurred in cats giv-
en 27.5 – 55 mg/kg/day. 10 Macroscopic and microscopic cartilage 
changes were noted but without accompanying lameness.
Acute bilateral blindness occurred in a dog following an acciden-
tal overdose of 35 mg/kg/day for 3 days.17
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving marbofloxacin or related flu-
oroquinolones and may be of significance in veterinary patients. Un-
less otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, 
but the potential risks should be weighed and additional monitoring 
performed when appropriate.
 ■ Aluminum-, Calcium-, and Magnesium-Containing Oral 
Products : May bind to marbofloxacin and prevent its absorp -
tion; separate doses of by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Antibiotics, Other  (eg, aminoglycosides, third-generation 
cephalosporins, penicillins—extended-spectrum ): Synergism 
may occur but is not predictable against some bacteria (particu -
larly Pseudomonas aeruginosa) with these compounds. Although 
marbofloxacin has minimal activity against anaerobes, in vitro 
synergy has been reported when it was used with clindamycin 
against strains of Peptostreptococcus spp, Lactobacillus spp, and 
Bacteroides fragilis. 
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one ): Con-
comitant use with fluoroquinolones may increase the risk for ten-
donitis and tendon rupture.
 ■ Cyclosporine (systemic): Fluoroquinolones may exacerbate 
the nephrotoxicity and reduce the metabolism of cyclosporine 
when used systemically.
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs  ( NSAIDs, 
eg, flunixin): Flunixin has been shown in dogs to increase the 
AUC and elimination half-life of enrofloxacin, and enrofloxacin 
increases the AUC and elimination half-life of flunixin; it is un -
known if marbofloxacin also causes this effect, if other NSAIDs 
interact with marbofloxacin, or if this interaction applies to other 
species.
 ■ Iron  ( oral): May decrease marbofloxacin absorption; doses 
should be separated by at least 2 hours after marbofloxacin.
 ■ Methotrexate (MTX) : May increase MTX concentrations and 
risk for MTX toxicity
 ■ Nitrofurantoin : May antagonize the antimicrobial activity of 
the fluoroquinolones; concomitant use is not recommended
 ■ Probenecid : May block tubular secretion of ciprofloxacin; may 
increase the blood concentration and half-life of marbofloxacin
 ■ QT-Prolonging Agents  (eg, cisapride, sotalol, quinidine, 
erythromycin, ondansetron): In humans, fluoroquinolones may 
enhance the QT-prolonging effect of other drugs.
 ■ Sucralfate : May inhibit absorption of marbofloxacin; adminis-
tration of these drugs should be separated by at least 2 hours after 
marbofloxacin.
 ■ Theophylline, Aminophylline : Marbofloxacin may increase 
theophylline blood concentrations; this interaction is more likely 
to occur with enrofloxacin than with marbofloxacin.18
 ■ Urine Acidifiers (eg, ammonium chloride , methionine): 
Low urinary pH could have an inhibitory effect on the activity of 
marbofloxacin.
 ■ W arfarin : Potential for increased warfarin effects; monitor pro-
thrombin time (PT)
 ■ Zinc  ( oral): May decrease marbofloxacin absorption; doses 
should be separated by at least 2 hours after marbofloxacin.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ In some humans, fluoroquinolones have caused increases in liver 
enzymes, BUN, and creatinine and decreases in hematocrit. The 
clinical relevance of these mild changes in veterinary medicine is 
not known.
Dosages
DOGS:
Skin and soft tissue infections: 
• Label dosage; FDA-approved: 2.75 – 5.5 mg/kg PO once dai -
ly.10 Give for 2 to 3 days beyond cessation of clinical signs to a 
maximum duration of 30 days. 
• Extra-label dosage: 5.5 mg/kg PO once daily19 
UTIs:
• Label dosage; FDA-approved: 2.75 – 5.5 mg/kg PO once daily 
for at least 10 days to a maximum duration of 30 days. NOTE: 
A shorter treatment duration (ie, 3 to 5 days) is adequate for 
most cases of bacterial cystitis.1
• Extra-label dosage for sporadic bacterial cystitis: 2.75 – 5.5 mg/kg 
PO once daily for 3 to 5 days.1 NOTE: When treating Pseudo-
monas spp infections, most clinicians recommend using the 
higher end of the dose range.
Leishmaniasis (extra-label): 2 mg/kg PO once daily for 28 days. 
At the one-year follow-up, marbofloxacin has shown some effica-
cy in 70% of treated dogs. At 3 months, there was a 61% decrease 
in the sum of clinical scores. Though clinically improved, dogs 
remained parasitologically positive.3,20,21
CATS:
Skin and soft tissue infections: 
• Label dosage; FDA-approved: 2.75 – 5.5 mg/kg PO once dai -
ly.10 Give for 2 to 3 days beyond cessation of clinical signs to a 


===== Plumb PDF 825 =====
798    Marbofloxacin 
maximum duration of 30 days. 
• Extra-label dosage: 5.5 mg/kg PO once daily19
UTIs:
• Label dosage; FDA-approved: 2.75 – 5.5 mg/kg PO once daily 
for at least 10 days to a maximum duration of 30 days. NOTE: 
a shorter treatment duration (ie, 3 to 5 days) is adequate for 
most cases of bacterial cystitis.1
• Extra-label dosage for sporadic bacterial cystitis: 2.75 – 5.5 mg/kg 
PO once daily for 3 to 5 days.1 NOTE: When treating Pseudomonas 
spp infections, most clinicians recommend using the higher end of 
the dose range.
First-line treatment of feline mycobacterial infections (extra- 
label): If decision is made to treat localized cutaneous nontuber -
culous mycobacteria (NTM) infections; 2 mg/kg PO once daily in 
combination with rifampin and either azithromycin or clarithro-
mycin for the initial 2 months, then continue with a combination 
of rifampin with either marbofloxacin or a macrolide for at least 4 
months, with treatment continuing for at least 3 months beyond 
resolution of lesions and clinical signs.22 Marbofloxacin is not ef-
fective against M avium complex (MAC) infection.
Hemotropic mycoplasma infections  (extra-label): 2.75 mg/kg 
PO once daily for 14 to 28 days. Treatment up to 8 weeks with a 
goal to achieve a negative PCR has been suggested.23,24 One proto-
col uses doxycycline 5 mg/kg PO twice daily for 28 days, and cats 
that remained PCR-positive or became positive again were treated 
with marbofloxacin 2 mg/kg PO once daily for 14 days.25
BIRDS:
Macaws (extra-label): From a single-dose pharmacokinetic study, 
2.5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours may be considered.26
Mallard ducks  (extra-label): 2 – 2.5 mg/kg PO or IV every 24 
hours.27,28 NOTE: Parenteral formulation is not available in the 
United States.
RABBITS :
Susceptible infections (extra-label): 5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours. 
2 mg/kg IV , IM, or SC every 24 hours.15,28,29 NOTE: Parenteral for-
mulation is not available in the United States.
REPTILES :
Ball pythons (Python regius) (extra-label): 10 mg/kg PO at least 
every 48 hours. Dosage is based on a pharmacokinetic study; 
further studies are required to determine effective dosages and 
 toxicity.30
Monitoring
 ■ Fluoroquinolone use should be based on culture and susceptibil-
ity results.
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
Client Information
 ■ Give this medicine to your animal as prescribed by your veter -
inarian. Do not stop the treatment even if your animal appears 
well.
 ■ This medicine is best given without food on an empty stomach, 
but if your animal vomits or acts sick after receiving it, give it with 
food or small treat (no dairy products, antacids, or iron supple -
ments). If vomiting continues, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ Be sure to tell your veterinarian what medications (including vi -
tamins, supplements, herbal therapies, and treats) you are giving 
your animal, including the amount and schedule of each. This 
medicine should not be given at the same time as some medi -
cations (eg, sucralfate) or vitamins that contain calcium, iron, 
or aluminum, as these can interfere with how well the medicine 
works.
 ■ This medicine may cause bone and joint abnormalities if used in 
young animals or animals that are pregnant or nursing. 
 ■ The most common side effects are vomiting, nausea, or soft stool/
diarrhea. 
 ■ For animals with thin hair coats, there may be a risk for sun sensi-
tivity within a few hours of receiving fluoroquinolones.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is tak-
ing this medicine. Do not miss important follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Marbofloxacin is a synthetic fluoroquinolone antibiotic that occurs 
as a light yellow, crystalline powder. It is soluble in water, but solubil-
ity decreases as pH increases. 
Marbofloxacin may also be known as Ro 9-1168, Aristos®, Boflox®, 
Efex®, Forcyl®, Kelacyl®, Marbocyl®, Marbocare®, Marbonor®, Marbo-
quin®, Marbox®, Marfloquin®, Quiflor®, or Zeniquin®.
Storage/Stability
Marbofloxacin tablets should be stored below 30°C (86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
A marbofloxacin 20 mg/mL oral suspension was prepared by grind-
ing twenty 100 mg tablets in a mortar with a pestle. The ground tab-
lets were passed through a sieve to separate the powder from the 
tablet coating and returned to the mortar. The powder was wet with a 
small amount of glycerin. Equal amounts of OraPlus® and OraSweet® 
were added to form a smooth paste, and the liquid was transferred 
to an amber prescription liquid bottle and brought to 100 mL final 
volume with additional vehicle. Stability studies supported a beyond-
use date (BUD) of 60 days when stored at controlled room tempera-
ture. The suspension should be shaken well prior to measuring a 
dose. NOTE: Use of OraBlend® resulted in a gritty suspension and 
a shorter BUD; OraPlus® and OraSweet® should be used separately.31
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Marbofloxacin Oral Tablets: 25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg, and 200 mg; 
 Zeniquin®, Marboquin®; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs and cats. 
Extra-label use of fluoroquinolones is illegal in food animals in the 
United States.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Marbofloxacin 


===== Plumb PDF 826 =====
Maropitant   799
Maropitant
(ma-rahp-it-ent) Cerenia®
Neurokinin-1 (NK-1) Receptor Antagonist, Antiemetic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ FDA-approved in dogs for the treatment of acute vomiting 
(SC injection), and for the prevention of acute vomiting (SC 
injection, oral tablets) and the prevention of vomiting due to 
motion sickness (tablets)
 ▶ The SC injection is also FDA-approved for the treatment of 
vomiting in cats.
 ▶ In animals that are actively vomiting, the injectable formula-
tion is preferred to ensure the full dose is received.
 ▶ Because maropitant acts at the emetic center, it is effective 
for the treatment of emesis mediated via either peripheral or 
central mechanisms. 
 ▶ SC injections may cause pain and swelling at the injection site. 
Refrigerating the injection may reduce pain.
 ▶ The PO dose is higher than the SC dose in dogs because of the 
decreased bioavailability of the oral tablet.
 ▶ Not for use in patients with suspected toxin ingestion
Uses/Indications
Maropitant tablets are indicated for the prevention of acute vomiting 
in dogs 2 months and older and vomiting due to motion sickness in 
dogs 4 months and older.1 
Maropitant injectable solution is indicated for the prevention and 
treatment of acute vomiting in dogs 2 months and older and for the 
prevention of vomiting caused by emetogenic medication and che -
motherapeutic agents in dogs 4 months and older. 2 Maropitant in-
jectable solution also is approved for treatment of vomiting in cats 4 
months or older.2
Maropitant has been effective for controlling vomiting secondary 
to a variety of stimuli, including xylazine (cats), hydromorphone 
(dogs),3–6 morphine (dogs), 7–9 morphine with dexmedetomidine 
(cats),10,11 cisplatin (dogs), 12–14 copper sulfate, apomorphine (dogs), 
brimonidine ophthalmic solution (cats),15 tranexamic acid (dogs), 16 
and parvovirus. 17–19 Maropitant demonstrated modest efficacy for 
controlling chemotherapy-induced nausea and ondansetron ap -
peared to have a better effect.14 In dogs hospitalized with parvoviral 
enteritis, maropitant was equally as effective as ondansetron in con-
trolling clinical signs.20 Maropitant reduced both nausea and vomit-
ing when administered 2 hours before preoperative administration 
of hydromorphone, acepromazine, and glycopyrrolate 21; however, 
preoperative maropitant does not appear to reduce perioperative 
gastroesophageal reflux.22,23
Maropitant appears to enhance the antinociceptive effect of other 
analgesic in dogs and cats 19,24–27 and has demonstrated a minimum 
alveolar concentration (MAC)-sparing effect (≈15% to 25% reduc -
tion) in dogs and cats maintained on inhalant anesthesia.19,24,28–30 
Maropitant failed to improve clinical signs, airway hyperrespon -
siveness, or eosinophilia in experimental models of acute and chron-
ic feline asthma.31,32
A 4-week treatment with oral maropitant seemed to be an effec -
tive, well-tolerated therapeutic option to control pruritus in cats with 
feline atopic skin condition.33 
Pharmacology/Actions
Maropitant is a neurokinin-1 (NK-1) receptor antagonist that acts 
in the CNS by inhibiting the binding of substance P , which is the 
key neurotransmitter involved in vomiting. Maropitant can suppress 
both peripheral and centrally mediated emesis. Maropitant has been 
shown to reduce the MAC requirements of sevoflurane and to reduce 
visceral pain in dogs, as NK-1 receptors are stimulated by substance 
P.28,30 Maropitant does not affect gastric emptying times or intestinal 
transit times, but it can decrease small intestine contraction pressure 
patterns.34 Maropitant has been shown to possess anti-inflammatory 
activity in a mouse model of pancreatitis.35
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, maropitant is rapidly absorbed after PO and SC adminis -
tration. Peak plasma concentrations (C max) are reached in less than 
1 hour following 1 mg/kg SC administration and less than 2 hours 
following 2 or 8 mg/kg PO administration; Cmax after IV administra-
tion is ≈3 times higher than the same dose given SC (297 ng/mL vs 
103 ng/mL, respectively) and is ≈4 times higher than 2 mg/kg PO  
(81 ng/mL). After PO administration, bioavailability is 24%  
(2 mg/kg) and 37% (8 mg/kg), which suggests first-pass metabolism 
becomes saturated at the higher dose. Feeding status does not affect 
bioavailability. Bioavailability is 91% following SC administration of 
1 mg/kg. An accumulation ratio of 1.5 occurs after use of maropitant 
every 24 hours for 5 consecutive days at 1 mg/kg SC or 2 mg/kg PO. 
Accumulation ratio is 2.18 after 2 consecutive days at 8 mg/kg PO 
daily. Accumulation ratios after 2 mg/kg and 8 mg/kg PO once daily 
for 14 days were 2.46 and 4.81 based on AUC, respectively, and 2.03 
and 2.77 based on C max.36 However, no accumulation was demon -
strated after administration of 2 mg/kg/day for 28 days.37
Maropitant is eliminated primarily by the liver. Hepatic metabo-
lism of maropitant involves 2 cytochrome P450 enzymes: CYP2D15 
(low capacity, high affinity) and CYP3A12 (high capacity, low affini-
ty). The nonlinear kinetics at oral doses of 2 – 16 mg/kg may be due to 
saturation of the low-capacity enzyme and increased involvement of 
CYP3A12 at higher doses. Twenty-one metabolites have been iden-
tified and the major pharmacologically active metabolite is a prod -
uct of hydroxylation. Plasma protein binding of maropitant is high 
(99.5%). Large interpatient PK variations have been observed. In 
dogs, the half-life is 8.8 hours (range: 6.07 to 17.7 hours) for 1 mg/kg  
SC, 6.9 hours for 1 mg/kg IV , and 4.03 hours (range: 2.58 to 7.09 
hours) for 2 mg/kg PO. Urinary recovery of maropitant and its major 
metabolite is minimal (less than 1%). 
In cats, bioavailability is ≈50% (PO) and 91% (SC). Protein plas -
ma binding is high (99%). Maropitant displays linear kinetics when 
administered SC within the 0.25 – 3 mg/kg dose range. Terminal 
elimination half-life in cats is ≈15 hours. Feline isoforms of CYP1A 
and CYP3A enzymes are involved in the hepatic biotransformation 
of maropitant in cats. Less than 1% of a dose is excreted unchanged 
in urine or feces.38,39
There appears to be an age-related effect on pharmacokinetics, as 
puppies (10 weeks of age) and kittens (16 weeks of age) appear to 
have a faster clearance of maropitant than adults.2
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Maropitant is most effective in preventing vomiting associated with 
chemotherapy if it is administered before the chemotherapeutic 
agent.1,2 Safe use has not been evaluated in dogs or cats that have 
GI obstructions or ingested toxins. If vomiting persists despite treat-
ment, reevaluation is needed to determine the cause.
Maropitant can cause prolongation of the QT interval because of 
cardiac potassium channel blockade. Safe use of maropitant has not 
been reported in patients with underlying cardiac disease when ad -
ministered in combination with cardiac antiarrhythmic drugs.40
Caution is advised in patients with hepatic dysfunction, as maro-
pitant is hepatically metabolized; the dose may need to be reduced by 
50% if used in these patients.
Caution is also advised when administering the higher dose of 
maropitant to prevent vomiting due to motion sickness in puppies 
younger than 11 weeks. A higher frequency and greater severity of 
histologic evidence of bone marrow hypoplasia was seen in puppies 
treated with the higher dose of maropitant as compared with control 


===== Plumb PDF 827 =====
800    Maropitant
puppies. In puppies 16 weeks or older, bone marrow hypocellularity 
was not observed.1,2
In humans, topical exposure may elicit allergic skin reactions 
in some individuals. In the event of accidental skin exposure, skin 
should be washed with soap and water. In the event of accidental 
eye exposure, eyes should be flushed with water for 15 minutes and 
medical attention should be sought.1,2
Adverse Effects
Maropitant appears to be well tolerated in dogs and cats. Allergic 
reactions are possible but rare and typically resolve with supportive 
treatment within 48 hours after the drug is discontinued.
In dogs given the higher oral dose required for prevention of 
motion sickness, the 2 most common adverse effects are pretravel 
vomiting and hypersalivation. Swelling or pain at the injection site 
has been reported following SC administration of this drug. A study 
found that dogs had less pain at the injection site when the injection 
was refrigerated and immediately injected,41 and a formulation pre-
served with benzyl alcohol was less painful than the metacresol-con-
taining product that is currently available in the US.42 Other adverse 
effects include depression and lethargy, anorexia, diarrhea, anaphy-
laxis/anaphylactoid reactions (including swelling of the head and 
face), ataxia, tremors, fever, dyspnea, collapse/loss of consciousness, 
sedation, and convulsions.1,2
In healthy dogs, IV maropitant further decreased arterial blood 
pressure caused by isoflurane anesthesia, and clinically significant 
hypotension occurred in dogs premedicated with acepromazine.43
In cats, adverse effects include depression and lethargy, anorexia, 
injection site pain, hypersalivation, dyspnea, ataxia, fever, recum -
bency, vomiting, panting, convulsion, and muscle tremors.2
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safe use of maropitant in dogs or cats used for breeding or in preg -
nant or lactating bitches or queens has not been evaluated.1,2 Because 
safety has not been established in animals, this drug should only be 
used when the maternal benefits outweigh the potential risks to off-
spring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Single-dose toxicity was studied in mice and rats after PO and IV 
administration.44 No adverse effects were reported after PO admin -
istration of up to 30 mg/kg (mice) and 100 mg/kg (rats) and after IV 
administration of 6.5 mg/kg (mice) and 2.5 mg/kg (rats). Clinical 
signs of overdose in mice and rats included decreased activity, irreg-
ular or labored respiration, ataxia, and tremors. Excretion of reddish 
urine was observed in some mice and rats following IV administra -
tion.
In dogs, no serious adverse effects were noted when oral doses 
up to 24 mg/kg (3 times the highest recommended dose) were ad -
ministered 3 times longer than the proposed maximum duration of 
treatment.
Oral toxicokinetic studies with the primary metabolite were con-
ducted in mice, rats, rabbits, and dogs; it was demonstrated that the 
metabolite was well tolerated.44
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
During field safety and efficacy studies, a number of medications 
were used concomitantly with maropitant. The most common con-
comitant medication was metronidazole. Other commonly used 
concomitant medications included dextrose/Ringer’s solution IV , 
sodium chloride IV , amoxicillin, ampicillin, cefazolin, cephalexin, 
enrofloxacin, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, famotidine, sucral -
fate, cimetidine, dexamethasone, ivermectin, ivermectin/pyrantel, 
pyrantel, lufenuron/milbemycin, milbemycin, moxidectin, vitamin 
B, and vaccines. No problems were observed with any of these drugs 
when used in conjunction with maropitant.
Drug interactions with maropitant have not been thoroughly in -
vestigated. Maropitant may be susceptible to interactions because it 
is biotransformed in the liver by CYP3A12 and CYP2D15 in dogs 
and by CYP1A- and CYP3A-related enzymes in cats and is highly 
bound to plasma proteins. The following drug interactions are the -
oretical in animals receiving maropitant and may be of significance 
in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not 
necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks must be weighed 
and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
 ■ Calcium Channel Blockers (eg, amlodipine, diltiazem, ve-
rapamil): The UK label states maropitant Should not be used con-
comitantly with Ca-channel antagonists as maropitant has affinity 
to Ca-channels.45
 ■ CYP3A Inhibitors (eg, amiodarone, diltiazem, cimetidine, 
erythromycin, ketoconazole, itraconazole ): May reduce maro -
pitant metabolism
 ■ CYP2D Inhibitors (eg, cimetidine, fluoxetine, terbinafine ): 
May reduce maropitant metabolism
 ■ Highly Protein Bound Drugs  ( eg, valproic acid, oral an -
ticoagulants [rivaroxaban, warfarin], NSAIDs, salicylates, 
sulfonamides, sulfonylurea antidiabetic agents): Because maro-
pitant is highly bound to plasma proteins (99.5%), it could theo -
retically displace other highly bound drugs, causing a transient 
increase in serum concentrations of each drug. These interactions 
are unlikely to be of clinical concern because free drug concen -
trations will equilibrate through increased clearance. Monitor for 
adverse effects of each drug when using this combination.
 ■ QT Prolonging Agents  (eg, cisapride, domperidone, quini-
dine, sotalol): Concurrent use may increase risk for QT prolon -
gation and should be avoided.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No specific concerns have been noted.
Dosages
NOTE: Refrigerating the injectable product may reduce the pain 
response associated with SC administration.
DOGS:
Label dosages (FDA-approved)1,2: 
Indication Dosage  
form
Minimum  
age for use Dosage Duration  
of therapy
Prevention  
and treatment  
of acute 
 vomiting
Injec-
tion
2 months 1 mg/kg SC  
once daily
Up to 5  
consecutive  
days
Prevention  
and treatment  
of acute 
 vomiting
Injec-
tion
4 months 1 mg/kg SC or 
IV (over 1 to 2 
minutes) once 
daily
Up to 5  
consecutive  
days
Prevention  
of vomiting 
caused by  
emetogenic  
medications or 
chemothera- 
peutic agents
Injec-
tion
4 months 1 mg/kg SC  
or IV (over 1  
to 2 minutes) 
once, 45 to 60 
minutes prior 
to emetogenic 
medications  
or chemothera-
peutic agents
Single  
injection


===== BSAVA PDF 258 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
242
potassium-depleting diuretics should be used with care in 
conjunction with beta-blockers. Nephrotoxicity has been described 
with concurrent use of mannitol and ciclosporin in human patients. 
Mannitol may result in temporary impairment of the blood–brain 
barrier for up to 30 minutes after administration of high doses. 
Mannitol should never be added to whole blood for transfusion or 
given through the same set by which the blood is being infused. Do 
not add KCl or NaCl to concentrated mannitol solutions (20% or 
25%) as a precipitate may form.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats:   
• Raised intracranial pressure: 0.25–2 g/kg i.v. infusion of 15–20% 
solution. There is some evidence that higher doses have greater 
clinical effect, but lower doses allow for repeated boluses. 
Doses of 0.25–1.0 g/kg are recommended. The dose is given 
over 20–30 min. The dose may be repeated once or twice after 
4–8 hours as long as hydration and electrolyte levels are 
monitored.
• Acute glaucoma (if refractory to topical treatments): 0.5–2 g/kg 
i.v. infusion over 30 min. Withholding water for the first few 
hours after administering is recommended. May repeat 2–4 
times over next 48 hours; monitor for dehydration.
• Early oliguric or anuric renal failure (as an alternative to using 
furosemide): 0.25–0.5 g/kg i.v. infusion over 5–10 min. If 
successful can repeat in 4 hours. Rehydrate the patient prior to 
the use of mannitol.
References
DiFazio J and Fletcher DJ (2013) Updates in the management of the small animal patient 
with neurologic trauma. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice 43 , 
915–940
Sankar T, Assina R, Karis JP et al . (2008) Neurosurgical implications of mannitol 
accumulation within a meningioma and its peritumoral region demonstrated by magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy: case report. Journal of Neurosurgery  108, 1010–1013
Marbofloxacin
(Actimarbo, Aurizon, Efex, Marbocare, Marbocyl, 
Marbodex, Marbotab, Marboxidin, Marfloquin, 
NorOtic, Quiflor, Softiflox, Ubiflox) POM-V 
Formulations: Injectable: 200 mg powder for reconstitution 
giving 10 mg/ml when reconstituted. Oral: 5 mg, 20 mg, 80 mg 
tablets. Topical: compound preparation containing 3 mg/ml of 
marbofloxacin along with clotrimazole and dexamethasone  
(aural use).
Action: Broad-spectrum antibiotic inhibiting bacterial DNA gyrase 
via a concentration-dependent mechanism particularly against 
Gram-negative bacteria, meaning that pulse-dosing regimens may 
be effective. Low urinary pH may reduce the activity.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 259 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
243
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Use: Fluoroquinolone use should be reserved for infections where 
culture and sensitivity testing predicts a clinical response and where 
first- and second-line antimicrobials would not be effective. Active 
against mycoplasmas and many Gram-positive and particularly 
Gram-negative organisms, including Pasteurella, Staphylococcus, 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella, Escherichia coli, Proteus and 
Salmonella. Fluoroquinolones are effective against beta-lactamase-
producing bacteria. Marbofloxacin is relatively ineffective in treating 
obligate anaerobic infections. Fluoroquinolones are highly lipophilic 
drugs that attain high concentrations within cells in many tissues and 
are particularly effective in the management of soft tissue, urogenital 
(including pyelonephritis and prostatitis) and skin infections. May 
allow clearance of Mycoplasma haemofelis in cats persistently 
infected after doxycycline treatment. 
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: The 20 mg and 80 mg tablets should not be 
administered to cats.
Adverse reactions: Some animals show GI signs (nausea, 
vomiting). Use with caution in epileptics until further information is 
available, as fluoroquinolones potentiate CNS adverse effects when 
administered concurrently with NSAIDs in humans. Enrofloxacin, 
particularly at high doses, has caused retinal blindness in cats; 
although not reported with marbofloxacin, caution should be 
exercised before using dose rates above those recommended by the 
manufacturer for cats. Cartilage abnormalities have been reported 
following the use of other fluoroquinolones in growing animals. 
Such abnormalities have not been specifically reported following the 
use of marbofloxacin, but the drug is not authorized for use in dogs 
<12 months of age and cats <16 weeks. In giant-breeds should not 
be administered to animals <18 months.
Drug interactions: Absorbents and antacids containing cations 
(Mg2+, Al3+) may bind fluoroquinolones, preventing their absorption 
from the GI tract. Their absorption may also be inhibited by 
sucralfate and zinc salts; separate dosing by at least 2 hours. 
Fluoroquinolones increase plasma theophylline concentrations. 
Cimetidine may reduce the clearance of fluoroquinolones and so 
should be used with caution with these drugs. Some 
fluoroquinolones may decrease the metabolism and increase 
nephrotoxicity of ciclosporin and tacrolimus in humans and 
therefore concurrent use in animals is best avoided until more 
research has been performed. May increase the action of orally 
administered anticoagulants.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs: Oral and parenteral: 2 mg/kg i.v., s.c., p.o. q24h. Higher doses 
should be considered for certain sites, including in prostatitis, and 
for certain isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa . Topical: 10 drops 
per ear once daily.
Cats: 2 mg/kg i.v., s.c., p.o. q24h. 


===== BSAVA PDF 260 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
244
References
Federico S, Carrano R, Capone D et al . (2006) Pharmacokinetic interaction between 
levofloxacin and ciclosporin or tacrolimus in kidney transplant recipients: ciclosporin, 
tacrolimus and levofloxacin in renal transplantation. Clinical Pharmacokinetics 45, 
169–175
Hirt RA, Teinfalt M, Dederichs D et al . (2003) The effect of orally administered 
marbofloxacin on the pharmacokinetics of theophylline. Journal of Veterinary Medicine: 
A Physiology, Pathology and Clinical Medicine 50 , 246–250
Maropitant
(Cerenia, Prevomax, Vetemex) POM-V 
Formulations: Injectable: 10 mg/ml solution. Oral: 16 mg, 24 mg, 
60 mg, 160 mg tablets.
Action: Inhibits vomiting reflex by blocking NK-1 receptors in 
medullary vomiting centre. Highly protein bound, with a long 
duration of activity (24 hours). Maropitant is not known to have any 
prokinetic effect.
Use:
• Treatment and prevention of vomiting in dogs, including that 
caused by chemotherapy and motion sickness (although not all 
preparations are specifically licensed for these purposes).
• Maropitant is well tolerated and has potent antiemetic activity in 
cats.
In cases of frequent vomiting, treatment by injection is 
recommended. Treatment by injection and/or tablets can be given 
for up to 5 days. In some individual dogs, repeat treatment at a lower 
dose may be adequate. For motion sickness, treatment for up to 2 
days can be given. If longer periods of treatment are required, the 
recommended interval between the last dose of one course and the 
first dose of a subsequent course is 72 hours. It should be used in 
combination with investigation into the cause of vomiting and with 
other supportive measures and specific treatments. Tablets best 
given with food; avoid prolonged fasting before administration.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed. 
Do not attempt to remove the tablet by pushing through the blister 
packing as this will damage the tablet.
Contraindications: No specific contraindications but it would be 
sensible not to use maropitant where GI obstruction or perforation 
could be present or for longer than 48 hours without a definitive 
diagnosis. Metabolized by the liver so use with caution in patients 
with hepatic disease.
Adverse reactions: Transient pain reaction during injection is 
reported as a very common occurrence especially in cats, but no 
significant lasting adverse reactions. Very high doses in cats may 
cause haemolysis. Pain on injection can be reduced by injecting the 
product at refrigerated temperatures.
Drug interactions: No compatibility studies exist, and therefore 
the injection should not be mixed with any other agent. Should not 
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
