
===== Plumb PDF 852 =====
Meloxicam   825
selected joining date.15 Follow label instructions for breed-based 
time of year to administer and guidance on separating ewes and 
rams.
GOATS:
Stimulate testosterone secretion in bucks during nonbreed -
ing season (extra-label): Following 2.5 months of long days, two  
18 mg implants (36 mg total dose) administered SC near the base 
of ears resulted in higher peak testosterone concentrations, which 
occurred 2 months earlier than in the control group.29
FERRETS :
Adjunctive treatment of adrenal disease to help control clinical 
signs (extra-label): 
a) Oral formulations: Anecdotally, 0.5 – 1 mg/ferret (NOT  
mg/kg) PO once daily 7 to 9 hours after sunrise17,30
b) Implant dosages: 2.7 mg/ferret (NOT mg/kg [under 600 g 
body weight]) or 5.4 mg/ferret (NOT mg/kg [over 600 g body 
weight]) SC every 3 to 4 months
MINK:
Accelerate fur priming cycle (label dosage; FDA-approved):  
2.7 mg/mink (NOT mg/kg) implanted SC21
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy (eg, depending on indication: hair regrowth, es -
trus suppression, improvement in sleep/unwanted behaviors)
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, sedation, lethargy, weight gain, sterile ab -
scesses [implants only])
Client Information
 ■ For treatment of hair loss, efficacy of melatonin varies. A 4-month 
trial is necessary to see if the treatment is beneficial.
 ■ The oral medicine may be given with or without food.
 ■ This medicine is usually well tolerated; sleepiness may occur.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Melatonin is a naturally occurring hormone produced in the pine -
al gland. It occurs as a white to pale yellow, crystalline solid that is 
slightly soluble in water and has a molecular weight of 232. It can be 
derived from natural sources or by synthetic means.
Melatonin may also be known as n-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine, 
MEL, MLT, or pineal hormone.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, store at room temperature in tight con -
tainers.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Melatonin implant 2.7 mg; PrimeX®; (OTC). FDA-approved for use 
in mink. NADA# 140-846. Although this product is still listed in 
FDA ’s Green Book of approved animal drugs, marketing status is 
uncertain.
The following products are marketed for ferret and dog use. Their 
FDA approval status is not known, and they are not listed in FDA ’s 
Green Book of approved animal drugs. 
Melatonin Implant 2.7 mg and 5.4 mg; Ferretonin®; (OTC); marketed 
for ferrets
Melatonin Implant 8 mg, 12 mg, 18 mg, and 24 mg; Dermatonin®; 
(OTC); marketed for dogs, cats, sheep, goats, skunk, cattle, and 
 horses. 
An 18 mg implant for sustained SC release is available in a variety of 
countries. One trade name is Regulin®. It is labeled for use in sheep 
(UK and AUS/NZ) and goats (AUS/NZ) to improve early breeding 
and ovulation rates.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Melatonin Capsules, Tablets, Chewable Tablets, Disintegrating Oral 
Tablets, Gummies, Extended-Release Tablets, Sublingual Tablets:  
0.2 – 20 mg, although 1 – 10 mg are most common; (OTC). Because 
melatonin is considered a “nutraceutical, ” there is no official labeling 
or central quality control systems for it in the US. Purchase from 
reputable sources.
Melatonin Oral Solution: 0.25 mg/mL, 0.33 mg/mL, and 1 mg/mL; 
generic; (OTC)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Meloxicam
(mel-ox-i-kam) Metacam®
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug (NSAID)
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ COX-2–preferential NSAID used in many species
 ▶ Long-term use in cats is controversial. 
 ▶ Available as both injectable and oral products
 ▶ Primary adverse effects are GI- and renal-related, but idiosyn-
cratic hepatotoxicity has occurred in dogs (rare).
Uses/Indications
Meloxicam is FDA-approved for the treatment of pain, inflamma -
tion, and osteoarthritis in dogs.1,2 Short-term use (eg, single-dose in-
jectable, administered before surgery) of meloxicam is also FDA-ap-
proved in the United States in cats to control postoperative pain and 
inflammation associated with orthopedic surgery, ovariohysterecto-
my, and castration.3 Meloxicam is licensed in several countries for 
long-term use (at lower doses) in cats. 
Oral meloxicam may be a cost-effective agent for use during pain-
ful procedures such as castration or dehorning in calves 4; however, 
meloxicam administration in calves prior to transportation did not 
affect movement or feeding or drinking behaviors5 and did not miti-
gate leukocyte function or inflammatory markers.6
Metronomic cyclophosphamide and meloxicam successfully 
managed oral squamous cell carcinoma in a horse.7
Pharmacology/Actions
Like other NSAIDs, meloxicam exhibits analgesic, anti-inflammato-
ry, and antipyretic activity, most likely through its inhibition of cy -
clooxygenase (COX) and prostaglandin synthesis. Meloxicam is con-
sidered COX-2 preferential (not COX-2 specific) because at higher 
doses, its COX-2 specificity is diminished.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, meloxicam is almost completely absorbed after PO and SC 
administration. The oral transmucosal spray product (not current -
ly marketed in the United States) is bioequivalent to the canine-ap -
proved oral suspension. 8 Peak blood concentrations occur ≈4 to 8 
hours after oral administration and 2.5 hours after SC administra -
tion.1,3,9,10 The volume of distribution in dogs is 0.3 L/kg and ≈97% is 
bound to plasma proteins. Meloxicam is extensively biotransformed 
to several different metabolites in the liver; none of these appear to 
have pharmacologic activity. The majority of these metabolites (and 
unchanged drug) are eliminated in the feces. A significant amount 
of enterohepatic recirculation occurs. Elimination half-life is spe -
cies-specific. The elimination half-life in dogs averages 24 hours 
(range, 12 to 36 hours).
In cats, SC injection is nearly completely absorbed. Peak con -
centrations occur ≈1.5 hours after injection. Meloxicam is relatively 
highly bound to feline plasma proteins (97%), and volume of distri-
bution is ≈0.27 L/kg. After a single dose, total systemic clearance is 


===== Plumb PDF 853 =====
826    Meloxicam
≈130 mL/hour/kg, and elimination half-life is ≈15 hours. The major 
pathway for biotransformation is oxidation, and the major elimina-
tion route is fecal.
In horses, oral meloxicam tablets appear to be well absorbed, 
regardless of feeding status. 11 Elimination half-life in horses given  
0.6 mg/kg IV toward the end of laparotomy for colic syndrome was 
6.9 hours12 and 5 hours in horses given 0.6 mg/kg PO once daily for 
14 days.13 Absorption was similar in foals younger than 6 weeks of 
age, but elimination half-life was 2.5 hours.14
In ruminant calves (≈3 months of age), meloxicam 1 mg/kg PO 
was well absorbed and had an elimination half-life of ≈24 hours. 4 
Half-life was 25.7 hours in 4- to 6-month-old beef calves given  
0.5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for 4 days, and meloxicam tissue 
concentrations were below the concentration of quantification 
15 days after treatment. 15 In 6-month-old Holstein steers given  
1 mg/kg PO, the terminal half-life was 16.7 hours, and mean res -
idence time (MRT) was 34 hours. 16 In adult cows given a single  
1 mg/kg PO dose, elimination half-life was 10 to 13 hours. 15,17 MRT 
was 30.3 hours in postpartum cows as compared with 22.3 hours in 
mid-lactation cows. Meloxicam was detected in the milk of postpar-
tum cows up to 144 hours after administration, as compared with 96 
hours in mid-lactation cows, and the authors suggest that a 96-hour 
milk withdrawal period may be insufficient in postpartum cows to 
avoid a violative residue.18
In lactating goats, meloxicam 0.5 mg/kg IM was completely ab -
sorbed, and elimination half-life was 10.8 hours. 19 Administration 
once every 24 hours was predicted to provide an analgesic plasma 
concentration. Meloxicam was quantifiable in milk up to 48 hours 
after IM administration. 
Elimination half-life was 15.4 hours in healthy sheep given  
0.5 mg/kg IV or 1 mg/kg PO; oral bioavailability was 72%, and time 
to peak concentration was 19 hours.20
Meloxicam was well absorbed (bioavailability, ≈90%) in mature 
swine given 0.5 mg/kg IV and PO, and elimination half-life was ≈6 
hours.21
In African gray parrots given 1 mg/kg IV , IM, and PO as a sin -
gle dose, peak drug concentrations were reached 30 minutes and 13 
hours after IM and PO administration, respectively. Bioavailability 
was 78% (IM) and 38% (PO) as compared with IV administration. 
Elimination half-life with IV administration was 31 hours.22 Plasma 
accumulation ratios of 2 (IM) and 2.4 (PO) were noted with meloxi-
cam dosages of 1 mg/kg PO or IM every 24 hours for 7 (IM) or 12 
(PO) days.23 In Hispaniolan parrots, peak meloxicam concentration 
occurred at 15 minutes, with 100% bioavailability after IM admin -
istration, while peak concentrations occurred 6 hours after oral ad -
ministration with 50% to 75% bioavailability. Elimination half-life 
was ≈15 hours regardless of the route of administration.24
In healthy white leghorn hens, a single dose of meloxicam 1 mg/kg  
PO produced peak concentrations after 2 hours, and the plasma 
elimination half-life was 2.8 hours. Meloxicam was not detected after 
4 days in egg whites and after 8 days in egg yolks.25
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Meloxicam is contraindicated in animals that are hypersensitive to 
it. The European and United Kingdom labels state that safe use has 
not been evaluated in dogs younger than 6 weeks of age9,10; the Unit-
ed States FDA label states that safe use has not been established in 
dogs younger than 6 months of age.1 The drug should not be used or 
should be used with extreme caution in dogs with active GI ulcer -
ation or bleeding or in dogs receiving glucocorticoids. 10,26 To avoid 
accidental overdosing, dogs weighing less than 4.5 kg (10 lb) should 
have meloxicam doses carefully measured and applied on food only, 
never directly into the mouth.2
Meloxicam, like all NSAIDs, should be used with caution in ani -
mals with impaired hepatic, cardiac, or renal function and animals 
with hemorrhagic disorders. Hypotension, high doses, hypovolemia, 
sodium depletion, and inhalant anesthesia all appear to increase risk 
for NSAID renal toxicity.27
Concurrent use with other anti-inflammatory drugs may result 
in additional or increased adverse effects; therefore, a treatment-free 
period from all other anti-inflammatories should be observed for 
at least 24 hours before beginning treatment with meloxicam. The 
treatment-free period, however, should take into account the phar -
macokinetic properties of the products used previously. Use meloxi-
cam under strict veterinary monitoring in animals with a risk for 
GI ulcers, or if the animal previously displayed intolerance to other 
NSAIDs.  
The manufacturer warns that additional doses of meloxicam or 
other NSAIDs are contraindicated in cats, as no safe dose for re -
peated NSAID administration has been established, and the United 
States product labels contain a boxed warning stating that repeated 
use of meloxicam in cats has been associated with acute renal failure 
and death.3 Safe use in cats younger than 4 months of age has not 
been established. Preoperative use in cats undergoing major surgery, 
in which hypotensive episodes are possible, may result in a higher 
risk for renal damage.
The human label states that no dose adjustment is necessary in 
patients with mild to moderate hepatic or renal impairment. 
The veterinary oral suspension comes with a dosing syringe that is 
marked in pounds. If providing dosing directions in mL, make sure 
to supply an appropriately marked dosing syringe.
Adverse Effects
Experience in Europe and Canada has demonstrated a relatively 
safe adverse effect profile for meloxicam at labeled doses in healthy 
dogs.26 GI distress is the most commonly reported adverse effect, 
and in United States field trials, vomiting, soft stools, diarrhea, and 
inappetence were the most common adverse effects. Renal toxicity 
appears to be quite low in animals with normal renal blood flow. 
Adverse effects reported postapproval have included GI effects (eg, 
vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, melena, ulceration), elevated liver en -
zymes/hepatotoxicity, pruritus, azotemia, elevated creatinine, and 
renal failure. When NSAIDs are used long term in dogs, gastropro -
tectant drugs (eg, proton pump inhibitors [PPIs], H2 blockers, miso-
prostol) have been used in an attempt to prevent or limit GI adverse 
effects, but the benefits of these drugs have not been proven.28 
Like other COX-2 NSAIDs, meloxicam may have effects on plate-
let function, although no effect was demonstrated in healthy dogs 
in a small study.29 A case report of a dog developing vasculitis with 
ulcers, vesicles, and erosions has been published. 30 In cats, single 
doses of meloxicam appear relatively safe. In field trials, some cats 
developed elevated BUN, posttreatment anemia, and residual pain 
at the injection site (rare). In other studies, meloxicam has caused 
GI effects (eg, vomiting, diarrhea, inappetence), behavior changes, 
and lethargy. Repeated use of meloxicam in cats is controversial, as 
repeated doses have been associated with renal failure and death. The 
FDA warns against repeated doses in cats; however, low-dose long-
term use is licensed in some countries, and guidelines for long-term 
NSAID use in cats suggest the benefits of treatment often outweigh 
the risks.31
Acute dosing studies in dogs have not demonstrated any hepatic 
toxicity.1,3 Administration to piglets for ≈2 months demonstrated no 
adverse effects on trabecular bone or growth plates.32 
Meloxicam is relatively safe in other species (eg, horses, cattle, 
camelids, swine, rabbits, small ruminants) when used at recom -
mended doses.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safe use has not been established in dogs or cats used for breeding 


===== Plumb PDF 854 =====
Meloxicam   827
or in pregnant or lactating animals. Meloxicam had a positive effect 
on pregnancy rates after embryo transfer in heifers. 33,34 Meloxicam 
reduced deslorelin-induced ovulation and induced intrafollicular 
hemorrhage and luteinization of anovulatory follicles in mares.35
Most NSAIDs are excreted in milk. Because safety has not been 
established, this drug should only be used when the maternal bene -
fits outweigh the potential fetal risks. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
GI effects (eg, vomiting, diarrhea) and renomegaly with minimal 
degeneration and necrosis were noted in dogs given 3 and 5 times 
the label dosage during 6-week safety studies. Overdoses should be 
treated supportively based on clinical signs. Therapeutic plasma ex-
change was successful in the overdose management of one dog.36
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have experi-
enced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consultation 
center that specializes in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
In humans, meloxicam is a CYP2C9 substrate. The following drug 
interactions have either been reported or are theoretical in humans 
or animals receiving meloxicam and may be of significance in veteri-
nary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily 
contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and perform addition-
al monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors  (ACEIs; eg, 
benazepril, enalapril): NSAIDs can reduce effects on blood pres-
sure.
 ■ Amiodarone : May increase meloxicam concentrations
 ■ Amlodipine : Some NSAIDs can reduce effects on blood pres -
sure.
 ■ Anesthetics, Inhalant (eg, isoflurane, sevoflurane ): May 
increase risk for renal hypotension and NSAID renal toxicity
 ■ Angiotensin-II Receptor Blockers  ( ARBs; eg, telmisar-
tan): Some NSAIDs can reduce effects on blood pressure.
 ■ Anticoagulants  (eg, heparins, rivaroxaban, warfarin ): In -
creased chance for bleeding
 ■ Bisphosphonates (eg, alendronate): May increase risk for GI 
ulceration
 ■ Clopidogrel : Increased chance for bleeding
 ■ Corticosteroids  (eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one): May 
increase risk for GI toxicity (eg, ulceration, bleeding, vomiting, 
diarrhea); avoid use with NSAIDs
 ■ Cyclosporine (systemic): Concurrent use may result in in -
creased risk for cyclosporine nephrotoxicity. 
 ■ Digoxin : NSAIDs may increase serum concentrations.
 ■ Diuretics (eg, furosemide, hydrochlorothiazide): Concurrent 
use may result in reduced diuretic efficacy and possible nephro -
toxicity.
 ■ Fluconazole : Administration has increased plasma concen -
trations of celecoxib in humans and could also affect meloxicam 
concentrations in dogs.
 ■ Fluoroquinolones (eg, enrofloxacin, marbofloxacin ): 
Meloxicam may increase fluoroquinolone concentrations, in -
creasing risk for CNS toxicity.
 ■ Leflunomide : May increase meloxicam exposure; risk for le -
flunomide hepatotoxicity may be increased
 ■ Methotrexate : Concomitant NSAID use with methotrexate 
may increase risk for myelosuppression, nephropathy, hepatotox-
icity, and GI toxicity; use together with extreme caution.
 ■ Nephrotoxic Drugs  (eg, aminoglycosides, amphotericin B, 
furosemide): May enhance risk for nephrotoxicity
 ■ NSAIDs ( eg, carprofen): May increase risk for GI toxicity (eg, 
ulceration, bleeding, vomiting, diarrhea)
 ■ Pentoxifylline : May increase risk for bleeding
 ■ Salicylates (eg, aspirin, bismuth subsalicylate ): Concurrent 
use may increase risk for GI toxicity and bleeding.
 ■ Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs; eg, 
fluoxetine): Concurrent use may result in an increased risk for 
bleeding.
 ■ Sulfonamides (eg, sulfamethoxazole): May inhibit meloxicam 
metabolism, increasing meloxicam exposure and risk for toxicity 
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline, clomip -
ramine): Concurrent use may increase risk for bleeding.
Dosages
When doses are listed in drops, use with caution; drug concentra -
tion per drop may be different in products marketed in different 
 countries.
DOGS:
Control of pain and inflammation associated with osteoarthri-
tis (label dosage; FDA-approved): 0.2 mg/kg PO, IV , or SC on the 
first day of treatment; subsequent doses of 0.1 mg/kg PO every 
24 hours.1–3 For dogs weighing less than 4.5 kg (10 lb), admin -
ister drops on food only, never directly into the mouth; for dogs 
weighing more than 4.5 kg (10 lb), drops can be placed in food or 
directly into the mouth. Consult product labels for additional oral 
dosing instructions for dogs weighing less than 2.3 kg (5 lb).2 Use 
the lowest effective dose for the shortest duration consistent with 
individual response. 
CATS:
Control of postoperative pain and inflammation associated 
with orthopedic surgery, ovariohysterectomy, and castration  
(label dosage; FDA-approved): 0.3 mg/kg SC once; should not be 
followed by additional doses of meloxicam or other NSAIDs.3
NOTE: The following dosages for cats are extra-label in the Unit-
ed States, and in 2010, the drug sponsor and the FDA issued the 
following: WARNING: Repeated use of meloxicam in cats has been 
associated with acute renal failure and death. Do not administer 
additional doses of injectable or oral meloxicam to cats.1 See Con-
traindications/Precautions/Warnings. However, the ISFM and 
AAFP Consensus Guidelines: Long-Term Use of NSAIDs in Cats 
include the following statements: 
It is only recently that NSAIDs have become licensed for long-term 
use in cats in some countries. The panel believe that these drugs 
have a major role to play in the management of chronic pain in cats, 
but at present only limited feline-specific data are available. To date 
published studies of the medium- to long-term use of the COX-1 
sparing drug meloxicam in older cats and cats with chronic kidney 
disease provide encouraging data that these drugs can be used safe-
ly and should be used to relieve pain when needed. While further 
data are needed and would undoubtedly lead to refinement of the 
guidelines presented here, the panel hope that these recommenda -
tions will encourage rational and safe long-term use of NSAIDs in 
cats, thereby improving patients’ quality of life in the face of painful 
disease conditions.31
Prevention of mild to moderate postoperative pain and inflam-
mation following surgical procedures: 0.2 mg/kg SC once before 
surgery. To continue treatment for up to 5 days, the initial dose 
may be followed 24 hours later by administration of oral suspen-
sion at 0.05 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for a total of up to 4 oral 
doses. For cats not receiving additional oral doses, a single injec -


===== Plumb PDF 855 =====
828    Meloxicam
tion of meloxicam 0.3 mg/kg SC has also been shown to be safe 
and effective.37
Alleviation of pain and inflammation associated with acute or 
chronic musculoskeletal disorders: On the first day of treatment, 
0.1 – 0.2 mg/kg PO once for acute disorders or 0.1 mg/kg PO 
once for chronic disorders.38–40 Thereafter, maintenance treatment 
should be 0.05 mg/kg PO every 24 hours. A clinical response is 
normally seen within 7 days. Treatment should be discontinued 
after 14 days if no clinical improvement is apparent.38,41 Many cats 
may experience pain relief at even lower doses given every 2 to 3 
days. Titrating to the lowest effective dose may help avoid adverse 
effects.42,43
HORSES :
Inflammation and pain associated with musculoskeletal disor-
ders or colic pain (extra-label): 
a) IV: 0.6 mg/kg IV once; oral dose may be given after 24 hours. 
b) Oral: 0.6 mg/kg PO either mixed with food or given directly 
in the mouth every 24 hours, for up to 14 days. When admin-
istering this product with food, add to a small quantity of feed 
to be fed before providing full meal.44,45
Pain and inflammation (extra-label): 
a) Foals: In a pharmacokinetic study in healthy foals, the authors 
concluded 0.6 mg/kg PO every 12 hours would likely be thera-
peutic in foals younger than 7 weeks of age.14
b) Adults: 0.6 mg/kg PO every 24 hours was effective in a lipo -
polysaccharide-induced synovitis model of pain.46
CATTLE:
Acute respiratory infection with appropriate antibiotic therapy 
to reduce clinical signs in cattle; diarrhea, in combination with 
oral rehydration therapy, to reduce clinical signs in calves older 
than 1 week of age and young nonlactating cattle; as adjunctive 
therapy in the treatment of acute mastitis, in combination with 
antibiotic therapy (extra-label): 0.5 mg/kg SC, IV , or IM once47 
Analgesia for surgical pain (extra-label): 
a) Oral: 0.5 – 1 mg/kg PO every 24 to 48 hours. 48 Single doses 
appear effective for dehorning.16 
b) Buccal: 0.5 mg/kg buccal meloxicam gel reduced pain and 
inflammation related to castration 49 and dehorning 50 in un -
weaned beef calves. 
Lameness (extra-label): 0.5 mg/kg PO once daily for 4 days alone 
or in combination with gabapentin (15 mg/kg PO once daily) was 
effective in experimentally induced lameness in 4- to 6-month-
old beef calves.51
SMALL RUMINANTS :
Pain and inflammation (extra-label): 
a) Sheep: 0.5 mg/kg IV every 12 hours. 2 mg/kg PO on first day 
and then 1 mg/kg PO every 24 hours. A single 1 mg/kg SC in-
jection provided analgesia in an experimental pain model.52,53 
b) Goats: 0.5 mg/kg IV every 8 hours; 0.5 mg/kg IM or PO every 
24 hours.54 1 mg/kg of buccal meloxicam was shown to be ef -
fective when given to lambs immediately before marking 55 or 
surgical mulesing and hot-knife tail docking.56
CAMELIDS :
Pain and inflammation (extra-label): 0.5 mg/kg IV; 1 mg/kg PO 
every third day54
 SWINE:
Noninfectious locomotor disorders to reduce the clinical signs 
of lameness and inflammation; for adjunctive therapy in the 
treatment of puerperal septicemia and toxemia (mastitis-me -
tritis-agalactia syndrome) with appropriate antibiotic therapy  
(extra-label): 0.4 mg/kg IM once. If required, a second adminis -
tration of meloxicam can be given after 24 hours.
BIRDS:
Analgesic (extra-label): 0.5 mg/kg IM once is also commonly 
used in birds and may be the safest of the NSAID analgesics for 
avian species. Because the adverse effects of all analgesics have not 
been studied in birds, these drugs should be used carefully in avi-
an patients.57 Another source states, Injectable forms of meloxicam 
and carprofen will cause myositis/muscle necrosis and therefore oral 
formulations are recommended . . . however oral bioavailability of 
NSAIDs varies greatly between avian species. Therefore, it is critical 
to monitor response to dosage and frequency of NSAID treatment 
for each avian patient.58  
FERRETS :
Anti-inflammatory/analgesic for postsurgical pain (extra-label): 
0.2 mg/kg PO or SC once59,60
SMALL MAMMALS :
Pain and inflammation (extra-label): 
a) Rabbits: Pharmacokinetic studies in healthy rabbits receiving 
1 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for 5 to 29 days concluded that 
meloxicam at this dose and treatment duration may be safe 
and effective.61,62 
b) Rats: 1 mg/kg PO or SC every 12 to 24 hours63
c) Guinea pigs: 
i. 0.2 mg/kg PO as a single presurgical dose, followed by  
0.1 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for postoperative days 2 and 
3. Dose may be titrated up to 0.5 mg/kg in individual cases; 
do not exceed 0.6 mg/kg per dose.38 
ii. 0.1 – 0.3 mg/kg PO or SC every 24 hours has also been 
 recommended.63 
REPTILES : 
Pain and inflammation  (extra-label): 0.2 mg/kg PO every 
24 hours for 5 days. Subsequent administration should be  
0.2 mg/kg every 48 hours. A study in ball pythons failed to demon-
strate analgesic effects when meloxicam was used at 0.3 mg/kg.64
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects, especially GI effects in dogs
 ■ Baseline and periodic serum renal and hepatic chemistry pan -
els when used chronically. One recommendation is to perform 
baseline renal and hepatic panels; repeat within the first 2 weeks 
and periodically thereafter.27 When liver enzymes are elevated and 
concern for liver function is present, liver function tests (eg, se -
rum bile acids) should be performed.65
Client Information
 ■ If using the oral liquid, shake the bottle well before using, and 
carefully measure the dose. Do not confuse the markings on the 
syringe (provided by the manufacturer). Give with food. For dogs 
weighing less than 4.5 kg (10 lb), it is safest to carefully measure 
the amount of medicine to give and apply it directly to a small 
amount of food. Do not give this medicine directly in the mouth.
 ■ Most animals tolerate meloxicam well, but ulcers or serious kid -
ney and liver problems can develop (rare), especially in cats. Con-
tact your veterinarian if your animal develops side effects such as 
eating less than normal, vomiting, changes in bowel movements, 
changes in behavior or activity (ie, more or less active than nor -
mal), weakness (eg, stumbling, clumsiness), seizures (ie, convul -
sions), aggression (ie, threatening behavior/actions), changes in 
drinking habits (ie, frequency, amount consumed), changes in 
urination habits (ie, frequency, color, or smell), and/or yellowing 
of gums, skin, or whites of the eyes (ie, jaundice). 


===== Plumb PDF 856 =====
Melphalan   829
 ■ Store this medicine well out of reach of animals and children, es-
pecially the honey-flavored oral liquid.
 ■ Periodic laboratory tests to check for liver and kidney side effects 
are required. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Meloxicam is a COX-2–preferential NSAID that occurs as a pale-yel-
low powder. It is in the oxicam class, related to piroxicam.
Meloxicam may also be known as UH-AC-62 and/or UH-AC-
62XX; many trade names are available, including Alloxate®, Infla-
cam®, Loxicom®, M-eloxyn®, Meloxadin®, Meloxidolor®, Meloxidyl®, 
Meloximed®, Metacam®, Ostilox® Recocam®, Rheumocam®, and Zeler-
is®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, store the injection and oral liquid at con -
trolled room temperature (20°C to 25°C [68°F-77°F]), with excur -
sions permitted between 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F) for the oral sus -
pension. The oral suspension labeled for use in the United Kingdom 
has a 6-month shelf life after the immediate package is first opened.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Meloxicam Oral Suspension: 0.5 mg/mL (0.02 mg/drop) and  
1.5 mg/mL (0.05 mg/drop) in a honey-flavored base: 10 mL,  
32 mL, 100 mL, and 180 mL dropper bottles with measuring syringe 
(marked in 5-lb body weight increments); Metacam®, generic; (Rx). 
FDA-approved for use in dogs. NADA# 141-213
Meloxicam 5 mg/mL for Injection: 10 mL vial; Metacam®, generic; 
(Rx). FDA-approved for use in dogs and cats. NADA# 141-219
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
Suggested withdrawal periods for extra-label use; always consult 
with local regulatory agencies prior to prescribing:
Horses: meat/offal, 5 days44,45
Cattle: Conservative 21- to 30-day meat withdrawal and 5-day milk 
withdrawal times have been recommended. 66,67 United Kingdom 
withdrawal periods: 15-day meat withdrawal; milk: 120 hours47
Swine: meat/offal, 5 days45
Sheep and goats : 15-day meat withdrawal time has been 
 recommended.67
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Meloxicam Tablets: 7.5 mg and 15 mg; Mobic®, generic; (Rx)
Meloxicam Capsules: 5 mg and 10 mg; Vivlodex®; (Rx)
Meloxicam Oral Suspension: 7.5 mg/5 mL in 100 mL bottle; Mobic®, 
generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Meloxicam
Melphalan
(mel-fa-lan) Alkeran®, Evomela®
Antineoplastic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Alkylating antineoplastic agent primarily used for multiple 
myeloma, resistant leukemia or lymphoma, and various other 
neoplasms
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with anemia, leukopenia, 
thrombocytopenia, previous chemotherapy or radiotherapy, 
impaired hepatic or renal function, or in those for whom im-
munosuppression may be dangerous (eg, infection).
 ▶ Adverse effects include chronic bone marrow suppression 
(eg, anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia), GI effects (eg, 
anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea), and pulmonary infiltrates or 
fibrosis.
 ▶ Potentially teratogenic and fetotoxic
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies melphalan as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling it.
Uses/Indications
Melphalan may be useful in the treatment of a variety of neoplas -
tic diseases, including lymphoreticular neoplasms particularly of 
plasma cell neoplasms, osteosarcoma, and mammary or pulmonary 
neoplasms. When combined with prednisone, it is considered the 
drug of choice for treating multiple myeloma. Melphalan can be used 
for treating primary (essential) thrombocythemia in dogs or cats. It 
has been used with some success in a variety of rescue protocols, 
including dexamethasone, melphalan, dactinomycin, and cytarabine 
(DMAC) for relapsed multicentric lymphoma in dogs and cats, 1–4 
and mechlorethamine, vincristine, melphalan, and prednisolone 
(MOMP) for relapsed canine lymphoma 5 and resistant feline lym -
phoma.6 Melphalan has been used successfully in combination with 
prednisone for canine cutaneous plasmacytosis.7
Pharmacology/Actions
Melphalan is a bifunctional alkylating agent and interferes with RNA 
transcription and DNA replication, thereby disrupting nucleic acid 
function. Because it is bifunctional, it has effects on both dividing 
and resting cells. Melphalan does not require activation by the liver 
(unlike cyclophosphamide).
Pharmacokinetics
Melphalan absorption is variable and often incomplete. It is dis -
tributed throughout the body water, but it is unknown whether it 
crosses the placenta, blood–brain barrier, or enters maternal milk. 
Melphalan is eliminated principally by hydrolysis. In humans, pro -
tein binding varies from 50% to 92%, and terminal half-lives are ≈75 
minutes following IV administration.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Melphalan should not be used in patients with a history of hyper -
sensitivity and should be used with caution in the following condi -
tions: anemia, bone marrow depression, current infection, impaired 
hepatic or renal function, tumor cell infiltration of bone marrow, or 
patients that have received previous chemotherapy or radiotherapy. 
Severe bone marrow suppression resulting in infection or bleeding 
can occur in humans. Melphalan is considered an irritant, and care 
should be taken to avoid extravasation.
In humans with impaired renal function receiving IV melphalan, 
a 50% dose reduction is suggested.8 
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) 
classifies melphalan as a hazardous drug; personal protective equipment 
(PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the risk for exposure. 


===== BSAVA PDF 266 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
250
Melatonin
(Circadin) POM 
Formulations: Oral: 2 mg and 3 mg tablets. Melatonin is also 
available in many over-the-counter formulations of various sizes and 
often with other drugs added.
Action: Hormone which is involved in the neuroendocrine control 
of seasonal hair loss, although the exact mechanism is not known.
Use:
• Treatment of hair cycling disorders in dogs; in particular, the 
treatment of alopecia X and seasonal flank alopecia.
A 4–6 week trial is recommended, if no growth is noted then 
treatment should be discontinued. For seasonal flank alopecia, 
treatment may have to be repeated the following year. The effect of 
melatonin on hair regrowth in dogs with non-pruritic alopecia of 
unknown aetiology is variable and every effort should be made to 
identify the underlying disorder before starting this therapy. Oral 
bioavailability of melatonin in dogs is unknown.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: No information available.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs: Hair cycling disorders: 3–6 mg p.o. q8h.
Cats: No information available.
References
Frank LA, Hnilica KA and Oliver JW (2006) Adrenal steroid hormone concentrations in 
dogs with hair cycle arrest (Alopecia X) before and during treatment with melatonin and 
mitotane. Veterinary Dermatology  1, 278–284
Meloxicam
(Inflacam, Loxicom, Meloxidyl, Meloxivet, 
Metacam, Rheumocam) POM-V 
Formulations: Oral: 0.5 mg/ml suspension for cats, 1.5 mg/ml 
oral suspension for dogs; 1.0 mg, 2.5 mg tablets for dogs.  Injectable: 
2 mg/ml solution for cats, 5 mg/ml solution.
Action: Preferentially inhibits COX-2 enzyme thereby limiting the 
production of prostaglandins involved in inflammation.
Use:
• Alleviation of inflammation and pain in both acute and chronic 
musculoskeletal disorders and the reduction of postoperative pain 
and inflammation following orthopaedic and soft tissue surgery.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 267 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
251
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
All NSAIDs should be administered cautiously in the perioperative 
period as they may adversely affect renal perfusion during periods of 
hypotension. If hypotension during anaesthesia is anticipated, delay 
meloxicam administration until the animal is fully recovered from 
anaesthesia and normotensive. Liver disease will prolong the 
metabolism of meloxicam leading to the potential for drug 
accumulation and overdose with repeated dosing. The oral dose 
(standard liquid preparation) may be administered directly into the 
mouth or mixed with food. In the cat, due to the longer half-life and 
narrower therapeutic index of NSAIDs, particular care should be 
taken to ensure the accuracy of dosing and not to exceed the 
recommended dose. Administration to animals with renal disease 
must be carefully evaluated.
Safety and handling: After first opening a bottle of liquid oral 
suspension use contents within 6 months. Shake the bottle of the 
oral suspension well before dosing. The shelf-life of a broached 
bottle of injectable solution is 28 days.
Contraindications: Do not give to dehydrated, hypovolaemic or 
hypotensive patients or those with GI disease or blood clotting 
problems. Administration of meloxicam to animals with renal disease 
must be carefully evaluated and is not advisable in the perioperative 
period. Do not give to pregnant animals or animals <6 weeks of age.
Adverse reactions: GI signs may occur in all animals after NSAID 
administration. Stop therapy if this persists beyond 1–2 days. Some 
animals develop signs with one NSAID and not another. A 3–5-day 
wash-out period should be allowed before starting another NSAID 
after cessation of therapy. Stop therapy immediately if GI bleeding is 
suspected. There is a small risk that NSAIDs may precipitate cardiac 
failure in humans and this risk in animals is not known.
Drug interactions: Do not administer concurrently or within 24 
hours of other NSAIDs and glucocorticoids. Do not administer with 
other potentially nephrotoxic agents, e.g. aminoglycosides.
DOSES
Dogs: Initial dose is 0.2 mg/kg s.c., p.o.; if given as a single 
preoperative injection effects last for 24 hours. Can be followed by a 
maintenance dose of 0.1 mg/kg p.o q24h.
Cats:   
• Initial injectable dose is 0.2 mg/kg s.c.; if given as a single 
preoperative injection effects last for 24 hours. To continue 
treatment for up to 5 days, may be followed 24 hours later by 
the oral suspension for cats at a dosage of 0.05 mg/kg p.o.
• Postoperative pain/inflammation:  single injection of 0.3 mg/kg 
s.c. has been shown to be safe and efficacious. It is not 
recommended to follow this with oral meloxicam 24 hours later.
• Chronic pain: initial oral dose is 0.1 mg/kg p.o. q24h, which can 
be followed by a maintenance dose of 0.05 mg/kg p.o q24h. 
Treatment should be discontinued after 14 days if no clinical 
improvement is apparent. 


===== BSAVA PDF 268 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
252
References
Aragon CL, Hofmeister EH and Budsberg SC (2007) Systematic review of clinical trials of 
treatments for osteoarthritis in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical 
Association  230, 514–521
Leece EA, Brearley JC and Harding EF (2005) Comparison of carprofen and meloxicam 
for 72 h following ovariohysterectomy in dogs. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 32 , 
184–192
Melphalan
(Alkeran*) POM
Formulations: Oral: 2 mg tablet. Injection: 50 mg powder in vial 
plus diluent.
Action: Forms inter- and intrastrand cross-links with DNA, resulting 
in inhibition of DNA synthesis and function.
Use:
• Treatment of multiple myeloma.
• May also be used as a substitute for cyclophosphamide in the 
treatment of canine lymphoma and in some rescue protocols for 
lymphoma.
• Treatment of some solid tumours (e.g. ovarian carcinoma, 
osteosarcoma, pulmonary and mammary neoplasia).
Take care in dosing small dogs using their body surface area as there 
is a risk of overdose due to the tablet sizes (tablets should not be 
split). Give tablets on an empty stomach.
Safety and handling: Cytotoxic drug; see Appendix and 
specialist texts for further advice on chemotherapeutic agents. 
Tablets should be stored in a closed, light-protected container under 
refrigeration (2–8°C).
Contraindications: Bone marrow suppression, concurrent 
infection and impaired renal function.
Adverse reactions: Myelosuppression is dose-limiting toxicity 
with leucopenia, thrombocytopenia; effect may be prolonged and 
cumulative. GI adverse reactions include anorexia, nausea and 
vomiting. Pulmonary infiltrates or fibrosis can also occur. Oral 
ulceration is seen in humans.
Drug interactions: Cimetidine decreases the oral bioavailability 
of melphalan. Steroids enhance the antitumour effects of 
melphalan. In humans ciclosporin enhances the risk of renal toxicity.
DOSES
See Appendix for chemotherapy protocols and conversion of body 
weight to body surface area.
Dogs: 
• Myeloma: 2 mg/m2 p.o. q24h for 1–2 weeks then reduce to 2–4 
mg/m2 p.o. q48h. Or 0.1 mg/kg p.o. q24h for 10 days then 0.05 
mg/kg p.o. q24–48h thereafter. Or 7 mg/m 2/day (rounded to the 
nearest whole 2 mg tablet) for 5 consecutive days every 21 days. 
Often used with prednisolone, see specialist texts for regimes. 
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
