
===== Plumb PDF 869 =====
842    Methadone
curs as white to off-white crystals that are slightly soluble in alcohol 
and freely soluble in water. It is a weak base—a 1% aqueous solution 
of metformin HCl has a pKa of 6.68, and a metformin base has a pKa 
of 12.4.
Metformin HCl may also be known as dimethylbiguanide HCl 
or metforimini hydrochloridium. There are many proprietary names 
outside of the United States for this drug.
Storage/Stability
Store metformin HCl oral products (tablets, sustained-release tab -
lets) protected from light at a controlled room temperature of 
20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F). Excursions permitted to 15°C to 30°C 
(59°F-86°F). 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Metformin HCl Oral Tablets: 500 mg, 850 mg, and 1000 mg; Gluco-
phage®, generic; (Rx)
Metformin HCl Extended-Release Oral Tablets: 500 mg, 750 mg, and 
1000 mg; Glucophage XR®, Glumetza®, Fortamet®, generic; (Rx)
Metformin HCl Oral Solution: 500 mg/5 mL (100 mg/mL) in  
118 mL and 473 mL; Riomet®; (Rx)
There are also fixed-dose oral tablet combination products available 
containing metformin and glyburide or glipizide.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Methadone
(meth-a-done) Dolophine®, Methadose®
Opioid Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Opioid mu-receptor agonist with NMDA blocking properties 
used in dogs, cats, and horses
 ▶ Can be used for sedation, as premedication before anesthesia, 
and for analgesia 
 ▶ Adverse effects include panting, vomiting, vocalization, defe-
cation postinjection, bradycardia, and respiratory depression.
 ▶ Many possible drug interactions
 ▶ DEA Schedule II (C-II) controlled substance in the United States
 ▶ Effects can be reversed with naloxone.
Uses/Indications
Methadone may be used as an opioid sedative, preanesthetic, or an-
algesic agent. Methadone use as a premedication reduces MAC re -
quirements.1 Methadone has demonstrated an analgesic effect after 
epidural use in horses.2 Poor bioavailability precludes oral adminis-
tration in dogs.3 
Pharmacology/Actions
In small animal species, methadone acts similarly to morphine with 
regard to its degree of analgesia and duration of action. Methadone is 
a synthetic mu-receptor agonist that is supplied as a racemic mixture; 
the L-isomer is up to 50 times more potent as a µ-agonist than the 
D-isomer. Agonism of the mu-opioid receptor (a g-protein coupled 
receptor) on both pre- and postsynaptic neurons results in decreased 
transmission and modulation of pain. Presynaptically, binding of the 
mu-opioid receptor results in closure of calcium ion channels and 
reduction of neurotransmitter release. Postsynaptically, agonism will 
open potassium channels, resulting in hyperpolarization and inhi -
bition of postsynaptic neurons.4 Both methadone isomers are non -
competitive inhibitors of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors5 
and can reduce reuptake of norepinephrine, 6 which may also con -
tribute to its analgesic effects, especially in patients tolerant to other 
opioids7,8; however, the therapeutic application of this is unknown. 
Methadone’s depression of the medullary respiratory center re -
sults in respiratory depression, and stimulation at the vagal center 
can cause bradycardia. Methadone is more lipid-soluble than mor -
phine and is therefore more potent due to having more favorable 
pharmacokinetics. IV administration of methadone has potential for 
histamine release, but studies have shown no resulting hemodynam-
ic instability9; histamine release following administration of metha -
done by other routes is unknown but possible.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, methadone has poor oral bioavailability due to extensive 
first-pass metabolism.3,10 Coadministration of multiple CYP450 in -
hibitors (eg, ketoconazole, fluconazole, fluoxetine, trimethoprim, 
chloramphenicol) presumably affects different isoenzymes in dogs 
and has been shown to significantly increase oral absorption, area 
under the curve (AUC), and plasma concentrations of methadone.3,11 
Methadone absorption after oral transmucosal administration is 
slower and reduced as compared with methadone given IM.12 SC ad-
ministration has a bioavailability of ≈80%, with peak concentrations 
occurring ≈1 hour after administration. Bioavailability is ≈90% after 
IM administration,6 with peak concentrations occurring within 5 to 
15 minutes. VdSS is ≈5 to 6 L/kg, and protein binding is 60% to 90%.6 
Terminal elimination half-life after IV administration is ≈1.75 to 4 
hours; clearance is ≈25 to 50 mL/kg/minute.13,14 After SC and IM ad-
ministration, half-life is ≈11 hours and ≈1 to 2 hours, respectively; 
however, there is wide interpatient variation.6,14
In cats, bioavailability of buccal (ie, oral transmucosal [OTM]) 
methadone is 44%.15 After administration of methadone 0.3 mg/kg 
IV or 0.6 mg/kg via OTM administration, peak concentrations oc -
curred at 10 minutes (IV) and 2 hours (OTM). 16 A 0.6 mg/kg IM 
dose provides 4 hours of analgesia and reaches plasma concentration 
between 40 to 124 ng/mL. T max and clearance were 20 minutes and 
9.1 mL/kg/minute, respectively.17
In horses, methadone given PO appears to be well absorbed, but 
bioavailability is ≈3 times lower when administered intragastrically. 
P-glycoprotein may play a role in the poor intestinal absorption of 
methadone in vivo. Elimination half-life is ≈1 to 2 hours, and clear -
ance is 5 to 8 mL/kg/minute.18,19
In goats, methadone has a high bioavailability and volume of distri-
bution (7 L/kg) after SC administration, with a half-life of ≈3.6 hours. 
IV administration resulted in a terminal half-life of ≈1.5 hours.20 Elim-
ination half-life after IM administration was ≈1.4 hours.21 
In humans, methadone is well absorbed from the GI tract via PO 
administration and after parenteral injection (SC or IM). Methadone 
is widely distributed and extensively bound to plasma proteins (60% 
to 90%, principally alpha1-acid glycoprotein). Methadone is metab-
olized in the liver to inactive metabolites primarily by the CYPP450, 
CYP3A, and CYP2B6 isoenzymes, but other isoenzymes also play 
metabolic roles. Methadone’s half-life in humans is widely variable 
(15 to 60 hours). Elimination half-lives of methadone may be ex -
tended if giving multiple doses.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Methadone is contraindicated in animals hypersensitive to narcotic 
analgesics and in animals with any condition associated with respira-
tory depression, acute respiratory dysfunction, advanced respiratory 
failure, and severe hepatic or renal dysfunction, as well as during 
parturition.6,22,23


===== Plumb PDF 870 =====
Methadone   843
Use methadone with extreme caution in patients with head inju -
ries, increased intracranial pressure, or acute abdominal conditions 
(eg, colic), as it may obscure the diagnosis or clinical course of these 
conditions.
Use opioids with caution in patients with hypothyroidism and 
hypoadrenocorticism (ie, Addison’s disease), as well as geriatric and 
severely debilitated patients. Neonatal, debilitated, and geriatric pa-
tients or patients with severe hepatic disease may be more suscepti -
ble to the effects of methadone, may require lower doses, and should 
be monitored closely. Greyhounds may require higher doses than 
other breeds.24
Methadone can cause bradycardia and therefore should be used 
cautiously in patients with pre-existing bradyarrhythmia. Hypoten-
sion may occur and result in decreased cardiac output and blood 
pressure.
Because vomiting may occur, methadone as a preanesthetic in 
animals with suspected gastric dilatation-volvulus or intestinal ob -
struction is usually not recommended.
Opioid analgesics are contraindicated in patients stung by scorpi-
ons (eg, Centruroides spp) as it may potentiate venom effects.25
Some dosage forms may contain benzylalcohol as a preservative. 
In human newborns, benzylalcohol and derivatives can potentially 
displace bilirubin from protein binding sites; caution in human ne -
onates is advised. There is an FDA black-box warning regarding the 
risk for misuse and abuse, respiratory depression, QT prolongation, 
neonatal withdrawal syndrome, accidental ingestion, and addiction 
treatment when prescribing methadone for humans. QT intervals 
may be prolonged in patients taking methadone, which can result in 
life-threatening arrhythmia. Use caution in patients with prolonged 
QT intervals or those receiving medications that can further prolong 
QT intervals. See Drug Interactions.
Extreme care should be taken when administering methadone; 
spillage onto the skin can result in respiratory depression. If metha-
done comes in contact with skin, wash the area thoroughly and seek 
medical advice.
Adverse Effects
In dogs, adverse effects can include panting, 26 whining/vocaliza -
tion,14 dysphoria, sedation, anorexia, 27 emesis, urination and/or 
defecation (shortly after injection), constipation or paralytic ileus, 
reduced body temperature,3 bradycardia, and respiratory depression 
or apnea. Systemic vascular resistance may increase. 28,29 Adverse 
effects appear to be dose-related. 1,30 Methadone tends to cause less 
sedation or vomiting than morphine.31 Methadone has a greater car-
diodepressant effect than morphine.32
In cats, methadone appears to cause less excitation (eg, lip licking, 
salivation, tremors, urination, vocalization) and vomiting than some 
other mu-agonists, but these effects can occur. Pupil dilation persists 
after analgesia in cats.6 Hyperalgesia has also been reported in cats. 
In horses, methadone 0.1 mg/kg IV or greater has caused pro -
nounced CNS excitement. Gut sounds may be diminished. 33 Mean 
arterial pressure may be increased when administered in combina -
tion with detomidine.34
In sheep, methadone 0.5 mg/kg IV may result in drooling, brux -
ism, mydriasis, nystagmus, vocalization, and tremors. Rumination 
was inhibited in goats receiving SC methadone.20
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Effects on the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis may cause tes -
ticular regression, decreased testosterone concentrations, and re -
duced sexual activity in males. Administration to animals from the 
time of organogenesis through lactation has resulted in increased 
neonate mortality, decreased litter size, neural tube defects, and life-
long behavior alterations.35 
In humans, methadone is relatively safe to use at low doses for 
short periods during the first 2 trimesters of pregnancy; methadone 
administered late in term has caused significant respiratory depres -
sion and increased stillbirths. 
Epidural administration results in lower umbilical cord meth -
adone concentration than IV methadone. 36 Some veterinary-ap -
proved product labels outside of the United States state that metha -
done is contraindicated for use in animals during parturition.23  
Methadone has been found in breast milk and there are subse -
quently low plasma concentrations in nursing human infants.
Although methadone enters maternal milk, it is considered com-
patible with breastfeeding in women.37
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdose may produce profound respiratory and/or CNS depression 
in most species. Newborn animals may be more susceptible to these 
effects than adults. In dogs, a lethal dose of 50% (LD 50) is reported 
to be 29 mg/kg.38 A dose of 4 mg/kg can be fatal in cats.6 Other toxic 
effects can include cardiovascular collapse, hypothermia, and skele-
tal muscle hypotonia. Seizures may occur at very high doses (ie, 10 
times the therapeutic dose).22,23 
Naloxone, an opioid antagonist, is the agent of choice in treating 
respiratory depression. Naloxone may need to be readministered in 
cases of larger overdoses. Patients given naloxone must be observed 
closely because naloxone’s effects may diminish before subtoxic con-
centrations of methadone are reached. Mechanical respiratory sup -
port should be considered in cases of severe respiratory depression. 
Dialysis, charcoal hemoperfusion, and forced diuresis do not appear 
to be beneficial in treating methadone overdose.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving methadone and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate. In hu -
mans, the FDA-approved product has a black-box warning regard -
ing the risk for fatal respiratory depression when methadone is ad -
ministered with other CYP inhibitors. 
 ■ Alpha 2-Receptor Agonists  (eg, detomidine, dexmedeto-
midine, xylazine ): Although methadone combinations with al -
pha2-receptoragonists are generally safe and effective, 39 severe 
hypoxemia was seen in dogs breathing room air in one study us -
ing methadone/medetomidine combination. 40 Detomidine may 
reduce methadone clearance in horses41
 ■ Antiarrhythmics, Class I and III  (eg, amiodarone, lido -
caine, procainamide, quinidine ): Use with methadone may in -
crease the risk for arrhythmia, including QT prolongation.
 ■ Anticholinergic Agents (eg, atropine, clomipramine, di -
phenhydramine, hyoscyamine, procainamide ): Medications 
with anticholinergic properties may increase the risk for urinary 
retention and constipation when combined with opioids.
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, fluconazole, itraconazole, keto -
conazole): May increase methadone plasma concentrations. 
Methadone is contraindicated with ketoconazole in humans. 
In dogs, ketoconazole did not appreciably increase methadone 
absorption following oral administration in one study 10 but ap -
peared to increase oral methadone absorption, peak methadone 
concentration, and total drug exposure (AUC) in another study.3 
Fluconazole appears to increase oral methadone absorption, peak 


===== Plumb PDF 871 =====
844    Methadone
methadone concentration, and exposure in dogs.11 
 ■ Benzodiazepines (eg, alprazolam, diazepam, midazolam ): 
May potentiate the CNS and respiratory depressant effects of 
methadone 
 ■ Calcium Channel Blockers : Use with methadone may in -
crease the risk for arrhythmias.
 ■ Central Nervous System Depressants, Other  (eg, anes-
thetic agents, antihistamines, , ethanol, methocarbamol, phe -
nothiazines): May cause increased CNS or respiratory depression 
when used with methadone
 ■ Chloramphenicol : May increase methadone concentrations. 
Chloramphenicol given to greyhounds that had also received 
methadone resulted in increased peak drug concentrations, total 
drug exposure (AUC), and persistence of drug concentrations. 
Coadministration of chloramphenicol with methadone may re -
sult in exaggerated and prolonged effects of methadone if metha-
done doses are not adjusted.26
 ■ Cimetidine : May reduce methadone metabolism 
 ■ Corticosteroids With Mineralocorticoid Activity 
(eg, desoxycorticosterone pivalate [DOCP], fludrocortisone ): 
Use with methadone may increase potential for electrolyte abnor-
malities.
 ■ Desmopressin : Opioids may increase the risk for water intoxi -
cation or hyponatremia when combined with desmopressin.
 ■ Diuretics (eg, furosemide): Opioids may decrease diuretic ef -
ficacy in patients with congestive heart failure and increase the 
adverse effects of diuretics. 
 ■ Interferon Alfa : May increase methadone concentrations
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics  (eg, clarithromycin, erythromycin): 
May inhibit metabolism of methadone and increase methadone 
concentrations
 ■ Magnesium Sulfate : The CNS effects of methadone may be 
increased; this is more likely with higher magnesium doses or IV 
magnesium therapy.
 ■ Minocycline : IV minocycline therapy may enhance the CNS 
depressant effects of methadone.
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors  ( MAOIs; eg , amitraz, 
linezolid, selegiline): Methadone may enhance the serotonergic 
effect of MAOIs and lead to possible serotonin syndrome; avoid 
concurrent use. 
 ■ Naloxone : Used clinically to reverse opioid CNS and respirato-
ry depression.
 ■ Opioid Agonist/Antagonist (eg, buprenorphine, butorpha-
nol, nalbuphine): Combined use could antagonize opioid effects.
 ■ Phenobarbital, Primidone : May decrease methadone con -
centrations; additive CNS or respiratory depression is possible
 ■ QT Prolongation  (eg, cisapride, fluoxetine, metronidazole, 
ondansetron): Methadone may prolong QT intervals in humans; 
this effect may be increased with agents that also prolong QT in -
tervals. In dogs, methadone does not appear to prolong the QT 
interval.30 Use with caution with other QT-prolonging agents.
 ■ Rifampin : May decrease methadone concentrations, but poten -
tially not in dogs
 ■ Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors  (SSRIs; eg, flu-
oxetine, sertraline): Concurrent fluoxetine increases oral meth -
adone absorption, peak methadone concentration, and exposure 
in dogs.3 May have additive serotonergic effects. Monitor for se -
rotonin syndrome.
 ■ Serotonin Modulators  (eg, metoclopramide, mirtazapine, 
ondansetron, tramadol, trazodone ): Serotonin effects may be 
enhanced when serotonin modulators are given concomitantly 
with methadone. Monitor for serotonin syndrome.
 ■ St John’s Wort : May decrease methadone concentrations
 ■ Succinylcholine : Opioids combined with succinylcholine 
may enhance the bradycardic effects of opioids. 
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants  (eg, amitriptyline, clomip -
ramine): Methadone may exacerbate the CNS depressant effects 
of tricyclic antidepressants; serotonin effects may be enhanced.
 ■ Trimethoprim : Concurrent use appears to increase oral meth -
adone absorption, peak methadone concentration, and exposure 
in dogs.3
 ■ Zidovudine : Methadone may increase zidovudine concentra -
tions.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Opioids may increase biliary tract pressure, resulting in increased 
plasma amylase and lipase values up to 24 hours following their 
administration.
 ■ The following drugs can reportedly cause false positive results on 
urine screening tests  for methadone: chlorpromazine, clomip -
ramine, diphenhydramine, doxylamine, quetiapine, quinolones, 
thioridazine, and verapamil. 
Dosages
NOTE: All listed dosages are based on the methadone HCl salt 
formulation (10 mg methadone HCl is equivalent to ≈8.9 mg 
of methadone). Most products are labeled with methadone HCl 
strength but check before administering to patients. 
DOGS:
Perioperative pain control (extra-label): 
IM: Methadone 0.5 mg/kg IM and acepromazine 0.03 mg/kg IM 
as a premedication prior to orthopedic surgery and meloxicam 
0.2 mg/kg at induction produced superior analgesia to buprenor-
phine for 8 hours postoperatively. 42 Methadone 0.3 mg/kg com -
bined with acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg or medetomidine 10 µg/kg 
and given IM as premedication for ovariohysterectomy produced 
superior analgesia to buprenorphine for 8 hours postoperatively.43
IV: Methadone 0.2 mg/kg IV; dexmedetomidine 1 µg/kg IV 
 preceded44
Epidural: Methadone 0.1 mg/kg at induction; may combine this 
dose with ropivacaine 1.65 mg/kg. 45 Methadone 0.5 mg/kg lum -
bosacrally has also been used 46; isoflurane MAC can be reduced 
by up to 30% with this higher methadone dose. 
Analgesia (extra-label): 
Continuous rate infusion (CRI): Methadone 0.1 – 0.2 mg/kg IV 
as a loading dose followed by methadone 0.12 mg/kg/hour IV 
CRI. Practically, add methadone 60 mg (6 mL of the 10 mg/mL 
injection) to 500 mL IV fluid (eg, 0.9% NaCl, Ringer’s, 5% dex -
trose) at 1 mL/kg/hour. May be combined with ketamine and/or 
lidocaine47
Intermittent dosing:
1. Dosage recommendations vary but range from methadone  
0.1 – 1 mg/kg IV ,45 SC, or IM every 4 to 8 hours.6,22
2. Methadone 0.2 mg/kg IV every 4 hours provided analgesia 
equivalent to fentanyl CRI following spinal surgery.48
3. Methadone 0.7 mg/kg IM provides sedation and analgesia as a 
premedication prior to orthopedic surgery.49
4. Methadone 0.5 mg/kg combined with acepromazine  
0.02 mg/kg and given IM decreases isoflurane MAC.50
5. Methadone 0.3 mg/kg IV after medetomidine 2.5 µg/kg IV en-
hances sedation and provides postoperative analgesia.51
Premedication to general anesthesia (extra-label): 
IM:
1. Methadone 0.2 – 0.3 mg/kg IM52


===== Plumb PDF 872 =====
Methadone   845
2. Methadone 0.2 mg/kg combined with acepromazine  
0.02 mg/kg and given IM53
3. Methadone 0.2 mg/kg combined with dexmedetomidine  
2 µg/kg and given IM prior to brachycephalic obstructive air -
way syndrome surgery54
4. Methadone 0.2 – 0.3 mg/kg combined with dexmedetomidine 
5 µg/kg and given IM55
5. Methadone 0.2 – 0.3 mg/kg combined with dexmedetomidine 
5 µg/kg and midazolam 0.3 mg/kg and given IM56
6. Methadone 0.2 – 0.3 mg/kg combined with medetomidine  
20 µg/kg and given IM57 
IV:
1. Methadone 0.2 mg/kg IV was used as a premedication, fol -
lowed by isoflurane for anesthesia in a study of 32 dogs under-
going orthopedic surgery.55
2. Methadone 0.2 – 0.3 mg/kg IV with acepromazine  
0.05 mg/kg IV58
SC: Methadone 1.1 mg/kg SC22
Extradural: Methadone 0.3 mg/kg diluted with saline to  
0.2 mL/kg; acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg IV was used as a preanes -
thetic agent58
Sedative combinations (extra-label):
IM:
1. Methadone 0.25 – 0.75 mg/kg combined with acepromazine 
0.05 mg/kg and given IM. For shorter sedation requirements 
(30 to 90 minutes), use methadone 0.25 mg/kg; for longer 
sedation requirements (up to 120 minutes), use methadone  
0.5 – 0.75 mg/kg IM. Peak effect is achieved within 30 minutes.39,59
2. Methadone 0.5 mg/kg IM; can be combined with dexmedeto -
midine 10 µg/kg60 or xylazine 0.5 mg/kg and given IM39
3. Methadone 0.4 mg/kg combined with medetomidine  
2.5 µg/kg and given IM enhances sedation; bradycardia and 
panting may occur.61
IV: Methadone 0.2 mg/kg IV with dexmedetomidine 2 µg/kg IV62
CATS:
Perioperative pain control (extra-label): 
IM combinations:
1. Methadone 0.5 mg/kg IM combined with medetomidine  
20 µg/kg IM63 or acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg IM64
2. Methadone 0.3 mg/kg IM, dexmedetomidine 15 µg/kg IM, and 
either alfaxalone 3 mg/kg IM or ketamine 3 mg/kg IM provid-
ed adequate analgesia and anesthesia and smooth recoveries 
for cats undergoing ovariectomy.65
3. QUAD protocol: methadone 5 mg/m 2 (NOT mg/kg), mede -
tomidine 600 µg/m2 (NOT µg/kg), ketamine 60 mg/m 2 (NOT 
mg/kg), midazolam 3 mg/m2 (NOT mg/kg) mixed in the same 
syringe and given IM 10 minutes prior to anesthesia66
SC: Methadone 0.6 mg/kg with acepromazine 0.02 mg/kg SC as 
preoperative combination provided effective analgesia for 6 hours 
following ovariohysterectomy in most cats.67 
Epidural:
1. In cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy, lumbosacral epidur -
al combination of lidocaine 2% 4 mg/kg with methadone  
0.3 mg/kg resulted in adequate surgical analgesia and pro -
longed (ie, greater than 18 hours) postoperative analgesia.68
2. Under maintenance anesthesia, methadone 0.2 mg/kg epidural 
reduced and delayed the need for postoperative rescue anal -
gesia.69
Analgesia (extra-label): 
Continuous rate infusion (CRI): Loading dose of 0.1 – 0.2 mg/kg  
IV; followed by 0.12 mg/kg/hour IV CRI. Practically, add metha-
done HCl 60 mg (6 mL of the 10 mg/mL injection) to 500 mL IV 
fluid and run at 1 mL/kg/hour IV CRI. May combine with ket -
amine and/or lidocaine47 
Intermittent dosing:
1. Dosage recommendations vary but range from methadone 
0.05 – 0.5 mg/kg IV , SC, or IM every 4 to 6 hours.
2. Methadone 0.2 – 0.6 mg/kg SC 17,70–72; may repeat at 3 time 
points at 5 hour intervals.22
3. Methadone 0.5 mg/kg IM with ketamine 0.3 mg/kg IM 20 
minutes before induction of anesthesia73
4. Methadone 0.75 mg/kg oral transmucosal provided transient 
antinociception under experimental conditions.72
Anesthesia premedication (extra-label): Methadone 0.1 – 0.6 mg/kg 
IV , IM, or SC70,74
IM combinations: 
1. Methadone 0.2 mg/kg combined with acepromazine  
0.05 mg/kg and given IM75
2. Methadone 0.2 mg/kg combined with dexmedetomidine  
5 µg/kg and given IM76
3. Methadone 0.2 mg/kg combined with tiletamine/zolazepam  
3 mg/kg and given IM77
4. Methadone 0.3 mg/kg combined with dexmedetomidine  
3 – 4 µg/kg and given IM78,79
HORSES :
Analgesia (extra-label): 0.22 mg/kg IM or SC23
IV combination: Methadone 0.2 – 0.5 mg/kg IV . Can be com -
bined with detomidine 10 µg/kg IV or acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg  
IV and given IV .80–82 In one study, more pronounced antinoci -
ception occurred with the methadone/detomidine combination 
as compared with methadone/acepromazine.81 Use of methadone 
0.5 mg/kg IV provided better analgesia but more adverse effects.80
Continuous rate infusion (CRI): 
1. Methadone 0.2 mg/kg combined with detomidine 5 µg/kg and 
given IV as a loading dose followed by methadone 0.05 mg/kg  
per hour and detomidine 12.5 µg/kg/hour IV CRI. 83,84 De -
creased gut sounds occurred.
Epidural (extra-label): Methadone 0.1 mg/kg in the first inter -
coccygeal space (ie, Co1-Co2) diluted with sterile 0.9% sodium 
chloride solution to a total volume of 20 mL and administered 
at a rate of 1 mL/second; analgesia was attained 15 minutes after 
administration and lasted 5 hours.2
Restraint (extra-label): Methadone 0.11 mg/kg combined with 
acepromazine 0.055 mg/kg and given IV23
Premedication (extra-label): Methadone 0.1 mg/kg combined 
with romifidine 80 µg/kg and given IV; combination administered 
30 to 120 minutes after acepromazine 0.02 mg/kg IM85
SHEEP:
Sedation (extra-label): Methadone 0.5 mg/kg IV combined with 
either xylazine 0.1 mg/kg or acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg IV87,88
Lumbosacral epidural (extra-label):
1. Methadone 0.15 – 0.3 mg/kg combined with bupivacaine  
0.25 – 0.5 mg/kg89,90,68
Monitoring
 ■ Analgesic or preanesthetic effect
 ■ Respiratory depression at higher doses


===== Plumb PDF 873 =====
846    Methazolamide
Client Information
 ■ Methadone should only be used in the clinic or with direct profes-
sional supervision when given as an injection.
 ■ Methadone is a C-II controlled drug and requires a new written 
prescription for refills. Use of this medication in animals or hu -
mans other than those for whom they are prescribed is illegal.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Methadone HCl, a synthetic diphenylheptane-derivative narcotic 
agonist, occurs as an odorless, white crystalline powder. Methadone 
is freely soluble in water, chloroform, and alcohol and practically in-
soluble in ether or glycerol. The pH of a 1% solution in water is be -
tween 4.5 to 6.5. The commercially available injection has a pH from 
3 to 6.5. Methadone is typically supplied as methadone hydrochlo -
ride (HCl) salt and doses are based on the concentration of the salt 
formulation (ie, 10 mg methadone HCl is equivalent to 8.9 mg meth-
adone). The dispersible tablet formulation (ie, Diskets®) contains 
insoluble ingredients that deter their use for injection. Methadone 
injectable products and oral suspensions should be protected from 
light.6 
Methadone may also be known as amidine HCl, amidone HCl, 
methadoni hydrochloridum, Phenadone, Adolan®, Biodone®, Cloro 
Nona®, Comfortan ®, Dolmed®, Eptadone ®, Gobbidona ®, Heptadon ®, 
Ketalgine®, Metadol®, Metasedin®, Methaddict®, Methadose®, Metha-
tabs®, Methex®, Methodyne®, Methone®, Pallidone®, Phymet®, Physep-
tone®, Pinadone®, Sedo®, Symoron®, Synastone®, or Synthadon®. 
Storage/Stability
Methadone injection should be stored at room temperature of 20°C 
to 25°C (68°F-77°F) and protected from light. Store vials in the man-
ufacturer’s carton until ready for use.
Methadone is a schedule II (C-II) controlled substance. In ac -
cordance with DEA regulations, it must be stored in an area that is 
substantially constructed and securely locked. Follow applicable lo -
cal, state, and federal rules regarding disposal of unused or wasted 
controlled drugs. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information.
Methadone injection is reportedly stable when mixed in a syringe 
with acepromazine and compatible with propofol and alfaxalone. 
Methadone is compatible in solution with 0.9% sodium chloride, 
and appears Y-site compatible with the following drugs (partial 
list): ampicillin/sulbactam, calcium chloride/gluconate, cefazolin, 
dexamethasone sodium phosphate, dexmedetomidine, diazepam, 
dobutamine, dopamine, esmolol, esomeprazole, famotidine, hydro-
cortisone sodium succinate, magnesium sulfate, methylprednisolone 
sodium succinate, metoclopramide, midazolam, pantoprazole, phe-
nobarbital, potassium chloride, and sodium bicarbonate.
Methadone injection is reportedly incompatible at Y-sites with 
acyclovir, allopurinol, amphotericin B conventional, dantrolene, flu-
orouracil, meloxicam, methohexital, pentobarbital, piperacillin-ta -
zobactam, sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, and thiopental. 
Methadone has reported variable compatibility at Y-sites with 
furosemide. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE IN THE UNITED STATES
Methadone HCl Injection: (10 mg/mL) is approved for veterinary 
use in some countries (ie, United Kingdom, Australia).
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a Class 1 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Methadone HCl Injection: 10 mg/mL in 20 mL multidose vials; ge -
neric; (Rx, C-II) 
Methadone HCl Oral Tablets: 5 and 10 mg; Dolophine®; generic; (Rx, 
C-II)
Methadone HCl Dispersible Tablet: 40 mg; Methadose®; generic; (Rx, 
C-II)
Methadone HCl Oral Solution: 1 mg/mL and 2 mg/mL in 500 mL 
bottles; Methadose®; generic; (Rx, C-II)
Methadone HCl Oral Liquid Concentrate: 10 mg/mL in 30 mL (with 
calibrated dropper) and 1000 mL bottles; Methadose®, Intensol®; ge-
neric; (Rx, C-II)
Report dispensing to state monitoring programs where required.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Methazolamide
(meth-a-zoe-la-mide) Neptazane®
Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitor
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitor used primarily for open 
angle glaucoma; reportedly is becoming difficult to obtain at 
an affordable cost
 ▶ Contraindications include patients with significant hepatic, 
renal, or pulmonary disease, hyponatremia, hypokalemia, 
hypoadrenocorticism, hyperchloremic acidosis, or electrolyte 
imbalance.
 ▶ Primary adverse effects include GI (eg, vomiting, diarrhea, 
inappetence), hypokalemia, and metabolic acidosis. Cats may 
be more susceptible to developing adverse effects.
 ▶ Give oral doses with food if GI adverse effects occur.
 ▶ Monitor with tonometry for glaucoma; check electrolytes 
Uses/Indications
Orally administered methazolamide is used for the medical treatment 
of glaucoma. Topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (eg, dorzolamide) 
are more commonly used today, as they can lower intraocular pressure 
as effectively as systemic drugs and have fewer adverse effects.
Pharmacology/Actions
The carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are noncompetitive, reversible 
inhibitors of carbonic anhydrase. Inhibition of carbonic anhydrase 
results in a reduction of the formation of hydrogen and bicarbonate 
ions from carbon dioxide and decreases the availability of these ions 
for active transport into body secretions.
Pharmacologic effects of the carbonic anhydrase inhibitors in -
clude decreased formation of aqueous humor, thereby reducing in -
traocular pressure; increased renal tubular secretion of sodium and 
potassium and, to a greater extent, bicarbonate, leading to increased 
urine alkalinity and volume; and anticonvulsant activity, which is in-
dependent of its diuretic effects (mechanism not fully understood, 
but may be due to carbonic anhydrase or a metabolic acidosis effect).
Pharmacokinetics
Little information is available. Methazolamide is absorbed from the 
GI tract, albeit more slowly than acetazolamide. It is distributed 
throughout the body, including the CSF and aqueous humor. Meth-
azolamide is at least partially metabolized in the liver.


===== BSAVA PDF 271 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
255
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
although methadone will cause constriction of GI sphincters (such 
as the pyloric sphincter) and may cause a reduction in GI motility 
when given over a long period. Methadone crosses the placenta and 
may exert sedative effects in neonates born to bitches treated prior 
to parturition. Severe adverse effects can be treated with naloxone.
Drug interactions: Other CNS depressants (e.g. anaesthetics, 
antihistamines, barbiturates, phenothiazines, tranquillizers) may 
cause increased CNS or respiratory depression when used 
concurrently with narcotic analgesics.
DOSES
When used for sedation is generally given as part of a combination. 
See Appendix for sedation protocols in cats and dogs.
Dogs: Analgesia: 0.1–0.5 mg/kg i.m. or 0.1–0.3 mg/kg i.v. prn.
Cats: Analgesia: 0.1–0.5 mg/kg i.m. or 0.1–0.3 mg/kg i.v. prn. Doses 
in the range of 0.6 mg/kg are appropriate for oral transmucosal 
administration in cats.
References
Ferreira TH, Rezende ML, Mama KR et al. (2011) Plasma concentrations and behavioural, 
antinociceptive and physiological effects of methadone after intravenous or oral 
transmucosal administration in cats. American Journal of Veterinary Research  72, 764–771
Hunt JR, Attenburrow PM, Slingsby LS et al . (2013) Comparison of premedication with 
buprenorphine or methadone with meloxicam for postoperative analgesia in dogs 
undergoing orthopaedic surgery.  Journal of Small Animal Practice  54, 418–424
Methenamine (Hexamine hippurate)
(Hiprex*) POM 
Formulations: Oral: 150 mg methenamine + 116 mg monosodium 
phosphate tablet; 1 g methenamine hippurate (Hiprex) tablet.
Action: Urinary antiseptic.
Use:
• Long-term control of recurrent urinary tract infections (UTIs).
It is bacteriostatic and mainly indicated for prevention of recurrent 
infection. It requires an acidic urine to be effective. Evidence for 
efficacy currently lacking in animals.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Severe renal or hepatic impairment, 
dehydration and metabolic acidosis.
Adverse reactions: Methenamine may cause GI disturbances, 
bladder irritation or a rash. Often poorly tolerated by cats.
Drug interactions: Efficacy is reduced when drugs that alkalinize 
urine (potassium citrate) are used concurrently.
DOSES
Dogs: Management of recurrent UTI:  1–3 tablets p.o. q24h 
(methenamine/sodium acid phosphate) or 500 mg/dog p.o. q12h 
(methenamine).


===== BSAVA PDF 272 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
256
Cats: Management of recurrent UTI: 1 tablet p.o. q24h 
(methenamine/sodium acid phosphate) or 250 mg/cat p.o. q12h 
(methenamine). 
References
Olin SJ and Bartges JW (2015) Urinary tract infections. Veterinary Clinics of North 
America: Small Animal Practice  45, 721–756
Methimazole see Thiamazole
Methionine
(Methionine*) general sale 
Formulations: Oral: 500 mg tablets.
Action: Urinary acidifier.
Use:
• Treatment of struvite urolithiasis.
There is an increased risk of acidosis if used with other urinary 
acidifying treatments. Used to be recommended for paracetamol 
poisoning, but alternative anti-oxidants now preferred (e.g. 
acetylcysteine, S-adenosylmethionine).
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Renal failure or severe hepatic disease. Young 
age.
Adverse reactions: Overdosage may lead to metabolic acidosis.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs: Urine acidification: 100 mg/kg p.o. q12h. Adjust the dose 
until urine pH is 6.5 or lower.
Cats: Urine acidification: 200 mg/cat p.o. q8h. Adjust the dose until 
urine pH is 6.5 or lower. 
References
Raditic DM (2015) Complementary and integrative therapies for lower urinary tract 
diseases. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice 45, 857–878
Methocarbamol
(Robaxin*) POM 
Formulations: Oral: 500 mg, 750 mg tablets.
Action: Carbamate derivative of guaifenesin that is a CNS 
depressant with sedative and musculoskeletal relaxant properties. 
The mechanism of action has not been fully established; it has no 
direct action on the contractile mechanism of skeletal muscle, the 
motor endplate or the nerve fibre.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 273 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
257
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Use:
• Treatment of tetanus and some toxicities (e.g. pyrethroid, 
strychnine).
• General muscle relaxant for muscular spasms.
The clearance of methocarbamol is significantly impaired in human 
patients with renal and hepatic disease. There is very limited 
literature on the use of methocarbamol in cats; case reports 
describing the use of methocarbamol by intravenous bolus injection 
and continuous rate infusion in dogs and cats have been published.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Salivation, emesis, lethargy, weakness and 
ataxia.
Drug interactions: As methocarbamol is a CNS depressant, 
additive depression may occur when given with other CNS 
depressant agents.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: 20–45 mg/kg p.o. q8h. Very high doses may be 
required for tetanus. It is recommended that the dose does not 
exceed 330 mg/kg, although serious toxicity or death has not been 
reported after overdoses. 
References
Draper WE, Bolfer L, Cottam E et al . (2013) Methocarbamol CRI for symptomatic 
treatment of pyrethroid intoxication: a report of three cases. Journal of the American 
Animal Hospital Association  49, 325–328
Nielsen C and Pluhar GE (2005) Diagnosis and treatment of hindlimb muscle strain 
injuries in 22 dogs. Veterinary and Comparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology 18 , 
247–253
Methoprene (S-Methoprene)
(Acclaim spray, Broadline, Duoflect, Fiprotec, 
Fleascreen Combo, Frontline Combo/Plus, R.I.P. 
fleas, Staykill) POM-V, NFA-VPS, general sale 
Formulations: Always in combination with other agents. Topical:  
9% S-methoprene with fipronil in spot-on pipettes of various sizes 
(e.g. Frontline Combo/Plus). A combination with eprinomectin, 
fipronil and praziquantel (Broadline).  Environmental: S-methoprene 
with permethrin (Acclaim) or tetramethrine + permethrin (R.I.P. 
Fleas) household sprays.
Action: Juvenile hormone analogue that inhibits larval development.
Use:
• Treatment and prevention of flea infestations ( Ctenocephalides 
canis and C. felis).
• Environmental sprays also have some efficacy against house 
dust mites Dermatophagoides farinae and D. pteronyssinus.
