
===== Plumb PDF 947 =====
920    Mycophenolate
Mycophenolate
Mycophenolate Mofetil (MMF)
(mye-koe-fen-oh-late) Cellcept®
Immunosuppressant
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Immunosuppressive drug that may be useful for treating dogs 
with IMHA, IMTP , glomerulonephritis, myasthenia gravis, or 
meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown etiology in dogs; po-
tentially useful in cats, but there is little information available 
on safety or efficacy.
 ▶ Limited experience in veterinary medicine, especially in cats or 
with long-term use
 ▶ Adverse effects include GI signs (eg, diarrhea, vomiting, an-
orexia) most commonly are dose-limiting and can be severe.
 ▶ Can be administered PO or IV. Compounding into appropriate 
oral dosage forms may be needed.
 ▶ Teratogenic in humans
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies mycophenolate as a hazardous drug; use 
appropriate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Although clinical experience using mycophenolate in veterinary 
medicine has been limited and no large well-controlled studies were 
located, mycophenolate appears useful in the treatment of a variety 
of autoimmune diseases, including immune-mediated hemolytic 
anemia (IMHA),1-4 immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMTP),5,6 
myasthenia gravis, 7,8 meningoencephalomyelitis, 9,10 glomerulo -
nephritis,11 and pemphigus foliaceous. 12 Mycophenolate has been 
suggested for use in treating inflammatory bowel disease in dogs; 
however, the drug’s primary adverse effects in dogs are gastritis, di-
arrhea, and intestinal inflammation. Mycophenolate is also used in 
anti-rejection protocols for organ transplants in animals. Mycophe-
nolate is often used as part of a combination immunosuppressive 
therapy protocol in a patient, although it has also been used alone as 
monotherapy. The drug was ineffective for the treatment of sudden 
acquired retinal degeneration syndrome (SARDS) in dogs.13
In humans, although this drug is used off-label for a variety of au-
toimmune disease indications, it is labeled only for use in preventing 
transplant rejection.
Pharmacology/Actions 
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) is a prodrug that must be hydrolyzed 
in vivo to mycophenolic acid (MPA) to be pharmacologically active. 
Mycophenolic acid noncompetitively, but reversibly, inhibits inosine 
monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH). Two distinct forms of 
IMPDH exist in the body, including type 1 found in most cells and 
type 2 existing in activated lymphocytes. Mycophenolic acid has a 
5-fold greater affinity for the type 2 IMPDH isoform. Inosine mo -
nophosphate dehydrogenase is the rate-limiting enzyme in de novo 
synthesis of guanosine nucleotides. As T cells and B cells are depen-
dent on de novo synthesis of purines (eg, guanosine) and, unlike 
other cells, cannot use salvage pathways, proliferative responses of 
T cells and B cells are inhibited, and suppression of B cell antibody 
formation occurs, thus inhibiting both cell-mediated and humoral 
immune responses. These effects enable MPA to inhibit leukocyte 
recruitment to inflammatory sites and allotransplant tissues.
In a study in juvenile dachshunds, MMF administration did not 
inhibit proliferating CD5+ T lymphocytes at any time point. 14 In 
healthy cats, MMF administration resulted in little change in periph-
eral blood mononuclear cell counts or CD4+/CD8+:T-cell ratios.15
Pharmacokinetics
Mycophenolate mofetil is absorbed after oral administration, but 
limited bioavailability studies in dogs have shown both a wide inter-
patient and interdose variation. A study performed in a single dog 
showed bioavailabilities of 54%, 65%, and 87% after administration 
of 10, 15, and 20 mg/kg of MMF , respectively.16 
A study in dogs compared the pharmacokinetic parameters of my-
cophenolic acid (MPA) with its pharmacodynamic effects on inosine 
monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) activity in lymphocytes17; 
volume of distribution at steady-state was ≈5 L/kg, but inter-patient 
variability (±4.5) was wide. Elimination half-life for MPA was ≈8 
hours (±4 hours). In a study performed in juvenile dachshunds re -
ceiving 13 mg/kg PO, peak MPA concentration occurred within 1 
hour of administration, and half-life was 5.5 minutes. 14 Mycophe-
nolic acid is primarily excreted in the urine, both unchanged (≈5%) 
and as the glucuronide metabolite (≈90%). In this study, the authors 
concluded that the pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic profile of 
MMF in dogs suggests that an every 8-hour dosing schedule would 
be required for optimization of immunosuppressive efficacy. Howev-
er, dosing every 8 hours can be clinically challenging because of the 
severity of adverse effects, and thus has not entered common clinical 
usage (see Adverse Effects). 
In a study in healthy cats, administration of 20 mg/kg MMF IV 
as a CRI over 2 hours resulted in all cats forming the active MPA 
metabolite. Disposition of plasma MPA was highly variable and 
unpredictable. The major metabolite was a glucoside product, and 
a glucuronide product was found in only 3 of 6 cats. 18 An in vitro 
study similarly demonstrated a relative deficiency of MPA glucuro -
nidation in cats.19 
In humans, oral bioavailability averages 94%; food reduces peak 
MPA concentrations by 40%.20 After absorption, MMF is rapidly and 
completely hydrolyzed to mycophenolic acid. Peak blood concentra-
tions are seen ≈1 to 2 hours after oral administration. Mycophenolic 
acid 97% protein (albumin) bound and undergoes extensive hepatic 
metabolism, primarily via glucuronidation. Mycophenolic acid un -
dergoes extensive enterohepatic recirculation, and reactivation to 
MPA within the gut may result in a second peak blood concentra -
tion 4 to 12 hours after administration. Elimination half-life of MPA 
is ≈17 hours. Metabolites are eliminated primarily via the kidneys.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Do not use mycophenolate in patients with documented hypersensi-
tivity reactions to mycophenolate. Patients with severe renal dysfunc-
tion may require dosage adjustment. Because MMF can cause diar -
rhea, use with caution in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. 
IV mycophenolate must be administered over at least 2 hours; do 
not give it as an IV bolus or via rapid IV infusion.
In humans, the active metabolite, MPA, is primarily excreted as 
the MPA-glucuronide metabolite. Mycophenolate should be used 
with caution in cats because of deficient MPA glucuronidation in 
this species.
For humans, mycophenolate has a black box warning regarding 
potential increased risk for lymphoma and serious infection associ -
ated with its use. Severe neutropenia has occurred in human trans -
plant patients receiving mycophenolate.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies mycophenolate as a group II hazardous drug 
(non-antineoplastic agent representing an occupational hazard to 
healthcare workers); personal protective equipment (PPE) should be 
used accordingly to minimize the risk of exposure.21
Do not confuse mycophenolate mofetil with mycophenolic acid. 
A study comparing adverse effects in dogs with MMF capsules and 
mycophenolate sodium (the sodium salt of mycophenolic acid) en -
teric-coated tablets demonstrated significantly greater occurrences 


===== Plumb PDF 948 =====
Mycophenolate   921
and severity of diarrhea, weight loss, and decreased activity in dogs 
that received the sodium salt enteric-coated tablets.22
Adverse Effects
Because of limited experience with mycophenolate in veterinary pa-
tients, the adverse effect profile is not well established. At usual doses 
(10 mg/kg PO twice daily), mycophenolate is usually well tolerated 
in dogs. Dose-dependent diarrhea appears to be the most common 
adverse effect, but vomiting, anorexia, lethargy/reduced activity, 
lymphopenia, papillomatosis, and increased rates of dermal infec -
tions can be seen. In a study evaluating MMF in dogs for the treat -
ment of IMHA at a dosage of 10 to 15 mg/kg PO every 8 hours, the 
authors concluded that the level of GI toxicity observed could not 
justify the use of MMF with this dosing regimen, despite the fact that 
4 of 5 dogs achieved disease remission.1 Ulcerative colitis may devel-
op.4 Mild hypersensitivity reactions after IV administration are pos-
sible. Because of the drug’s immunosuppressive actions, increased 
systemic infection and malignancy rates are possible, especially with 
long-term use.
Diarrhea was the most common adverse effect in healthy cats en-
rolled in mycophenolate pharmacokinetic studies. Diarrhea was less 
frequent after IV administration and appeared dose related with oral 
use. Hyporexia was noted in 1 cat. Decreases in PCV and platelet 
counts have been noted, but the reduced values remained within the 
reference range.15,18,23 Hepatopathy and pancreatitis were reported in 
one cat after receiving MMF for treatment of IMHA.24
In humans, the most common adverse effects include constipa -
tion, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and headache. Hypertension and 
peripheral edema occur in ≈30% of patients. Leukopenia has been 
reported in 25% to 45% of patients taking the medication. Other ef-
fects that occur more rarely include GI bleeding, severe neutropenia, 
cough, confusion, tremor, fatal neurologic disease, infection, and 
malignant lymphoma (0.4% to 1%).
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Mycophenolate should be avoided, if at all possible, during pregnan-
cy. Mycophenolate is a known teratogen in humans, causing con -
genital malformations and first trimester pregnancy loss. At doses 
significantly lower than those used in humans, increased resorptions 
and malformations were noted in rabbits and rats. 
Mycophenolic acid is distributed in rat milk. It is unknown if my-
cophenolate is safe to use during nursing and it should be considered 
contraindicated.25 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In acute toxicity studies performed in mice and monkeys, no deaths 
occurred in oral doses of mycophenolate up to 4000 mg/kg and 1000 
mg/kg, respectively. In small animals, acute GI disturbances or neu-
tropenia are possible. Treat supportively, if required. Cholestyramine 
may increase mycophenolate excretion.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving mycophenolate and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Acyclovir and V alacyclovir : Increased serum concentra -
tions of acyclovir and the phenolic glucuronide of mycophenolic 
acid
 ■ Aminoglycosides  (eg, amikacin, gentamicin): In rats, use to -
gether induced greater nephrotoxicity.
 ■ Antacids, Oral (Aluminum-, Calcium-, or Magne -
sium-Containing) : Decreased absorption of mycophenolate; 
separate dosing by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Azathioprine : Increased risk for myelosuppression; concur -
rent use is not recommended.
 ■ Cholestyramine : May inhibit enterohepatic recycling of my -
cophenolate, reducing serum concentrations
 ■ Immunosuppressive Agents  (eg, corticosteroids [eg, dexa-
methasone, predniso(lo)ne ], leflunomide): Additive immuno -
suppressant effects could occur
 ■ Iron  (oral) : Decreased absorption of mycophenolate; separate 
dosing by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Lanthanum Carbonate : May decrease mycophenolate plas -
ma concentrations
 ■ Probenecid : Potentially increased serum concentrations of my-
cophenolic acid and the phenolic glucuronide of mycophenolic 
acid
 ■ Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs; eg, omeprazole, pantopra -
zole): May reduce mycophenolate absorption, decreasing MPA 
exposure (AUC)
 ■ Salicylates (eg, aspirin, bismuth subsalicylate ): Potentially 
increased concentrations of free mycophenolic acid
 ■ Sevelamer : Decreased absorption of mycophenolate; adminis -
ter MMF at least 2 hours prior to sevelamer.
 ■ Telmisartan : May decrease mycophenolate exposure (AUC)
 ■ V accines, Modified Live : Vaccines may be less effective; ad -
minister vaccines prior to initiating mycophenolate therapy and 
avoid concurrent use.
The following drugs or drug classes may reduce MPA exposure by 
inhibiting the enterohepatic recycling of the mycophenolate glucu -
ronide metabolite:
 ■ Cephalosporins (eg, cephalexin, cefpodoxime)
 ■ Clindamycin  
 ■ Cyclosporine : additive immunosuppressant effects also possi-
ble
 ■ Fluoroquinolones (eg, ciprofloxacin, enrofloxacin)
 ■ Metronidazole
 ■ Rifampin
 ■ Penicillins (eg, amoxicillin/clavulanate)
 ■ Sulfonamides, Potentiated (eg, sulfa-/trimethoprim)
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No issues noted
Dosages
DOGS:
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (extra-label): 8 – 12 mg/kg 
PO or IV every 12 hours in combination with predniso(lo)ne  
2 – 3 mg/kg/day PO (50 – 60 mg/m2/day [NOT  mg/kg/day] for 
dogs greater than 25 kg)2,4    
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMTP) (extra-label):  
7 – 9 mg/kg PO every 12 hours in combination with pred-  
niso(lo)ne (≈2 mg/kg/day)5,6  
Meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown etiology (extra-label): 
10 – 20 mg/kg PO or IV every 12 hours in conjunction with cor -
ticosteroids.9,10 One study described administering MMF IV over 
20 minutes using a syringe pump.10
Adjunctive immunosuppressive treatment of glomerular dis -
ease based on established pathology  (extra-label): The Interna-
tional Renal Interest Society (IRIS) consensus statement recom -


===== Plumb PDF 949 =====
922    Mycophenolate
mends mycophenolate alone or in combination with prednisolone 
for peracute and/or rapidly progressive glomerular disease: my -
cophenolate 10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. For stable or slowly 
progressive glomerular diseases, IRIS recommends mycopheno -
late alone. In the absence of overt adverse effects, therapy should 
continue for at least 8 weeks before altering or discontinuing the 
drug. Therapy should be continued in dogs demonstrating a com-
plete or partial response to initial treatment for a minimum of 12 
to 16 weeks. Thereafter, consideration should be given to taper -
ing the treatment to a dose/schedule that maintains the response 
without worsening the proteinuria, azotemia, or clinical signs.11
Myasthenia gravis (extra-label): 15 – 20 mg/kg diluted and given 
IV over 2 to 4 hours every 24 hours until able to swallow, then 
10 – 20 mg/kg PO every 12 hours.7 One retrospective study found 
that when compared to using pyridostigmine alone, MMF with 
pyridostigmine did not significantly affect remission rate, time to 
remission, or survival time.8 
Aplastic anemia (extra-label): From a case report in a single dog: 
mycophenolate 10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. The first effects (im-
provements in hematocrit) were observed 2 weeks later, and com-
plete remission of all blood cell counts were obtained in ≈3 weeks.26
Immune-mediated skin disease  (extra-label): Dosages varied, 
but 10 – 20 mg/kg PO twice daily was typical. Adverse GI ef -
fects were noted with higher dosages. 12,27 In one study, dogs that 
achieved remission still required glucocorticoids.12
CATS:
Adjunctive treatment of IMHA (extra-label): From a case report 
of 2 cats: mycophenolate 10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. 28 Use for 
immune-mediated disorders in cats is not recommended by some 
based on pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic data.15
Monitoring
 ■ Efficacy
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBCs every 2 to 3 weeks for the first month, 
then every 2 to 3 months during treatment.4
 ■ Baseline and periodic serum chemistry profile, urinalysis, and 
urine culture
 ■ Signs associated with infection (eg, fever, malaise, inappetence)
 ■ GI effects (eg, inappetence, vomiting, diarrhea)
Client Information
 ■ Preferably give on an empty stomach; if vomiting or lack of appe-
tite occurs, try giving with food.
 ■ Limited experience in veterinary medicine, especially in cats or 
for long-term use
 ■ Diarrhea, vomiting, and anorexia are the most likely adverse ef -
fects and can be severe. If any of these signs persist or are severe, 
contact your veterinarian.
 ■ Because of concerns that this drug can suppress the immune sys-
tem and cause birth defects, pregnant women should wear gloves 
when handling this drug and avoid inhaling dust from capsules 
or split or crushed tablets. The manufacturer recommends that 
tablets or capsules not be crushed, split, or opened. 
 ■ This medicine is considered to be a hazardous drug as defined 
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) because it may affect the reproductive ability of males 
or females actively trying to conceive, women who are pregnant 
or may become pregnant, and women who are breastfeeding. It 
is recommended to wear gloves when administering this med -
ication to your animal, and wash hands thoroughly afterwards. 
If you have any concerns about the risks associated with expo -
sure to this medicine, speak with your veterinarian or health care 
 provider.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Mycophenolate mofetil occurs as a white or almost white, crystalline 
powder. It is sparingly soluble in alcohol and practically insoluble in 
water at neutral pH; aqueous solubility increases as pH decreases. 
The pH of mycophenolate for injection after reconstitution is 2.2 to 
4.1.
Mycophenolic acid is derived from Penicillium stoloniferum.
Mycophenolate mofetil may also be known as RS-61443 or MMF . 
International trade names include CellCept®, Cellmune®, Imuxgen®, 
Munotras®, Mycept®, Myfortic®, and Refrat®.
Storage/Compatibility
Mycophenolate mofetil tablets and capsules should be stored be-
tween 20°C and 25°C (68°F-77°F) and protected from light.
Mycophenolate mofetil powder for oral suspension should be stored 
between 15°C and 30°C (59°F-86°F), preferably at 25°C (77°F). Once 
reconstituted with 94 mL of water, the solution may be stored at 
room temperature or in the refrigerator; do not freeze. The unused 
drug should be discarded after 60 days. Refer to the product label of 
generic formulations for specific reconstitution recommendations.
The injectable product should be stored between 15°C and 30°C 
(59°F-86°F); preferably at 25°C (77°F). Each vial should be recon -
stituted with 14 mL of 5% dextrose injection; the final volume is  
≈15 mL. Gently agitate to dissolve the powder. Mycophenolate in -
jection should not be mixed or given with any other medication or 
diluent. Administer mycophenolate within 6 hours of dilution. The 
drug must be administered over at least 2 hours and is not to be given 
as an IV bolus or via rapid IV infusion. For human use, the manu -
facturer recommends further diluting with dextrose 5% to a concen-
tration of 6 mg/mL for IV administration. Mycophenolate diluted in 
dextrose 5% to a final concentration between 1 – 10 mg/mL in PVC 
bags was stable for seven days when stored under refrigeration or at 
room temperature.29
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
The manufacturer states that mycophenolate injection should not 
be mixed or given with any other medication or diluent. The drug 
appears Y-site compatible with buprenorphine, butorphanol, calci-
um chloride, dexmedetomidine, dobutamine, dopamine, hydromor-
phone, magnesium sulfate, metoclopramide, metronidazole, ondan-
setron, potassium chloride, and ranitidine. The drug appears Y-site 
incompatible with amphotericin B, calcium gluconate, cefazolin, 
dexamethasone sodium phosphate, furosemide, heparin, meropen -
em, pantoprazole, phenobarbital, and sodium bicarbonate.
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; consult specialized references or a 
hospital pharmacist for more specific information.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Mycophenolate Mofetil Oral Capsules: 250 mg; CellCept®, generic; 
(Rx)
Mycophenolate Mofetil Oral Tablets: 500 mg; CellCept®, generic; (Rx)
Mycophenolate Mofetil Powder for Oral Suspension: 200 mg/mL 
(reconstituted) in 225 mL bottles; CellCept®; (Rx)
Mycophenolate Mofetil Lyophilized Powder for Injection: 500 mg in 
20 mL vials; CellCept®; (Rx)
Mycophenolate is also available as the sodium salt of mycophenolic 
acid in oral, delayed-release tablets; however, this dosage form can -
not be used interchangeably with mycophenolate mofetils.22 
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb


===== Plumb PDF 950 =====
Nalbuphine    923
Nalbuphine 
(nal-byoo-feen) Nubain®
Opioid Partial Agonist
See also Nalbuphine Ophthalmic
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Injectable opioid mixed agonist/antagonist used in combina-
tion as a premedication prior to general anesthesia in small 
animal species
 ▶ May also be used for mild-to-moderate pain relief or to reverse 
effects of full mu-opioid agonists without complete elimina-
tion of analgesic effects
 ▶ Has a relatively short duration of action in dogs and cats
 ▶ Use cautiously in patients with hepatic or renal impairment, 
bradyarrhythmias, or head trauma.
 ▶ Limited information about its use in veterinary medicine, but 
appears to be relatively safe and effective in small animal 
species
 ▶ Not a controlled substance in the United States
Uses/Indications
Nalbuphine may be used as premedication prior to general anesthe-
sia. It could theoretically be used for analgesia, but it is only effective 
for relief of mild-to-moderate pain and has a relatively short dura -
tion of effect. Nalbuphine may be used to reverse the adverse effects 
(eg, respiratory depression) of mu-agonists (eg, morphine) while re-
taining some analgesic effects. 
Nalbuphine has been used in dogs epidurally to decrease the 
MAC of isoflurane and to provide postoperative analgesia for ovari-
ohysterectomy.1 In calves undergoing surgical castration, nalbuphine 
reduces some pain-related behaviors but does not eliminate physio-
logical signs of distress.2 
When compared with other mixed agonist/antagonists (eg, butor-
phanol, buprenorphine), the potential benefit of nalbuphine is that 
it is not a controlled substance in the United States; however, there 
is considerably less clinical experience and published information 
about its use in animals.
Pharmacology/Actions
Nalbuphine is a synthetic opioid-receptor agonist-antagonist of the 
phenanthrene series. Nalbuphine binds to kappa-, mu-, and del -
ta-opioid receptors. Its primary analgesic pharmacologic activity is 
due to its agonist activity at kappa receptors. Nalbuphine can cause 
respiratory depression, but above a certain dose (30 mg in adult hu-
mans), further respiratory depression does not occur.3
Nalbuphine does not increase plasma histamine in dogs.4
Pharmacokinetics
Nalbuphine has a similar pharmacokinetic profile as morphine. 5 
Nalbuphine must be administered parenterally as it has very low oral 
bioavailability secondary to GI mucosal metabolism and a high first-
pass effect. In humans, the onset of action is usually within 3 min -
utes after IV administration and 15 minutes after SC or IM doses. In 
humans, plasma half-life is ≈5 hours. Analgesic effects usually last 
from 3 to 6 hours after a dose. Analgesic duration of action in dogs 
and cats has anecdotally been reported as significantly shorter than 
in humans.
In calves, after 0.4 mg/kg IV , half-life, volume of distribution, and 
clearance were 0.68 hours, 6.8 L/kg, and 114 mL/minute/kg, respec-
tively. Plasma concentrations were only detectable 3 hours after the 
injection.2
In Hispaniolan Amazon parrots, IM dosages of nalbuphine HCl 
had complete bioavailability. After IV administration, the measured 
volume of distribution was 2 L/kg and clearance was ≈70 mL per  
minute/kg. Terminal half-life was ≈20 minutes for both IV and IM 
doses.6 A follow-up study using a sustained-release IM form (nalbu-
phine decanoate 37.5 mg/kg IM) showed a mean terminal half-life 
of 20.4 hours. Plasma concentrations that could be associated with 
antinociception (20 ng/mL) were maintained for 24 hours after in -
jection.7
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Nalbuphine is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it. Severe 
pain should be treated with other analgesics (eg, mu-opioid ago -
nists). Use nalbuphine cautiously in patients with hepatic or renal 
impairment, bradyarrhythmias, or head trauma.
When used alone, nalbuphine rarely causes clinically significant 
respiratory depression, but it should be used with caution in patients 
with impaired respiratory function or when used concomitantly with 
other CNS- or respiratory-depressant agents; respiratory depression 
can be severe in these patients—adequate monitoring is required. 
Naloxone can reverse nalbuphine-induced respiratory depression.
In humans, nalbuphine is contraindicated in patients with signif-
icant respiratory depression, acute or severe asthma, and known or 
suspected GI obstruction.3
Nalbuphine can precipitate withdrawal signs in patients that are 
physically dependent on opioid drugs. While the potential for abuse 
of nalbuphine by humans is less than with other opioids (especially 
mu-receptor agonist agents), there have been reports of diversion, 
abuse, and dependence. Although there are no special recordkeeping 
or storage requirements, veterinarians should be alert to this potential.
Adverse Effects
Respiratory depression is unlikely but can occur. Other adverse ef -
fects that can be seen with nalbuphine include excitement (high dos-
es), dysphoria, vomiting, and bradycardia.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Safe use of nalbuphine during pregnancy has not been established. 
Very little drug is excreted into milk, and nalbuphine is consid -
ered relatively safe in humans to use while nursing; however, off -
spring exposed to nalbuphine should be monitored for excess seda -
tion or respiratory depression.3
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdoses of nalbuphine are rarely serious, particularly when used 
on an inpatient basis and with adequate monitoring when used with 
other CNS and respiratory depressant drugs. Respiratory depression 
can be reversed with naloxone. 3 In humans, single doses of nalbu -
phine 72 mg SC administered to healthy subjects caused sedation, 
sleepiness, and mild dysphoria. Oral ingestions are not serious as the 
drug has low oral bioavailability.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving nalbuphine and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Cimetidine : Increased nalbuphine effects possible
 ■ CNS or Respiratory Depressants : Additive CNS and/or re-
spiratory depression can occur.


===== Plumb PDF 951 =====
924    Naloxone
 ■ Mu-Opioid Agonists (eg, fentanyl, morphine): Administra-
tion of nalbuphine with or following a mu agonist may result in a 
reduced analgesic effect. 
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Opioid screening tests. Nalbuphine may interfere with enzymatic 
tests.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
In combination as a preanesthetic adjunct  (extra-label):  
0.2 – 0.4 mg/kg IV , IM, or SC in combination with other prean -
esthetic agents (eg, midazolam, acepromazine, alpha-2 agonists)
Sole agent for mild-to-moderate pain (extra-label): 0.25 – 1 mg/kg  
IV , IM, or SC.8 Up to 2 mg/kg IV or IM has been suggested for 
use in dogs. 
CALVES: 
Pain relief after surgical castration (extra-label): 0.4 mg/kg IV 
reduced some pain-related behaviors but did not significantly 
eliminate signs of distress in calves.2
SMALL MAMMALS :
Analgesic (extra-label):
Rabbits, Ferrets: 0.5 – 1.5 mg/kg IV , IM every 4 hours
Guinea Pigs: 1 – 4 mg/kg IM, SC every 3 hours
Gerbils, Mice, Rats, Hamsters: 1 – 2 mg/kg IM, SC every 2 to 4 
hours (dosages have been recommended up to 8 mg/kg IM)
Monitoring
 ■ Level of sedation and analgesia
 ■ Respiratory depth and rate especially when used in combination 
with other respiratory depressant drugs
Client Information
 ■ Nalbuphine is only used in an inpatient setting.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Nalbuphine HCl is a synthetic opioid agonist/antagonist in the 
phenanthrene series and is structurally related to both naloxone 
(opioid antagonist) and oxymorphone (opioid agonist). Nalbuphine 
HCl is soluble in water and ethanol; insoluble in chloroform and 
ether.
The commercially available injection in 10 mL vials also contains 
sodium citrate hydrous 0.94%, citric acid anhydrous 1.26%, methyl- 
and propylparabens 0.2%, and hydrochloric acid to adjust pH to 3.5 
to 3.7.
Nalbuphine HCl may also be known as EN-2234A, Nubian (street 
name), and Nubain®.
Storage/Stability
Store intact vials and ampules at 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F) and pro-
tect from light.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Nalbuphine HCl injection has been found compatible with the 
following IV solutions: dextrose 5% in sodium chloride 0.9%; dex -
trose 10%; lactated Ringer’s solution (LRS); sodium chloride 0.9%.9
At usual concentrations, nalbuphine has been found compatible 
with the following drugs (partial listing) when mixed in syringes: 
atropine sulfate, diphenhydramine, glycopyrrolate, hydroxyzine, li -
docaine, midazolam, and ranitidine. Diazepam, ketorolac, and pen-
tobarbital are incompatible. Propofol is compatible at a 1:1 ratio at 
Y-site.9 There are anecdotal reports of syringe mixtures successfully 
combining nalbuphine with acepromazine, dexmedetomidine, or 
medetomidine, although published stability data were not located.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Nalbuphine HCl Injectable Solution: 10 mg/mL and 20 mg/mL in  
1 mL ampules and 10 mL multi-dose vials; generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Naloxone
(nal-ox-one) Narcan®
Antidote; Opioid Antagonist
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Most effective at reversing pure mu-opioid receptor agonists 
(eg, fentanyl, morphine); less effective reversal agent for par-
tial opioid agonists (eg, buprenorphine)
 ▶ Use with caution in animals with pre-existing cardiac abnor-
malities or patients that are opioid dependent. At reversal 
dosages, can negate opioid analgesic effects.
 ▶ Reversal effect may last for a shorter time than opioid effect; 
monitor and re-dose as needed.
Uses/Indications
Naloxone is used almost exclusively for its opioid reversal effects, 
but the drug has been investigated for treating other conditions (eg, 
septic, hypovolemic, or cardiogenic shock). Frequent administration 
of low-dose naloxone is advocated by some to reverse opioid effects 
while minimizing consequences of opioid withdrawal. Some have 
found low-dose naloxone useful in treating postanesthetic dyspho -
ria associated with perioperative opioids,1 but this practice is some -
what controversial due to the difficulty in distinguishing pain from 
dysphoria in animal patients. Naloxone has been employed as a test 
drug to see if endogenous opioid blockade will result in diminished 
tail chasing or other self-mutilating behaviors.2 
Pharmacology/Actions
Naloxone is considered a pure opioid antagonist and has no analge-
sic activity at usual dosages. The drug acts as a competitive antago -
nist by binding to the mu, kappa, and delta opioid receptor sites, and 
has its highest affinity for the mu receptor. It also has some GABA 
antagonistic effects, which can elicit convulsions, although this is 
usually not clinically relevant.
Naloxone reverses the majority of effects associated with high-
dose opioid administration (eg, respiratory and CNS depression). In 
dogs, naloxone does not reverse the emetic or hypotensive actions of 
apomorphine.3
At higher doses, naloxone has other pharmacologic activity in -
cluding effects on dopaminergic mechanisms (increases dopamine 
levels) and GABA antagonism.
Pharmacokinetics
Naloxone is only minimally absorbed when given orally due to an 
extensive first-pass metabolism. Much higher doses are required 
if using this route of administration for any pharmacologic effect. 
When given IV , naloxone has a rapid onset of action (usually 1 to 2 
minutes). If given IM, the drug generally has an onset of action with-
in 5 minutes of administration. The duration of action usually per -
sists from 45 to 90 minutes but may have an effect for up to 3 hours.
Naloxone is distributed rapidly throughout the body with high 
concentrations found in the brain, kidneys, spleen, skeletal muscle, 
lung, and heart. Naloxone is metabolized in the liver, principally 
via glucuronidative conjugation, with metabolites excreted into the 
urine. In humans, the serum half-life is ≈60 minutes, but ≈3 hours 
in neonates.4


===== BSAVA PDF 294 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
278
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF, 
Mycophenolic acid)
(CellCept* (MMF), Myfortic* (MPA)) POM
Formulations: Oral: 250 mg capsule, 500 mg tablet, 1 g/5 ml 
powder for oral suspension (MMF); 180 mg, 360 mg tablets. 
Injectable: 500 mg powder for reconstitution and slow i.v. infusion 
(mycophenolic acid).
Action: Inhibits the enzyme that controls the rate of synthesis of 
guanine monophosphate in the de novo pathway of purine 
synthesis. This pathway is important in the proliferation of B and T 
lymphocytes. This action is similar to azathioprine.
Use:
• Management of immune-mediated disease including immune-
mediated haemolytic anaemia, immune-mediated polyarthritis, 
immune-mediated skin disease, immune-mediated 
thrombocytopenia and myasthenia gravis.
The use of MPA has not been reported in veterinary medicine. 
Clinical veterinary experience of this drug is limited; however, in 
humans, mycophenolate is more lymphocyte-specific and less bone 
marrow suppressive than azathioprine.
Safety and handling: Cytotoxic drug; see Appendix and 
specialist texts for further advice on chemotherapeutic agents.
Contraindications: Bone marrow suppression, pre-existing 
infections.
Adverse reactions: Bone marrow suppression, nausea,  
vomiting, diarrhoea and an increased incidence of infections 
(pyoderma, Malassezia). In humans there is a risk for increased 
lymphoma associated with its use. In humans, headache, 
hypertension, peripheral oedema, confusion, coughs and  
tremours are also reported.
Drug interactions: Competes with other drugs that undergo 
active renal tubular secretion resulting in increased concentration of 
either drug. Concomitant administration of antacids (such as 
omeprazole) may decrease absorption.
DOSES
See Appendix for immunosuppression protocols.
Dogs:
• Immune-mediated disease: 8–12 mg/kg (typically 10 mg/kg) 
p.o., i.v. (give slowly over at least 2 hours) q12h (MMF), the dose 
can be reduced or given q24h if adverse effects are observed.
• Pemphigus: 7–13 mg/kg p.o. q8h (MMF).
Cats: Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia: 10 mg/kg p.o. q12h 
based on limited experience. Other immunosuppressants may  
be preferable.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 295 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
279
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
References
Bacek LM and Macintire DK (2011) Treatment of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia 
with mycophenolate mofetil in two cats. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical 
Care 21, 45–49
Wang A, Smith JR and Creevy KE (2013) Treatment of canine idiopathic immune-
mediated haemolytic anaemia with mycophenolate mofetil and glucocorticoids: 30 
cases (2007 to 2011). Journal of Small Animal Practice  54, 399–404


===== BSAVA PDF 296 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
280
Naloxone
(Naloxone*, Narcan*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 0.02 mg/ml, 0.4 mg/ml solutions.
Action: Competitive antagonist for opioid receptors, reversing the 
effects of opioid agonists.
Use:
• Treatment of opioid overdose.
• Also used to identify persistent activity of opioid drugs.
Onset of action i.v. is very rapid, but duration is short (30–40 min). 
Repeated doses or an infusion may be required to manage 
overdose of longer acting opioids such as morphine and 
methadone or high-dose fentanyl. Naloxone will also antagonize 
the effects of endogenous opioids; therefore, it can cause 
antanalgesic effects in opioid naïve subjects. Administration to 
animals that could be in pain must therefore be considered 
carefully. Low dose naloxone i.v. will cause a transient elevation of 
unconsciousness when persistent opioid activity contributes to an 
unexpectedly long recovery from anaesthesia.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Indiscriminate use in animals that have 
undergone major surgery or trauma will expose the recipient to acute 
severe discomfort. In such cases the effects of opioid overdose 
(respiratory depression) should be managed by endotracheal 
intubation and artificial ventilation. Naloxone should be reserved for 
emergency situations when the effects of opioid overdose are severe.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: 0.01–0.02 mg/kg i.v.; 0.04 mg/kg i.m., s.c., intratracheal. 
Naloxone can be administered as a continuous rate infusion at 0.02 
mg/kg/h i.v. if a longer duration of opioid antagonism is required.
References
Golder FJ, Wilson J, Larenza FP et al . (2010) Suspected acute meperidine toxicity in a 
dog.  Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia  37, 471–477
Nandrolone
(Laurabolin, Decadurabolin*) POM-V, POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 25 mg/ml, 50 mg/ml (in oil).
Action: Binds to testosterone receptors and stimulates protein 
synthesis.
Use:
• In cases where excessive tissue breakdown or extensive repair 
processes are taking place.
• Management of aplastic anaemia.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
