
===== Plumb PDF 920 =====
Mirtazapine   893
Lyme borreliosis (extra-label): 10 mg/kg IV or PO once or twice 
daily for 30 days12 
CATS:
Susceptible infections including respiratory tract infections  
(extra-label): Based on a pharmacokinetic study and typical bacte-
rial MIC, 8.8 mg/kg PO every 24 hours.23,37 Anecdotal dosing rec-
ommendations range from 5 – 25 mg/kg PO twice daily, whereas 
5 – 12.5 mg/kg PO twice daily is commonly noted.  Practically,  
50 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 24 hours is recommended. 
HORSES : 
Susceptible (MIC less than or equal to 0.25 μg/mL) nonocu -
lar infections  (extra-label): Based on pharmacokinetic data,  
4 mg/kg PO every 12 hours.25,40 Oral absorption is improved if hay 
is withheld for 2 hours after administration.28
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy: resolving signs of infection; culture and suscep-
tibility testing if indicated
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, nausea, vomiting)
Client Information
 ■ Oral minocycline works best when given without food. If your an-
imal vomits or acts sick after receiving the medicine on an empty 
stomach, try giving the next dose with a small amount of food or 
a treat. 
 ■ Do not give as a dry pill. Give this medicine with a moist treat 
or small amount of liquid to be sure it reaches the stomach. This 
is especially important in cats as minocycline may cause ulcers 
in the throat and esophagus if the pill gets stuck there before it 
reaches the stomach. If your animal has trouble swallowing or eat-
ing, contact your veterinarian immediately. 
 ■ Do not give antacids, including sucralfate, oral iron, and antidiar-
rheal medicine, within 2 hours before or after giving minocycline. 
These other medications will reduce the effectiveness of this an -
tibiotic.
 ■ This drug may make your animal’s skin more sensitive to sunlight 
and increase the risk for sunburn on hairless areas (eg, nose, ab -
domen, around the eyelids and ears). Tell your veterinarian if you 
notice any reddening/sunburn on the skin while your animal is 
on this medication.
 ■ For this medication to work, give it exactly as your veterinarian 
has prescribed. Always check the prescription label to be sure you 
are giving the drug correctly. Avoid missing doses and give the full 
course of medication as directed by your veterinarian even if your 
animal seems to be back to normal.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is tak-
ing this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Minocycline HCl is a semisynthetic tetracycline that occurs as a 
yellow crystalline powder. It is soluble in water and slightly soluble 
in alcohol. Commercial minocycline dosage forms contain minocy-
cline hydrochloride.
Minocycline may also be known as minocyclini hydrochloridum, 
Arestin®, Minocin®, or Solodyn®; many other trade names are  available.
Storage/Stability
Store oral preparations at room temperature in tight containers. Do 
not freeze oral suspensions. The injectable should be stored at room 
temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]) and protected from light, 
moisture, and excessive heat. After reconstitution with sterile water 
for injection, solutions with a concentration of 20 mg/mL are stable 
for 4 hours at room temperature or for 24 hours if refrigerated.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compatibility is dependent on factors such as pH, concentration, 
temperature, and diluent used; specialized references or a hospital 
pharmacist should be consulted for more specific information.
Minocycline lyophilized powder for injection should be reconsti-
tuted with 5 mL sterile water for injection and immediately further 
diluted with sodium chloride injection USP , dextrose injection USP , 
dextrose and sodium chloride injection USP , Ringer’s injection USP , 
or lactated Ringer’s injection USP . Minocycline is incompatible with 
most medications. If the same IV line is being used for sequential 
drug administration, the line should be flushed with saline before 
and after minocycline infusion. 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Minocycline HCl Oral Tablets: 50 mg, 75 mg, and 100 mg; generic; 
(Rx)
Minocycline Extended-Release Tablets: 45 mg, 55 mg, 65 mg, 80 mg, 
90 mg, 105 mg, 115 mg, and 135 mg; Solodyn®, generic; (Rx)
Minocycline HCl Oral Capsules: 50 mg, 75 mg, and 100 mg; generic; 
(Rx)
Minocycline HCl Pellet-Filled Oral Capsules: 50 mg and 100 mg; 
Minocin®; (Rx)
Minocycline HCl Powder for Injection: 100 mg in vials; Minocin®; 
(Rx) 
Minocycline HCl Powdered Microspheres, Extended-Release, Den-
tal: 1 mg; Arestin®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Mirtazapine
(mir-taz-ah-peen) Remeron®, Mirataz®
Tetracyclic Antidepressant; 5-HT3 Antagonist
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Transdermal formulation is labeled for management of weight 
loss in cats. Also used in tablet form as an appetite stimulant 
and antiemetic in dogs and cats with chronic kidney disease 
(CKD). 
 ▶ It can be used in conjunction with other antiemetics.
 ▶ Primary adverse effect is sedation. In cats, vocalization and 
increased affection can be noted. Serotonin syndrome is possi-
ble; check for drug interactions when administering with other 
medications. 
 ▶ The lowest effective dose should be used to reduce sedative 
properties. Doses should not exceed 30 mg/day in dogs when 
using it for appetite stimulation.
 ▶ Gloves should be worn when handling transdermal mirtazap-
ine. Humans and other animals in the household should avoid 
contact with the treated cat for at least 2 hours after transder-
mal administration.
Uses/Indications
Transdermal mirtazapine is indicated in the management of weight 
loss in cats1; the average weight gain in cats was 3.9% of body weight 
after a 2-week course of therapy.2 Mirtazapine is an effective appetite 
stimulant and has antiemetic activity in cats with CKD.3 Cats receiv-
ing mirtazapine tablets ingested significantly more food as compared 
with placebo. Food ingestion did not correlate with mirtazapine 
dose, but high doses (ie, 3.75 mg/cat [NOT mg/kg]) of mirtazapine 
were associated with noticeable behavior changes.4 In cats with stage 
2 or 3 chronic kidney disease, administration of compounded trans-


===== Plumb PDF 921 =====
894    Mirtazapine
dermal mirtazapine demonstrated an increased appetite and weight 
gain; this formulation may benefit cats in countries where the com -
mercial product is not available.5 
In a study of healthy dogs, mirtazapine accelerated gastric emp -
tying and colonic transit without having an effect on small intestine 
transit.6 Mirtazapine can also be used for the treatment of chemo -
therapy-induced nausea and vomiting.7 
Pharmacology/Actions
The antidepressant activity of mirtazapine appears to be mediated 
by antagonism at central presynaptic alpha-2 receptors, which nor -
mally act as a negative feedback mechanism, inhibiting further nor-
epinephrine (NE) release. By blocking these receptors, mirtazapine 
overcomes the negative feedback loop and causes a net increase in 
NE. This mechanism may also contribute to the appetitestimulating 
effects of the medication, as NE acts at other α receptors to increase 
appetite. In addition, mirtazapine antagonizes several serotonin (5-
HT) receptor subtypes. The drug is a potent inhibitor of the 5-HT 2, 
5-HT3, and histamine (H1) receptors. Antagonism at 5-HT3 receptors 
accounts for the antinausea and antiemetic effects of the drug, and 
its action at H1 receptors produces prominent sedative effects. It is a 
moderate peripheral α 1-adrenergic antagonist, a property that may 
explain the occasional orthostatic hypotension associated with its 
use; it is also a moderate antagonist of muscarinic receptors, which 
may explain the relatively low incidence of anticholinergic effects. 
Pharmacokinetics
In a pilot study in healthy beagles, the mean clearance of mirtazapine 
was 1193 mL/kg/hour and the mean half-life was 6.17 hours after 
20 mg/dog PO. 8 
After administration of oral mirtazapine at either 1.88 mg (low 
dose [LD]) or 3.75 mg (high dose [HD]) in a study of healthy 
cats, median elimination half-lives were 9.2 hours and 15.9 hours, 
respectively. Mean clearance was 10.5 mL/kg/minute (LD) and  
18 mL/kg/minute (HD). A single LD of mirtazapine was well toler -
ated, and the half-life (9 hours) was compatible with 24-hour dose 
intervals in healthy cats. Mirtazapine does not appear to have lin -
ear kinetics in cats. 4 A study in cats with CKD ( n = 6) found that 
the mean half-life was 15.2 hours and the mean oral clearance was  
0.6 L/hour/kg. 9 The authors concluded that the results were com -
patible with administration every 48 hours in cats with CKD. 9 Liver 
disease delays time to peak concentration (4 hours vs 1 hour) and 
prolongs elimination half-life (14 hours vs 7 hours) in cats.10
Transdermal mirtazapine bioavailability in cats is ≈65%, and peak 
drug concentration is reached ≈16 hours after administration of a 
single dose and ≈2 hours after repeated administration. 11 Half-life 
is 21 to 27 hours,11 although a shorter half-life (10 to 11 hours) may 
reflect both topical and oral (ie, grooming) exposure. In healthy cats, 
transdermal mirtazapine has been shown to reach a steady-state 
within 14 days. Transdermal time to maximum concentration is 6 
hours, with a peak plasma concentration (Cmax) of 32.1 ng/mL.
After a single PO dose of mirtazapine 2 mg/kg (fasted or fed) 
in horses, peak concentrations occurred at 2.2 hours (fasted) and 
1.3  hours (fed) after administration. The mean residence time of 
mirtazapine was 6 to 7 hours, and elimination half-life was ≈4 to 5 
hours. The authors concluded that mirtazapine might be amenable 
for long-term oral administration but obtaining additional infor -
mation concerning safety and efficacy before it is used clinically is 
critical.12
Following oral administration in humans, mirtazapine is rapid -
ly and completely absorbed, but oral bioavailability is ≈50%. C max is 
reached within ≈2 hours after oral administration. Food has minimal 
effects on both the rate and extent of absorption and does not require 
dose adjustment. Plasma protein binding (PPB) for mirtazapine ap-
pears to be ≈70% to 72% in mice, rats, and dogs, whereas in humans 
and rabbits, it is ≈85%. Despite the interspecies differences in PPB, 
no displacement interactions or dose adjustments for mirtazapine 
are expected because of its large therapeutic window and nonspecif-
ic, relatively low affinity for plasma proteins. Mirtazapine is metabo-
lized via multiple pathways and varies by species. In all species tested 
(ie, humans and laboratory animals), the drug is metabolized via the 
following mechanisms: 8-hydroxylation followed by conjugation, 
N-oxidation, and demethylation followed by conjugation. Humans 
and guinea pigs also produce metabolites via N +-glucuronidation, 
whereas mice are the only species that have been found to use de -
methylation followed by CO 2 addition and conjugation and 13-hy -
droxylation followed by conjugation as methods of mirtazapine 
breakdown. These processes are conducted primarily by CYP2D6, 
CYP1A2, and CYP3A4, but mirtazapine exerts minimal inhibition 
on these cytochromes. Several metabolic pathways of mirtazapine 
involve conjugation with glucuronide (glucuronidation). Because 
cats have a limited capacity for glucuronidation, mirtazapine is 
cleared less rapidly from the system; therefore, extended dosing in -
tervals may be required.
In humans, elimination occurs via urine (75%) and feces (15%). 
Renal impairment may reduce elimination by 30% to 50% as com -
pared with normal subjects, and hepatic impairment may reduce 
clearance by up to 30%. The elimination half-life of mirtazapine 
ranges from 20 to 40 hours across age and gender subgroups, so dose 
increases should occur no more frequently than every 7 to 14 days. 
Females (both human and animal) of all ages exhibit significantly 
longer elimination half-lives than males (in humans, mean half-life 
of 37 hours for females versus 26 hours for males).
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Mirtazapine is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it and 
in those that have received monoamine oxidase inhibitors (eg , sele-
giline) in the past 14 days. Transdermal mirtazapine should not be 
administered orally or in the eye.
Mirtazapine has been associated with orthostatic hypotension in 
humans and should, therefore, be used with caution in patients with 
known cardiac disease or cerebrovascular disease that could be exac-
erbated by hypotension. Patients with renal impairment, renal fail -
ure, or hepatic disease may require lower doses of mirtazapine and 
should be closely monitored while receiving mirtazapine. Mirtazap-
ine has rarely been associated with hyponatremia in humans; caution 
should be used in patients receiving a diuretic or other medication 
that could decrease sodium levels. 
In humans, abrupt discontinuation of mirtazapine after long-term 
administration has resulted in withdrawal symptoms, (eg, nausea, 
headache, malaise). In general, antidepressants may affect blood glu-
cose concentrations because of their indirect effects on the endocrine 
system; caution should be used in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Mirtazapine exhibits very weak anticholinergic activity; conse -
quently, vigilance should be used in patients that might be more sus-
ceptible to these effects (eg, those with urinary retention; prostatic 
hypertrophy; acute, untreated closed-angle glaucoma, or increased 
intraocular pressure; GI obstruction or ileus). Effects of mirtazapine 
may also be additive to anticholinergic medications.
Extra care should be taken in active animals, as mirtazapine may 
impair concentration and alertness. Although extremely rare, mir -
tazapine has been associated with blood dyscrasias in humans and 
should be used cautiously in patients with the pre-existing hemato -
logic disease, especially leukopenia, neutropenia, and/or thrombo -
cytopenia. Prolongation of the QT interval has been reported, and 
risk may increase with other QT-prolonging drugs.
Adverse Effects
Mirtazapine appears to be well tolerated in both dogs and cats at the 
appropriately prescribed dosages. In a study evaluating the adverse 


===== Plumb PDF 922 =====
Mirtazapine   895
effects of mirtazapine in cats, the 10 most common adverse effects 
seen (listed from most frequent to least frequent) were vocaliza -
tion (56%), agitation (31%), vomiting (26.2%), abnormal gait/ataxia 
(16.7%), restlessness (14.3%), tremors/trembling (14.3%), hypersali-
vation (13%), tachypnea (11.9%), tachycardia (10.7%), and lethargy 
(10.7%).13 Only 1 cat that received a dose of 1.88 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) 
dose had adverse effects, whereas 25 cats that received a dose of 3.75 
mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) displayed adverse effects. Other adverse effects 
reported during the study included anorexia, disorientation, dyspnea, 
hypothermia, mouth breathing/panting, mydriasis, behavior changes, 
depression/sedation, fasciculations, hyperactivity, hypertension, pac-
ing, dysphoria, inappropriate elimination, polyphagia, circling, dis -
comfort, hiding, inappetence, seizures, and weakness.13 Increases in 
liver enzymes have been reported in some cats receiving mirtazapine. 
Cats experienced more behavioral effects (vocalization, interactions) 
with 3.75 mg doses as compared with 1.88 mg doses.
Transdermal mirtazapine may cause application site reactions (eg, 
erythema, crusting/scabbing, residue) in ≈10% of cats.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Reproductive studies in rats, rabbits, and dogs have shown no evi -
dence of teratogenicity. Additional studies in hamsters, rabbits, and 
rats have shown no evidence of fetal genetic mutation or reduction 
in parental fertility, although there were increases in postimplanta -
tion losses and pup deaths, as well as decreases in birth weight. 
Mirtazapine is distributed in human breast milk and can be de -
tected in the serum of breastfed infants; caution should be used in 
nursing dams. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Clinical signs associated with mirtazapine overdose include agita -
tion, lethargy, vocalization, panting, and tremors; cats may also de -
velop tachycardia and ataxia. 
In humans, mirtazapine ingestion upwards of 10 times the ther -
apeutic dose exhibits minimal toxicity, requiring no acute interven-
tion and only 6 hours of observation. Similar effects were seen in 
patients receiving up to 30 times the recommended dose. However, 
serotonin syndrome is possible, and the package insert for mirtazap-
ine recommends that activated charcoal be administered in addition 
to other standard monitoring activities in an overdose situation.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
Mirtazapine is a substrate for several hepatic cytochrome P450 iso -
enzymes, including 2D6, 1A2, and 3A4. The following drug inter -
actions have either been reported or are theoretical in humans or 
animals receiving mirtazapine and may be of significance in veteri -
nary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily 
contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and perform addition-
al monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Benzodiazepines  (eg, diazepam, midazolam): Concurrent use 
has minimal effects on mirtazapine blood levels, but use together 
may cause additive impairment of motor skills.
 ■ Buprenorphine : Concurrent use with mirtazapine may in -
crease the risk for serotonin syndrome.
 ■ Butorphanol : Concurrent use with mirtazapine may increase 
the risk for serotonin syndrome.
 ■ Cimetidine : May increase mirtazapine exposure
 ■ Clonidine : Concurrent use with mirtazapine may cause in -
creases in blood pressure. 
 ■ CNS Depressants (eg, acepromazine, antihistamines , gab-
apentin): Concurrent use with mirtazapine may increase the risk 
for sedation and CNS depression.
 ■ Cyproheptadine : May negate the effects of mirtazapine
 ■ Diuretics (eg, furosemide): May increase the risk for hypona -
tremia
 ■ Erythromycin : May increase mirtazapine exposure
 ■ Ketoconazole : May increase mirtazapine exposure
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors  (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, 
linezolid, methylene blue, selegiline ): Increased risk for sero -
tonin syndrome when used concurrently with mirtazapine. Con-
current use or use within 14 days is contraindicated.
 ■ Opioids (eg, morphine): May increase the risk for hyponatre -
mia, sedation, and CNS depression 
 ■ Serotonergic Agents, Miscellaneous  (eg, buspirone, 
metoclopramide, ondansetron, trazodone ): Concurrent use 
with mirtazapine increases the risk for serotonin syndrome.
 ■ Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs; eg, flu-
oxetine, fluvoxamine): Concurrent use with mirtazapine increas-
es the risk for serotonin syndrome.
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants  (eg, amitriptyline, clomip -
ramine): Concurrent use with mirtazapine increases the risk for 
serotonin syndrome.
 ■ Tramadol : Increased risk for serotonin syndrome when used 
concurrently with mirtazapine
 ■ W arfarin : May prolong prothrombin time (PT) when used con-
currently with mirtazapine
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No specific concerns were noted.
Dosages
DOGS:
Appetite stimulant and/or antiemetic  (extra-label): There is 
little data on mirtazapine pharmacokinetics or efficacy in dogs. 
Anecdotal dosages ranging from 3.75 – 30 mg/dog (depending on 
dog size; NOT mg/kg) PO every 24 hours have been suggested. 
Alternatively, 1.1 – 1.3 mg/kg PO every 24 hours. 14 Doses should 
not exceed 30 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO once daily.
Chemotherapy-induced anorexia: 0.5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours7 
CATS:
Management of weight loss (label dosage; FDA-approved): Using 
the transdermal formulation, apply 1.5-inch ribbon (≈2 mg/cat) to 
the inner pinna of the cat’s ear every 24 hours for 14 days.1 The per-
son applying medication should wear gloves. Alternate application 
of ointment between the left and right inner pinnae of the ears.
Appetite stimulant and/or antiemetic (extra-label): NOTE: 
Higher initial doses are not more effective and have more adverse 
effects.
a) Healthy cats: 1.88 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 24 hours.4 
Practically, ¼ of a 7.5 mg tablet or ⅛ of a 15 mg tablet PO 
every 24 hours
b) Cats with chronic kidney or hepatic disease: 1.88 mg/cat 
(NOT mg/kg) PO every 48 hours.3,10 Practically, ¼ of a 7.5 mg 
tablet or ⅛ of a 15 mg tablet PO every 48 hours  
Chemotherapy-induced anorexia: 0.5 mg/kg PO every 24 to 72 
hours7 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy measured by the following parameters: increased 
appetite, decreased episodes of vomiting, and weight gain
 ■ Liver enzymes in cats
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, behavior, sedation) and signs of serotonin 


===== Plumb PDF 923 =====
896    Misoprostol
syndrome (eg, sedation, GI signs, vocalization, agitation, tremors, 
difficulty breathing, hyperactivity, hyperthermia)
Client Information
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. If your animal 
vomits after receiving the medication on an empty stomach, give 
it with food or a small treat. If vomiting continues, contact your 
veterinarian.
 ■ Mirtazapine is usually tolerated well in dogs. Contact your veter-
inarian if your cat develops side effects as the dose may need to 
be adjusted. Common side effects include vocalization, behavior 
changes, and tremors/shaking. Report excessive drowsiness or 
vocalization to your veterinarian.
 ■ If your animal is receiving orally disintegrating tablets, make sure 
your hands are dry before handling the tablet. Place the tablet un-
der the animal’s tongue and hold the animal’s mouth closed for 
several seconds to allow it to dissolve (should occur quickly). Af-
ter the tablet has melted, offer the animal water.
 ■ Y ou should wear gloves when handling the transdermal formula-
tion and dispose of them afterward in the regular trash. Be sure 
you understand how to give this medicine to your animal. Apply 
the medicine to the inner side of the ear flap and not into the ear 
canal. After applying the medication, wash your hands with soap 
and water. Caregivers should avoid contact with the treated area 
for 2 hours after administration, as the medicine can be absorbed 
through the skin.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Mirtazapine, a member of the piperazinoazepine group of compounds, 
is classified as an atypical tetracyclic antidepressant and is not chemi-
cally related to other antidepressants. Mirtazapine occurs as a white to 
creamy white crystalline powder that is slightly soluble in water.
Mirtazapine may also be known as 6-azamianserin, Org-3770, 
mepirzapine, and Remeron®; many trade names for international 
products are available.
Storage/Stability
Store mirtazapine transdermal ointment at 25°C (77°F) and use it 
within 30 days after opening.
Store the coated tablets and orally disintegrating tablets between 
20°C and 25°C (68°F and 77°F), with excursions permitted between 
15°C and 30°C (59°F and 86°F). Protect from light and moisture. The 
orally disintegrating tablets must be used immediately upon removal 
from the tablet blister and cannot be stored. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Compounded preparation stability: Mirtazapine 10 mg/mL oral sus-
pension can be compounded from commercially available tablets. 
Triturate 10 mirtazapine 30 mg tablets with 15 mL of Ora-Plus® and 
qs ad to 30 mL with Ora-Sweet®. The resulting suspension retains 
90% potency for 90 days stored at both 5°C (41°F) and 25°C (77°F).  
Compounded mirtazapine suspensions should be protected from 
light and shaken well before use.15
Mirtazapine powder compounded into a transdermal  Lipoderm® 
gel at concentrations of 1.88 mg/0.1 mL and 3.75 mg/0.1 mL did 
not reliably meet compendial standards for potency, as mirtazapine 
concentration within the gel varied by greater than 10% of target 
despite concerted efforts of the compounding staff. 5 Transdermal 
mirtazapine gel prepared by commercial compounding pharma -
cies have also demonstrated significant variation from the intended 
product concentration.16 
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Mirtazapine Transdermal Ointment: 100 mg/tube in 5 g tube  
(20 mg/1 g); Mirataz®, (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Mirtazapine Oral Tablets: 7.5 mg, 15 mg, 30 mg, and 45 mg; Remer-
on®, generic; (Rx)
Mirtazapine Orally Disintegrating Tablets (ODT): 15 mg, 30 mg, and 
45 mg; Remeron SolTab®, generic; (Rx). NOTE: Some generic ODTs 
may contain xylitol (unknown quantity).
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Misoprostol
(mye-soe-prost-ole) Cytotec®
Prostaglandin Analogue 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Prostaglandin E1 analogue for treatment or prevention of GI 
lesions, especially those associated with aspirin therapy; may 
also be useful for reproductive purposes. Appears ineffective 
in prevention of glucocorticoid-induced lesions
 ▶ Contraindications include pregnant animals (but has been 
used in horses mid-gestation and intravaginally for cervical 
ripening) and nursing dams (diarrhea in the nursing offspring).
 ▶ Caution is advised in patients sensitive to prostaglandins or 
prostaglandin analogues.
 ▶ Adverse effects include GI distress (eg, diarrhea, abdominal 
pain, vomiting, flatulence) and potentially uterine contractions 
and vaginal bleeding in female dogs.
 ▶ The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies misoprostol as a hazardous drug; use appro-
priate precautions when handling.
Uses/Indications
Misoprostol may be useful as primary or adjunctive therapy in pre-
venting gastroduodenal ulceration in dogs, especially when caused 
or aggravated by NSAIDs. 1 Although misoprostol can be used for 
treatment of gastric ulcers, other drugs may be equally effective and 
better tolerated; it does not appear to be effective in reduction of gas-
tric ulceration secondary to glucocorticoid therapy. 2-6 Misoprostol 
reduces basal gastric acid secretion in horses.7
There is limited evidence of efficacy for misoprostol in the treat -
ment of atopic dermatitis in dogs.8 
Misoprostol’s effects on uterine contractility and cervical ripening 
make it effective as an adjunct treatment for reproductive indications 
(eg, abortifacient, pyometra) in multiple species. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Misoprostol is a synthetic prostaglandin E 1 analogue. It has 2 main 
pharmacologic effects that make it a potentially useful agent in pre -
vention of upper GI ulceration. It acts via direct action on parietal 
cells to inhibit basal and nocturnal gastric acid secretion as well as 
gastric acid secretions stimulated by food, pentagastrin, or hista -
mine—pepsin secretion is decreased under basal conditions, but not 
when stimulated by histamine. Misoprostol also has a cytoprotective 
effect on gastric mucosa, likely by increasing production of gastric 
mucosa and bicarbonate and increasing turnover and blood sup -
ply of gastric mucosal cells. Misoprostol enhances mucosal defense 
mechanisms and healing in response to acid-related injuries.
Other pharmacologic effects include increased amplitude and 
frequency of uterine contractions, cervical thinning and relaxation, 
stimulation of uterine bleeding, and total or partial expulsion of 
uterine contents in pregnant animals.
Pharmacokinetics
Approximately 88% of an oral dose of misoprostol is rapidly ab -
sorbed from the GI tract in humans, but a significant amount is me-


===== Plumb PDF 924 =====
Misoprostol   897
tabolized via the first-pass effect. The presence of food and antacids 
will delay the absorption of the drug. Misoprostol is rapidly de-es -
terified to misoprostol acid, which is the primary active metabolite. 
Misoprostol and misoprostol acid are equal in their effects on gastric 
mucosa.9 Plasma protein binding of both misoprostol and the acid 
metabolite is between 81% and 89%.10
Misoprostol acid is further biotransformed via oxidative mecha -
nisms to pharmacologically inactive metabolites. These metabolites, 
free acid, and small amounts of unchanged drug are principally ex -
creted into the urine. In humans, the serum half-life of misoprostol 
is ≈30 minutes and its duration of pharmacologic effects is ≈3 to 6 
hours.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Misoprostol is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it and 
during pregnancy. The misoprostol product label has a black-box 
warning against administration in pregnant women due to risk for 
abortion, premature birth, uterine rupture, or birth defects 11; this 
drug should be used with caution in female veterinary patients with 
reproductive potential that may become pregnant.
Do not confuse miSOPROstol with miFEPRIStone.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) classifies misoprostol as a hazardous drug; personal pro -
tective equipment (PPE) should be used accordingly to minimize the 
risk for exposure.12 
Adverse Effects
In humans, the most prevalent adverse effect seen with misoprostol 
is GI distress, which usually manifests as diarrhea, abdominal pain, 
vomiting, and flatulence.11 Adverse effects are often transient and re-
solve over several days or may be minimized by dosage adjustment 
or giving doses with food. Potentially, uterine contractions and vag-
inal bleeding could occur in female dogs. See Contraindications/
Precautions/Warnings and Reproductive/Nursing Safety.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Misoprostol may cause abortion, premature birth, uterine rupture, 
or birth defects (eg, skull and limb defects, facial malformations) 
and is contraindicated during pregnancy. However, in humans, it is 
used intravaginally for cervical ripening to induce labor when spon-
taneous labor and vaginal delivery is indicated. Misoprostol may im-
pair fertility as pre- and postimplantation losses, and a significant 
decrease in the number of live pups were noted when high doses 
were given to male and female breeding rats.
In horses, a study 13 in midgestational pregnant mares given 
a 5-day course of oral misoprostol 5 µg/kg PO twice daily as a GI 
mucosal cytoprotectant during colic found that pregnancy was not 
disrupted and no adverse effects were noted. Cervical tone, ultraso -
nographic characteristics of the uterus, cervix and conceptus, and 
progesterone and estrone sulfate concentrations were similar before 
misoprostol treatment. The authors concluded that additional in -
vestigation of treatment at earlier and later stages of gestation, for 
longer term treatment, and evaluating neonates for developmental 
disturbances would add further information on safety of misoprostol 
during gestation.
Misoprostol acid is excreted in milk. Misoprostol is not recom -
mended for lactating dams, as it could potentially cause significant 
diarrhea in nursing offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
There is limited information available. Overdoses in laboratory ani-
mals have produced diarrhea, GI lesions, emesis, tremors, focal car-
diac, hepatic, or renal tubular necrosis, dyspnea, abdominal pain, 
 sedation, tremors, fever, seizures, bradycardia, and hypotension.11 GI 
distress (eg, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain) is the most com -
mon clinical sign seen in dogs.
Overdoses should be treated seriously, and standard GI decontam-
ination techniques should be employed when applicable. Resultant 
toxicity should be treated supportively and based on clinical signs.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving misoprostol and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Antacids, Magnesium-Containing : Magnesium-contain -
ing antacids may aggravate misoprostol-induced diarrhea. If an 
antacid is required, an aluminum-only antacid may be a better 
choice. Antacids and food reduce the rate of misoprostol absorp-
tion and may reduce the systemic availability, but these probably 
do not affect therapeutic efficacy.
 ■ Oxytocin : Misoprostol may enhance effects.
 ■ Phenylbutazone : Concurrent use may result in neurosensory 
effects (eg, dizziness, ataxia).
Dosages
DOGS:
Prevention of aspirin-induced gastric injury (extra-label):  
3 µg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours. Efficacy appears similar with dos-
ing intervals of every 8 hours and every 12 hours.14,15 
Prevention of gastric injury caused by other NSAIDs (extra-label): 
No controlled studies documenting safety and efficacy were lo -
cated and no clear evidence currently is available that supports 
any dosage in dogs.5 Anecdotal dosage recommendations usually 
range from 2 – 5 µg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours, although some 
have suggested that longer times between doses may be effective 
and that dosages above 3 µg/kg may be associated with more GI 
adverse effects.
Adjunctive therapy as an abortifacient (extra-label):
a) Aglepristone 10 mg/kg SC every 24 hours on 2 consecutive 
days and misoprostol 200 µg/bitch (NOT µg/kg) for bitches 
weighing less than or equal to 20 kg (44 lb) or 400 µg/bitch 
(NOT µg/kg) for bitches weighing more than 20 kg (44 lb) in-
travaginally once daily until completion of abortion. In a study, 
all bitches in the treatment group aborted within 6 days.16
b) Misoprostol 1 – 3 µg/kg administered as a vaginal supposito -
ry once daily to promote cervical dilation. This allows for a 
reduced dinoprost (PGF2alpha) dose of 0.1 mg/kg SC every 
8 hours for 2 days, then 0.2 mg/kg SC every 8 hours to effect. 
Abortion usually occurs after 5 days.17
Pyometra and metritis (extra-label): Give aglepristone 10 mg/kg  
SC on days 1, 2, 8, 15, and 29. Give misoprostol 10 µg/kg PO 
twice daily on days 3 through 12. Approximately 75% of cases 
showed significant clinical improvement without developing the 
adverse effects associated with the prostaglandins (PGF2alpha, 
 cloprostenol).18
Adjunctive therapy for atopic dermatitis  (extra-label): Target 
dosage of 5 µg/kg PO 3 times daily. Modest improvement in clini-
cal signs.19 NOTE: This is not recommended as a first-choice ther-
apy, and efficacy is questionable.
CATS:
GI adverse effects associated with NSAID use  (extra-label): No 
controlled studies documenting safety or efficacy in cats were 


===== BSAVA PDF 286 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
270
Mirtazapine
(Zispin) POM 
Formulations: Oral: 15 mg tablets, 15 mg/ml solution. Also 
available as a transdermal formulation on a named patient basis.
Action: Tricyclic antidepressant that acts on central alpha-2 
receptors which leads to increased noradrenaline levels within the 
brain. Also inhibits several types of serotonin receptors and 
histamine (H1) receptors.
Use:
• Appetite stimulation in dogs and cats. Efficacy in cats with stable 
chronic kidney disease has been demonstrated.
• Antiemetic role in conjunction with other drugs, but authorized 
preparations should be used.
• Anecdotal use beginning to appear concerning its use in the 
management of social fears in dogs. 
Monitor animal carefully when using mirtazapine, particularly if there 
is also cardiac, hepatic or renal disease. 
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Do not use in patients with pre-existing 
haematological disease.
Adverse reactions: Sedation is common and can be profound. 
Can affect behaviour in many different ways, increased vocalization 
and interaction with others. Has been associated with blood 
dyscrasias in humans.
Drug interactions: Several interactions known in humans, 
principally involving other behaviour-modifying drugs.
DOSES
Dogs: 1.1–1.3 mg/kg p.o. q24h.
Cats: 1.9 mg/cat p.o. q48h (can double dose if needed or increase 
frequency to q24h but not both).
Misoprostol
(Cytotec*) POM
Formulations: Oral: 200 μg tablet.
Action: Cytoprotection of the gastric mucosa: it inhibits gastric 
acid secretion and increases bicarbonate and mucus secretion, 
epithelial cell turnover and mucosal blood flow. It prevents,  
and promotes healing of, gastric and duodenal ulcers, particularly 
those associated with the use of NSAIDs. Some reports suggest  
it may not prevent gastric bleeding associated with high doses  
of methylprednisolone. It may also be useful in the management of 
canine atopy, although other treatments are likely safer.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 287 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
271
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Use:
• Protection against NSAID-induced gastric ulceration. In humans, 
higher doses (20 μg (micrograms)/kg p.o. q6–12h) are used to 
manage pre-existing NSAID-induced gastric ulceration, while 
doses of 2–5 μ g/kg p.o. q6–8h are used prophylactically to 
prevent ulceration.
• Has been used in combination with aglepristone to induce 
abortion in dogs and cats. 
Give with food. Combinations with diclofenac are available for 
humans, but are not suitable for small animals because of different 
NSAID pharmacokinetics.
Safety and handling: Women who are, or might be, pregnant 
should avoid handling this drug.
Contraindications: Do not use in pregnant animals.
Adverse reactions: Diarrhoea, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting 
and abortion.
Drug interactions: Use of misoprostol with gentamicin may 
exacerbate renal dysfunction.
DOSES
Dogs:   
• Protection against NSAID-induced gastric ulceration: 2–5 μ g 
(micrograms)/kg p.o. q8–12h.
• Atopic dermatitis: 3–6 μ g/kg p.o. q8h has been suggested.
Cats: Protection against NSAID-induced gastric ulceration:  5 μg 
(micrograms)/kg p.o. q8h.
Mitotane (o,p'-DDD)
(Lysodren*) POM
Formulations: Oral: 500 mg tablet or capsule.
Action: Necrosis of the adrenal cortex reducing the production of 
adrenal cortical hormones.
Use:
• Management of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism 
(HAC) in dogs. However, other medications are authorized for 
this condition (see Trilostane).
• Has been used in the management of adrenal-dependent HAC, 
but with variable success.
Mitotane is available from Europe for animals that have failed 
trilostane therapy. It should be given with food high in fat/oil to 
improve its absorption. Closely monitor for any decrease in 
appetite (typically seen within 3–10 days of therapy); an ACTH 
stimulation test should be performed to monitor treatment 
efficacy. In diabetic animals the insulin dose should be reduced  
by 30%. The addition of prednisolone is generally not 


===== BSAVA PDF 288 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
272
recommended. If switching from trilostane to mitotane, then 
post-ACTH cortisol concentrations should be >200 nmol/l before 
starting mitotane. Not recommended in cats as trilostane is more 
likely to be effective.
Safety and handling: Drug crosses skin and mucous membrane 
barriers. Wear gloves when handling this drug and avoid inhalation 
of dust.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Anorexia, vomiting, diarrhoea and weakness, 
generally associated with too rapid a drop in plasma cortisol levels. 
They usually resolve with steroid supplementation. Acute-onset of 
neurological signs may be seen 2–3 weeks after initiation of therapy, 
possibly due to rapid growth of a pituitary tumour. Provide 
supplemental glucocorticoids during periods of stress. 
Approximately 5% of dogs require permanent glucocorticoid and 
mineralocorticoid replacement therapy if given mitotane overdose.
Drug interactions: Barbiturates and corticosteroids increase the 
hepatic metabolism of mitotane. There may be enhanced CNS 
depression with concurrent use of CNS depressants. Spironolactone 
blocks the action of mitotane. Diabetic animals may have rapidly 
changing insulin requirements during the early stages of therapy.
DOSES
Dogs: 30–50 mg/kg p.o. (with/after food) q24h to effect (generally 
3–10 days) then 50 mg/kg p.o. q7–14 days in 2–3 divided doses as 
required. Higher doses (50–150 mg/kg p.o. q24h) may become 
necessary for adrenal carcinomas.
Cats: Similar dose to dogs but efficacy in cats is very variable, with 
many showing no response at non-toxic levels.
Mitoxantrone
(Novantrone*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 2 mg/ml.
Action: Antitumour antibiotic which inhibits topoisomerase II. It is 
cell cycle non-specific, but most active during S phase.
Use:
• Treatment of canine and feline lymphoma, squamous cell 
carcinoma (SCC), and transitional cell carcinoma.
• Its use has also been described in renal adenocarcinoma, fibroid 
sarcoma, anal gland adenocarcinoma, thyroid carcinoma, 
prostate carcinoma, mammary gland adenocarcinoma, feline 
injection site sarcoma, haemangiopericytoma and as a 
radiosensitizer in cats with oral SCC.
Renal excretion is minimal, so it is far safer to administer to cats with 
renal insufficiency than doxorubicin, although ancedotally acute 
renal failure in cats can occur following administration.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
