
===== Plumb PDF 1075 =====
1048    Pradofloxacin
flicts or is dependent on diluent or concentration factors with the 
following drugs or solutions: fat emulsion 10%, amikacin sulfate, 
dobutamine HCl, mannitol, methylprednisolone sodium succinate 
(at Y-site), ondansetron, penicillin G sodium, promethazine HCl (at 
Y-site), and sodium bicarbonate. 
Potassium chloride for injection is reportedly physically  incom-
patible with the following solutions or drugs: amphotericin B, diaz-
epam (at Y-site), and phenytoin sodium (at Y-site).
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : 
Parenteral Products: There are several products for parenteral use 
that contain potassium; refer to Appendix tables or individual pro -
prietary veterinary products for additional information.
Oral Products: These products are not found in the FDA Green 
Book; approval status is uncertain.
Potassium Gluconate Tablets: 2 mEq (468 mg); Tumil-K®, Renakare®, 
generic; (Rx). Labeled for use in cats and dogs
Potassium Gluconate Oral Powder: Each 0.65 g (¼ teaspoon) con -
tains 2 mEq of potassium in 4 oz containers; Renakare®, Tumil-K®; 
(Rx). Labeled for use in dogs and cats
Potassium Gluconate Gel: Each 2.34 g (½ teaspoon) contains 2 mEq 
of potassium in 5 oz tubes; Tumil-K® Gel, Renakare®; (Rx). Labeled 
for use in dogs and cats
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS (NOT A COMPLETE LIST) :
Parenteral Products:
Potassium Chloride for Injection Concentrate: 2 mEq/mL in sin -
gle-dose and multi-dose vials and must be diluted before adminis -
tering; generic; (Rx)
Potassium Chloride for Injection, Highly Concentrated: 10 mEq and 
20 mEq in 50 mL or 100 mL bags, and 40 mEq/100 mL bags; gener -
ic; (Rx). Ready-to-use solution for fluid-restricted patients; requires 
administration through a central line via calibrated infusion device.
There are also premixed IV bags of saline and dextrose (both sep -
arately and in various combinations) that contain potassium  
10 mEq/L, 20 mEq/L, 30 mEq/L, or 40 mEq/L. 
Potassium Acetate for Injection Concentrate: 2 mEq/mL and  
4 mEq/mL and must be diluted before administering; (Rx)
Potassium Phosphate for Injection (see Phosphate, Intravenous) is 
also available. 
Oral Products: There are many human-labeled potassium salts for 
oral use available in several dosage forms; refer to human drug ref -
erences for more information on these products. Tablets, controlled/
sustained release tablets and capsules, effervescent tablets, liquids, 
and powder in varying strengths available; (OTC, Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Pradofloxacin
(pra-doe-flox-a-sin) Veraflox®
Fluoroquinolone Antibiotic 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ FDA-approved for use in cats; approved for dogs in some 
countries
 ▶ Enhanced aerobic gram-positive activity and activity against 
anaerobes; its gram-negative activity is similar to other fluoro-
quinolones. 
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity to fluoroquino-
lones; do not administer to pregnant or lactating animals, 
or kittens less than 12 weeks of age, as safety has not been 
determined.
 ▶ May produce erosions of cartilage of weight-bearing joints 
and other signs of arthropathy in immature animals of various 
species
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with renal insufficiency, pre-exist-
ing CNS disorders (eg, epilepsy), or underlying conditions that 
predispose to arrhythmias (eg, electrolyte imbalances, cardiac 
disease); use with caution in immunocompromised cats (ie, 
infected with feline leukemia and/or feline immunodeficiency 
virus), as safety has not been determined. 
 ▶ Adverse effects may include GI distress, photosensitivity, mye-
losuppression, and arrhythmias (dogs only).
 ▶ Many potential drug interactions
 ▶ FDA prohibits extra-label use in food animals. Should not be 
used in humans
Uses/Indications
In cats, pradofloxacin oral suspension is FDA-approved for the 
treatment of skin infections (wounds and abscesses) caused by sus -
ceptible strains of Pasteurella multocida, Streptococcus canis, Staphy-
lococcus aureus, Staphylococcus felis, and Staphylococcus pseudinter-
medius. Pradofloxacin has also been used clinically in cats for the 
treatment of bacterial UTIs, Bartonella spp,1 Mycoplasma haemofelis 
upper respiratory infections, and in combination with other antimy-
cobacterial drugs for feline leprosy syndromes. One study showed 
pradofloxacin to be equivalent to amoxicillin for treatment of bacte-
rial upper respiratory infections.2
Pradofloxacin is not FDA-approved for use in dogs (see Contra-
indications/Precautions/Warnings). In other countries, pradoflox -
acin is labeled for the treatment of wound infections, superficial 
and deep pyoderma caused by susceptible strains of the S pseudin-
termedius group (including S pseudintermedius); acute UTIs caused 
by susceptible strains of Escherichia coli and the S pseudintermedius 
group (including S pseudintermedius); and as adjunctive treatment 
to mechanical or surgical periodontal therapy in the treatment of 
severe infections of the gingiva and periodontal tissues caused by 
susceptible strains of anaerobic organisms (eg,  Porphyromonas spp 
and Prevotella spp). 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated fluoro -
quinolones as Critically Important (Highest Priority) antimicrobials 
for human medicine.3 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) 
has designated fluoroquinolones as Veterinary Critically Important 
Antimicrobial (VCIA) Agents for veterinary species.4
Pharmacology/Actions
Pradofloxacin is a broad-spectrum third-generation bactericidal flu-
oroquinolone antibiotic. The bactericidal activity of pradofloxacin is 
concentration dependent, so its antibacterial activity is dependent 
on high peak concentrations. Its antibacterial action is via inhibition 
of DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV , thereby preventing DNA su-
percoiling and DNA synthesis.


===== Plumb PDF 1076 =====
Pradofloxacin   1049
Pradofloxacin is unique among veterinary fluoroquinolones 
in that it has enhanced aerobic gram-positive activity and activity 
against anaerobes; its gram-negative activity is similar to other flu -
oroquinolones. This spectrum of activity is similar to the human 
fluoroquinolone, moxifloxacin. Pradofloxacin, compared with other 
veterinary fluoroquinolones, also has enhanced activity against My-
coplasma spp. It is the only antibiotic shown to date that can elimi -
nate Mycoplasma haemofelis from the blood of experimentally inoc-
ulated cats.5 Methicillin-resistant staphylococci (MRSP) isolates are 
usually resistant to all fluoroquinolones, including pradofloxacin. 6 
Proposed ALCS breakpoints during the FDA approval process of less 
than 1 µg/mL were considered susceptible and breakpoints greater 
than 2 µg/mL were considered resistant.
Pradofloxacin has weak activity against streptococci and entero -
cocci and is not recommended in the treatment of these infections. 
Unlike enrofloxacin, pradofloxacin does not cause retinal toxicity 
in cats.7 It has also not been linked to Streptococcus canis-associated 
necrotizing fasciitis.
Pharmacokinetics
In dogs, after oral administration, pradofloxacin is rapidly absorbed 
with peak plasma concentrations occurring ≈2 hours after a dose. 8 
Bioavailability is reported to be high and not affected by tablet size or 
the dose administered. Repeated doses do not impact pharmacoki -
netics. Volume of distribution is more than 2 L/kg, and only ≈35% of 
the drug is bound to plasma proteins. Peak drug concentrations are 
slightly higher in serum than in interstitial fluid but persist at con -
centrations higher than in plasma for most of the 24-hour dosing pe-
riod. Pradofloxacin at 3 mg/kg PO resulted in 5 times as high PK-PD 
values in leukocytes compared with plasma, with the lowest values 
in CSF , synovial fluid, and aqueous humor.9 Highest tissue concen -
trations were found in cartilage, liver, and kidneys and measured 1 
to 1.5 hours after a dose. Clearance was 0.24 L/hour/kg, and plasma 
elimination half-life was ≈8 hours. Pradofloxacin is primarily metab-
olized via glucuronidation and sulfation; ≈40% of a dose is excreted 
in the urine. Approximately 85% of a dose is excreted into the urine 
within 24 hours—40% is excreted unchanged and the rest is excreted 
primarily as glucuronide metabolites.10–13
In cats, pradofloxacin is rapidly absorbed with peak plasma con -
centrations occurring within 1 to 2 hours. 8,14 Oral bioavailability is 
≈60% with oral suspension and ≈70% with oral tablets. Repeat dos -
es do not significantly alter the pharmacokinetics. A 5 mg/kg PO 
dose produced a peak concentration of 2.1 μg /mL when given to 
fasted cats; administration with food reduces peak concentrations 
by 50% and total absorption by ≈25%. Volume of distribution is rel-
atively high, and only ≈30% of the drug is bound to plasma pro -
teins. Like in dogs, glucuronidation is the major metabolic pathway 
for cats; 70% of a dose is excreted into the urine within 24 hours, 
but only ≈10% of it is excreted as unchanged drug. Clearance is  
0.27 L/hour/kg, and terminal plasma elimination half-life has been 
variably reported from 3 to 8 hours. 11,12,15 Clinical efficacy is asso -
ciated with achieving a peak pradofloxacin concentration 10 times 
greater than bacterial MIC.16,17
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Pradofloxacin is contraindicated in animals that are hypersensitive 
to it or other quinolones. It should not be used in kittens younger 
than 12 weeks of age 18 (younger than 6 weeks on United Kingdom 
label14), as safety has not been evaluated. Pradofloxacin has been 
shown to produce erosions of cartilage of weight-bearing joints and 
other signs of arthropathy in immature animals of various species.18  
Pradofloxacin should not be used in dogs and cats with pre-existing 
articular cartilage lesions. 8,14 Additionally, pradofloxacin adminis -
tration to healthy cats for longer than 7 days resulted in reversible 
leukopenia, neutropenia, and lymphopenia.18 
Although pradofloxacin is approved for use in dogs in other 
countries (eg, United Kingdom, Europe), it is not FDA-approved in 
the United States due to myelosuppression (thrombocytopenia and 
leukopenia) observed in canine safety studies at daily oral pradoflox-
acin doses of 27 mg/kg (6 times the maximum recommended dose) 
and above, but not at lower, recommended doses.12,18 Additional con-
traindications for dogs include use in dogs less than 12 months of age 
(most breeds), in giant breeds less than 18 months old due to effects 
on articular cartilage, and with CNS disorders (eg, epilepsy).19
Use with caution in animals with impaired renal function or se -
verely impaired hepatic function. It should also be used with caution 
in dogs predisposed to arrhythmias and in cats with pre-existing 
CNS disorders18 (eg, epilepsy, a contraindication on the United King-
dom label8,14). The safety of pradofloxacin in immune-compromised 
cats (eg, cats infected with feline leukemia virus and/or feline immu-
nodeficiency virus) has not been evaluated.18
Fluoroquinolones may cause photosensitization, and prolonged 
exposure of bare (eg, nose) or thinly haired skin to direct sunlight 
should be avoided.
The artificial beef flavor used in the tablets originates from irradi-
ated (to inactivate any viruses or micro-organisms) pig livers. Dogs 
that are hypersensitive to pork products could potentially react to 
these proteins.
Extra-label use of fluoroquinolones is prohibited in food animals.
Adverse Effects
In dogs and cats, pradofloxacin at recommended dosages appears 
to be well tolerated with diarrhea/loose stools occasionally reported. 
Articular cartilage abnormalities have been noted in young, rapid -
ly growing animals given fluoroquinolones (see Contraindications/
Precautions/Warnings).8,14,18
Myelosuppression (thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, lymphope -
nia) is possible in dogs and cats (when used for longer than 7 days).18 
Therapy should be discontinued if this occurs. See Contraindica-
tions/Precautions/Warnings
In dogs, QT interval can be increased and pradofloxacin poten -
tially could have proarrhythmic effects, especially in patients with 
coexisting risk factors (eg, hypothyroidism, bradycardia, electrolyte 
disturbances, heart failure, or liver or kidney disease).20
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Pradofloxacin is labeled as contraindicated for use during pregnancy 
or lactation.8,14 The drug does not pose additional risk when used in 
breeding animals.8
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Pradofloxacin appears to be quite safe in acute overdose situations, 
with vomiting and diarrhea possible. The approximate LD 50 after a 
single intraperitoneal application in rats was more than 50 mg/kg, 
and single oral doses of 100 mg/kg were tolerated well in young cats, 
and in dogs; however, in one dog there was temporary overloading 
of renal excretory capacity.12
Acute overdoses should be managed supportively. Consider per-
forming baseline white blood cell counts in dogs with overdoses.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions either have been reported or are 


===== Plumb PDF 1077 =====
1050   Pradofloxacin
theoretical in humans or animals receiving pradofloxacin or other 
fluoroquinolones and may be of significance in veterinary patients. 
Unless otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindi -
cated, but weigh the potential risks and perform additional monitor-
ing when appropriate.
 ■ Antacids, Aluminum-, Calcium- or Magnesium-  
Containing : May bind to pradofloxacin and prevent its absorp-
tion; separate doses of these products by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Cimetidine : Cimetidine has been shown to interfere with the 
metabolism of quinolones and should be used with care when 
used concurrently.18
 ■ Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, prednisone): May en-
hance the toxic effect of quinolones, specifically the risk for ten -
donitis and tendon rupture
 ■ Cyclosporine : Fluoroquinolones may exacerbate the nephro -
toxicity and reduce the metabolism of cyclosporine. Concurrent 
use of pradofloxacin with oral cyclosporine should be avoided.18
 ■ Dairy Products : May bind to pradofloxacin and prevent its 
absorption; do not administer pradofloxacin with dairy products. 
 ■ Digoxin : Concurrent use of pradofloxacin with digoxin should 
be avoided, as it may increase the oral bioavailability of digoxin.
 ■ NonSteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs  ( NSAIDs; 
eg, flunixin): Flunixin has been shown in dogs to increase the 
AUC and elimination half-life of enrofloxacin, and enrofloxacin 
increases the AUC and elimination half-life of flunixin; it is un -
known if pradofloxacin also causes this effect or if other NSAIDs 
interact with pradofloxacin in dogs. Fluoroquinolones should not 
be used in combination with NSAIDs in animals with a history 
of seizures due to potential pharmacodynamic interactions in the 
CNS.8,14
 ■ Glyburide : Severe hypoglycemia is possible with concurrent 
use of glyburide with pradofloxacin. 
 ■ Iron, Zinc  (oral): Decreased pradofloxacin absorption; separate 
doses by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Lanthanum : May decrease pradofloxacin absorption
 ■ Methotrexate : When used concurrently with pradofloxacin, 
increased methotrexate levels possible with resultant toxicity
 ■ Nitrofurantoin : May antagonize the antimicrobial activity 
of fluoroquinolones, and concomitant use of nitrofurantoin with 
pradofloxacin is not recommended.
 ■ Probenecid : Blocks tubular secretion of ciprofloxacin and may 
also increase the blood level and half-life of pradofloxacin
 ■ QT-Prolonging Agents ( eg, cisapride, sotalol, quinidine, 
erythromycin, ondansetron): May enhance the QT-prolonging 
effect of pradofloxacin
 ■ Sevelamer : May decrease pradofloxacin absorption
 ■ Sucralfate : May inhibit absorption of pradofloxacin; separate 
doses of these drugs by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Theophylline : Pradofloxacin may increase theophylline blood 
concentration. The United States label states, The dosage of the -
ophylline should be reduced when used concurrently with quino-
lones.18 The United Kingdom labels state, The combination of 
fluoroquinolones with theophylline could increase the plasma 
levels of theophylline by altering its metabolism and thus should 
be avoided.8,14
Laboratory Considerations
No specific concerns noted.
Dosages
DOGS:
Wound infections, superficial and deep pyoderma caused by 
susceptible strains of the Staphylococcus pseudintermedius  
group (including S pseudintermedius ); acute UTIs caused by 
susceptible strains of Escherichia coli  and the Staphylococcus 
pseudintermedius group (including S pseudintermedius); and 
as adjunctive treatment to mechanical or surgical periodontal 
therapy in the treatment of severe infections of the gingiva and 
periodontal tissues caused by susceptible strains of anaerobic 
organisms (extra-label):
3 – 4.5 mg/kg PO once daily.8 As with other fluoroquinolones, the 
upper end of the dosing range may be preferable. The duration of 
the treatment depends on the nature and severity of the infection 
and on the response to treatment.
CATS:
Skin infections (wounds and abscesses) caused by susceptible 
strains of Pasteurella multocida, Streptococcus canis, Staph -
ylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus felis, and Staphylococcus 
pseudintermedius (label dosage; FDA-approved): 7.5 mg/kg  
(3.4 mg/lb) PO once daily for 7 consecutive days. If acceptable re-
sponse to treatment is not observed, or if no improvement is seen 
within 3 to 4 days, then the diagnosis should be re-evaluated and 
appropriate alternative therapy considered.18
Bartonellosis (extra-label): 5 – 10 mg/kg PO once or twice daily 
for 28 to 42 days. 1,21 (NOTE: larger, once-daily dosages of fluo -
roquinolones are preferred over twice-daily administration.) 
Elimination of infection often requires use of more than one class 
of antibiotic. For cats that are reasonably stable (eg, when treat -
ing  Bartonella spp-linked polyarthritis),  one recommendation 
is to start with one antibiotic (eg, doxycycline 5 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours), then add the second antibiotic  (eg, pradofloxacin)  5 
to  7 days later. Initiation of both antibiotics simultaneously has 
been associated with a Jarisch-Herxheimer-like reaction,  which 
can be confused with an adverse drug reaction.1,21 
Mycoplasma haemofelis (extra-label): 5 – 10 mg/kg PO once dai-
ly for 14 days5
Acute infections of the upper respiratory tract caused by 
susceptible strains of  Pasteurella  multocida , E coli,   and 
the Staphylococcus intermedius  group (including  S pseud -
intermedius ) (extra-label): Oral suspension, 5 – 7.5 mg/kg PO 
once daily 14; oral tablets, 3 – 4.5 mg/kg PO once daily. 8 The 
duration of the treatment depends on the nature and severity 
of the infection and on the response to treatment. For most 
infections the following treatment courses will be sufficient: 
wound infections and abscesses, 7 days; acute infections of the 
upper respiratory tract, 5 days.
BIRDS:
Infections caused by susceptible strains of Staphylococcus spp 
and Streptococcus spp species (extra-label): 15 mg/kg PO every 
24 hours22
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy, including culture and susceptibility when indi -
cated
 ■ Consider performing baseline and periodic white blood cell 
counts. Discontinue therapy if an unexplained drop in leukocyte, 
neutrophil, and/or lymphocyte counts is noted.18
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is an antibiotic used to treat bacterial infections. 
Be sure to give your animal this medicine exactly as prescribed by 
your veterinarian.
 ■ If using the liquid form, shake the container well before measur -
ing each dose. Use the syringe provided to ensure accurate dosing. 
Rinse syringe between doses.
 ■ This medicine is best given without food on an empty stomach, 


===== Plumb PDF 1078 =====
Pralidoxime (2-PAM)   1051
but if your animal vomits or acts sick afterwards, give it with food 
or a small treat (no dairy products, antacids, or anything contain-
ing iron). If vomiting continues, contact your veterinarian. 
 ■ Be sure to finish the entire course of treatment even if your animal 
appears to feel better. 
 ■ Pradofloxacin may stunt bone growth or cause joint abnormalities 
if used in young animals, or during pregnancy or while nursing.
 ■ The most common side effects are vomiting, nausea (acting sick), 
or diarrhea. 
 ■ For animals with thin hair coats, there may be a risk of sun sen -
sitivity within a few hours after receiving this type of antibiotic.
 ■ Y our veterinarian will need to monitor your animal while it is tak-
ing this medicine. Do not miss these important follow-up visits.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Pradofloxacin (CAS Registry 0195532-12-8; ATCvet: QJ01MA97, 
QJ01MA) is an 8-cyano fluoroquinolone antibiotic structurally sim-
ilar to moxifloxacin. It occurs as a brownish, light yellow to yellow, 
fine crystalline powder. Pradofloxacin has 4 enantiomeric forms, but 
secondary to its high antimicrobial potency, the S,S-isomer is used in 
the pharmaceutical products.
The oral suspension contains 2 mg/mL sorbic acid (E200) as a 
preservative.
Pradofloxacin may also be known as UNII-6O0T5E048I. Its trade 
name is Veraflox®.
Storage/Stability
The oral suspension should be stored below 30°C (86°F) in the orig-
inal container and kept tightly closed; after opening, it is stable for 
60 days18 (3 months on United Kingdom label19). Oral tablets require 
no special storage conditions, but once the container is opened, they 
should be protected from light and moisture.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No information has been located.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Pradofloxacin Oral Suspension: 25 mg/mL in 15 mL and 30 mL bot-
tles; Veraflox®; (Rx). Approved for use in cats. NADA 141-344#
Pradofloxacin Oral Tablets: 15 mg, 60 mg, and 120 mg. Approved in 
United Kingdom and Europe for cats (15 mg only) and dogs (15 mg, 
60 mg, 120 mg); POM-V; Veraflox®; (Rx)
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Pralidoxime (2-PAM)
(pra-li-dox-eem) Protopam Chloride®
Antidote; Cholinesterase Reactivator
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Cholinesterase reactivator used for adjunctive treatment of 
organophosphate poisoning
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity; generally not rec-
ommended for carbamate poisoning.
 ▶ Use with caution in animals with renal impairment and pa-
tients receiving anticholinesterase agents for the treatment of 
myasthenia gravis.
 ▶ Adverse effects appear to be uncommon; rapid IV injection 
may cause tachycardia, muscle rigidity, transient neuromuscu-
lar blockade, or laryngospasm.
 ▶ Most effective if given within 24 hours of exposure
 ▶ Available dosage forms and significant cost may be a limiting 
factor.
Uses/Indications
Pralidoxime is used in the treatment of organophosphate poisoning, 
in conjunction with atropine and supportive therapy. 
Pralidoxime must generally be given within 24 hours of exposure 
to be effective, but some benefits may occur, particularly in large ex-
posures, if given within 36 to 48 hours.
Pralidoxime has been shown to have vasoconstrictive properties. 
When pralidoxime is administered during CPR in pig models, it has 
been shown to increase coronary perfusion pressure leading to high-
er rates of restoration of spontaneous circulation1–3; however, clinical 
significance is not yet determined.
Pharmacology/Actions
Pralidoxime reactivates cholinesterase that has been inactivated by 
phosphorylation secondary to certain organophosphates. Via nucle-
ophilic attack, the drug removes and binds the offending phosphoryl 
group attached to the enzyme, which is then excreted. Pralidoxime 
may have protective effects on cholinesterase and may directly de -
toxify some organophosphates. It has greater activity at nicotinic 
sites. Its effects occur primarily at the neuromuscular junction of 
respiratory and skeletal muscle. Because it acts in the periphery, at -
ropine is needed to block the effect of accumulated acetylcholine in 
the respiratory center.
Pharmacokinetics
Pralidoxime is only marginally absorbed after oral dosing, and oral 
dosage forms are no longer available in the United States. It is rapidly 
distributed, primarily throughout the extracellular fluid. Because of 
its quaternary ammonium structure, it has limited CNS penetration.
Pralidoxime is thought to be metabolized by the liver and rapid -
ly excreted as both metabolite(s) and unchanged drug in the urine. 
Elimination half-life in humans is ≈75 minutes. The half-life in ru -
minants is ≈2 to 5 hours.4
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Pralidoxime is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to 
it. Pralidoxime is generally not recommended for use in instances 
of carbamate poisoning because cholinesterase inhibition by carba -
mates is rapidly reversible, but there is some controversy regarding 
this issue. One case report has demonstrated efficacy in a dog with 
carbamate toxicity using a lower, more frequent dosing regimen.5 
Pralidoxime should be used with caution in patients receiving an-
ticholinesterase agents for the treatment of myasthenia gravis, as it 
may precipitate a myasthenic crisis. It should also be used cautiously 
and at a reduced dose in patients with renal impairment. Temporary 


===== Plumb PDF 1079 =====
1052   Pralidoxime (2-PAM)
worsening of cholinergic signs can occur if pralidoxime is adminis -
tered IV too rapidly.
Adverse Effects
At usual doses, pralidoxime generally is safe and free of significant 
adverse effects. Transient increases in liver enzymes and creatine 
phosphokinase may occur. Rapid IV injection may cause tachy -
cardia, muscle rigidity, transient neuromuscular blockade, and 
 laryngospasm.
In humans, pain at injection site has been reported after IM ad -
ministration. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
It is not known whether this drug causes fetal harm or is excreted in 
maternal milk.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring. 
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
The acute LD50 of pralidoxime in dogs is 190 mg/kg. Signs of over -
dose may include dizziness, nausea, or increased heart rate; however, 
it may be difficult to distinguish these signs from effects of the poi -
soning being treated. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving pralidoxime and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Atropine : Effects of atropine occur more rapidly with concom-
itant use.
 ■ Barbiturates : Anticholinesterases can potentiate the action of 
barbiturates; use with caution.
 ■ Benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam, midazolam ): Respiratory 
depressants should be avoided in patients with organophosphate 
toxicity. 
 ■ Cimetidine : Use should be avoided in patients with organo -
phosphate toxicity.
 ■ Reserpine : Use should be avoided in patients with organophos-
phate toxicity 
 ■ Opioids (eg, morphine): Respiratory depressants should be 
avoided in patients with organophosphate toxicity.
 ■ Succinylcholine : Use should be avoided in patients with or -
ganophosphate toxicity.
 ■ Theophylline : Use should be avoided in patients with organo-
phosphate toxicity.
Dosages
NOTES: 
1) Usually used in conjunction with Atropine; refer to that mono-
graph and/or the references below for more information.
2) Treatment may vary depending on patient factors such as type 
of poisoning, amount ingested, and time since ingestion.
DOGS/CATS:
Organophosphate poisoning (extra-label):  
a) 25 mg/kg IM; repeat in 1 hour if muscle weakness has not been 
resolved
b) Cats: 20 – 25 mg/kg IM every 12 hours6
c) Initial dose of 20 mg/kg IV , IM, or SC. IV administration is 
preferred; dilute in saline and administer over at least 5 min -
utes (see Compatibility/Compounding Considerations  be -
low). Subsequent doses of 20 mg/kg IM, SC, or IV (slowly) ev-
ery 6 to 12 hours can be administered until nicotinic signs (eg, 
tachycardia, hypertension, muscle fasciculations, respiratory 
depression) are present. Discontinue after 3 to 4 treatments if 
no response or if nicotinic signs are aggravated. 
i. Alternatively, 50 mg/kg/day IV CRI may be used7 
ii. Kittens:  50 mg/kg initial dose followed by a 20 mg/kg dose 
the next day in a kitten8
iii. Dogs: 66 mg/kg given IV over 12 hours in a dog9 
HORSES :
Organophosphate poisoning (extra-label): 20 mg/kg (may re -
quire up to 35 mg/kg) IV and repeat every 4 to 6 hours10
RUMINANTS :
Organophosphate poisoning in cattle  (extra-label): 30 mg/kg 
IM every 8 hours11
CAMELIDS :
Organophosphate poisoning (extra-label): 20 mg/kg (route not 
specified)12
BIRDS:
Organophosphate poisoning (extra-label): 
a) 10 – 20 mg/kg every 8 to 12 hours (route not specified) with 
atropine 0.2 – 0.5 mg/kg IM every 3 to 4 hours. 13 Use lower 
dose when given with atropine14
b) 10 – 100 mg/kg IM every 24 to 48 hours or repeat once in 6 
hours15
Monitoring
 ■ Pralidoxime therapy is monitored via improvement in the clinical 
signs associated with organophosphate poisoning (eg, salivation, 
lacrimation, urination, defecation/diaphoresis, gastrointestinal 
upset, emesis [SLUDGE]). For more information, refer to one of 
the references outlined in the dosage section.
Client Information
 ■ This agent should only be used with close professional  supervision.
Chemistry/Synonyms
A quaternary ammonium oxime cholinesterase reactivator, prali -
doxime chloride occurs as a white to pale yellow, crystalline powder 
with a pKa of 7.8 to 8. It is freely soluble in water. The commercially 
available injection has a pH of 3.5 to 4.5 after reconstitution.
Pralidoxime chloride may also be known as 2-Formyl-1-meth -
ylpyridinium chloride oxime, 2-PAM, 2-PAM chloride, 2-PAMCl, 
2-pyridine aldoxime methochloride and Protopam®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise instructed by the manufacturer, pralidoxime chlo-
ride powder for injection should be stored at room temperature, with 
excursions permitted to 15° to 30°C (59°F-86°F). After reconstitut -
ing with sterile water (preservative-free) for injection, the solution 
should be used immediately. Do not use sterile water with preserva-
tives to reconstitute the powder for injection.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Reconstitute with 20 mL of sterile water for injection to yield  
50 mg/mL. For IV infusion, a concentration of 10 – 20 mg/mL in 
sodium chloride 0.9% is recommended. For IM injection when IV 
administration is not feasible, reconstitute each vial with 3.3 mL 
of sterile water for injection (with no preservatives added) to yield  
300 mg/mL.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE


===== BSAVA PDF 351 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
335
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
DOSES
Dogs:  
• Correction of hypokalaemia: intravenous doses must be titrated 
for each patient; dilute concentrated solutions prior to use 
(normally to 20–60 mmol/l). Rate of i.v. infusion should not 
exceed 0.5 mmol/kg/h, especially when concentration in 
replacement fluid is >60 mmol/l. Use of fluid pumps is 
recommended.
• Oral: replacement dose needs to be titrated to effect to 
maintain mid-range normal values in each individual patient. 
Starting doses are 2 mEq per 4.5 kg in food q12h or 2.2 mEq per 
100 kcal required energy intake.
Cats:  
• Correction of hypokalaemia: intravenous doses as for dogs.
• Oral: replacement dose needs to be titrated to effect to 
maintain mid-range normal values in each individual patient. 
Starting doses are 2.2 mEq per 4.5 kg in food q12h or 2–6 mEq/
cat/day p.o. in divided doses q8–12h.
Potentiated sulphonamides see 
Trimethoprim/Sulphonamide 
Pradofloxacin
(Veraflox) POM-V 
Formulations: Oral: 15 mg, 60 mg, 120 mg tablets; 25 mg/ml 
solution.
Action: Broad-spectrum, concentration-dependent antibiotic that 
inhibits DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV, blocking bacterial 
replication.
Use: Fluoroquinolone use should be reserved for infections where 
culture and sensitivity testing predicts a clinical response and where 
first- and second-line antimicrobials would not be effective. Active 
against many Gram-negative and Gram-positive organisms. Much 
improved activity versus  anaerobes compared with earlier 
generation fluoroquinolones. Like other members of the class, 
pradofloxacin has exceptional lipid solubility, attaining high 
concentrations especially in the urogenital tract including the 
prostate gland. Specific indications include superficial and deep 
pyodermas and wound infections associated with susceptible 
organisms such as Staphylococcus pseudintermedius , urinary tract 
infections associated with susceptible organisms such as 
Escherichia coli  and S. pseudintermedius , severe periodontal 
disease associated with anaerobes such as Porphyromonas  spp. 
and Prevotella spp. and acute severe upper respiratory tract 
infections associated with organisms such as  E. coli, 
Staphylococcus spp. and Pasteurella multocida .


===== BSAVA PDF 352 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
336
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Do not use in pregnant or lactating animals. 
Do not use in dogs <12 months of age (<18 months for giant-breeds) 
or cats <6 weeks of age due to potential adverse effects on 
cartilage. Do not use in animals with persistent cartilage lesions. Do 
not use in dogs or cats with neurological disease especially epilepsy.
Adverse reactions: Most common is mild GI upset.
Drug interactions: Absorbents and antacids containing cations 
(Mg2+, Al3+) may bind fluoroquinolones, preventing their absorption 
from the GI tract. Their absorption may also be inhibited by 
sucralfate and zinc salts; separate dosing by at least 2 hours. 
Fluoroquinolones increase plasma theophylline concentrations. 
Cimetidine may reduce the clearance of fluoroquinolones and so 
should be used with caution with these drugs. Some 
fluoroquinolones may decrease the metabolism and increase 
nephrotoxicity of ciclosporin and tacrolimus in humans and 
therefore concurrent use in animals is best avoided until more 
research has been performed. May increase the action of orally 
administered anticoagulants.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs: 3–5 mg/kg p.o. q24h.
Cats: 3–5 mg/kg p.o. q24h (tablet), 5.0 mg/kg p.o. q24h (suspension). 
References
Boothe DM, Bush KM, Boothe HW et al . (2018). Pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics of oral pradofloxacin administration in dogs. American Journal of 
Veterinary Research  79, 1268–1276
Federico S, Carrano R, Capone D et al . (2006) Pharmacokinetic interaction between 
levofloxacin and ciclosporin or tacrolimus in kidney transplant recipients: ciclosporin, 
tacrolimus and levofloxacin in renal transplantation. Clinical Pharmacokinetics 45, 169–175
Sykes JE and Blondeau JM (2014) Pradofloxacin: a novel veterinary fluoroquinolone for 
treatment of bacterial infections in cats. Veterinary Journal 201, 207–214Pralidoxime
(Pralidoxime*) POM 
Formulations: Powder for reconstitution: 1 g vial which produces 
50 mg/ml solution.
Action: Reactivates the cholinesterase enzyme damaged by 
organophosphate (OP) and allows the destruction of accumulated 
acetylcholine at the synapse to be resumed. In addition, pralidoxime 
detoxifies certain OPs by direct chemical inactivation and retards the 
‘ageing’ of phosphorylated cholinesterase to a non-reactive form.
Use:
• Management of OP toxicity.
Most effective if given within 24 hours. Pralidoxime does not 
appreciably enter the CNS, thus CNS toxicity is not reversed. If given 
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 353 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
337
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
within 24 hours of exposure, treatment is usually only required for 
24–36 hours. Respiratory support may be necessary. Treatment of 
OP toxicity should also include atropine. Use at a reduced dose with 
renal failure.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Do not use for poisoning due to carbamate 
or OP compounds without anticholinesterase activity.
Adverse reactions: Nausea, tachycardia, hyperventilation, and 
muscular weakness are reported in humans.
Drug interactions: Aminophylline, morphine, phenothiazines or 
theophylline should be avoided in these patients.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: Organophosphate toxicity: dilute to a 20 mg/ml 
solution and administer 20–50 mg/kg slowly i.v. (over 2 min at least 
– 500 mg/min max.) i.m., s.c. Repeat after 1 hour if still severe signs, 
then q8–12h.
References
Bahri LE (2002) Pralidoxime. Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practising 
Veterinarian  24, 884–886
Praziquantel
(Anthelmin, Broadline Spot-on, Cazitel, Cestem, 
Dolpac, Droncit, Droncit Spot-on, Dronspot 
Spot-on, Drontal, Endoguard, Milbactor, 
Milbemax, Milprazon, Milpro, Prazitel, Profender 
Spot-on, Veloxa, WORMclear, Various other 
authorized proprietary preparations) POM-V, 
NFA-VPS, AVM-GSL 
Formulations: Oral: 10 mg, 20 mg, 25 mg, 30 mg, 40 mg, 50 mg, 
125 mg, 144 mg, 150 mg, 175 mg tablets. Topical: 20 mg, 25 mg,  
30 mg, 60 mg, 75 mg, 96 mg in spot-on pipettes.
Action: Cestocide that increases cell membrane permeability of 
susceptible worms, resulting in loss of intracellular calcium and 
paralysis. This allows the parasites to be phagocytosed or digested.
Use:
• Treatment of Dipylidium caninum, Taenia, Echinococcus 
granulosus and Mesocestoides  in dogs and cats.
As it kills all intestinal forms of Echinococcus, it is the preferred drug in 
most Echinococcus control programmes. The PETS travel scheme 
requires animals to be treated with praziquantel prior to entry into the 
UK. The inclusion of pyrantel and febantel in some preparations 
increases the spectrum of efficacy. Drontal plus can be used from  
