
===== Plumb PDF 1085 =====
1058    PrednisoLONE/Prednisone/ PrednisoLONE Sodium Succinate
is not necessarily contraindicated, but the potential risks should be 
weighed and additional monitoring performed when appropriate.
 ■ Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors (ACEIs; eg, 
benazepril, enalapril): May increase risk for hypotension
 ■ Amlodipine : May increase risk for hypotension
 ■ Beta-Blocking Agents  (eg, propranolol): May enhance the 
postural hypotensive effects seen after the first dose of prazosin
 ■ Clonidine : May decrease prazosin antihypertensive effects
 ■ Pentoxifylline : May increase risk for hypotension
 ■ Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors ( eg, sildenafil): May increase 
risk for hypotension
 ■ Telmisartan : May increase risk for hypotension
 ■ V asopressors ( eg, dopamine, norepinephrine ): Prazosin may 
reduce dopamine pressor effect.
 ■ Verapamil : May cause synergistic hypotensive effects when 
used concomitantly with prazosin
Laboratory Considerations
None noted
Dosages
DOGS:
Decrease urethral resistance in idiopathic vesico-urethral re -
flex dyssynergia (VURD; extra-label): 
a) 0.5 mg/kg PO twice daily. If adverse effects develop, decrease 
the dose by 50%. Moderate to good effect was noted in 60% of 
the dogs treated.13 
b) Anecdotally, 1 mg/15 kg (33 lb) PO 2 to 3 times daily
Dysuria in patients with prostatic carcinoma  (extra-label): 
From a case report, 0.1 – 0.4 mg/kg PO daily was helpful in man-
aging dysuria associated with prostatic carcinoma.1
Systemic hypertension (extra-label): 
a) Weight-based dosage: 0.5 – 2 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours7
b) Dosage per dog: 0.5 – 2 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) PO every 8 to 
12 hours14,15
Adjunctive treatment of heart failure  (extra-label): 1 mg/dog 
(NOT mg/kg) PO 3 times daily for dogs weighing less than 15 kg 
(33 lb); 2 mg/dog (NOT mg/kg) 3 times daily PO for dogs weigh -
ing more than 15 kg (33 lb)16,17
CATS:
Decreasing urethral resistance with functional urethral ob -
struction (extra-label): Use is controversial, and efficacy has been 
questioned.2,6 Several dosages have been suggested, but most 
commonly 0.25 – 1 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO every 12 hours for 
1 to 2 weeks4–6
Hypertension (extra-label): 0.25 – 0.5 mg/cat (NOT mg/kg) PO 
once daily7
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Baseline and periodic blood pressure
 ■ Mucous membrane color, capillary refill time (CRT), pulse 
 oximetry
Client Information
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. If your animal 
vomits, stops eating, or acts sick after getting prazosin on an emp-
ty stomach, give the medicine with food or a small treat to see if 
this helps. If vomiting continues, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ The most common side effect with this medicine is lethargy 
(tiredness/lack of energy).
Chemistry/Synonyms
Prazosin HCl, a quinazoline-derivative postsynaptic alpha-1-adren-
ergic blocker, occurs as a white to tan powder. It is slightly soluble 
in water and very slightly soluble in alcohol. Dosage forms contain 
prazosin HCl, but potency and dosage are expressed (and calculated) 
as prazosin base.
Prazosin may also be known as CP-12299-1, furazosin hydrochlo-
ride, prazosini hydrochloridum; many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Prazosin capsules should be stored in well-closed containers and 
protected from light and moisture at room temperature (20°C-25°C 
[68°F-77°F]).
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Prazosin Capsules: 1 mg, 2 mg, and 5 mg (as base); Minipress®, 
generic; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
PrednisoLONE/Prednisone/ 
PrednisoLONE Sodium Succinate
(pred-niss-oh-lone; pred-ni-zone)
Glucocorticoid
For more information, see  Glucocorticoid Agents, General Infor -
mation and Trimeprazine/Prednisolone
NOTE: Prednisone and prednisoLONE are distinct drugs. This 
monograph uses TALL man letters to differentiate prednisoLONE 
from prednisone. They are often considered bioequivalent as most 
species rapidly convert prednisone to its active form, prednisolone, in 
the liver; however, horses, cats, and animals that have severe hepatic 
failure may not efficiently absorb or convert prednisone to prednis-
oLONE. PrednisoLONE or an alternative glucocorticoid should be 
used for these animals when possible. 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat many conditions in a variety of species.  
 ▶ Prednisone’s anti-inflammatory activity is 4 times more po-
tent than hydrocortisone and it has some mineralocorticoid 
 activity.
 ▶ Contraindications (relative) include systemic fungal infections. 
Increased risk of GI ulceration when used concurrently with 
NSAIDS or aspirin.     
 ▶ Caution is advised for use in animals with an active bacterial 
infection, corneal ulcer, hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes melli-
tus, osteoporosis, chronic psychotic reactions, predisposition 
to thrombophlebitis, hypertension, congestive heart failure, 
and renal insufficiency.
 ▶ Goal of therapy should be to use the lowest dose possible 
for the least amount of time to treat and control patient’s 
 condition.
 ▶ PrednisoLONE is recommended for use in cats and horses 
because of the poor bioavailability of prednisone.
 ▶ Primary adverse effects are related to iatrogenic hyperadreno-
corticism with sustained use.
 ▶ Many potential drug and laboratory interactions


===== Plumb PDF 1086 =====
PrednisoLONE/Prednisone/PrednisoLONE Sodium Succinate    1059
Uses/Indications
Although glucocorticoids have been used to treat many conditions 
in humans and animals, prednisoLONE and prednisone have 4 pri-
mary uses with accompanying dosage ranges: 1) replacement or 
supplementation (eg, relative adrenal insufficiency associated with 
septic shock) for glucocorticoid deficiency secondary to hypoadre -
nocorticism, 2) anti-inflammatory agent, 3) immunosuppression, 
and 4) antineoplastic agent. 
Glucocorticoids are used in the treatment of endocrine condi -
tions (eg, adrenal insufficiency), autoimmune and immune-medi -
ated diseases (eg, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus, masticatory 
myositis), severe allergic conditions, anaphylaxis, envenomation, re-
spiratory diseases (eg, asthma), dermatologic diseases (eg, pemphi -
gus, allergic dermatoses), hematologic disorders (eg, thrombocyto -
penia, autoimmune hemolytic anemia), neoplasias, nervous system 
disorders (eg, increased CSF pressure), GI diseases (eg, ulcerative 
colitis exacerbations, inflammatory bowel disease), renal diseases 
(eg, nephrotic syndrome), and induction of fetal maturation. Some 
glucocorticoids are used topically on the eye and skin or are injected 
intra-articularly or intralesionally. This list is not exhaustive. High-
dose use is not supported for hemorrhagic or hypovolemic shock, 
head trauma, spinal cord trauma,1 or sepsis.
In general, when administering glucocorticoids, the following 
principles should be followed:
 ■ A specific diagnosis is ideally obtained before glucocorticoids are 
administered as they can mask disease.
 ■ A course of treatment should be determined prior to treatment.
 ■ A therapeutic endpoint should be determined prior to treatment.
 ■ The least potent glucocorticoid should be used at the lowest dose 
for a minimal amount of time.
 ■ It is important to understand when glucocorticoid use is inappro-
priate (eg, acute infection, diabetes).2
Pharmacology/Actions
PrednisoLONE and prednisone are intermediate-acting corticoste -
roids with biologic half-lives of 12 to 36 hours. Glucocorticoids have 
effects on almost every cell type and system in mammals. 
Cardiovascular system : Glucocorticoids can reduce capillary per -
meability and enhance vasoconstriction. A clinically insignificant 
positive inotropic effect can occur after glucocorticoid administra -
tion. This drug’s vasoconstrictive properties and increased blood 
volume can result in increased blood pressure.
Cells: Glucocorticoids can inhibit fibroblast proliferation, macro -
phage response to migration inhibiting factor, sensitization of lym -
phocytes, and the cellular response to mediators of inflammation; 
they can also stabilize lysosomal membranes.
CNS/autonomic nervous system : Glucocorticoids can lower the 
seizure threshold, alter mood and behavior, diminish response to 
pyrogens, stimulate appetite, and maintain alpha rhythm. Glucocor-
ticoids are necessary for normal adrenergic receptor sensitivity.
Endocrine system: When an animal is not stressed, glucocorticoids 
suppress the release of corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic hormone 
[ACTH]) from the anterior pituitary, which reduces or prevents the 
release of endogenous corticosteroids. Stress factors (eg, renal dis -
ease, liver disease, diabetes) may occasionally nullify the suppress -
ing aspects of exogenously administered steroids. The release of 
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH), prolactin, and luteinizing hormone may be reduced when 
glucocorticoids are administered at pharmacologic doses. Conver -
sion of thyroxine (T 4) to triiodothyronine (T 3) may be reduced by 
glucocorticoids, and plasma levels of parathyroid hormone may be 
increased. Glucocorticoids may inhibit osteoblast function. Vaso -
pressin (antidiuretic hormone [ADH]) activity is reduced at the re -
nal tubules and diuresis may occur. Glucocorticoids inhibit insulin 
binding to insulin-receptors and the post-receptor effects of insulin.
Fluid and electrolyte balance : Glucocorticoids can increase renal 
potassium and calcium excretion, sodium and chloride reabsorp -
tion, and extracellular fluid volume. Hypokalemia and/or hypocal -
cemia rarely occur. Diuresis may develop following glucocorticoid 
administration.
GI tract and hepatic system: Glucocorticoids increase the secretion 
of gastric acid, pepsin, and trypsin. They alter the structure of mucin 
and decrease mucosal cell proliferation. Iron salts and calcium ab -
sorption are decreased, whereas fat absorption is increased. Hepatic 
changes can include increased fat and glycogen deposits in hepato -
cytes and increased serum levels of ALT and gamma-glutamyl tran-
speptidase (GGT). Significant increases can be seen in serum ALP 
levels. Glucocorticoids can cause minor increases in bromosulfoph-
thalein (BSP) retention time.
Hematopoietic system: Glucocorticoids can increase the number of 
circulating platelets, neutrophils, and RBCs, but platelet aggregation 
is inhibited. Decreased amounts of lymphocytes (peripheral), mono-
cytes, and eosinophils are seen because glucocorticoids can seques -
ter these cells into the lungs and spleen and can prompt decreased re-
lease from bone marrow; removal of old RBCs becomes diminished. 
Glucocorticoids can cause involution of lymphoid tissue.
Immune system (also see Cells and Hematopoietic system): Gluco-
corticoids can decrease circulating levels of T-lymphocytes; inhibit 
lymphokines; inhibit neutrophil, macrophage, and monocyte mi -
gration; reduce production of interferon; and inhibit phagocytosis, 
chemotaxis, antigen processing, and intracellular killing. Specific ac-
quired immunity is affected less than nonspecific immune respons -
es. Glucocorticoids can also antagonize the complement cascade and 
mask the clinical signs of infection. Mast cells are decreased in num-
ber and histamine synthesis is suppressed. Many of these effects only 
occur at high doses and species have different responses.
Metabolic effects: Glucocorticoids stimulate gluconeogenesis. Lipo-
genesis is enhanced in certain areas of the body (eg, abdomen), and 
adipose tissue can be redistributed away from the extremities to the 
trunk. Fatty acids are mobilized from tissues and their oxidation is 
increased. Plasma levels of triglycerides, cholesterol, and glycerol are 
increased. Protein is mobilized from most areas of the body (not the 
liver).
Musculoskeletal: Glucocorticoids may cause muscular weakness, 
atrophy, and osteoporosis. Bone growth can be inhibited via growth 
hormone and somatomedin inhibition, increased calcium excretion, 
and inhibition of vitamin D activation. Resorption of bone can be 
enhanced. Fibrocartilage growth is also inhibited.
Ophthalmic: Prolonged corticosteroid use (both systemic or topi -
cally to the eye) can cause increased intraocular pressure and glau -
coma, cataracts, and exophthalmos.
Skin: Thinning of dermal tissue and skin atrophy can be seen with 
glucocorticoid therapy. Hair follicles can become distended and al -
opecia may occur.
Pharmacokinetics
Prednisone is a prodrug and requires hepatic bioactivation.
In cats, prednisoLONE has a higher bioavailability when adminis-
tered orally as compared with prednisone.3 Reported bioavailabilities 
(of active prednisoLONE) are 100% and 21%, respectively. Although 
it is not clear if this is due to decreased GI absorption or decreased 
hepatic conversion of prednisone to prednisoLONE, oral predniso -
LONE is the superior choice in cats. 3,4 In a study, overconditioned 
cats had significantly higher plasma prednisoLONE concentrations 
(2 times) as compared with normal-conditioned cats.5


===== Plumb PDF 1087 =====
1060   PrednisoLONE/Prednisone/PrednisoLONE Sodium Succinate 
In horses, oral prednisone has been shown to have poor oral bio-
availability and minimal conversion to prednisoLONE, and there -
fore prednisoLONE is recommended over prednisone in horses.6 
In humans, prednisoLONE is hepatically conjugated and metabo-
lites are primarily excreted in the urine. Plasma half-life is not mean-
ingful from a therapy standpoint when evaluating systemic corti -
costeroids. PrednisoLONE and prednisone are intermediate-acting 
corticosteroids with biologic half-lives of 12 to 36 hours in humans.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Systemic use of glucocorticoids is considered contraindicated in 
systemic fungal infections (unless it is being used as replacement 
therapy for Addison’s disease), when administered IM in animals 
with idiopathic thrombocytopenia and in those hypersensitive to a 
particular compound. Sustained-released injectable glucocorticoids 
are considered contraindicated for chronic corticosteroid therapy for 
systemic diseases. 
The veterinary injectable product label states: C ontraindicated 
in animals with tuberculosis, Cushingoid syndrome, and peptic ul -
cer. Existence of congestive heart failure, diabetes, chronic nephritis, 
and osteoporosis are relative contraindications. In the presence of in -
fection, appropriate antibacterial agents should also be administered 
and should be continued for at least 3 days after discontinuance of the 
glucocorticoid and disappearance of all signs of infection. Do not use 
in viral infections.7 
Caution is advised when using predis(ol)one in animals with con-
comitant renal disease, as they may be at increased risk for adverse 
GI effects. Animals with hepatic dysfunction may have impaired 
ability to metabolize prednisone to prednisoLONE.
Systemic glucocorticoids can suppress adrenal function. Ani -
mals that have received these drugs chronically should be tapered 
off slowly, as endogenous ACTH release and corticosteroid function 
may return slowly. Additional glucocorticoids should be adminis -
tered if the animal undergoes a stressor (eg, surgery, trauma, illness) 
during the tapering process or until normal adrenal and pituitary 
functions resume.
Animals, particularly cats, at risk for diabetes mellitus should be 
administered glucocorticoids with caution because of the potent hy-
perglycemic effects of these agents. Patients with cardiovascular dis-
ease should be monitored closely, as glucocorticoids can cause fluid 
retention, which may cause the patient’s condition to decompensate. 
Glucocorticoids are immunosuppressive at higher doses (greater 
than or equal to 2 mg/kg/day) and may increase the risk for infec -
tion. In humans, long-term glucocorticoids may increase intraocular 
pressure and may increase the risk for cataracts and/or osteoporosis. 
Do not confuse prednisoLONE with predniSONE, particularly in 
cats and horses.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are generally associated with long-term administration 
of these drugs, especially if the drugs are administered at high doses 
or not on an alternate-day regimen. Effects typically manifest as clin-
ical signs of hyperadrenocorticism. Glucocorticoids can delay growth 
when administered to young, growing animals. A listing of potential 
effects are outlined in Glucocorticoid Agents, General Information.
In dogs, polydipsia (PD), polyphagia (PP), and polyuria (PU) may 
occur during short-term burst therapy and on days when the drug 
is administered during alternate-day maintenance therapy. Adverse 
effects in dogs can include dull/dry coat, weight gain, panting, vom-
iting, diarrhea, elevated liver enzymes, GI ulceration (especially with 
high parenteral or oral doses); hypercoagulability; hyperlipidemia, 
activation or worsening of diabetes mellitus, muscle wasting, and/
or behavior changes (eg, depression, lethargy, aggression). Gluco -
corticoids have been known to delay growth in young animals. Dis-
continuation of the drug may be necessary; changing to an alternate 
steroid may also alleviate adverse effects. Adverse effects associated 
with anti-inflammatory therapy are relatively uncommon, with the 
exception of PU, PD, and PP . Adverse effects associated with im -
munosuppressive dosages are more common and potentially more 
severe. In healthy dogs, immunosuppressive dosages of prednis(ol)
one 2 – 4 mg/kg/day PO for 1 to 3 weeks did not enhance platelet 
function or coagulation 8 or produce clinical or histologic evidence 
of pancreatitis. 9 PrednisoLONE reduced gallbladder emptying in 
healthy beagles.10 Bone mineral density, as assessed by quantitative 
CT, was reduced ≈15% from baseline after a 9-week tapered pred -
nisoLONE dose, which recovered to near baseline 30 months after 
prednisoLONE was discontinued.11
Cats generally require higher doses than dogs for clinical effects 
but typically develop fewer adverse effects. Glucocorticoids appear 
to have a greater hyperglycemic effect in cats than other species. Oc-
casionally, PU, PD, and PP with weight gain, diarrhea, and/or de -
pression will be present. Long-term, high-dose therapy can lead to 
Cushingoid effects. Systemic steroid administration may increase the 
chance for development of acute bullous keratopathy.12
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Corticosteroid therapy may induce parturition in large animal spe -
cies during the latter stages of pregnancy. The veterinary label states: 
Clinical and experimental data have demonstrated that corticosteroids 
administered orally or by injection to animals may induce the first stage 
or parturition is used during the last trimester of pregnancy and may 
precipitate premature parturition followed by dystocia, fetal death, 
retained placenta, and metritis. Additionally, corticosteroids admin -
istered to dogs, rabbits, and rodents during pregnancy have resulted in 
cleft palate in offspring. Corticosteroids administered to dogs during 
pregnancy have also resulted in other congenital anomalies, including 
deformed forelegs, phocomelia, and anasarca.  Multiple midline de -
fects were noted in a litter of golden retriever puppies with gestation 
exposure to doxycycline and prednisone.13 In humans, maternal glu-
cocorticoid use may lead to hypoadrenalism in newborns.12
Caution is advised when using in nursing dams; glucocorticoids 
unbound to plasma proteins can enter milk. High doses or prolonged 
administration to nursing dams may potentially inhibit growth, in -
terfere with endogenous corticosteroid production, or cause other 
unwanted effects in nursing offspring. In humans, several studies 
suggest that amounts excreted in milk are negligible when the pred-
nisone or prednisoLONE dose given to the mother is less than or 
equal to 20 mg/day or when the methylprednisoLONE dose is less 
than or equal to 8 mg/day. Larger doses given for short periods may 
not harm the infant.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdoses of glucocorticoids used alone are unlikely to cause harm-
ful effects, but GI effects that are sometimes severe can be seen in 
dogs. Supportive treatment may be required if clinical signs occur. 
Other clinical signs associated with an overdose in dogs include 
polyuria and polydipsia. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving oral prednisoLONE/
prednisone and may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless 
otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but 
the potential risks must be weighed and additional monitoring per -
formed when appropriate.


===== Plumb PDF 1088 =====
PrednisoLONE/Prednisone/PrednisoLONE Sodium Succinate    1061
 ■ Amphotericin B : May cause hypokalemia when administered 
concomitantly with glucocorticoids
 ■ Anticholinesterase Agents  (eg, neostigmine, pyridostig -
mine): In animals with myasthenia gravis, concomitant glucocor-
ticoid use with these agents may lead to profound muscle weakness. 
If possible, anticholinesterase medication should be discontinued 
at least 24 hours before corticosteroid  administration. 
 ■ Aspirin  (salicylates): Glucocorticoids may reduce salicylate 
blood levels. Combination may increase the risk for GI ulcers or 
erosions. In dogs, prednisone given with ultra-low–dose aspirin 
(0.5 mg/kg/day is often used in the treatment of immune-medi -
ated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) does not increase the severity of 
GI lesions as compared with prednisone alone but may increase 
incidence of diarrhea.14
 ■ Barbiturates : May increase the metabolism of glucocorticoids
 ■ Cholestyramine : May reduce prednis(ol)one absorption
 ■ Cyclophosphamide : Glucocorticoids may also inhibit the he -
patic metabolism of cyclophosphamide; dosage adjustments may 
be required.
 ■ Cyclosporine : Concomitant administration with glucocorti -
coids may increase the blood levels of each by mutually inhibiting 
the hepatic metabolism of the other; clinical significance of this 
interaction is not clear.
 ■ Digoxin : Secondary to hypokalemia, increased risk for arrhyth-
mias
 ■ Diuretics, Potassium-Depleting  (eg, furosemide, thia -
zides): May cause hypokalemia when administered concomitant-
ly with glucocorticoids
 ■ Ephedrine : May increase metabolism of glucocorticoids
 ■ Estrogens : Effects of hydrocortisone, and possibly other glu -
cocorticoids, may be potentiated by concomitant administration 
with estrogens.
 ■ Fluoroquinolones : Concurrent use may increase risk for ten-
dinitis and tendon rupture.
 ■ Insulin : Insulin requirements may increase in animals receiving 
glucocorticoids.
 ■ Ketoconazole : May decrease the metabolism of glucocorti -
coids
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics  (eg, clarithromycin, erythromycin): 
May decrease the metabolism of glucocorticoids 
 ■ Mitotane : May alter the metabolism of steroids; higher than 
usual doses of steroids may be necessary to treat mitotane-in -
duced adrenal insufficiency.
 ■ Mycophenolate : PrednisoLONE increased the in vitro un -
bound (active) fraction of mycophenolic acid in dogs but not in 
cats.15
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs  ( NSAIDs; eg, 
carprofen, meloxicam, phenylbutazone, robenacoxib): Admin-
istration of other ulcerogenic drugs with glucocorticoids may in-
crease risk for GI ulceration.
 ■ Phenobarbital, Primidone : May increase the metabolism of 
glucocorticoids
 ■ Rifampin : May increase the metabolism of glucocorticoids
 ■ V accines : Animals receiving corticosteroids at immunosuppres-
sive dosages should generally not receive live attenuated-virus 
vaccines, as virus replication may be augmented; a diminished 
immune response may occur after vaccine, toxoid, or bacterin ad-
ministration in animals receiving glucocorticoids.
 ■ W arfarin : Glucocorticoids may affect clotting times; monitor -
ing is advised.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Glucocorticoids may increase serum cholesterol and urine glu -
cose levels.
 ■ Glucocorticoids may decrease serum potassium.
 ■ In cats, increases in ALP are not attributable to glucocorticoid 
administration due to lack of a steroid-induced ALP isoenzyme.
 ■ Glucocorticoids can suppress the release of TSH and reduce T 3 
and T 4 values. Thyroid gland atrophy has been reported after 
chronic glucocorticoid administration. Uptake of I 131 by the thy -
roid may be decreased by glucocorticoids.
 ■ Reactions to allergen intradermal skin tests may be suppressed 
by glucocorticoids.16,17 A 2-week (14-day) withdrawal time before 
intradermal skin testing is recommended for dogs and cats18,19; no 
withdrawal time is required before serum IgE testing to identify 
sensitizing allergens in cats.19
 ■ False-negative results of the nitroblue tetrazolium test for system-
ic bacterial infections may be induced by glucocorticoids.
 ■ High-dose prednisone increases serum cystatin C in dogs.20
 ■ Bovine urinary prednisoLONE:cortisol ratio of greater than or 
equal to 0.26 may discriminate between endogenous and exoge -
nous prednisoLONE.21
Dosages
NOTE: Currently, there are no injectable prednisone/predniso -
LONE products available for use in animals in the United States. 
Unless cited by a veterinary-approved product, all dosages should 
be considered extra-label. 
DOGS/CATS:
NOTES: 
1. PrednisoLONE should be used in place of prednisone in cats 
whenever possible, as cats do not absorb or convert prednisone 
to prednisoLONE as well as dogs.3
2. If given daily, therapy for longer than 1 to 2 weeks will suppress 
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and recovery 
will take longer than 1 week. Therefore, if corticosteroids are 
used for longer than a few days, dosage must be tapered off  
using alternate-day therapy. Many glucocorticoid responsive 
diseases can be managed with chronic alternate-day therapy. 
If possible, it is suggested to avoid giving doses greater than 
1 mg/kg (prednisoLONE equivalent) every other day; larger 
doses saturate a dog’s ability to fully metabolize the last dose 
before the next dose is given and can negate the benefits of 
alternate-day therapy. However, to induce remission of clinical 
signs or manage their recurrence initially requires daily thera-
py at an appropriate dose to control clinical signs, then taper -
ing the drug to reach a minimum daily dose that will control 
clinical signs, followed by alternate-day therapy to manage the 
disease. Animals vary greatly in their response to the thera -
peutic and adverse effects of glucocorticoids, and there may be 
qualitative differences between the effects of different gluco -
corticoids in the same animal.22
Anti-inflammatory agent: 
Dogs: 0.5 – 1 mg/kg PO once daily; not to exceed 40 mg/dog 
(NOT mg/kg) in large breed dogs.23 Dose can be given once daily, 
or the total dose can be divided and given twice daily.4,24
Cats: prednisoLONE 1 – 2 mg/kg PO once daily4,24
Immunosuppressive agent:
Dogs: Initial dose of 2 – 4 mg/kg PO once daily.4,24 50 – 60 mg/m2 
once daily for dogs over 25 kg (55 lb) can be considered an initial 
dosage to provide immunosuppression and minimize adverse ef-


===== Plumb PDF 1089 =====
1062   PrednisoLONE/Prednisone/PrednisoLONE Sodium Succinate 
fects in larger dogs.25  Many suggest beginning with 2 mg/kg PO 
once daily and dividing the total dose and giving it twice daily. 
Administration of a dose at the upper end of the range may not 
provide additional immune suppression but may cause more pro-
nounced adverse effects. Many internists believe that the predni-
sone total daily dose should not exceed 60 – 80 mg, regardless of a 
dog’s weight.23 A sample prednisone immunosuppressive protocol 
for dogs is (dosages should be tailored to the ongoing require -
ments of the individual animal): 2.2 mg/kg daily (daily dose not to 
exceed 60 – 80 total) for 3 weeks, then 1 mg/kg daily for 3 weeks, 
then 0.5 mg/kg daily for 3 weeks, then 0.5 mg/kg every other day, 
provided disease remission is maintained.
Cats: Initial dose of prednisolone 2 – 8 mg/kg PO once daily.4,24,26 
Many start with 4 mg/kg PO daily then dividing the total dose and 
giving it twice daily.4 
Antineoplastic/cytotoxic agent : When prednis(ol)one is used 
as an antineoplastic agent, alone or in a multidrug chemother -
apy protocol, the following dosages should be used only as a 
general guide. Consultations with a veterinary oncologist and 
referral to current veterinary oncology references are strongly 
 recommended.
Dogs: 2 mg/kg PO daily. Omission of prednisone from the 
L-CHOP protocol did not improve progression-free survival in 
dogs with peripheral nodal lymphoma.27 
Cats: PrednisoLONE should be used. Cats are relatively steroid 
resistant and require higher doses than dogs. Doses can typically 
be safely doubled as compared with dogs. See above note for ad -
ditional information.22 NOTE: When used with other cytotoxic 
agents in chemotherapy protocols, prednisoLONE doses may be 
reduced. 
Adjunctive treatment for hypoadrenocorticism:
Acute treatment using prednisoLONE sodium succinate :  
1 – 2 mg/kg IV after second blood draw for cortisol measurement 
(ACTH stimulation test).28 Injectable glucocorticoid therapy (eg, 
prednisoLONE sodium succinate 0.5 mg/kg IV every 6 hours) 
should be continued until the animal can be safely switched to 
oral glucocorticoid therapy.29 Alternatively, injectable dexameth-
asone sodium phosphate can be used in the acute management of 
hypoadrenocorticism.  
Oral glucocorticoid replacement (ongoing, with a mineralocor-
ticoid): Oral glucocorticoid therapy can begin after a confirmed 
diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism has been made and parenter -
al therapy has achieved a positive clinical response. Prednisone 
can be given initially at 0.1 – 0.22 mg/kg PO once daily, then ta -
pered to the lowest dose to control clinical signs. 28 An increase 
in dose is often needed in times of stress (eg, surgery, illness). 
It is common for dogs to require no more than 0.1 mg/kg once 
per day of prednis(ol)one and less may be sufficient to prevent 
recurrence of signs of glucocorticoid insufficiency. When using 
fludrocortisone for mineralocorticoid replacement therapy, up to 
50% of dogs will not require any additional prednisone, as there is 
enough glucocorticoid activity in fludrocortisone for those dogs. 
One study reported 11 out of 13 dogs receiving fludrocortisone  
0.022 mg/kg PO daily required a mean prednisoLONE dosage of 
0.06 mg/kg daily and suggested that most dogs receiving fludro -
cortisone may benefit from the addition of a small prednisoLONE 
dose.30 All dogs receiving desoxycorticosterone pivalate (DOCP) 
will also require prednis(ol)one, as it only has mineralocorticoid 
activity.4 In one study, dogs receiving DOCP initially received 
prednisoLONE 0.22 mg/kg PO daily, but it was possible to reduce 
the dosage to 0.13 mg/kg PO daily.31
HORSES : 
NOTE: Prednisone does not appear to be absorbed well after oral 
administration; prednisoLONE or another oral steroid should be 
used.
Glucocorticoid effects (label dosage; FDA-approved): predniso-
LONE sodium succinate 50 – 100 mg/horse (NOT mg/kg) as an 
initial dose, IV or IM over a period of 30 seconds to 1 minute. 
Dose may be repeated in inflammatory, allergic, or other stress 
conditions at intervals of 12, 24, or 48 hours based on the size 
of the animal, the severity of the condition, and the response to 
treatment.7
Adjunctive therapy of severe equine asthma (SEA):
a) Short-term treatment with environmental control : In the 
study, dexamethasone sodium phosphate was given 0.1 mg/kg 
IM once daily for 4 days, 0.075 mg/kg IM once daily for 4 days, 
and 0.05 mg/kg IM for 4 days or oral prednisoLONE was given 
1 mg/kg PO for 4 days, 0.75 mg/kg for 4 days, and 0.5 mg/kg 
PO for 4 days. Except for bronchoalveolar lavage cytology, PO 
prednisoLONE was as effective as IM dexamethasone.32
b) In horses under continuous antigen exposure, dexamethasone 
was given 0.05 mg/kg PO once daily for 7 days or predniso -
LONE was given 2 mg/kg PO once daily for 7 days. Although 
both were effective, dexamethasone was more so.33
Pruritus: Topical therapy is preferred, but for more severe cas -
es, oral prednisoLONE can be considered. Induction dose of  
2 mg/kg PO once daily for 3 to 10 days. Dose can be tapered to  
0.5 mg/kg PO every 48 hours once pruritus is controlled.34
Adjunctive therapy of neoplasia responsive to glucocorticoid 
therapy: Typical dose is prednisoLONE 1 mg/kg PO every other 
day.35
CATTLE:
Glucocorticoid activity : PrednisoLONE sodium succinate  
0.2 – 1 mg/kg IV or IM36
NEW WORLD CAMELIDS : 
Steroid-responsive pruritic dermatoses secondary to allergic 
origins: 0.5 – 1 mg/kg PO initially; can be gradually reduced to 
lowest effective dose given every 48 hours.37
BIRDS:
Anti-inflammatory: 0.2 mg/30 g (1 oz) body weight, or one 5-mg 
tablet can be dissolved in 2.5 mL of water and 2 drops adminis -
tered orally, twice daily. Administration schedule should be ta -
pered if using long-term.38
Shock: PrednisoLONE sodium succinate (10 mg/mL)  
0.1 – 0.2 mL/100 g (3.5 oz) body weight repeated every 15 minutes 
to effect. Dose may be decreased by half in large birds.38
RABBITS/RODENTS/SMALL MAMMALS :
Rabbits: Rarely indicated. As an anti-inflammatory agent:  
0.5 – 2 mg/kg PO
Mice, rats, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, chinchillas :  
0.5 – 2.2 mg/kg IM or SC
REPTILES :
Shock in most species : PrednisoLONE sodium succinate  
5 – 10 mg/kg IV39,40
Monitoring
Monitoring of glucocorticoid therapy is dependent on reason for 
use, dosage, agent used (amount of mineralocorticoid activity), dose 
schedule (daily vs alternate-day therapy), duration of therapy, and 
the animal’s age and condition. The following list may not be appro-
priate or complete for all animals; clinical assessment and judgment 
should be used if adverse effects are noted.


===== BSAVA PDF 93 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
77
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
References
Dandrieux JRS, Noble PJM, Scase TJ et al . (2013) Comparison of a chlorambucil-
prednisolone combination with an azathioprine-prednisolone combination for treatment 
of chronic enteropathy with concurrent protein-losing enteropathy in dogs: 27 cases 
(2007–2010). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association  242, 1705–1714
Stein TJ, Pellin M, Steinberg H et al . (2010) Treatment of feline gastrointestinal small-cell 
lymphoma with chlorambucil and glucocorticoids. Journal of the American Animal 
Hospital Association  46, 413–417
Chloramphenicol
(Chloramphenicol*, Chlorogen*, Chloromycetin 
Ophthalmic Ointment*, Chloromycetin 
Redidrops*,  Kemicetine*, Minims*, Optrex*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 1 g powder for reconstitution. Topical: 
Ophthalmic 1% ointment; 0.5% solution. Oral: 250 mg capsules.
Action: Time-dependent antimicrobial that acts by binding to the 
50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible bacteria, preventing bacterial 
protein synthesis.
Use: Broad spectrum of activity against Gram-positive (e.g. 
Streptococcus, Staphylococcus), Gram-negative (e.g. Brucella, 
Salmonella, Haemophilus) and obligate anaerobic bacteria (e.g. 
Clostridium, Bacteroides fragilis). Other sensitive organisms include 
Chlamydia, Mycoplasma (unreliable in treatment of ocular 
mycoplasmosis) and Rickettsia. Resistant organisms include 
Nocardia and Mycobacterium. Acquired resistance may occur in 
Enterobacteriaceae. High lipid solubility makes it suitable for the 
treatment of intraocular infections. It will also access the CNS. 
However, due to concerns of resistance development and human 
toxicity, systemic use should be restricted to life-threatening 
infections resistant to other antimicrobials (e.g. meticillin-resistant 
staphylococci). Patients with hepatic or renal dysfunction may need 
adjustment to the dose. Use with caution or avoid in nursing bitches 
or queens as crosses into milk.
Safety and handling: Humans exposed to chloramphenicol may 
have an increased risk of developing a fatal aplastic anaemia. 
Products should be handled with care; use impervious gloves and 
avoid skin contact.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Reversible dose-related reversible bone 
marrow suppression can develop in all species. Unlike humans, the 
development of irreversible aplastic anaemia in veterinary species 
does not appear to be a significant problem. Owing to a reduced 
capacity to metabolize chloramphenicol, the cat is more susceptible 
to bone marrow suppression. Other adverse effects include nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhoea and anaphylaxis.
Drug interactions: Irreversible inhibition of hepatic cytochrome 
P450-dependent enzymes increases plasma levels of pentobarbital, 


===== BSAVA PDF 94 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
78
phenobarbital, propofol and oral hypoglycaemic agents. Recovery 
requires synthesis of new liver enzymes and can take up to 3 weeks. 
Rifampin accelerates the metabolism of chloramphenicol, thus 
decreasing serum levels. Chloramphenicol may inhibit activity of 
aminoglycosides and beta-lactams. May also competitively inhibit 
macrolide or lincosamide antimicrobials.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs:   
• Ophthalmic: 1 drop q4–8h; ointment q8–12h.
• Systemic: 40–50 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c., p.o. q8h.
• CNS infections: 10–15 mg/kg p.o. q4–6h is recommended in 
some texts.
Cats:
• Ophthalmic: 1 drop q4–8h; ointment q8–12h.
• Systemic: 10–20 mg/kg slow i.v., i.m., s.c., p.o. q12h.
Chlorhexidine
(Adaxio, Antisept, Clorexyderm shampoo, spray, 
gel, CLX wipes, Douxo Pyo, Ermidra foam, 
Hibiscrub, Iryplus eye wipes, Malaseb, Microbex, 
Otodine, Stomidine F, Corsodyl*, Savlon*, 
TrizChlor*) POM-V, GSL, general sale 
Formulations: Topical shampoo: 2% chlorhexidine + 2% 
miconazole (Malaseb); 31.2 mg/ml chlorhexidine (Microbex); 11.26 
mg/ml chlorhexidine + 17.37 mg/ml miconazole (Adaxio); 3% 
chlorhexidine + 0.5% climbazole + phytosphingosine (Duoxo Pyo 
shampoo/mousse/pads); 4% chlorhexidine (Clorexyderm 4% 
shampoo, spray, Ermidra foam); Cleansing solution: sodium acetate, 
chlorhexidine digluconate, acetic acid (antisept spray); Spot gel: 
chlorhexidine 4%, Triz-EDTA, polyvinylpyrrolidone, lanolin, glycerine 
(clorexyderm spot gel); 1.5% chlorhexidine + cetrimide (Savlon); 
Surgical scrub solution: 4% chlorhexidine + isopropyl alcohol 
(Hibiscrub); Mouthwash: 0.12% chlorhexidine (Chlorohex); Topical 
skin cleaner: chlorhexidine, Tris-EDTA, zinc gluconate, glycerine, 
climbazole, benzyl alcohol, propylene glycol (CLX wipes); Ear/
wound cleaner: 0.15% chlorhexidine + EDTA (TrizChlor); Ear cleaner: 
chlorhexidine, Tris-EDTA, lactic acid (Otodine); Toothpaste: 0.07% 
chlorhexidine, Tris-EDTA (Stomidine F).
Action: Chemical antiseptic that disrupts bacterial cell membrane.
Use:
• Topical treatment of bacterial, dermatophyte and Malassezia  skin 
infections in dogs as a shampoo (Adaxio, Douxo, Malaseb, 
Microbex). Concurrent systemic antibacterial therapy may be 
required when treating bacterial skin infections. Leave in contact 
with the skin for 5–10 minutes prior to washing off.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 95 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
79
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
• Local infection can be treated with mousse spray, gel or wipes 
(Douxo, CLX, Antisept, Clorexyderm).
• Ear flush for cleansing; Tris-EDTA and chlorhexidine have 
synergistic antimicrobial action. Chlorhexidine as a single agent 
is not consistently effective as a treatment for dermatophytosis.
• Washing surgical instruments, routine antisepsis for surgical 
operations (Savlon, Hibiscrub) and dental hygiene (Corsodyl).
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Do not instil into ears where the integrity of 
the tympanum is unknown. Do not use on eyes.
Adverse reactions: Ototoxic. May irritate mucous membranes.
Drug interactions: Not known.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: Antispetic: topical agents may be used daily to weekly.
References
Banovic F, Bozic F and Lemo N (2013) In vitro comparison of the effectiveness of 
polihexanide and chlorhexidine against canine isolates of Staphylococcus  
pseudintermedius , Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  and Malassezia pachydermatis . Veterinary 
Dermatology  24, 409–413
Clark SM, Loeffler A and Bond R (2015) Susceptibility in vitro of canine methicillin-
resistant and suceptiblestaphylococcal isolates to fusidic acid, chlorhexidine and 
miconazole: opportunities for topical therapy of canine superficial pyoderma. The 
Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy  70, 2048–2052Chlorphenamine  
(Chlorpheniramine)
(Piriton*) POM, GSL 
Formulations: Injectable: 10 mg/ml solution. Oral: 4 mg tablet, 
0.4 mg/ml syrup.
Action: Binds to H1 histamine receptors to prevent histamine 
binding.
Use:
• Management of allergic disease.
• Prevention and early treatment of anaphylaxis.
• Commonly used as premedication before transfusions and 
certain chemotherapeutic agents.
Specific doses for dogs and cats have not been determined by 
pharmacokinetic studies. Use with caution in cases with urinary 
retention, angle-closure glaucoma and pyloroduodenal obstruction.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: May cause mild sedation. May reduce seizure 
threshold.
Drug interactions: No information available.
