
===== Plumb PDF 205 =====
178    Calcium, Oral (-Carbonate, -Gluconate, -Lactate) 
In humans, nausea and constipation have been reported while 
taking this drug.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
In humans, calcium crosses the placenta and is excreted in milk; cal-
cium salts are considered compatible with pregnancy and lactation.1
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Potentially, acute overdoses could cause hypercalcemia in susceptible 
animals. Patients should be monitored and treated based on clinical 
signs. If overdose was massive and recent, consider using standard 
protocols to empty the gut.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are 
theoretical in humans or animals receiving oral calcium-containing 
products and may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless 
otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but 
weigh the potential risks and perform additional monitoring when 
appropriate.
 ■ Aspirin : Concurrent use may result in decreased salicylate ef -
fectiveness.
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, itraconazole, ketoconazole, but not 
fluconazole): Concurrent use may result in decreased antifungal 
exposure.
 ■ Bisphosphonates, Oral (eg, alendronate): Concurrent oral 
administration may reduce bisphosphonate absorption.
 ■ Calcitriol : If administered with calcium carbonate, may lead 
to hypercalcemia; if calcitriol is used concomitantly, intensified 
monitoring for hypercalcemia is mandatory.
 ■ Cefpodoxime : Concurrent use may result in decreased cefpo -
doxime effectiveness.
 ■ Corticosteroids  (eg, dexamethasone, prednis(ol)one): Cal-
cium may reduce corticosteroid bioavailability. 
 ■ Digoxin : Calcium carbonate is not recommended for use in hu-
man patients that are on digoxin therapy as hypercalcemia may 
cause serious arrhythmias.
 ■ Fluoroquinolones (eg, enrofloxacin): Oral calcium-contain-
ing products can reduce absorption of fluoroquinolones; if both 
calcium carbonate and a fluoroquinolone are required, separate 
doses by at least 2 hours.
 ■ H2 Receptor Antagonists (eg, famotidine, ranitidine): Re-
ducing stomach acid may lower the phosphorous binding capaci-
ty of calcium carbonate.
 ■ Levothyroxine : Oral calcium products may reduce levothy -
roxine absorption if given at the same time. Separate doses by at 
least 2 hours if possible.
 ■ Loop Diuretics (eg, furosemide): Loop diuretics promote cal-
cium excretion.2
 ■ Mycophenolate : Oral calcium-containing products can re -
duce absorption of mycophenolate. 
 ■ Oral Phosphates : Concurrent use may result in decreased 
phosphate absorption.
 ■ Propranolol : Concurrent use may result in decreased pro -
pranolol bioavailability.
 ■ Proton Pump Inhibitors (eg, omeprazole): Reducing stom-
ach acid may lower the phosphorous binding capacity of calcium 
carbonate. Omeprazole reduces dietary calcium digestibility3; the 
effect, if any, on calcium supplementation is unclear.
 ■ Quinidine : Oral calcium-containing products can decrease qui-
nidine excretion.
 ■ Rifampin: Oral calcium-containing products can reduce absorp-
tion of rifampin; if both calcium carbonate and rifampin are re -
quired, separate doses by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Sotalol : Oral calcium-containing products can reduce sotalol 
absorption.
 ■ Sucralfate : Concurrent use may result in decreased sucralfate 
efficacy.
 ■ Tetracyclines (eg, doxycycline, minocycline ): Oral calci -
um-containing products can reduce absorption of tetracyclines; 
if both calcium carbonate and a tetracycline are required, separate 
doses by at least 2 hours.
 ■ Thiazide Diuretics ( eg, chlorothiazide/hydrochlorothiazide): 
Concurrent use may increase risk of hypercalcemia.
 ■ Verapamil : Concurrent use may result in reversal of hypoten -
sive effects.
Laboratory Considerations
When using to treat hypocalcemia:
 ■ Hemolyzed blood samples or hyperlipidemia: Can cause falsely 
elevate total calcium concentrations
 ■ Heparinized blood collection tubes: Sodium or lithium heparin 
may bind small amounts of ionized calcium. Heparinized samples 
are acceptable provided that careful attention is paid to the con -
centration of heparin in the final sample.
 ■ Hyperbilirubinemia: Can cause falsely lower total calcium con -
centrations
 ■ Oxalate, citrate, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) 
blood collection tubes : These anticoagulants in blood sample 
collection tubes can bind calcium and cause falsely low total cal -
cium concentrations.
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
Hyperphosphatemia associated with chronic kidney disease 
using a low-phosphorus diet  (extra-label): Calcium carbonate  
30 – 60 mg/kg PO per day divided and given with food or just prior 
to each meal.4,5 Doses up to 90 – 150 mg/kg/day PO may be need-
ed.6 Therapy usually begins at the lower end of the recommended 
dose range and is adjusted upward as needed every 4 to 6 weeks 
until the serum phosphorus target is reached. Decrease dose if se-
rum calcium exceeds normal limits. See Chemistry/Synonyms.
Calcium supplement for chronic hypocalcemia: Dogs (total 
dose/dog, NOT mg/kg): ≈1250 mg (toy breeds) – 10 g (giant 
breeds) of calcium carbonate PO per day. This dosage is equiva -
lent to 0.5 – 4 g/dog (NOT mg/kg) of elemental calcium PO per 
day. Cats: 1250 mg – 2.5 g/cat (NOT mg/kg) (0.5 – 1 g/cat of ele-
mental calcium) PO per day. See Chemistry/Synonyms.
Monitoring
The IRIS guidelines suggest monitoring serum phosphorus and cal-
cium concentrations every 4 to 6 weeks initially, then, once stable, 
at 12-week intervals. 4,5 However, some recommend more frequent 
intervals (ie, initially every 10 to 14 days), particularly in patients at 
higher risk for hypercalcemia.
 ■ Serum phosphorus (after a 12 -hour fast): 2.7 – 4.6 mg/dL is the 
goal for Stage 2 patients and is ideal for all stages. More realistic 
goals for Stage 3 and 4 patients are less than 5 mg/dL and less than 
6 mg/dL, respectively.
 ■ Serum ionized (if possible) calcium: Directly measured serum 
ionized calcium is a better indicator of calcium status than total 
calcium but requires specific collection techniques and analyzers.7 
The IRIS guidelines suggest a goal for total calcium of less than  
12 mg/dL in cats.
 ■ Calcium x phosphorus product less than 60 
Client Information
 ■ Give medication with meals, either just before the animal eats or 
mixed into its food.


===== Plumb PDF 206 =====
Cannabidiol (CBD)   179
 ■ Y our veterinarian may prescribe additional doses to be adminis-
tered between meals if additional calcium is required; give only 
with meals unless your veterinarian instructs you to do otherwise.
 ■ Use of this medication requires ongoing laboratory monitoring.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Calcium carbonate occurs as a fine, white, odorless, microcrystal -
line powder. It is practically insoluble in water, but water solubili -
ty is increased by presence of carbon dioxide or ammonium salts. 
Calcium carbonate dissolves with effervescence in hydrochloric acid. 
It is insoluble in alcohol. Calcium carbonate may also be known as 
calcii carbonas, E170, or precipitate chalk. A common oral dosage 
form trade name is Tums®. One gram of calcium carbonate contains  
400 mg of elemental calcium (40%).
Calcium gluconate is a white or almost-white, crystalline or 
granular powder. It is sparingly soluble in water and freely soluble 
in boiling water. One gram of calcium gluconate contains 90 mg of 
elemental calcium (9%).
Calcium lactate is a white or almost-white, crystalline or granular 
powder. It is soluble in water (freely soluble in boiling water) and 
slightly soluble in alcohol. It may also be known as calcii lactas. One 
gram of calcium lactate contains 130 mg of elemental calcium (13%).
When using oral calcium supplements, adjust the dose to give an 
equivalent amount of elemental calcium as provided by the chosen 
calcium salt. For example, 1 g of calcium gluconate contains 90 mg 
of elemental calcium, 1 g of calcium lactate contains 130 mg of el -
emental calcium, and 1 g of calcium carbonate contains 400 mg of 
elemental calcium.
Storage/Stability
The commercially available tablets, capsules, and gel caps should be 
stored at room temperature (25°C [77°F]); excursions are permitted 
at 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE.
An oral nutritional supplement ( Epakitin®) (not FDA-approved) 
contains calcium carbonate 10% (100 mg/g) and chitosan (8%).
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Calcium Carbonate: Many oral products are available, and all are 
OTC. Dosage forms include chewable and regular tablets in strengths 
ranging from 420 mg (168 mg calcium) to 1250 mg (500 mg calcium; 
common sizes are 500 mg [200 mg calcium] and 750 mg [300 mg 
calcium]), oral powders (1000 mg/packet [400 mg calcium]), sus -
pensions (1250 mg/5 mL), and capsules (600 mg [240 mg calcium]); 
generic.
Calcium Gluconate: Generally available as 500 mg (45 mg calcium), 
650 mg (58.5 mg calcium), and 1 g (90 mg calcium) oral tablets; all 
are OTC.
Calcium Lactate Tablets: 325 mg (42.3 mg calcium) and 650 mg  
(84.5 mg calcium); generic; OTC
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Cannabidiol (CBD)
(can-na-bi-dye-ole) Epidiolex®
Cannabinoid
NOTE: The information presented in this monograph is for products 
containing only cannabidiol (CBD); extrapolation of this informa-
tion to “full-spectrum” products will not accurately predict safety or 
efficacy. 
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ The use of cannabidiol (CBD) in animals has not been ap-
proved by the FDA. State and local laws vary, and practitioners 
should consult independent legal counsel to determine their 
compliance obligations with respect to the veterinary use of 
CBD.
 ▶ Naturally occurring cannabinoid that has been used to treat 
canine osteoarthritis and epilepsy 
 ▶ In veterinary species, efficacy for specific conditions and opti-
mal dosages are under investigation.
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity to CBD.
 ▶ Use with caution in patients with hepatic impairment; dosage 
reduction may be needed
 ▶ Withdraw gradually when discontinuing its use as an anticon-
vulsant.
 ▶ CBD appears to be well tolerated at dosages that have been 
studied; hypersalivation, diarrhea, emesis, increased liver 
enzymes, lethargy, and ataxia have been noted. 
 ▶ Products that also contain tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) appear 
more likely to cause adverse effects; choose products carefully, 
as formulations may contain varying amounts of CBD as well 
as other cannabinoids (eg, THC) or impurities. 
Uses/Indications
Cannabidiol (CBD) use in veterinary medicine is an area of active 
investigation. CBD has shown benefit as an analgesic for canine os -
teoarthritis1–3 and has reduced seizure frequency in dogs with epilep-
sy.4 CBD controlled pruritic behavior in dogs with atopic dermatitis.5 
One study found no difference between CBD and placebo for reliev-
ing clinical signs associated with osteoarthritis in dogs. 6 Low-dose 
CBD (1.4 mg/kg daily PO) lacked efficacy as an anxiolytic in dogs 
with noise phobia.7
Although most studies have focused on CBD, the products used 
in many studies contained varying amounts of other cannabinoids. 
The impact of these other cannabinoids on the safety and efficacy of 
CBD products remains unclear. See Chemistry/Synonyms for fur -
ther information. 
Pharmacology/Actions
Cannabidiol (CBD) is a lipophilic, nonintoxicating cannabinoid that 
can bind to CB 2 cannabinoid receptors, which are primarily found 
in the periphery (ie, immune system) and have little to no psycho -
tropic effects. Activation of these receptors is thought to prevent in-
flammatory cytokine release.8,9 CBD also interacts with many (over 
65) noncannabinoid receptors,10 including the serotonin 1A recep -
tor (5-HT1A), which may help alleviate anxiety, insomnia, pain, and 
nausea; it also acts on the vanilloid receptor (TRPV1), which assists 
in perception of pain, inflammation, and body temperature.11,12 The 
anticonvulsant effect of CBD in humans is not thought to be due to a 
direct effect on cannabinoid receptors.13 
In contrast, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) is a cannabinoid pri -
marily targeting CB 1 receptors, which modulate calcium and po -
tassium ion influx and appear to inhibit excitatory and inhibitory 
neurotransmitter release.14 The CB 1 receptor is found primarily in 
the CNS and is involved in cognitive function, emotion, movement, 


===== Plumb PDF 207 =====
180    Cannabidiol (CBD)
and hunger. THC is considered intoxicating and is responsible for 
the “high” associated with marijuana use in humans.8,15
Alterations in the canine metabolome were observed after 3 weeks 
of cannabidiol administration to healthy dogs; the physiologic rele -
vance of this finding warrants further investigation.16
Pharmacokinetics
Assessment of cannabidiol (CBD) pharmacokinetics is complicated 
by the lack of standardized CBD formulations. 
Absorption of CBD after oral administration appears to be lim -
ited by an extensive first-pass effect.14,17 In dogs, bioavailability after 
transdermal application to the pinna was ≈9% relative to oral ad -
ministration.18 CBD is widely distributed into tissues and is highly 
lipophilic.8,19 Elimination half-life of CBD is ≈1 to 4 hours following 
single doses,1,20,21 but is ≈14 to 25 hours following 28 days of CBD 
administration.22 When CBD was administered IV , half-life varied 
between 7 and 9 hours.23,24
In cats that were given a single dose of a CBD fish oil formulation, 
peak concentration of 43 ng/mL occurred 1 to 4 hours after admin -
istration; AUC was 164 ng/hour/mL and half-life was 1.7 hours.21
In horses, orally administered CBD (in oil) was readily absorbed, 
with peak concentration occurring ≈3 to 5 hours after dosing. 25,26 
Peak concentration following pelleted CBD occurred at ≈2.5 hours.27 
Terminal half-life ranged from 8.5 to 15 hours following single or 
repeated (4 to 6 weeks) administration.25–27
In humans, peak CBD concentration is reached ≈2 to 2.5 hours af-
ter administration.13 Administration with food increases absorption, 
leading to a 4- to 5-fold increase of C max and a 3- to 4-fold increase 
in AUC. The drug is widely distributed, and protein binding exceeds 
94%. CBD is extensively metabolized, primarily in the liver but also 
in the GI tract, by CYP2C19, CYP3A4, UGT1A7, UGT1A9, and 
UGT2B7. At least one metabolite (7-OH-CBD) is active. Half-life is 
≈60 hours, and elimination occurs via the feces. 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Cannabidiol (CBD) is contraindicated in patients that are hyper -
sensitive to it or to other components of the formulation. Use CBD 
with caution in patients with hepatic dysfunction; dosage reduction 
is recommended in humans with hepatic impairment, and it is as -
sumed that this applies to veterinary patients. 
When it is used to control seizures, CBD should be discontinued 
gradually, as rapid withdrawal can increase the risk for seizures.13
Adverse Effects
When cannabidiol (CBD) is administered at 4 mg/kg/day PO (the 
dosage most commonly used in studies), it appears to be well tol -
erated. Occasional GI effects 6,28 (eg, hypersalivation, diarrhea, em -
esis) and lethargy may occur, but CBD is without apparent effect 
on voluntary daily activity in dogs. 22,29 Decreased body weight was 
noted in one study of healthy dogs, despite food intake being consid-
ered adequate.22 Higher dosages and/or products that also contain 
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) appear more likely to cause adverse 
CNS effects (eg, hyperesthesia, static ataxia) in dogs. 22,30 A case of 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome has been documented in one dog after 
receiving a CBD-containing product.31 Increases (2 times the upper 
limit of normal) in ALP were noted in healthy dogs and were not 
associated with adverse effects, and in one study increases in ALP 
were more common at higher dosage (12 mg/kg/day) as compared 
with lower dosages (1 – 4 mg/kg/day).28 
Cats experienced low rates of lethargy and ataxia following ad -
ministration of CBD-infused oil; emesis and hypersalivation also 
occurred, but these effects appeared to be due to the medium-chain 
triglyceride oil in the formulation.32 One cat was reported to have an 
increased ALT (3 times the upper limit of normal).21
Horses receiving CBD for up to one week showed no adverse GI 
or behavioral effects, or changes in activity (step count). 25,27 In one 
study in 12 horses receiving CBD for 6 weeks, 26 10 horses gained 
weight (average 18.5 kg), and elevated liver enzymes were noted in 
8 horses. Additionally, all horses experienced mild decreases in to -
tal calcium, although ionized calcium remained within the reference 
range. Hypocalcemia and elevated liver enzymes normalized within 
10 days of discontinuing CBD.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Administration of cannabidiol (CBD) 150 – 250 mg/kg/day to preg-
nant rats increased embryofetal mortality, decreased growth, delayed 
sexual maturation, and caused small testes and reduced fertility in 
male offspring.13 Administration of CBD to rabbits caused decreased 
birth weights, and reproductive system changes. 
CBD is excreted in human maternal milk following maternal 
medical or recreational use of cannabis products, 33 and in mouse 
milk following intraperitoneal injections of CBD.34 It is unknown if 
CBD is excreted in maternal milk following oral administration.13
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Cannabidiol (CBD) products may contain more or less CBD than is 
stated on the product label.35 They also may contain varying amounts 
of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), which may increase the risk for ad-
verse effects or toxicity. Although the ASCPA has not seen an in -
crease in calls from states that have legalized recreational marijuana, 
animal clinics in Colorado have reported significant increases in 
marijuana exposures.19,36 Because recreational use of marijuana re -
mains illegal in many states, clients may be reluctant to discuss pos-
sible exposures to marijuana or treatment with cannabis products, 
including CBD. For that reason, some clients may need reassurance 
when taking a history.
Clinical signs of a CBD overdose can include hypersalivation, em-
esis, lethargy, diarrhea, and ataxia.
Treatment of a significant cannabinoid overdose may consist of 
GI decontamination (inducing emesis, activated charcoal) for recent 
ingestion or if a significant amount remains in the stomach, and sup-
portive treatment (eg, IV fluids, antiemetics). Additionally, butorph-
anol may be used for agitation and a benzodiazepine (eg, diazepam, 
midazolam) may be administered to control seizures as indicated. 
IV lipid emulsion may be useful. 8 Anecdotally, most overdoses of 
cannabinoids do not require intervention; placing the animal in a 
dark, quiet room can minimize stimulations while the animal is in -
toxicated.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged to consult with one 
of the 24-hour poison control centers that specialize in providing 
information specific for veterinary patients. For general information 
related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact informa-
tion for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
In humans, cannabidiol (CBD) is a substrate of CYP3A4 and CY -
P2C19; therefore, it may affect concentrations of drugs metabolized 
by CYP2C19 and CYP1A2. The following drug interactions either 
have been reported or are theoretical in humans or animals receiv -
ing CBD and may be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless 
otherwise noted, use together is not necessarily contraindicated, but 
weigh the potential risks and perform additional monitoring when 
appropriate.
 ■ Amiodarone:  Concurrent use may lead to increased CBD con -
centration.13,37,38
 ■ Azole Antifungals (eg, fluconazole, itraconazole, keto -
conazole, voriconazole): Increased CBD concentration is possi -
ble; there is possible additive hepatotoxicity risk.13,37,38


===== Plumb PDF 208 =====
Cannabidiol (CBD)   181
 ■ Benzodiazepines : Concurrent use with CBD may lead to in -
creased concentrations of certain benzodiazepines (eg, alprazol-
am, diazepam; not midazolam).11,13 Concurrent use may increase 
risk for sedation and respiratory depression.
 ■ Central Nervous System (CNS) Depressants  (eg, ace -
promazine, gabapentin, pregabalin, tramadol, trazodone ): 
Concurrent use with other CNS depressants increases risk for 
sedation.13,38
 ■ Chloramphenicol:  Concurrent use may lead to increased 
CBD concentration.13,37,38
 ■ Cimetidine:  Concurrent use may lead to increased CBD con -
centration.13,37,38
 ■ Clopidogrel : CBD may decrease formation of clopidogrel 
active metabolite. Clopidogrel may increase CBD concentra -
tion.13,37,38
 ■ Dexamethasone: Concurrent use may lead to decreased CBD 
concentration.13,38,39
 ■ Diltiazem:  Concurrent use may lead to increased CBD concen-
tration.13,37,38
 ■ Fenofibrate : Increased fenofibrate concentration may occur 
when used concurrently with CBD.
 ■ Fluoxetine:  Concurrent use may lead to increased CBD con -
centration and risk for serotonin syndrome.13,37,38
 ■ Glipizide : CBD may decrease glipizide metabolism, increasing 
hypoglycemic effect.
 ■ Hepatotoxic Drugs  (eg, lomustine, prednis(ol)one, sex-steroid 
hormones [eg, estrogens, progestins]): Concurrent use with val-
proate and clobazam increased serum liver transaminases. 13 It is 
suggested to use CBD cautiously with other hepatotoxic drugs.
 ■ Lidocaine : Increased lidocaine concentration is possible with 
concurrent use.
 ■ Loperamide : Increased loperamide concentration is possible 
with concurrent use.
 ■ Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)  (eg, 
carprofen, meloxicam): Concurrent use with CBD oil for 4 weeks 
resulted in no apparent adverse effects or significant laboratory 
value changes in dogs.1  
 ■ Opioids (eg, fentanyl, methadone, morphine, tramadol ): In -
creased risk for CNS depression
 ■ Phenobarbital: A pharmacokinetic interaction was not ob -
served in healthy dogs, but possible additive risk for CNS depres-
sion or hepatotoxicity.40
 ■ Propofol : CBD use may increase propofol concentration.
 ■ Proton Pump Inhibitors  (eg, omeprazole, pantoprazole ): 
Concurrent use may lead to increased CBD concentration.13,37,38
 ■ Rifampin:  May decrease CBD concentration13,38,39
 ■ Sildenafil : CBD may increase sildenafil concentrations.
 ■ Theophylline/Aminophylline: CBD may increase theophyl-
line concentration.
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants  (TCAs; eg, amitriptyline, clo -
mipramine): Concurrent use increased risk for cardiovascular 
effects (hypotension, tachycardia).38
 ■ W arfarin : CBD may prolong prothrombin times and increase 
the risk for bleeding.
Laboratory Considerations 
 ■ Cannabidiol may cause a false-positive on cannabis screening  
tests, particularly if the product administered was a full- or misla-
beled broad-spectrum product. 
Dosages
NOTES: 
1. Effective cannabidiol (CBD) dosages remain under investiga-
tion and are yet to be fully determined. The dosages listed be-
low represent recommendations from peer-reviewed studies 
using products that contain only CBD and do not accurate -
ly reflect dosage recommended for full-spectrum products. 
Some clinicians recommend starting with lower dosages and 
slowly escalating to the dosages presented below.
2. In humans, dosage reductions of 50% and 80% are rec -
ommended for patients with moderate and severe hepatic 
impairment, respectively. 13 Until veterinary-specific infor -
mation becomes available, it is suggested to reduce initial 
dosages in veterinary patients with hepatic impairment.  
3. Be sure to fully understand and comply with local, state, or 
provincial regulations related to CBD. See Dosage Forms/
Regulatory Status.
DOGS:
Osteoarthritis (extra-label): 2 mg/kg PO, OTM every 12 hours2
Epilepsy (extra-label): 2.5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours in addition 
to current therapy. The authors hypothesize that a higher dosage 
may be more effective.4 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy 
 ■ Liver enzymes (ALP , ALT) and bilirubin at baseline; at 1, 3, and 
6 months after initiating therapy and then as clinically indicated 
during ongoing therapy13 
 ■ Adverse effects (eg, vomiting, salivation, sedation, ataxia)
Client Information
 ■ Although there is limited information available, it appears canna-
bidiol (CBD) is well tolerated by dogs and cats.
 ■ Giving CBD with food will increase the amount of medicine that 
is absorbed, but CBD can be given with or without food. It is im-
portant to give CBD the same way each time. 
 ■ If your animal vomits or acts sick after receiving the drug on an 
empty stomach, try giving the next dose with food or a small treat. 
If vomiting continues, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ Information regarding the use of CBD in animals is continually 
emerging and other side effects may be discovered. Contact your 
veterinarian if you notice any unexplained side effects or abnor -
mal behaviors in your animal.
 ■ Do not give your animal a CBD product without first discussing it 
with your veterinarian. Some products contain ingredients other 
than CBD that could be harmful to your animal. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Cannabidiol (CBD) is a cannabinoid derived from the Cannabis sa-
tiva L plant that occurs as a white to pale yellow crystalline solid that 
is soluble in oils and organic solvents and is insoluble in water. The 
FDA-approved product ( Epidiolex®) contains sesame seed oil and 
7.9% (w/v) dehydrated alcohol.13 
Cannabidiol may also be known as CBD or Epidiolex®.
Cannabis sativa L contains more than 100 cannabinoids, of which 
CBD and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) are the most well-known 
but others may exert a pharmacologic effect. Hemp is distinguished 
from marijuana by THC concentration: Although hemp and mari -
juana can both be from the Cannabis sativa L plant, hemp contains 
not more than 0.3% THC (dry weight), whereas marijuana contains 
more than 0.3% THC. 41 That is, hemp and marijuana are varieties 
or cultivars of the same plant but differ in THC concentration. CBD 
may only be legally produced from hemp grown under the restric -
tions established by the 2018 Farm Bill.41
Storage/Stability
The product FDA-approved for human use ( Epidiolex®) should 
be stored upright at 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F), with permitted 
excursions between 15°C to 30°C (59°F-86°F); keep the cap tightly 


===== Plumb PDF 209 =====
182    Capromorelin
closed.13 Do not freeze. Use product within 12 weeks of opening. Un-
less otherwise instructed by the manufacturer, store other cannabidi-
ol (CBD) products at room temperature in tightly closed containers. 
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Many compounded formulations are available. It is recommended to 
request a certificate of analysis that demonstrates product potency 
and purity. A 3-fold difference in cannabidiol (CBD) concentration 
was discovered between batches of commercially supplied CBD in 
oil.26
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
Other than the product FDA-approved for human use ( Epidiolex®), 
cannabidiol (CBD) products are compounded, and as such, product 
quality (eg, potency, purity, stability) is not overseen or enforced by 
the FDA. Considerations for selecting a product include:
1. Choose a product made from hemp, not marijuana. Legal -
ly, CBD oil products must be derived from hemp and must 
contain less than 0.3% tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Because 
hemp contains minimal amounts of THC, using a product de-
rived from hemp will limit the amount of THC present. Legally 
grown hemp is no longer a controlled substance under federal 
law, but it may be a controlled substance in individual states. 
See Chemistry/Synonyms for further information.
2. Request a certificate of analysis (COA). Reputable companies 
will provide a COA of their products stating CBD, THC, or 
other cannabinoid content. Some companies will also confirm 
the absence of other harmful toxins (eg, pesticides, microbes, 
residual solvents, heavy metals).
3. Using CBD in animals has not been approved by the FDA. 
State and local laws vary, and practitioners should consult in -
dependent legal counsel to determine their compliance obliga-
tions with respect to the veterinary use of CBD.
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS: NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated CBD as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not be 
allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regulations 
before entering in a competition while this medication is being ad -
ministered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. See 
Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS:
Cannabidiol Solution: 100 mg/mL in 60 mL or 100 mL bottles; Epid-
iolex®; (Rx)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Cannabidiol (CBD)
Capromorelin
(kap-roe-moe-rel-in) Elura®, Entyce®
Appetite Stimulant
Prescriber Highlights 
 ▶ FDA-approved to stimulate appetite in dogs, and for manage-
ment of weight loss in cats with chronic kidney disease
 ▶ Ghrelin-receptor agonist that stimulates growth hormone 
release and causes the feeling of hunger
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity and acromegaly 
(hypersomatotropism) in cats.
 ▶ Use with caution in dogs and cats with hepatic dysfunction, in 
dogs with renal insufficiency, and in cats with cardiac disease 
or severe dehydration. Hyperglycemia has occurred in healthy 
cats given labeled doses of capromorelin; use in diabetic pa-
tients has not been evaluated and may not be appropriate.
 ▶ Adverse effects include vomiting, hypersalivation, hiding 
behavior (cats), diarrhea, and polydipsia; some cats have de-
veloped hypotension and bradycardia after administration.  
Uses/Indications 
Capromorelin is labeled for the stimulation of appetite in dogs and 
for the management of weight loss in cats with chronic kidney dis -
ease (CKD). 
In preapproval studies, dogs given capromorelin for 4 to 7 days 
had an ≈60% increase in food consumption and ≈6% weight gain as 
compared with the baseline.1 In a clinical field study, 68.6% of dogs 
receiving capromorelin experienced increased appetite based on 
owner observation as compared with 44.6% of dogs that received the 
vehicle control. In the same study, 76% of dogs receiving capromo -
relin gained weight (1.8% increase) as compared with 44.6% of dogs 
that received the control (0.1% increase). 2 A post-approval study 
demonstrated that healthy beagles treated with capromorelin had an 
average 60% increase in food consumption compared to an 11% de-
crease in placebo-treated dogs.3
In cats with CKD, field studies demonstrated a 3.3% increase in 
body weight after 2 weeks of treatment, and 5.2% increase after 8 
weeks.4 In healthy laboratory cats receiving capromorelin, food con-
sumption increased by 25% to 45% and body weight increased by 4% 
to 6.6% as compared with an 11% food consumption increase and 
1% decrease in body weight in cats receiving a placebo.5,6 In a safety 
study, cats given capromorelin 6 mg/kg PO once daily for 91 days 
had a nonsignificant increase in food consumption but significant 
weight gain.6 Further studies are warranted to establish efficacy.
Pharmacology/Actions 
Capromorelin is a ghrelin-receptor agonist that stimulates growth 
hormone (GH) release and causes release of insulin-like growth fac-
tor 1 (IGF1). Serum GH and cortisol increased in healthy dogs given 
capromorelin for 7 days, and levels returned to baseline 8 hours after 
administration; the magnitude of GH and cortisol elevations were 
diminished by days 4 and 7 as compared with day 1. Increased IGF1 
levels were sustained throughout the 7-day study period.7 Sustained 
elevation of IGF1 was also noted in cats.8 
Ghrelin appears to regulate cardiac, gastric, and pancreatic func-
tion and may result in anxiety. In mice, exogenous ghrelin acceler -
ates gastric emptying and intestinal transit.9 At the spinal cord level, 
capromorelin stimulates bladder emptying in mice 10 and colonic 
motility in rats.11,12
In addition to stimulating appetite and the effects described above 
in rats, ghrelin and ghrelin-receptor agonists have been shown to 
stimulate bone formation, increase muscle mass, and have anti-in -
flammatory and immunomodulatory effects.13


===== BSAVA PDF 91 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
75
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
References
Koenigshof AM, Beal MW, Poppenga RH et al . (2015) Effect of sorbitol, single, and 
multidose activated charcoal administration on carprofen absorption following 
experimental overdose in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care  25, 
606–610
Chitosan
(Ipakitine) general sale 
Formulations: Oral: powder containing 8% chitosan, 10% calcium 
carbonate and 82% lactose.
Action: Adsorbent for intestinal uraemic toxins, including phosphate.
Use:
• The combination product has been shown to reduce serum urea 
and phosphate in chronic renal disease in cats.
Phosphate-binding agents are usually only used if low phosphate diets 
are unsuccessful. Monitor serum phosphate levels at 4–6 week 
intervals and adjust dosage accordingly if trying to achieve target serum 
concentrations. Monitor for hypercalcaemia. As formulation contains 
lactose, use with care in diabetic and lactose-intolerant animals.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: None reported.
Adverse reactions: Hypercalcaemia, possibly due to the calcium 
carbonate component.
Drug interactions: Increased risk of hypercalcaemia with 
concurrent calcitriol administration.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: Chronic kidney disease: 200 mg/kg p.o. q12h (mixed 
with food).
Chlorambucil
(Leukeran*) POM
Formulations: Oral: 2 mg tablet.
Action: Alkylating agent that inhibits DNA synthesis and function 
through cross-linking with cellular DNA. Cell cycle non-specific.
Use:
• Management of some malignancies including in some 
metronomic chemotherapy protocols.
• May be useful in the treatment of feline pemphigus foliaceus and 
severe feline eosinophilic granuloma complex.
• Management of  lymphoproliferative, myeloproliferative and 
immune-mediated diseases including protein-losing 
enteropathy.


===== BSAVA PDF 92 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
76
Safety and handling: Cytotoxic drug; see Appendix and 
specialist texts for further advice on chemotherapeutic agents. 
Tablets should be stored in a closed, light-protected container under 
refrigeration (2–8°C).
Contraindications: Bone marrow suppression, factors 
predisposing to infection.
Adverse reactions: Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, leucopenia, 
thrombocytopenia, anaemia (rarely), neurotoxicity (one case reported 
in a cat), alopecia (rarely) and slow regrowth of clipped hair coat. 
Chlorambucil was suspected to have caused seizures in one dog.
Drug interactions: Drugs that stimulate hepatic cytochrome 
P450 system increase cytotoxic effects. Prednisolone has a 
synergistic effect in the management of lymphoid neoplasia.
DOSES
See Appendix for chemotherapy protocols and conversion of body 
weight to body surface area.
Dogs: Give with food:
• Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia: 2–6 mg/m 2 p.o. q24h initially 
until remission achieved, then at reduced dosage/frequency as 
required to maintain remission; or 0.2 mg/kg q24h for 7 days 
then 0.1 mg/kg q24h for maintenance; or 20 mg/m
2 every 1–2 
weeks. Often used with prednisolone 40 mg/m 2 p.o. q24h for 7 
days then 20 mg/m2 q48h.
• Lymphoma: 15–20 mg/m 2 p.o. q2wk with prednisolone; or 2–6 
mg/m2 q24–48h. 1.4 mg/kg p.o. as single dose as substitute for 
cyclophosphamide in CHOP-type protocols.
• Pemphigus complex (in combination with corticosteroids): 
0.1–0.2 mg/kg p.o. q24h initially until marked improvement of 
clinical signs; then alternate-day dosing, often for several weeks.
• Protein-losing enteropathy and other immune-mediated 
diseases: 2–6 mg/m
2 p.o. q24h until clinical remission, then 
tapered to the minimum effective dose.
• For metronomic chemotherapy: 4 mg/m2 p.o. q24h.
Cats: Give with food:
• Immune-mediated disease: cats >4 kg: 2 mg (total dose) p.o. 
q48h for 2–4 weeks, then tapered to lowest effective dose; cats 
<4 kg started at 2 mg (total dose) q72h.
• Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia: 2 mg/m 2 p.o. q48h or 20 mg/
m2 q14d, with or without prednisolone.
• For low grade/small cell lymphoma: 20 mg/m2 p.o. once every 
two weeks with prednisolone.
• As a substitute for cyclophosphamide in the CHOP protocol: 
1.4 mg/kg p.o. once.
• Feline pemphigus foliaceus or severe feline eosinophilic 
granuloma complex (in combination with corticosteroids): 
0.1–0.2 mg/kg p.o. q24h until marked improvement of clinical 
signs; then alternate-day dosing, often for several weeks. 
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 93 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
77
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
References
Dandrieux JRS, Noble PJM, Scase TJ et al . (2013) Comparison of a chlorambucil-
prednisolone combination with an azathioprine-prednisolone combination for treatment 
of chronic enteropathy with concurrent protein-losing enteropathy in dogs: 27 cases 
(2007–2010). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association  242, 1705–1714
Stein TJ, Pellin M, Steinberg H et al . (2010) Treatment of feline gastrointestinal small-cell 
lymphoma with chlorambucil and glucocorticoids. Journal of the American Animal 
Hospital Association  46, 413–417
Chloramphenicol
(Chloramphenicol*, Chlorogen*, Chloromycetin 
Ophthalmic Ointment*, Chloromycetin 
Redidrops*,  Kemicetine*, Minims*, Optrex*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 1 g powder for reconstitution. Topical: 
Ophthalmic 1% ointment; 0.5% solution. Oral: 250 mg capsules.
Action: Time-dependent antimicrobial that acts by binding to the 
50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible bacteria, preventing bacterial 
protein synthesis.
Use: Broad spectrum of activity against Gram-positive (e.g. 
Streptococcus, Staphylococcus), Gram-negative (e.g. Brucella, 
Salmonella, Haemophilus) and obligate anaerobic bacteria (e.g. 
Clostridium, Bacteroides fragilis). Other sensitive organisms include 
Chlamydia, Mycoplasma (unreliable in treatment of ocular 
mycoplasmosis) and Rickettsia. Resistant organisms include 
Nocardia and Mycobacterium. Acquired resistance may occur in 
Enterobacteriaceae. High lipid solubility makes it suitable for the 
treatment of intraocular infections. It will also access the CNS. 
However, due to concerns of resistance development and human 
toxicity, systemic use should be restricted to life-threatening 
infections resistant to other antimicrobials (e.g. meticillin-resistant 
staphylococci). Patients with hepatic or renal dysfunction may need 
adjustment to the dose. Use with caution or avoid in nursing bitches 
or queens as crosses into milk.
Safety and handling: Humans exposed to chloramphenicol may 
have an increased risk of developing a fatal aplastic anaemia. 
Products should be handled with care; use impervious gloves and 
avoid skin contact.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: Reversible dose-related reversible bone 
marrow suppression can develop in all species. Unlike humans, the 
development of irreversible aplastic anaemia in veterinary species 
does not appear to be a significant problem. Owing to a reduced 
capacity to metabolize chloramphenicol, the cat is more susceptible 
to bone marrow suppression. Other adverse effects include nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhoea and anaphylaxis.
Drug interactions: Irreversible inhibition of hepatic cytochrome 
P450-dependent enzymes increases plasma levels of pentobarbital, 
