
===== Plumb PDF 1216 =====
Sucralfate   1189
Sucralfate
(soo-kral-fate) Carafate®
GI-Mucosal Protectant
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Local-acting treatment for GI ulcers/esophagitis; may also 
protect somewhat against GI ulceration
 ▶ No contraindications have been identified; however, sucralfate 
should be used with caution when decreased GI transit times 
may be harmful.
 ▶ Adverse effects are unlikely, although constipation is possible. 
Vomiting has been reported in cats.
 ▶ Tablets should be dissolved in water before administration. 
Should be administered on an empty stomach, if possible
 ▶ To avoid possible drug interactions (eg, drug binding, de-
creased drug bioavailability), other medications should be 
administered 2 hours before sucralfate is administered. 
Uses/Indications
Sucralfate has been used to treat oral, esophageal, gastric, and duode-
nal ulcers and to prevent drug (eg, aspirin)-induced gastric erosions. 
Despite sucralfate’s theoretical benefits and widespread use, research 
has shown limited or no evidence to support the effectiveness of su-
cralfate for these indications. 1–3 A consensus panel has determined 
that evidence supporting sucralfate use in small animal species for 
the prevention or treatment of esophageal injury is weak 4; howev-
er, sucralfate in combination with omeprazole is recommended for 
treating horses with equine glandular gastric disease.5
Sucralfate has been used in humans with hyperphosphatemia 
secondary to renal failure and could be useful for this indication in 
animals; however, in a study, sucralfate did not significantly change 
serum or urine phosphorus levels in healthy cats or normophospha-
temic cats with CKD, and adverse effects (eg, vomiting, anorexia, 
constipation, worsening azotemia) may interfere with treatment.6 
Pharmacology/Actions
Although the exact mechanism of action of sucralfate as an antiulcer 
agent is unknown, the drug appears to have a local effect rather than 
a systemic one. After oral administration, sucralfate may react with 
hydrochloric acid in the stomach to form a paste-like complex that 
preferentially binds to the proteinaceous exudates that are generally 
found at ulcer sites (eg, albumin, fibrinogen). This insoluble com -
plex may form a barrier at the site and protect the ulcer from further 
damage caused by pepsin, acid, or bile. Sucralfate can bind bile acids 
and reduce pepsin activity. As an aluminum salt, sucralfate can bind 
to GI phosphorus.
Sucralfate may have some cytoprotective effects, possibly by stim-
ulation of prostaglandins E2 and I2. It also has some antacid activity, 
although this may not be of clinical importance. Sucralfate may also 
bind to intact GI mucosa to form a protective layer. 
Sucralfate does not significantly affect gastric acid output or tryp-
sin or pancreatic amylase activity. It may slightly decrease the rate of 
gastric emptying but will not alter peristalsis.
Pharmacokinetics
By reacting with hydrochloric acid in the gut, most of the drug is 
converted to sucrose sulfate, which is excreted in the feces within 
48 hours. 7 The duration of action (binding to ulcer site) may persist 
up to 6 hours after oral administration. A negligible amount of an 
oral dose is absorbed into the systemic circulation and excreted in 
the urine unchanged within 48 hours.8
Dissolving tablets in water before administration to dogs and cats 
is recommended to increase the dispersion of the drug, as tablet frac-
tions have been observed in dog feces.9
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Sucralfate is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity 
to it. Because it may cause constipation, it should be used with cau -
tion in animals in which decreased GI transit times might be dele -
terious. Hyperglycemia has been reported rarely in diabetic humans 
receiving sucralfate suspension. Small amounts of aluminum may be 
absorbed following oral administration and may accumulate in pa -
tients with renal failure. 
Concurrent use of sucralfate with proton pump inhibitors (eg, 
omeprazole) or histamine-H 2 receptor antagonists (eg, ranitidine) 
does not enhance the treatment of gastroduodenal injury in small 
animal species.4
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are uncommon with sucralfate therapy. Constipation 
is the most prominent adverse effect reported in humans (2%) and 
dogs receiving the drug. Vomiting has been reported in cats. Sucral-
fate can have an unpalatable taste, and patient acceptance may be a 
problem.
Sucralfate administration to cats with CKD resulted in clinical 
decompensation (vomiting, anorexia, constipation, worsening azo -
temia) in 3 of the 5 studied cats.6
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
In rats, sucralfate doses up to 38 times those used in humans have 
not been shown to cause impaired fertility, and doses up to 50 times 
normal used in humans have not been shown to cause signs of tera-
togenicity.7 
Sucralfate is most likely not excreted in breast milk because of 
minimal systemic absorption.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Overdoses are unlikely to cause significant problems. Laboratory an-
imals receiving up to 12 g/kg PO have demonstrated no incidence of 
mortality.7 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving sucralfate and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Antacids, Aluminum Containing : Additive absorption of 
aluminum may occur, particularly in patients with renal insuf -
ficiency.
Sucralfate may impair the oral absorption of the following medica -
tions; administration should be separated by at least 2 hours to min-
imize this effect (with other medication being administered before 
sucralfate)4:
 ■ Alendronate : Other oral bisphosphonates should be assumed 
to have the same effects.
 ■ Antacids, Aluminum Containing : Can decrease sucralfate 
effectiveness; administration should be separated by 30 minutes. 
Additive absorption of aluminum may occur, particularly in pa -
tients with renal insufficiency.
 ■ Antacids, Calcium/Magnesium Containing : Can decrease 
sucralfate effectiveness; administration should be separated by 30 
minutes.
 ■ Ciprofloxacin : Other oral fluoroquinolones, except enrofloxa-
cin, should be assumed to be affected.9,10 


===== Plumb PDF 1217 =====
1190    Sufentanil
 ■ Diclofenac
 ■ Digoxin
 ■ Feeding, Enteral : Administration should be separated by an 
hour.
 ■ Ferrous Sulfate
 ■ Furosemide
 ■ Ketoconazole
 ■ Lanthanum
 ■ Levothyroxine : A dministration should be separated by 4 
hours.
 ■ Macrolide Antibiotics  (eg, azithromycin, clarithromycin, 
erythromycin)
 ■ Penicillamine
 ■ Tetracyclines  (eg, doxycycline, minocycline, tetracycline)11,12
 ■ Theophylline
 ■ Vitamins, Fat Soluble
 ■ W arfarin
Dosages
DOGS/CATS:
GI-mucosal protectant for conditions such as esophagitis, gas-
tric or duodenal ulcers, and uremic gastritis  (extra-label): Em-
pirically administered at ¼ to ½ of a 1 g tablet (250 – 500 mg)/ani-
mal (NOT g/kg) for toy-breed dogs and cats and 1 g/animal (NOT 
g/kg) PO 2 to 4 times daily for large-sized dogs. When using tablet 
formulations, it is recommended to crush the tablet then suspend 
it in a small amount of water prior to administration.
FERRETS :
GI-mucosal protectant (extra-label): 
a) 75 mg/kg PO every 4 to 6 hours; should be administered 10 
minutes prior to feeding13
b) 25 – 125 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours14
HORSES :
GI-mucosal protectant (extra-label): 
a) Gastric glandular disease: Sucralfate 12 – 20 mg/kg PO twice 
daily in combination with omeprazole 4 mg/kg PO once dai -
ly.5,15,16
b) Prevention of stress-induced ulcers (used with acid-sup -
pressive drugs) in foals: 
i. 10 – 20 mg/kg PO every 6 to 8 hours17
ii. 20 – 40 mg/kg PO every 6 hours18
iii. 2 – 4 g/foal (NOT g/kg) PO every 6 hours18
c) Right dorsal colitis | colonic ulcers: 22 mg/kg PO every 6 to 8 
hours19,20 
REPTILES :
GI irritation in most species (extra-label): 500 – 1000 mg/kg PO 
every 6 to 8 hours21
BIRDS:
Upper GI mucosal hemorrhage (extra-label): 50 – 100 mg/kg PO 
every 12 hours22
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy (dependent on the reason for use); may be moni-
tored by a decrease in clinical signs, endoscopic examination, and 
fecal occult blood testing
Client Information
 ■ This medicine is best given on an empty stomach and not at the 
same time as other medications. If you are giving your animal any 
other medication, be sure to give the other medications 2 hours 
before you give the sucralfate. 
 ■ Sucralfate be given several times a day to be most effective.
 ■ Shake liquids well before using. If using tablets, it is best to dis -
solve the tablets in lukewarm water just before giving them.
 ■ This medicine is usually tolerated well. Some animals may devel-
op constipation. Some cats may vomit after receiving this medi -
cine. Contact your veterinarian if you have concerns about your 
animal taking this medicine.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Sucralfate, a basic aluminum complex of sucrose sulfate, can occur 
as a white, amorphous powder. It is practically insoluble in alcohol 
or water. Each 1 g sucralfate tablet contains ≈207 mg of aluminum.
Sucralfate is structurally related to heparin but does not possess 
any appreciable anticoagulant activity. It is also structurally related to 
sucrose but is not utilized as sugar by the body.
Sucralfate is also known as basic aluminum sucrose sulfate and 
Carafate®, Sulcrate®, and Cytogard®.
Storage/Stability
Store sucralfate tablets in tight containers at room temperature 
(15°C-30°C [59°F-86°F]). Store sucralfate suspension at controlled 
room temperature (20°C-25°C [68°F-77°F]); do not freeze.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
A sucralfate 200 mg/mL suspension can be extemporaneously pre -
pared. For a volume of 100 mL, twenty (20) sucralfate 1 g tablets 
should be crushed, and a sufficient quantity of distilled water added 
to bring the volume to 100 mL. Suspending agents (eg, acacia, trag -
acanth) should not be used, as they can bind to sucralfate and make 
it inactive. “Shake well” and “refrigerate” should be labeled on the 
compounded solution. When refrigerated, it is stable for 14 days.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Sucralfate Tablets: 1 g; Carafate®, generic; (Rx)
Sucralfate Suspension: 1 g/10 mL in 10 mL unit-dose cups and  
415 mL bottles; Carafate®, generic; (Rx)
Formulations are available as oral mucosal coating agents and regu-
lated by the FDA as medical devices.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Sufentanil
(soo-fen-ta-nil) Sufenta®
Opioid Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Injectable opioid that is 5 to 7 times more potent than 
fentanyl. May be useful for adjunctive anesthesia or epidural 
analgesia
 ▶ Dose-related respiratory and CNS depression most likely 
adverse effects
 ▶ DEA Schedule II (C-II) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Sufentanil is an opioid analgesic that may be useful as an anesthesia 
adjunct or as an epidural analgesic. In humans, it has been used as 
the primary anesthetic in intubated patients with assisted ventilation 
and as a postoperative analgesic.
Pharmacology/Actions
Sufentanil is a potent mu opioid with the expected sedative, anal -
gesic, and anesthetic properties. When comparing analgesic poten -
cies when injecting IM, 0.01 to 0.04 mg of sufentanil is equivalent to 


===== Plumb PDF 1218 =====
Sufentanil   1191
0.4 to 0.8 mg of alfentanil, 0.1 to 0.2 mg of fentanyl, and ≈10 mg of 
morphine. Like fentanyl, sufentanil appears to have less circulatory 
effects than morphine. Sufentanil has a rapid onset of action (1 to 3 
minutes) and a faster recovery time than fentanyl.
Pharmacokinetics
In isoflurane-anesthetized cats, a sufentanil 1 µg/kg IV bolus had a 
volume of distribution (at steady-state) of ≈0.77 L/kg, a clearance of 
≈17.6 mL/minute/kg, and a terminal half-life of ≈54 minutes. Elimi-
nation of sufentanil is expected to be more rapid than either fentanyl 
or alfentanil because of a small volume of distribution and moderate 
clearance.1
In humans, the drug has a rapid onset of action (1 to 3 minutes) 
after IV injection. The drug is highly lipid-soluble and has a volume 
of distribution in the central compartment of 0.1 L/kg. Approxi -
mately 93% is bound to plasma proteins. Plasma concentrations 
rapidly decline because of redistribution, and its terminal elimina -
tion half-life is ≈2.5 hours. Plasma clearance has been reported to be  
≈12 mL/minute/kg. Sufentanil is metabolized primarily in the liv -
er and small intestine via O-demethylation and N-dealkylation. 
The parent drug and these metabolites are excreted primarily in 
the urine. Although the manufacturer states to use sufentanil with 
caution in patients with impaired renal or hepatic function, limited 
pharmacokinetic studies in these patients rarely showed any drug 
accumulation.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Sufentanil is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to 
it or other opioids.2 It should be used with caution in debilitated or 
geriatric patients and those with severely diminished renal or hepatic 
function. Initial dose reduction may be required in geriatric or debil-
itated patients, particularly those with diminished cardiopulmonary 
function.
Because of the drug’s potency, the use of a tuberculin syringe to 
measure doses less than 1 mL in addition to a double-check system 
for dose calculations and measurement is recommended. It should 
only be used in situations where patient vital signs can be continu -
ously monitored. 
Opioid analgesics are contraindicated in patients stung by scor -
pions (eg, Centruroides spp), as they may potentiate venom effects.3
Do not confuse SUfentanil with fentanyl or ALfentanil.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are generally dose-related and consistent with other 
opioid agonists. Respiratory depression and/or CNS depression are 
most likely to be encountered and can be exacerbated if sufentanil is 
given with other drugs that can cause those effects.
In humans, bradycardia may occur, but it is usually responsive 
to anticholinergic agents. Dose-related skeletal muscle rigidity has 
been reported, particularly with high doses and/or rapid IV admin -
istration and can be managed with concurrent use of neuromuscular 
blockers. Sufentanil has rarely been associated with asystole, hyper -
carbia, and hypersensitivity reactions.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Although sufentanil is indicated for epidural use (mixed with bupiv-
acaine ± epinephrine) in women for labor/delivery, it should not be 
administered systemically to a dam close to giving birth, as offspring 
may show behavioral alterations (eg, hypotonia, depression) associ-
ated with opioid administration.
The effects of sufentanil on lactation and its safety for nursing off-
spring are not well defined, but sufentanil milk levels approximate 
those found in serum. This, coupled with its low oral bioavailability, 
makes it unlikely to cause significant effects in nursing offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
In dogs, the LD 50 of IV sufentanil is 10.1 to 19.5 mg/kg. Severe IV 
overdoses may cause apnea, circulatory collapse, pulmonary edema, 
seizures, cardiac arrest, and death. Treatment is a combination of 
supportive therapy and administration of an opioid antagonist, such 
as naloxone. Although sufentanil has a fairly rapid half-life, multiple 
doses of naloxone may be necessary. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving sufentanil and may be of sig-
nificance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use together 
is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential risks and 
perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Alpha-2 Receptor Agonists  (eg, dexmedetomidine, xyla -
zine): Concurrent use may increase the risk for CNS and/or re -
spiratory depression. 
 ■ Anesthetic Agents  (eg, alfaxalone, isoflurane, ketamine, 
propofol): Concurrent use may increase the risk for CNS and/or 
respiratory depression. 
 ■ Anticholinergic Agents  (eg, acepromazine, atropine, gly -
copyrrolate): Concurrent use may increase the risk for urinary 
retention, constipation, and CNS and respiratory depression.
 ■ Antihypertensive Agents  (eg, atenolol, lisinopril): Concur-
rent use may increase the risk for bradycardia, hypotension, and 
orthostasis. Use cautiously and monitor blood pressure and heart 
rate. Opioids may decrease the therapeutic effects of diuretics. 
 ■ Benzodiazepines  (eg, diazepam, midazolam ): Concurrent 
use may increase the risk for CNS and/or respiratory depression. 
 ■ Bethanechol : Concurrent use may antagonize the beneficial 
effects of bethanechol on GI motility. Avoid combination.
 ■ CNS Depressants  (eg, methocarbamol, phenobarbital): Con-
current use may increase the risk for CNS and/or respiratory de -
pression. Monitor and adjust dosages accordingly.
 ■ Desmopressin : Concurrent use may increase levels of oral des -
mopressin and increase the risk for water intoxication and/or 
hyponatremia, which can progress to seizures, coma, respiratory 
arrest, and death. Monitor electrolytes and renal function.
 ■ Domperidone : Concurrent use may antagonize the GI effects 
of domperidone.
 ■ Drugs That Inhibit Hepatic Isoenzymes  (eg, cimetidine, 
diltiazem, erythromycin, fluconazole, itraconazole, keto -
conazole) May increase the half-life and decrease the clearance 
of sufentanil, leading to prolonged effects and an increased risk 
for respiratory depression. Consider adjusting doses accordingly.
 ■ Drugs That Induce Hepatic Isoenzymes  (eg, griseofulvin, 
mitotane, phenobarbital ): Current use may decrease levels of 
sufentanil. Monitor clinical response and adjust doses  accordingly.
 ■ Drugs That Depress Cardiac Function Or Reduce V agal 
Tone (eg, beta-blockers or other anesthetic agents): May produce 
bradycardia or hypotension if used concurrently with sufentanil
 ■ Ifosfamide : Concurrent use may increase the risk for neurotox-
icity, including somnolence, confusion, hallucinations, blurred 
vision, urinary incontinence, seizures, and coma. Use cautiously 
and monitor.
 ■ Iohexol : Concurrent use of opioids with intrathecal iohexol 
may increase the risk for seizures. Opioids should be withheld for 
48 hours before and 24 hours after intrathecal administration of 
iohexol.


===== Plumb PDF 1219 =====
1192    Sufentanil
 ■ Loperamide : Concurrent use may increase the risk for consti -
pation.
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors  (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, sele-
giline): Concurrent use may increase the risk for anxiety, con -
fusion, hypotension, respiratory depression, cyanosis, and coma. 
MAOIs should be withheld for 14 days prior to administration of 
opioids. Avoid combination.
 ■ Metoclopramide : Concurrent use may antagonize the proki -
netic effects of metoclopramide.
 ■ Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  (eg, atracurium): Con-
current use may increase the risk for tachycardia, bradycardia, 
and/or hypotension. Use cautiously and monitor
 ■ Serotonin Receptor Antagonists  (eg, dolasetron, fluox-
etine): Concurrent use may increase the risk for serotonin syn -
drome. Avoid combination.
 ■ Tramadol : Concurrent use may increase the risk for seizures, 
serotonin syndrome, urinary retention, and constipation. The risk 
for CNS and respiratory depression may be additive.
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants  ( TCAs; eg, amitriptyline, clo -
mipramine): Concurrent use may increase risk for urinary reten-
tion, constipation, and CNS and respiratory depression.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ Because opioids can increase biliary tract pressure and raise se -
rum amylase and lipase values, these values may be unreliable for 
24 hours after sufentanil is administered.
Dosages
NOTE: In obese patients, calculate doses based on lean body 
weight.
DOGS/CATS:
Opioid analgesic (extra-label): 0.5 –  1 µg/kg slow IV followed 
by 0.5 – 1 µg/kg/ HOUR IV CRI has been noted. 1,4–8 Dosage is ti -
trated to effect. Dosages as high as 2.5 µg/kg slow IV followed by  
2 – 4 µg/kg/HOUR IV CRI have been noted.9
Epidural analgesia in dogs  (extra-label): 0.5 – 1 µg/kg diluted 
to a volume of 0.2 – 0.36 mL/kg with sterile saline. The onset of 
action is 10 to 15 minutes; duration 1 to 4 hours.10–12
RABBITS :
Anesthesia (extra-label): 0.5 µg/kg IV bolus, followed by  
0.72 µg/kg/HOUR IV CRI13
Monitoring
 ■ Anesthetic and/or analgesic efficacy
 ■ Cardiac and respiratory rate
 ■ Pulse oximetry or other methods to measure blood oxygenation 
when used for anesthesia
 ■ Blood pressure
Client Information
 ■ Sufentanil is a very potent opioid that should only be used by 
professionals in a setting where adequate patient monitoring is 
available.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Sufentanil citrate is a phenylpiperidine derivative opioid related to 
fentanyl. It occurs as a white or almost white powder that is soluble 
in water and sparingly soluble in alcohol, acetone, and chloroform. 
The commercially available injection has a pH (adjusted with citric 
acid) of 3.5 to 6.
Sufentanil citrate may also be known as R-33800, sufentanili ci -
tras, fentathienel citrate, sufentanyl citrate, sulfentanil citrate, Fast-
fen®, Fentaientel®, and Sufenta®.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, store sufentanil injection protected from 
light at room temperature 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F). Sufentanil ci -
trate is hydrolyzable in acidic solutions.
Sufentanil citrate is a DEA Schedule II (C-II) controlled sub -
stance; store it in a substantially constructed and securely locked 
area. Follow applicable local, state, and federal rules regarding the 
disposal of unused or wasted controlled drugs.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Sufentanil citrate is reportedly compatible with 5% dextrose and 
bupivacaine. Sufentanil is Y-site compatible with solutions contain-
ing atropine, dexamethasone sodium phosphate, diazepam, diphen-
hydramine, etomidate, metoclopramide, midazolam, phenobarbital, 
and propofol. It is incompatible with lorazepam, phenytoin, and 
thiopental.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE.
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 1 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See the Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Sufentanil Citrate Injection: 50 µg/mL (as base) in 1 mL, 2 mL, and  
5 mL ampules; Sufenta® (preservative free), generic; (Rx, C-II)
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 


===== Plumb PDF 1220 =====
Sulfa-/Trimethoprim   1193
Sulfa-/Trimethoprim
Sulfadiazine/Trimethoprim
Sulfamethoxazole/Trimethoprim
(sul-fa-dye-a-zeen; sul-fa-meth-ox-a-zole/trye-meth-ohe-prim)
Bactrim®, EquiSul-SDT®, Uniprim®
Potentiated Sulfonamide Antimicrobial
NOTE: In the United States, 2 FDA-approved combinations of sulfon-
amide with trimethoprim (ie, sulfa-/trimethoprim) are used clinically 
in animals: sulfadiazine/trimethoprim for parenteral and oral use in 
dogs, cats, and horses and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim for oral 
use in humans. In Canada, sulfadoxine is also available in combina -
tion with trimethoprim for veterinary use.
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Combination antimicrobial agent, often referred to as a po-
tentiated sulfonamide, used to treat bacterial and protozoal 
infections
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity to sulfonamides 
and severe renal or hepatic impairment.
 ▶ Caution is advised in cases of diminished renal or hepatic 
function, urinary obstruction, urolithiasis, and in dog breeds 
predisposed to sulfonamide hypersensitivity (eg, Doberman 
pinschers).
 ▶ Adverse effects in dogs include keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 
hypersensitivity (type 1 or type 3), acute neutrophilic hepatitis 
with icterus, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, fever, hemolytic 
anemia, urticaria, polyarthritis, facial swelling, polydipsia, 
crystalluria, hematuria, polyuria, cholestasis, hypothyroidism, 
anemia, agranulocytosis, and idiosyncratic hepatic necrosis.
 ▶ Adverse effects in cats include anorexia, crystalluria, hematu-
ria, leukopenia, and anemia.
 ▶ Adverse effects in horses include diarrhea, hypersensitivity 
reactions, and hematologic effects (eg, anemia, thrombocy-
topenia, leukopenia) when administered orally and transient 
pruritus after IV injection.
 ▶ Local injection adverse effects (eg, warmth, edema, pain) are 
possible.
 ▶ Sulfa-/trimethoprim is potentially teratogenic; weigh the risks 
versus the benefits before prescribing.
 ▶ In the United States, extra-label use of sulfonamides is prohib-
ited in lactating dairy cattle.
Uses/Indications
Although sulfadiazine/trimethoprim is only FDA-approved for use 
in dogs and horses, this drug is used to treat infections caused by 
susceptible bacteria and parasitic organisms in various species. 
Sulfadiazine/trimethoprim is commonly used in horses because it 
is 1 of a limited number of safe oral options. Although use in dogs is 
more limited because of concerns about adverse effects and availabil-
ity of other antimicrobial options, this antibiotic is a potential choice 
for treatment of various infections (eg, cystitis, prostatitis) and is also 
sometimes used for treatment of atypical pathogens (eg, Nocardia 
spp). Prophylactic use of sulfadiazine/trimethoprim reduced mor -
bidity in dogs receiving doxorubicin.1
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated sulfa -
methoxazole/trimethoprim as a Highly Important antimicrobial for 
human medicine.2 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) An-
timicrobial Classification has designated sulfadiazine/trimethoprim 
as a Veterinary Critically Important antimicrobial.3
Pharmacology/Actions
Sulfonamides are bacteriostatic agents while trimethoprim is bac -
tericidal; both agents are time-dependent antibiotics. When used in 
combination, the resulting potentiated sulfonamides are bactericid-
al. Potentiated sulfonamides sequentially inhibit enzymes in the folic 
acid pathway, inhibiting bacterial thymidine synthesis. Sulfonamides 
compete with para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) to reduce bacterial 
dihydrofolic acid (DFA) formation, and trimethoprim blocks the 
conversion of DFA to tetrahydrofolic acid by preferentially inhibiting 
bacterial dihydrofolate reductase. Infected tissue and cellular debris 
can inhibit the activity of sulfa-/trimethoprim by secreting PABA 
and thymidine. The effects of sulfa-/trimethoprim on the equine GI 
microbiome appear to be reversible.4
The in vitro optimal ratio for most susceptible bacteria is ≈1:20 
(trimethoprim:sulfonamide), but synergistic activity can reportedly 
occur with ratios of 1:1 to 1:40. The serum concentration of the tri -
methoprim component is considered more important than the sul -
fonamide concentration. 
Potentiated sulfonamides have a fairly broad spectrum of activi -
ty. Generally susceptible gram-positive bacteria include most strep -
tococci and staphylococci and Nocardia spp. Many gram-negative 
organisms of the Enterobacteriaceae family are inherently suscep -
tible to potentiated sulfonamides but acquired resistance can occur. 
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is ineffective against Pseudomonas aeruginosa; 
some protozoa (ie, Pneumocystis jiroveci, Coccidia spp, Neospora spp, 
Toxoplasma spp) are also inhibited. Potentiated sulfonamides appear 
to have little activity against most atypical bacteria and anaerobes; 
methicillin-resistant staphylococci are usually resistant. Enterococcus 
spp infections may appear to be susceptible to sulfonamide-contain-
ing antibiotics in vitro; however, they are intrinsically resistant, so 
sulfa-/trimethoprim should not be used for these bacteria.
Resistance development is thought to occur more slowly to the 
combination of drugs than to either drug alone. In gram-negative 
organisms, sulfamethoxazole resistance is usually plasmid mediat -
ed, although a point mutation for dihydropteroate synthase also may 
confer resistance.  
Pharmacokinetics
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is relatively well absorbed after oral adminis -
tration, with peak concentrations occurring ≈1 to 4 hours after ad -
ministration; however, the drug is absorbed more slowly after SC 
absorption. Oral bioavailability in fed horses after a single dose of 
30 mg/kg paste was 74% for sulfadiazine and 46% for trimethoprim.5 
Bioavailability was ≈84% in male goats.6 Food has no apparent effect 
on the absorption of sulfadiazine, but trimethoprim absorption is 
decreased.
In calves 1 day and 1 week of age, trimethoprim and sulfadia -
zine were absorbed after oral administration, although serum tri -
methoprim concentration was diminished in the 1-week-old calves. 
In calves 6 weeks of age, peak sulfadiazine concentration was only 
60% as compared with calves 1 day of age, and trimethoprim was 
undetectable.7 In a separate study, sulfadiazine half-life was 8.5 to 10 
hours in calves 6 weeks of age and ≈8 to 13 hours in calves 12 weeks 
of age.8 In ruminants older than 8 weeks of age, trimethoprim is ap-
parently trapped in the ruminoreticulum after oral administration 
and undergoes some degradation that limits its usefulness.
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is well distributed in the body; however, in 
horses, concentrations are lower in the pulmonary epithelial lining 
fluid than in plasma. 5 Both sulfadiazine and trimethoprim attain 
therapeutic concentrations in the equine endometrium. 9 In dogs, 
therapeutic concentrations of both agents are reached in the skin. 10 
In patients with inflamed meninges, the drugs enter the CSF in con-
centrations ≈50% of those found in the serum. Sulfa-/trimethoprim 


===== BSAVA PDF 403 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
387
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Do not use in cases of intestinal obstruction 
or where enterotomy or enterectomy is to be performed.
Adverse reactions: No information available.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs: All uses: 1.5 g p.o. q24h (dogs <5 kg); 3 g p.o. q12–24h (5–15 
kg); 4 g p.o. q12–24h (>15 kg). Sprinkle over feed or place on tongue.
Cats: All uses: Kittens: 1 capsule q24h. Adults: 1 capsule q12h.
Succinylcholine see Suxamethonium
Sucralfate
(Antepsin*, Antepsin suspension*, Carafate*) 
POM 
Formulations: Oral: 1 g tablet; 0.2 g/ml suspension.
Action: In an acidic medium an aluminium ion detaches from the 
compound, leaving a very polar, relatively non-absorbable ion. This 
ion then binds to proteinaceous exudates in the upper GI tract, 
forming a chemical diffusion barrier over ulcer sites, preventing 
further erosion from acid, pepsin and bile salts. However, its major 
action appears to relate to stimulation of mucosal defences and 
repair mechanisms (stimulation of bicarbonate and PGE production 
and binding of epidermal growth factor). These effects are seen at 
neutral pH.
Use:
• Treatment of oesophageal, gastric and duodenal ulceration.
• The efficacy of sucralfate as a phosphate binder in renal failure is 
uncertain.
Can be used alongside an H2 receptor antagonist or proton-pump 
inhibitor but should be given separately.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Perforated ulcer.
Adverse reactions: Minimal; constipation is the main problem in 
humans. Bezoar formation and hypophosphataemia are also 
reported in humans.
Drug interactions: Sucralfate may decrease the bioavailability of 
H2 antagonists, phenytoin and tetracyclines. It may be a wise 
precaution to administer sucralfate at least 2 hours before or after 
these drugs. Sucralfate interferes significantly with the absorption of 
fluoroquinolones and digoxin.


===== BSAVA PDF 404 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
388
DOSES
Dogs: All uses: 500 mg/dog p.o. q6–8h (dogs up to 20 kg); 1–2 g/
dog p.o. q6–8h (>20 kg).
Cats: All uses: 250 mg/cat p.o. q8–12h. 
References
Bazelle J, Threlfall A and Whitley N (2018) Gastroprotectants in small animal veterinary 
practice – a review of the evidence. Part 1: cyto-protective drugs. Journal of Small 
Animal Practice  59, 587–602
Marks SL, Kook PH, Papich MG et al . (2018) ACVIM consensus statement: support for 
rational administration of gastrointestinal protectants to dogs and cats. Journal of 
Veterinary Internal Medicine  32, 1823–1840
Sulfasalazine
(Salazopyrin*, Sulphasalazine*) POM 
Formulations: Oral: 500 mg tablet; 250 mg/5 ml oral suspension.
Action: Sulfasalazine is a prodrug: a diazo bond binding 
sulfapyridine to 5-ASA is cleaved by colonic bacteria to release free 
5-ASA, which acts locally in high concentrations in the colon as an 
anti-inflammatory.
Use: Used in the management of colitis. There is a significant risk of 
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and periodic Schirmer tear tests should be 
performed.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Dobermanns appear to be sensitive to 
adverse effects associated with sulfapyridine.
Adverse reactions: Uncommon but include keratoconjunctivitis 
sicca (KCS), vomiting, allergic dermatitis and cholestatic jaundice. 
Owners should be made aware of the seriousness of KCS and what 
signs to monitor. The cause of the KCS is not clear. Historically 
sulfapyridine has been blamed. Olsalazine has been recommended 
as the incidence of KCS is less with its use, although not completely 
abolished. It is possible that 5-ASA may sometimes be responsible.
Drug interactions: The absorption of digoxin may be inhibited by 
sulfasalazine, and the measurement of serum folate concentration 
may be affected. Sulfasalazine may cause a reduction in serum 
thyroxine concentrations.
DOSES
Dogs: All uses: 15–30 mg/kg p.o. q8–12h, maximum 6 g/day.
Cats: All uses: 10–20 mg/kg p.o. q8–12h.
Sulphonamide see Trimethoprim/
sulphonamide 
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 405 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
389
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Suxamethonium (Succinylcholine)
(Suxamethonium*) POM 
Formulations: Injectable: 50 mg/ml solution.
Action: Competitively binds to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. 
The persistent depolarization prevents the transmission of further 
action potentials, resulting in muscle relaxation.
Use:
• Used to facilitate intubation in cats.
There are no indications for suxamethonium in dogs. Suxamethonium 
has a very rapid onset of action (5–15 seconds) and short duration of 
action (3–5 minutes). However, use of neuromuscular blockade to 
facilitate intubation is rarely required in small animals and 
suxamethonium has been largely replaced by non-depolarizing drugs. 
Use with caution in patients with hepatic disease.
Safety and handling: Store in refrigerator.
Contraindications: Do not administer unless the animal is 
adequately anaesthetized and facilities to provide positive pressure 
ventilation are available. Do not use in animals exposed to 
organophosphate compounds.
Adverse reactions: Can cause arrhythmias (sinus bradycardia, 
ventricular arrhythmias) via stimulation of muscarinic receptors in 
the sinus node. A small rise in potassium concentration is expected 
after suxamethonium; patients with burns and neuromuscular 
disorders are at severe risk of hyperkalaemia.
Drug interactions: The actions of suxamethonium may be 
enhanced by beta-adrenergic blockers (e.g. propranolol), 
furosemide, isoflurane, lidocaine, magnesium salts and 
phenothiazines. Diazepam may reduce the duration of action of 
suxamethonium. Neostigmine and pyridostigmine should not be 
administered with suxamethonium as they inhibit 
pseudocholinesterases, thereby enhancing suxamethonium’s effect.
DOSES
Dogs: Do not use.
Cats: 1.0 mg/kg i.v. A total dose of 3.5 mg is satisfactory in cats  
>3.5 kg.
