
===== Plumb PDF 1220 =====
Sulfa-/Trimethoprim   1193
Sulfa-/Trimethoprim
Sulfadiazine/Trimethoprim
Sulfamethoxazole/Trimethoprim
(sul-fa-dye-a-zeen; sul-fa-meth-ox-a-zole/trye-meth-ohe-prim)
Bactrim®, EquiSul-SDT®, Uniprim®
Potentiated Sulfonamide Antimicrobial
NOTE: In the United States, 2 FDA-approved combinations of sulfon-
amide with trimethoprim (ie, sulfa-/trimethoprim) are used clinically 
in animals: sulfadiazine/trimethoprim for parenteral and oral use in 
dogs, cats, and horses and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim for oral 
use in humans. In Canada, sulfadoxine is also available in combina -
tion with trimethoprim for veterinary use.
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Combination antimicrobial agent, often referred to as a po-
tentiated sulfonamide, used to treat bacterial and protozoal 
infections
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity to sulfonamides 
and severe renal or hepatic impairment.
 ▶ Caution is advised in cases of diminished renal or hepatic 
function, urinary obstruction, urolithiasis, and in dog breeds 
predisposed to sulfonamide hypersensitivity (eg, Doberman 
pinschers).
 ▶ Adverse effects in dogs include keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 
hypersensitivity (type 1 or type 3), acute neutrophilic hepatitis 
with icterus, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, fever, hemolytic 
anemia, urticaria, polyarthritis, facial swelling, polydipsia, 
crystalluria, hematuria, polyuria, cholestasis, hypothyroidism, 
anemia, agranulocytosis, and idiosyncratic hepatic necrosis.
 ▶ Adverse effects in cats include anorexia, crystalluria, hematu-
ria, leukopenia, and anemia.
 ▶ Adverse effects in horses include diarrhea, hypersensitivity 
reactions, and hematologic effects (eg, anemia, thrombocy-
topenia, leukopenia) when administered orally and transient 
pruritus after IV injection.
 ▶ Local injection adverse effects (eg, warmth, edema, pain) are 
possible.
 ▶ Sulfa-/trimethoprim is potentially teratogenic; weigh the risks 
versus the benefits before prescribing.
 ▶ In the United States, extra-label use of sulfonamides is prohib-
ited in lactating dairy cattle.
Uses/Indications
Although sulfadiazine/trimethoprim is only FDA-approved for use 
in dogs and horses, this drug is used to treat infections caused by 
susceptible bacteria and parasitic organisms in various species. 
Sulfadiazine/trimethoprim is commonly used in horses because it 
is 1 of a limited number of safe oral options. Although use in dogs is 
more limited because of concerns about adverse effects and availabil-
ity of other antimicrobial options, this antibiotic is a potential choice 
for treatment of various infections (eg, cystitis, prostatitis) and is also 
sometimes used for treatment of atypical pathogens (eg, Nocardia 
spp). Prophylactic use of sulfadiazine/trimethoprim reduced mor -
bidity in dogs receiving doxorubicin.1
The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated sulfa -
methoxazole/trimethoprim as a Highly Important antimicrobial for 
human medicine.2 The Office International des Epizooties (OIE) An-
timicrobial Classification has designated sulfadiazine/trimethoprim 
as a Veterinary Critically Important antimicrobial.3
Pharmacology/Actions
Sulfonamides are bacteriostatic agents while trimethoprim is bac -
tericidal; both agents are time-dependent antibiotics. When used in 
combination, the resulting potentiated sulfonamides are bactericid-
al. Potentiated sulfonamides sequentially inhibit enzymes in the folic 
acid pathway, inhibiting bacterial thymidine synthesis. Sulfonamides 
compete with para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) to reduce bacterial 
dihydrofolic acid (DFA) formation, and trimethoprim blocks the 
conversion of DFA to tetrahydrofolic acid by preferentially inhibiting 
bacterial dihydrofolate reductase. Infected tissue and cellular debris 
can inhibit the activity of sulfa-/trimethoprim by secreting PABA 
and thymidine. The effects of sulfa-/trimethoprim on the equine GI 
microbiome appear to be reversible.4
The in vitro optimal ratio for most susceptible bacteria is ≈1:20 
(trimethoprim:sulfonamide), but synergistic activity can reportedly 
occur with ratios of 1:1 to 1:40. The serum concentration of the tri -
methoprim component is considered more important than the sul -
fonamide concentration. 
Potentiated sulfonamides have a fairly broad spectrum of activi -
ty. Generally susceptible gram-positive bacteria include most strep -
tococci and staphylococci and Nocardia spp. Many gram-negative 
organisms of the Enterobacteriaceae family are inherently suscep -
tible to potentiated sulfonamides but acquired resistance can occur. 
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is ineffective against Pseudomonas aeruginosa; 
some protozoa (ie, Pneumocystis jiroveci, Coccidia spp, Neospora spp, 
Toxoplasma spp) are also inhibited. Potentiated sulfonamides appear 
to have little activity against most atypical bacteria and anaerobes; 
methicillin-resistant staphylococci are usually resistant. Enterococcus 
spp infections may appear to be susceptible to sulfonamide-contain-
ing antibiotics in vitro; however, they are intrinsically resistant, so 
sulfa-/trimethoprim should not be used for these bacteria.
Resistance development is thought to occur more slowly to the 
combination of drugs than to either drug alone. In gram-negative 
organisms, sulfamethoxazole resistance is usually plasmid mediat -
ed, although a point mutation for dihydropteroate synthase also may 
confer resistance.  
Pharmacokinetics
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is relatively well absorbed after oral adminis -
tration, with peak concentrations occurring ≈1 to 4 hours after ad -
ministration; however, the drug is absorbed more slowly after SC 
absorption. Oral bioavailability in fed horses after a single dose of 
30 mg/kg paste was 74% for sulfadiazine and 46% for trimethoprim.5 
Bioavailability was ≈84% in male goats.6 Food has no apparent effect 
on the absorption of sulfadiazine, but trimethoprim absorption is 
decreased.
In calves 1 day and 1 week of age, trimethoprim and sulfadia -
zine were absorbed after oral administration, although serum tri -
methoprim concentration was diminished in the 1-week-old calves. 
In calves 6 weeks of age, peak sulfadiazine concentration was only 
60% as compared with calves 1 day of age, and trimethoprim was 
undetectable.7 In a separate study, sulfadiazine half-life was 8.5 to 10 
hours in calves 6 weeks of age and ≈8 to 13 hours in calves 12 weeks 
of age.8 In ruminants older than 8 weeks of age, trimethoprim is ap-
parently trapped in the ruminoreticulum after oral administration 
and undergoes some degradation that limits its usefulness.
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is well distributed in the body; however, in 
horses, concentrations are lower in the pulmonary epithelial lining 
fluid than in plasma. 5 Both sulfadiazine and trimethoprim attain 
therapeutic concentrations in the equine endometrium. 9 In dogs, 
therapeutic concentrations of both agents are reached in the skin. 10 
In patients with inflamed meninges, the drugs enter the CSF in con-
centrations ≈50% of those found in the serum. Sulfa-/trimethoprim 


===== Plumb PDF 1221 =====
1194    Sulfa-/Trimethoprim
is relatively well distributed into the prostate, and both drugs con -
centrate in the urine. The volume of distribution for trimethoprim is 
1.49 L/kg in dogs; 0.59 to 1.51 L/kg in horses; and 2.7 L/kg in don -
keys.11 The volume of distribution for sulfadiazine is 1.02 L/kg in 
dogs and 0.6 L/kg in donkeys. 11 Sulfadiazine and trimethoprim are 
20% and 35% bound to equine plasma proteins.12
Sulfa-/trimethoprim is both renally excreted unchanged via glo -
merular filtration and tubular secretion and metabolized by the liver. 
Sulfonamides are primarily acetylated (not in dogs) and conjugated 
with glucuronic acid, and trimethoprim is metabolized to oxide and 
hydroxylated metabolites. Trimethoprim may be more extensively 
metabolized in the liver of adult ruminants than in other species. The 
serum elimination half-life for trimethoprim is 2.5 hours in dogs, ≈2 
to 3 hours in horses, 10.9 hours in goats,6 and 1.5 hours in cattle. The 
serum elimination half-life for sulfadiazine is 9.84 hours in dogs, ≈4 
to 8 hours in horses, and 2.5 hours in cattle. Sulfadiazine and tri -
methoprim clearances in donkeys were 1.7 and 4.4 mL/minute/kg,  
respectively.11 Although trimethoprim is rapidly eliminated from the 
serum, the drug may persist for a longer period of time in tissue.
Because of the number of variables involved, it is extremely dif -
ficult to apply pharmacokinetic values in making dosage recom -
mendations with these combinations. Each drug (ie, trimethoprim, 
sulfonamide) has different pharmacokinetic parameters (eg, absorp-
tion, distribution, elimination) in each species. Because different 
organisms have different MIC values and the optimal ratio of tri -
methoprim to sulfonamides differs from organism to organism, this 
problem is exacerbated.
Considerable controversy exists regarding the frequency of ad -
ministration of these combinations. Sulfadiazine/trimethoprim is 
labeled for once daily administration in dogs and horses, but many 
clinicians believe that sulfa-/trimethoprim is more efficacious if giv-
en twice daily, regardless of the sulfonamide used.
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
The veterinary manufacturer states that sulfadiazine/trimethoprim 
should not be used in dogs or horses with marked liver parenchymal 
damage, impaired hepatic function, blood dyscrasias, or a history 
of sulfonamide or trimethoprim sensitivity. Sulfadiazine/trimetho -
prim is not for use in horses (or FDA-approved for other animals) 
intended for food. Sulfonamides are not considered contraindicated 
in patients allergic to thiazide diuretics or sulfonylurea agents.13
Doberman pinschers, Samoyeds, and miniature schnauzers ap -
pear to be more susceptible to sulfonamide-induced polysystemic 
immune complex disease14; use sulfa-/trimethoprim with caution in 
these breeds.
Sulfa-/trimethoprim should be used with caution in patients with 
pre-existing hepatic or renal disease or folate deficiency. In animals 
with moderate to severe renal dysfunction, consider dosage reduc -
tion; avoid products containing sulfadiazine.
Sulfadiazine has potential for crystallization in the urine, so use 
should be avoided in dogs with uroliths, at increased risk for devel -
oping uroliths, with highly concentrated urine (from dehydration), 
or with acidic urine.
Horses receiving sulfadiazine/trimethoprim that are under con -
ditions of stress may develop potentially fatal acute diarrhea. 15 Dis-
continue antimicrobial therapy if acute diarrhea or persistent changes 
in fecal consistency are observed and initiate appropriate treatment. 
Sulfadiazine/trimethoprim should not be administered to horses with 
drug-induced cardiac arrhythmias (eg, anesthetic and sedative agents) 
and it should not be given IV concurrently or with previous adminis-
tration of CNS depressants (eg, anesthetic agents, phenothiazines).16
In humans, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim is contraindicated in 
patients younger than 2 months of age, with known hypersensitivity 
to either drug component, with marked hepatic or renal impairment, 
and with megaloblastic anemia due to folate deficiency.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects noted in dogs include keratoconjunctivitis sic -
ca (KCS; which may be irreversible), acute neutrophilic hepatitis 
with icterus, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, fever, hemolytic anemia, 
urticaria, polyarthritis, facial swelling, polydipsia, polyuria, and 
cholestasis. Potentiated sulfonamides may cause clinical hypothy -
roidism in dogs, particularly with extended therapy. Acute hyper -
sensitivity reactions manifesting as type I (ie, anaphylaxis) or type 
III (ie, formation of antigen:antibody complexes) reactions can be 
seen. Hypersensitivity reactions appear to be more common in large-
breed dogs. Doberman pinschers, Samoyeds, and miniature schnau-
zers may be more susceptible to hypersensitivity reactions than other 
breeds.14 Other hematologic effects (eg, anemia, agranulocytosis) are 
possible but are rare, although the incidence may increase with pro-
longed use of high doses.17 Sulfa-/trimethoprim has rarely caused an 
idiosyncratic, moderate to massive hepatic necrosis in dogs. 18 Use 
of sulfa-/trimethoprim may increase the risk for developing acute 
pancreatitis,14 but cause and effect have not been definitively shown.
Adverse effects noted in cats may include anorexia, leukopenia, 
and anemia.
In horses, transient pruritus has been noted after IV injection. 
Oral therapy has resulted in dose-related diarrhea, but incidence is 
relatively low. Previous administration of potentiated sulfonamides 
has been implicated in increasing the mortality rate associated with 
severe diarrhea. If the 48% injectable product is administered IM or 
SC, or if it extravasates after IV administration, swelling, pain, and 
minor tissue damage may result. Hypersensitivity reactions, neuro -
logic effects (eg, gait alterations, behavior changes), cutaneous vas -
culitis, and hematologic effects (eg, anemia, thrombocytopenia, leu-
kopenia) may also be seen.19 In experimental models, trimethoprim 
inhibited equine voltage-gated K+ channel K(v)11.1, suggesting that 
trimethoprim could induce repolarization disorders in horses 20,21; 
validation with in vivo studies are needed. Neurologic adverse ef -
fects (agitation, erratic behavior, hypermetric gait) have been noted 
in horses being treated with typical doses of sulfa-/trimethoprim; all 
adverse effects resolved with discontinuation of the drug.22
Sulfonamides (and their metabolites) can precipitate in the urine, 
particularly when given at high dosages for prolonged periods. Acid-
ic or highly concentrated urine may also contribute to increased risk 
for crystalluria, hematuria, and renal tubule obstruction.
Regurgitation may occur in birds.
Sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim can markedly reduce tear pro -
duction in rabbits,23 but sulfadiazine/trimethoprim had no effect in 
horses.24
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Trimethoprim and sulfonamides cross the placenta. Safety of sulfa-/
trimethoprim has not been clearly established in pregnant animals. 
Reports of teratogenicity (eg, cleft palate, fetal loss) have been re -
ported in rats and rabbits. Studies in male animals have not demon-
strated reduced reproductive performance. First trimester exposure 
in humans has been associated with increased risk for congenital 
malformations. 
Trimethoprim and sulfonamides are distributed into milk. Use 
sulfa-/trimethoprim products in nursing animals with caution. 
Sulfonamides are distributed into maternal milk, but in humans 
are considered compatible with breastfeeding in healthy, full-term 
infants.25,26 Premature infants and infants with hyperbilirubinemia 
may be at risk for adverse effects.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Manifestations of an acute overdose can include clinical signs of GI 
distress (eg, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea), CNS toxicity (eg, depres -
sion,), facial swelling, bone marrow depression, and increased se -
rum aminotransferase (ie, ALT, AST) activity. Oral overdoses can be 


===== Plumb PDF 1222 =====
Sulfa-/Trimethoprim   1195
treated by emptying the stomach (following typical protocols) and 
initiating supportive therapy based on clinical signs. Acidification 
of the urine may increase the renal elimination of trimethoprim but 
could also cause sulfonamide crystalluria, particularly with sulfadi -
azine-containing products. CBC and other laboratory parameters 
should be monitored as necessary. Severe bone marrow suppression 
associated with chronic overdoses can be treated with folinic acid 
(leucovorin). Peritoneal dialysis is not effective in removing tri -
methoprim or sulfonamides from circulation.
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta-
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
In humans, trimethoprim may be a substrate of p-glycoprotein, 
sulfamethoxazole is a substrate of the CYP2C family, and both tri -
methoprim and sulfamethoxazole may inhibit CYP2C enzymes. The 
following drug interactions have either been reported or are theoret-
ical in humans or animals receiving sulfa-/trimethoprim and may 
be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Amantadine : A human patient developed toxic delirium while 
receiving amantadine in conjunction with sulfamethoxazole/tri -
methoprim.27
 ■ Amiodarone : May reduce sulfonamide metabolism and in -
crease the risk for adverse effects.
 ■ Anesthetic Agents : Concurrent IV administration is contra -
indicated. Ester-type local anesthetics (eg, procaine, tetracaine) 
may locally inhibit sulfonamide effects.28,29
 ■ Angiotensin II-Receptor Blockers  ( ARBs; eg, telmisar-
tan): May increase the risk for hyperkalemia when used with po-
tassium-sparing drugs
 ■ Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors  (ACEIs; eg, 
benazepril, enalapril ): May increase the risk for hyperkalemia 
when used with potassium-sparing drugs
 ■ Antacids : Concurrent administration may decrease sulfon -
amide bioavailability.
 ■ Azathioprine, Mercaptopurine : Increased risk for myelo -
suppression
 ■ Cyclosporine : Sulfa-/trimethoprim may increase the risk for 
nephrotoxicity.
 ■ Detomidine : Concurrent use has resulted in fatal arrhythmias 
in horses.21 
 ■ Digoxin : Sulfa-/trimethoprim may increase digoxin  concentration.
 ■ Diuretics, Thiazide : May increase the risk for thrombocyto -
penia
 ■ Hypoglycemic Agents, Oral  (eg, glipizide, metformin ): 
Sulfa-/trimethoprim may potentiate hypoglycemic effects.
 ■ Leucovorin : May reduce therapeutic effect of sulfa-/trimetho -
prim
 ■ Methenamine : May form an insoluble precipitate in the urine
 ■ Methotrexate (MTX): Sulfa-/trimethoprim may displace 
from plasma proteins and increase the risk for toxic effects; it can 
also interfere with MTX assays (competitive protein binding tech-
nique, but not when measured by radioimmunoassay).
 ■ Phenothiazines (eg, acepromazine, promethazine): Concur-
rent administration is contraindicated. 
 ■ Potassium Supplements : Increased risk for hyperkalemia
 ■ Procainamide : Sulfa-/trimethoprim may increase the concen -
tration of procainamide and its active metabolite.
 ■ Pyrimethamine : May increase the risk for megaloblastic ane -
mia and myelosuppression
 ■ Rifampin : May reduce serum concentrations of trimethoprim 
and sulfonamide
 ■ Spironolactone : May increase the risk for hyperkalemia when 
used with potassium-sparing drugs
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants (TCAs; eg, amitriptyline, clo -
mipramine): Sulfa-/trimethoprim may decrease efficacy.
 ■ W arfarin : Sulfa-/trimethoprim may prolong prothrombin time 
and INR.
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ When using the Jaffe alkaline picrate reaction assay for creatinine 
determination, sulfa-/trimethoprim may cause an overestimation 
of ≈10%.
 ■ Sulfonamides may give false-positive results for urine glucose de-
terminations when using the Benedict’s method.
Dosages
NOTE: There is significant controversy regarding the frequency 
of administration of these drugs. See Pharmacokinetics for more 
information. Unless otherwise noted, doses are for combined sul-
fa-/trimethoprim. See Monitoring if treatment is expected to be 
longer than 7 days.
DOGS:
For systemic antibacterial action against sensitive organisms, 
either alone or as an adjunct to surgery or debridement with 
associated infection; treatment of acute urinary tract infections, 
acute bacterial complications of distemper, acute respiratory 
tract infections, acute alimentary tract infections, wound infec-
tions, and abscesses (label dosage; FDA-approved): 30 mg/kg PO 
once daily. Alternatively, especially in severe infections, the initial 
dose may be followed by 15 mg/kg every 12 hours.30  
Superficial bacterial folliculitis (extra-label): 15 – 30 mg/kg PO 
twice daily.31 Potentiated sulfonamides (ie, sulfa-/trimethoprim, 
sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim) are first-tier drugs only if region-
al susceptibility of Staphylococcus pseudintermedius is known.
Bacterial cystitis  (extra-label): Potentiated sulfonamides (ie,  
sulfa-/trimethoprim, sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim) are first-tier 
drugs only if regional pathogen susceptibility patterns are 
known.32 
a) Uncomplicated UTI: 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. Treatment 
may be as short as 3 days.32,33 
b) Complicated UTI: 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours32
Parasitic diseases (extra-label):
Coccidiosis: 
a) Body weight less than 4 kg (8.8 lb): 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 12 
to 24 hours34
b) Body weight greater than 4 kg (8.8 lb): 30 – 60 mg/kg PO every 
24 hours34
Neosporosis: Sulfadiazine/trimethoprim 15 – 20 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours for 4 weeks in combination with pyrimethamine 1 mg/kg  
PO once daily for 4 weeks. If observable clinical improvement is 
slow, treatment should be extended beyond the recommended 4 
weeks until 2 weeks after clinical signs have plateaued. All litter -
mates of affected puppies should be treated regardless of clinical 
signs. Alternative treatment is clindamycin 12.5 – 25 mg/kg PO or 
IM every 12 hours for 4 weeks. 35 NOTE: There is no approved or 
curative treatment for canine neosporosis. Arrestment of clinical 
disease is best achieved when treatment is initiated before the oc-
currence of contracture or paralysis.


===== Plumb PDF 1223 =====
1196    Sulfa-/Trimethoprim
Toxoplasmosis: Sulfa-/trimethoprim 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 
for 4 weeks can be used. Supportive care should be provided as 
needed.35 There is no approved treatment for toxoplasmosis in dogs.
Pneumocystosis (Pneumocystis jiroveci): 15 mg/kg PO every 8 
hours for 3 weeks or 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for 3 weeks 
American canine hepatozoonosis ( Hepatozoon americanum): 
Triple-combination therapy (TCP) consists of sulfadiazine/tri -
methoprim 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for 14 days, clindamy -
cin 10 mg/kg PO every 8 hours for 14 days, and pyrimethamine  
0.25 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for 14 days or ponazuril  
10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for 14 days. Prolonged therapy con-
sists of decoquinate 10 – 20 mg/kg mixed in food twice daily; treat-
ment is continued for 2 years. If relapse occurs, either ponazuril 
or TCP should be administered again for 14 days, followed by 
long-term decoquinate therapy.36 NOTE: No treatment is effec -
tive in eliminating H americanum in infected dogs. Treatment can 
increase survival time, improve quality of life, and decrease the 
number and severity of clinical relapses. Supportive care can en -
sure hydration, and NSAIDs can assist with pain control.
CATS:
Bacterial cystitis (extra-label): Potentiated sulfonamides (ie, sulfa-/
trimethoprim, sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim) are first-tier drugs 
only if regional pathogen susceptibility patterns are known.32 
a) Uncomplicated UTI: 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. Treatment 
may be as short as 3 days.32,33 
b) Complicated UTI: 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours.32 
Parasitic diseases (extra-label):
Coccidiosis: 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours34
Toxoplasmosis: 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours for 4 weeks can be 
used. Supportive care should be provided as needed.35
HORSES :
Control of bacterial infections of horses during treatment of 
acute strangles, respiratory tract infections, acute urogeni -
tal infections, wound infections, and abscesses  (label dosage; 
FDA-approved): 
a) Powder and paste formulations: 75 mg/kg PO once daily; ad-
minister in a small amount of feed. Continue treatment for 2 
to 3 days after clinical signs have subsided. Usual treatment 
course is 5 to 7 days.37,38
b) IV injection formulation: 21.3 mg/kg IV once daily38
Lower respiratory tract infections by susceptible strains of Strep-
tococcus equi subsp zooepidemicus (label dosage; FDA-approved): 
24 mg/kg (combined active ingredients) PO twice daily for 10 days15 
Respiratory infections (extra-label): 30 mg/kg PO or IV twice 
daily.5 NOTE: Potentiated sulfonamides for treatment of low -
er airway infections in horses should be restricted to treatment 
against highly susceptible pathogens.
Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly P carinii) in foals (extra-label): 
30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours
Dermatologic infections (extra-label): 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 
12 hours, often in conjunction with topical antibacterial sham -
poo. Treatment for 3 weeks may be necessary.39
BIRDS:
Susceptible infections (extra-label):
a) Respiratory and enteric infections in psittacines  using the 
24% (240 mg/mL) injectable suspension: 0.22 mL/kg IM once 
to twice daily
b) Respiratory and enteric infections in hand-fed baby psittac-
ines: Using the sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim oral suspen -
sion 240 mg/5 mL (48 mg/mL): 0.22 mL/30 g 2 to 3 times daily 
for 5 to 7 days
c) Coccidiosis in toucans and mynahs : Using the sulfame -
thoxazole/trimethoprim oral suspension 240 mg/5 mL  
(48 mg/mL): 2.2 mL/kg once daily for 5 days; may be added 
to feed.
d) Canaries, finches, and mynah birds : Sulfadiazine/trimetho-
prim 100 mg/kg PO twice daily is recommended for treatment 
of avian coccidian parasitic diseases. 40 NOTE: Atoxoplasma 
spp treatment is difficult.
e) GI protozoal infections in pigeons: 25 – 50 mg/kg PO twice 
daily for 10 to 14 days41
FERRETS :
Susceptible infections (extra-label):
a) 30 mg/kg PO twice daily
b) Coccidiosis: 30 mg/kg PO once daily for 14 days
RABBITS, RODENTS, SMALL MAMMALS :
Susceptible infections (extra-label):
a) Rabbits: 
 i. 15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours; 30 – 48 mg/kg SC 
every 12 hours. Sulfadiazine has a very short half-life (ie, ≈1 
hour) in rabbits.42 
 ii. GI protozoal infections: 25 – 30 mg/kg PO twice daily for 
10 to 14 days41
b) Chinchillas, Gerbils, Guinea Pigs, Hamsters, Mice, Rats :  
15 – 30 mg/kg PO every 12 hours
c) Chinchillas, Hedgehogs: 30 mg/kg PO or SC every 12 hours43
REPTILES :
Susceptible infections (extra-label):
a) Most species: 30 mg/kg IM (upper part of body) once daily for 
2 treatments, then every other day for 5 to 12 treatments; may 
be useful for enteric infections.44
b) All species : 30 mg/kg IM, first 2 doses should be 24 hours 
apart, then every other day45
c) 15 – 25 mg/kg/day IM for 7 to 14 days46
d) GI protozoal infections in bearded dragons : 15 – 20 mg/kg 
PO once daily for 7 to 14 days; may consider giving dose every 
other day after the second dose.41 
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
 ■ Renal function (creatinine, BUN) and potassium
 ■ If prolonged therapy (ie, greater than 7 days) is anticipated, the 
following is recommended: 
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC and hepatic profile 
 ■ In dogs, baseline Schirmer tear testing, with periodic re-evaluation 
(eg, in 5 days, then every 2-3 weeks) and owner monitoring for oc-
ular discharge
 ■ Thyroid function tests should also be considered (baseline and 
ongoing) in dogs
Client Information
 ■ Shake the oral suspension well before using. It does not need to 
be refrigerated.
 ■ Give to horses on an empty stomach.
 ■ Animals must be allowed free access to water and not become 
dehydrated while receiving this medication.
 ■ If the animal’s eyes are dry, develop a discharge, or become irritat-
ed, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ In horses, discontinue treatment and contact your veterinarian 
immediately if there are changes in stool consistency or diarrhea. 
Chemistry/Synonyms
Trimethoprim occurs as odorless, bitter-tasting, white to cream-col-


===== Plumb PDF 1224 =====
Sulfadimethoxine   1197
ored crystals or crystalline powder. It is very slightly soluble in water 
and slightly soluble in alcohol.
Sulfadiazine occurs as an odorless or nearly odorless, white to 
slightly yellow powder. It is practically insoluble in water and spar -
ingly soluble in alcohol.
Sulfamethoxazole occurs as a practically odorless and tasteless, 
white to off-white, crystalline powder. Approximately 0.29 mg is sol-
uble in 1 mL of water, and 20 mg is soluble in 1 mL of alcohol.
In combination, sulfadiazine and trimethoprim may be known 
as co-trimazine, sulfadiazine/trimethoprim, trimethoprim/sulfadia-
zine, SDZ-TMP , TMP-SDZ, and various trade names.
In combination, sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim may be 
known as co-trimoxazole, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, tri -
methoprim/sulfamethoxazole, SMX-TMP , TMP-SMX, and various 
trade names.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise instructed by the manufacturer, sulfa-/trimetho -
prim products should be stored at room temperature of 20°C to 25°C 
(68°F-77°F) in tight containers and protected from freezing. Shake 
suspensions well before use.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information noted
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Trimethoprim/Sulfadiazine Oral Suspension: Each gram contains 
67 mg trimethoprim and 333 mg sulfadiazine (proprietary formula-
tion) in 135 mL, 280 mL, 560 mL, and 900 mL bottles; Equisul-SDT®; 
(Rx). FDA-approved for use in horses not intended for food. NADA# 
141-360
Trimethoprim/Sulfadiazine Powder: Each gram contains 67 mg tri-
methoprim and 333 mg sulfadiazine; Uniprim® Powder in 37.5 g and 
1125 g packets; 200 g, 400 g, and 1200 g jars; 2000 g pails; and 12 kg 
box; (Rx). FDA-approved for use in horses not intended for food. 
NADA# 200-033
Trimethoprim/Sulfadiazine Oral Paste: Each gram contains 67 mg 
trimethoprim and 333 mg sulfadiazine. Available in 37.5 g (total 
weight) syringes; Tribrissen® 400 Oral Paste; (Rx). FDA-approved for 
use in horses not intended for food. NOTE: Not currently marketed 
in the United States; approved products are available in other coun-
tries.
Trimethoprim/Sulfadiazine Sterile Injection: 48% in 100 mL vials: 
Di-Biotic® 48% , Tribrissen® 48% Injection; (Rx). FDA-approved for 
use in horses not intended for food. NOTE: Not currently marketed 
in the United States; approved products are available in other coun-
tries under different trade names. A 24% solution may also be avail-
able.
In Canada, trimethoprim and sulfadoxine are available for use in cat-
tle and swine ( Trimidox®; Borgal®). Slaughter withdrawal = 10 days; 
milk withdrawal = 96 hours. (In the United States, extra-label use of 
sulfonamides is prohibited in lactating dairy cattle.)
In the United Kingdom, trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole oral 
drops ( Sulfatrim®) are available for use in rabbits, pigeons, and 
bearded dragons.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Trimethoprim Tablets: 100 mg; generic; (Rx). A 50 mg/5 mL oral 
solution (trimethoprim HCl, Primsol®) is also available.
Trimethoprim and Sulfamethoxazole (Co-Trimoxazole; TMP-SMZ) 
Oral Tablets: 80 mg trimethoprim and 400 mg sulfamethoxazole; 
Double Strength Tablets: 160 mg trimethoprim and 800 mg sulfame-
thoxazole; Bactrim® and Bactrim® DS; generic; (Rx)
Trimethoprim 8 mg/mL and Sulfamethoxazole 40 mg/mL (labeled as 
40 mg/5 mL and 200 mg/5mL) oral suspension; Sulfatrim®; generic; 
(Rx)
Trimethoprim and Sulfamethoxazole Injection: 80 mg sulfamethox-
azole, 16 mg trimethoprim per mL in 5 mL single-use vials, 10 mL, 
or 30 mL multiple-dose vials; generic; (Rx). Contains benzyl alcohol, 
propylene glycol (40%); pH ≈10. NOTE: Refer to product label for 
administration guidelines.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
Sulfadimethoxine
(sul-fa-dye-meth-ox-een) Albon®
Sulfonamide Antimicrobial
See also Sulfadimethoxine/Ormetoprim
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Used to treat bacterial and protozoal infections
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity to sulfonamides 
and severe renal or hepatic impairment. 
 ▶ Use with caution in breeds that are prone to sulfonamide hy-
persensitivity (ie, Doberman pinschers, Samoyeds, miniature 
schnauzers). 
 ▶ Adverse effects include the possibility of the drug precipitat-
ing in the urine (particularly with high doses administered for 
prolonged periods, acidic urine, or highly concentrated urine). 
In dogs, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, hypersensitivity reactions 
(eg, rashes, fever, bone marrow suppression, dermatitis, non-
septic polyarthritis), focal retinitis, and vomiting are possible. 
Diminished renal or hepatic function or urinary obstruction 
may occur.
 ▶ Potentially teratogenic; potential risks versus benefits should 
be considered.
 ▶ In the United States, extra-label use of sulfonamides is prohib-
ited in lactating dairy cattle.
Uses/Indications
Sulfadimethoxine injection and tablets are FDA-approved for use in 
dogs and cats for respiratory, genitourinary, enteric, and soft tissue 
infections caused by susceptible organisms. Efficacy is greater when 
treatment is initiated early in the course of disease. Sulfadimethoxine 
is also used to treat coccidial infections in small animals.
In horses, sulfadimethoxine injection is FDA-approved for the 
treatment of respiratory infections caused by Streptococcus equi.
In cattle, sulfadimethoxine is FDA-approved for treatment of 
shipping fever complex, calf diphtheria, bacterial pneumonia, and 
foot rot caused by susceptible organisms.
In poultry, sulfadimethoxine is added to drinking water to treat 
coccidiosis, fowl cholera, and infectious coryza.
Although sulfadimethoxine is not used in human medicine, the 
World Health Organization (WHO) has designated sulfonamides as 
highly important antimicrobials for human medicine. 1 The Office 
International des Epizooties (OIE) has designated sulfonamides as 
Veterinary Critically Important Antimicrobial (VCIA) Agents for 
veterinary species.2
Pharmacology/Actions
Sulfonamides are time-dependent, bacteriostatic agents when used 
alone, but are considered bactericidal when used in combination with 
dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors (eg, ormetoprim, trimethoprim). 
They are thought to prevent bacterial replication by competing with 


===== BSAVA PDF 434 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
418
DOSES
Dogs: Hyperadrenocorticism: 2 mg/kg p.o. q24h or 1 mg/kg p.o. 
q12h.
Cats: Hyperadrenocorticism: 10–30 mg/cat p.o. q12–24h. 
References
Lemetayer J and Blois S (2018) Update on the use of trilostane in dogs. The Canadian 
Veterinary Journal  59, 397–407
Macfarlane L, Parkin T and Ramsey I (2016) Pre-trilostane and three-hour post-trilostane 
cortisol to monitor trilostane therapy in dogs. Veterinary Record 179 , 597
Sanders K, Kooistra HS and Galac S (2018) Treating canine Cushing’s syndrome: current 
options and future prospects. The Veterinary Journal  241, 42–51
Trimethoprim/Sulphonamide 
(Potentiated sulphonamides)
(Duphatrim, Norodine, Trimacare, Trimedoxine, 
Septrin*) POM-V, POM
Formulations: Trimethoprim and sulphonamide are formulated in 
a ratio of 1:5. Injectable: trimethoprim 40 mg/ml and sulfadiazine 
200 mg/ml (240 mg/ml total) solution. Oral: trimethoprim and 
sulfadiazine in a variety of tablet sizes designated by the amount of 
trimethoprim, e.g. 20 mg, 80 mg. Each 5 ml of paediatric suspension 
contains 200 mg sulfamethoxazole and 40 mg trimethoprim = 48 
mg/ml suspension. Tablets contain 80 mg trimethoprim and 400 mg 
sulfamethoxazole. If availabililty of veterinary fomulations is limited, 
POM products may be used on a named patient basis.
Action: Trimethoprim and sulphonamides block sequential steps in 
the synthesis of tetrahydrofolate, a cofactor required for the 
synthesis of many molecules, including nucleic acids. The two-step 
mechanism ensures that bacterial resistance develops more slowly 
than to either agent alone. Time-dependent mechanism of action.
Use: Many organisms are susceptible, including Nocardia , Brucella, 
Gram-negative bacilli, some Gram-positive organisms 
(Streptococcus), plus Pneumocystis carinii , Toxoplasma gondii and 
other coccidians. Pseudomonas  and Leptospira are usually resistant. 
Trimethoprim/sulphonamide is useful in the management of urinary, 
respiratory tract and prostatic infections, but ineffective in the 
presence of necrotic tissue. Trimethoprim alone may be used for 
urinary, prostatic, systemic salmonellosis and respiratory tract 
infections. Fewer adverse effects are seen with trimethoprim alone. 
Trimethoprim is a weak base which becomes ion-trapped in fluids 
that are more acidic than plasma (e.g. prostatic fluid and milk). 
Ensure patients receiving sulphonamides are well hydrated and are 
not receiving urinary acidifying agents.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Avoid use in animals with keratoconjunctivitis 
sicca (KCS) or previous history of adverse reaction to sulphonamides 
such as KCS or polyarthritis.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 435 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
419
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
Adverse reactions: Drowsiness, anorexia, leucopenia, anaemia 
and hypersalivation may be seen in cats. Hepatic necrosis, vomiting, 
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia and an immune-mediated 
polyarthritis may be seen in dogs. Dobermanns seem to be more 
susceptible to the development of immune-mediated systemic 
adverse effects. Acute hypersensitivity reactions are possible with 
sulphonamide products and may manifest as a type III 
hypersensitivity reaction. Sulphonamides may reversibly suppress 
thyroid function. KCS has been reported in dogs treated with 
sulfapyridine and other sulphonamides. Monitor tear production 
particularly during long-term use and in breeds susceptible to 
keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Drug interactions: Antacids may decrease the bioavailability of 
sulphonamides if administered concomitantly. Urinary acidifying 
agents will increase the tendency for sulphonamide crystals to form 
within the urinary tract. Concomitant use of drugs containing 
procaine may inhibit the action of sulphonamides since procaine is a 
precursor for para-amino benzoic acid.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Doses (mg) of total product (trimethoprim + sulphonamide).
Dogs, Cats: 15–30 mg/kg p.o. q12h. 30 mg/kg s.c. q24h. 
References
Frank LA, Hnilica KA, May ER et al . (2005) Effects of sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim on 
thyroid function in dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research  66, 256–259
Weese JS, Blondeau J, Boothe D et al . (2019). International Society for Companion 
Animal Infectious Diseases (ISCAID) guidelines for the diagnosis and management of 
bacterial urinary tract infections in dogs and cats. The Veterinary Journal  247, 8–25
Yaemsiri S and Sykes J (2018) Successful treatment of disseminated nocardiosis caused 
by nocardia veterana in a dog. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine  32, 418–422
Tropicamide
(Mydriacyl*, Tropicamide*) POM 
Formulations: Ophthalmic: 0.5%, 1% solution (single-use vials), 1% 
(5 ml bottle).
Action: Inhibits acetylcholine at the iris sphincter and ciliary body 
muscles, causing mydriasis (pupil dilation) and cycloplegia (paralysis 
of the ciliary muscle).
Use: Synthetic, short-acting anticholinergic used for mydriasis and 
cycloplegia. It is the mydriatic of choice for intraocular examination 
due to its rapid onset (20–30 minutes) and short duration of action 
(2–12 hours in dogs, 4–9 hours in cats). Tropicamide is more 
effective as a mydriatic than as a cycloplegic and is therefore less 
effective than atropine in relieving ciliary body muscle spasm 
associated with uveitis. Use with care in patients with lens luxation.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Avoid in glaucoma.


===== BSAVA PDF 436 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
420
Adverse reactions: May cause salivation in cats, but less marked 
than with atropine.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: 1 drop per eye, repeat after 20–30 min if necessary.
Tylosin
(Bilosin, Tylan, Tyluvet) POM-V 
Formulations: Injectable: 200 mg/ml solutions (Bilosin, Tylan, 
Tyluvet). Oral: 100 g/bottle soluble powder (Tylan).
Action: A time-dependent macrolide antibiotic that binds to the 
50S ribosomal subunit, suppressing bacterial protein synthesis.
Use: Tylosin has good activity against mycoplasmas and has the 
same antibacterial spectrum of activity as erythromycin but is 
generally less active against bacteria. Although rarely indicated in 
small animal medicine, it has been used for the treatment of 
antibiotic-responsive diarrhoea in dogs and for cryptosporidiosis. 
Administration is predominantly by the oral route in dogs and cats.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: GI disturbances. The activity of tylosin is 
enhanced in an alkaline pH. Tylosin can cause pain at the site of 
injection.
Drug interactions: Not well documented in small animals. It does 
not appear to inhibit the same hepatic enzymes as erythromycin.
DOSES
See Appendix for guidelines on responsible antibacterial use.
Dogs: Various doses: 7–15 mg/kg p.o. q12–24h. In colitis, higher 
doses recommended 12–20 mg/kg q8h with food gradually 
increasing the dosing interval to q24h.
Cats: 7–15 mg/kg p.o. q12–24h. 
References
Westermarck E, Frias R and Skrzypczak T (2005) Effect of diet and tylosin on chronic 
diarrhoea in Beagles. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine  19, 822–827
Westermarck E, Skrzypczak T, Harmoinen J et al . (2005) Tylosin-responsive chronic 
diarrhoea in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 19, 177–186
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
