
===== Plumb PDF 1288 =====
Tramadol   1261
Monitoring
 ■ Serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, glucose (if diabetic)
 ■ Hydration status
 ■ Blood pressure, if indicated
 ■ Clinical signs of edema, patient weight, if indicated
Client Information
 ■ While taking this medicine, your animal will drink and urinate 
more often than usual. Be sure your animal always has access to 
freshwater. Y ou may give this medicine with or without food. 
 ■ While your animal is taking this medicine, your veterinarian will 
need to monitor your animal closely. Do not miss these important 
follow-up visits. 
 ■ Contact your veterinarian immediately if you notice excessive 
thirst, weakness, collapse (passing out), head tilt, lack of urina -
tion, or a racing heartbeat.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Torsemide is a lipophilic anilinopyridine sulfonylurea loop diuretic 
that occurs as white to off-white, crystalline powder. It is practically 
insoluble in water and slightly soluble in alcohol.
Torsemide may also be known as torasemide, AC-3525, AC 4464, 
BM-02.015, JDL-464, and Demadex®. International trade names 
include Isemid®, Torem®, and Unat®.
Storage/Stability
Store torsemide tablets below 40°C (104°F); preferably between 15°C 
and 30°C (59°F and 86°F).
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
No specific information was noted.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE IN THE US.
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 3 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Torsemide Oral Tablets: 5 mg, 10 mg, 20 mg, and 100 mg; Demadex®, 
generic; (Rx)
Torsemide Injection: 10 mg/mL; generic; (Rx). NOTE: This product 
has been discontinued.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb
 
Tramadol
(tram-ah-doll) Ultram®
Opioid Agonist
Prescriber Highlights
 ▶ Synthetic mu-receptor partial opioid agonist that also inhibits 
the reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine
 ▶ Appears useful as an analgesic in cats, but studies in dogs pro-
vide conflicting evidence of analgesia; may take up to 2 weeks 
for full analgesic activity in chronic pain states
 ▶ It is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to it and other 
opioids, and in those with GI obstruction. Use with caution in 
patients with a history of seizures or patients receiving other 
CNS or respiratory depressants.
 ▶ Appears well tolerated in dogs; sedation is the most likely 
adverse effect.
 ▶ Several potential clinically significant drug interactions exist; 
avoid use with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; 
eg, fluoxetine) or monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs; eg, 
selegiline).
 ▶ DEA Schedule IV (C-IV) controlled substance
Uses/Indications
Tramadol is used for adjunct treatment of postoperative or chronic 
pain in many species. It is most useful when used in combination 
with NSAIDs or other analgesic drugs (eg, amantadine, gabapentin, 
alpha-2  agonists).1 Tramadol use as an analgesic was widely adopt -
ed in veterinary medicine in part based on its low cost and previ -
ous status as a noncontrolled drug; however, evidence of efficacy is 
conflicting and studies demonstrating tramadol’s efficacy as a sole 
analgesic2–5 are outweighed by studies that cite its limitations.1,6–11 A 
meta-analysis that reviewed the efficacy of tramadol for postopera -
tive pain management in dogs found that tramadol likely results in 
a decreased need for rescue analgesia compared to no treatment or 
placebo, but the certainty of the evidence was determined to be low.12 
Studies of tramadol in dogs with osteoarthritis did not show benefits 
compared to placebo.10,13 Anecdotally, tramadol has also been used 
as an anti-tussive agent; however, evidence of efficacy is lacking.
Tramadol’s efficacy as an analgesic in cats is more robust.14–19 
In horses, tramadol administered as an epidural may also be use-
ful as an analgesic, but no appropriate commercial dosage forms are 
available in the United States; however, studies evaluating the an -
tinociceptive effects in horses after IV administration have found 
that IV tramadol is not an effective analgesic in horses when used 
alone.20,21 Some studies have shown benefits when used in combi -
nation therapy.21,22 In donkeys, tramadol used with lidocaine as an 
epidural has a shorter onset and longer duration of action than when 
lidocaine is used alone.23
Tramadol administered systemically in sheep, camels, and came-
lids has noticeable adverse effects and a lack of efficacy and should 
not be used in those species.24–28
Pharmacology/Actions
Tramadol is a centrally acting partial opioid agonist with primar -
ily mu-receptor activity. It also weakly inhibits the reuptake of se -
rotonin and norepinephrine. Analgesic activity is due to the parent 
compound and its active metabolite, M1 (O-desmethyltramadol 
[ODT]). When compared with tramadol in laboratory animal stud-
ies, M1 was 20 times more potent in binding to mu receptors and was 
6 times more potent as an analgesic. 
Naloxone only partially antagonizes the analgesic effects of trama-
dol; other partial antagonists include yohimbine and ondansetron.


===== Plumb PDF 1289 =====
1262    Tramadol
Pharmacokinetics
Bioavailability is ≈65% after oral administration of immediate-re -
lease tablets in dogs, but there is significant interpatient variabili -
ty. Rectal bioavailability is ≈10%. The volume of distribution (V D), 
total body clearance, and half-life are 3.8 L/kg, 55 mL/kg/minute, 
and 1.7 hours, respectively.29 Tramadol is extensively metabolized via 
several pathways to at least 20 metabolites. The active M1 metabolite 
is formed by cytochrome P450 2D15 (CYP2D15) but is a minor me-
tabolite in dogs.30,31 M1 has a half-life of ≈2 hours after oral tramadol 
administration.29 Dogs appear to produce substantial quantities of 
the inactive metabolite M2 via CYP2B11. M1 and M2 are further 
metabolized to M5 (N,O-didesmethyltramadol) via CYP2C21 and 
2D15.30,32 Pharmacokinetics of tramadol have been reported for 
young and middle-aged dogs. After IV administration at 4 mg/kg, 
the VD, elimination half-life, and total body clearance were 4.77 ± 
1.07 L/kg, 1.91 ± 0.26 hours, and 29.9 ± 7.3 mL/kg/minute, respec -
tively, in young dogs and 4.73 ± 1.43 L/kg, 2.39 ± 0.97 hours, and 
23.7 ± 5.4 mL/kg/minute, respectively, in middle-aged dogs. Excre -
tion was significantly prolonged in older animals. 33 In greyhounds, 
tramadol’s half-life is slightly shorter (ie, 1.1 hours).34 
After intranasal administration in dogs, tramadol was rapidly 
absorbed into the systemic circulation, becoming detectable after 5 
minutes and reaching maximum concentrations ≈40 minutes after 
administration. Bioavailability was determined to range from 3.3% 
to 20.6%. In general, plasma concentrations were low and variable. 
Tramadol half-life was ≈1 hour. M1 was largely undetectable. Plas -
ma concentrations were low, and because they did not correlate with 
analgesic effect it was hypothesized that tramadol bypassed systemic 
circulation and traveled directly to the CNS. 
A study of 8 cats that received the immediate-release oral tablet 
showed high interpatient variability in absorption (2 cats had inad -
equate data and could not be analyzed). The main metabolite pro -
duced in cats is the active M1 metabolite. The elimination half-life 
for the parent compound was ≈2.25 to 3.5 hours and was 4.5 hours 
for the M1 metabolite. 35 Another study in 6 cats demonstrated the 
following approximate values: 60% oral bioavailability, 2 L/kg vol -
ume of distribution at steady state (VSS), 12 mL/kg/minute clearance, 
and 3.2 hours terminal half-life. The terminal half-life of M1 after 
oral administration was ≈4.8 hours. After transdermal application of 
a compounded tramadol gel, a dose of ≈2.8 mg/kg resulted in unde-
tectable or very low plasma concentrations.36
In adult horses, tramadol had relatively poor oral absorption (≈3% 
to 10%)37,38 and an elimination half-life of ≈1.5 to 2.5 hours after IV 
or IM administration and up to 10 hours when given orally.37–41 The 
M1 active metabolite half-life was ≈4 hours. Oral doses of 10 mg/kg 
yielded concentrations of tramadol and M1 that are believed to be 
therapeutic, whereas lower doses (3 to 6 mg/kg) were inconsistent 
and transient.41–44 M2 appears to be the main metabolite produced by 
horses, with very low and variable M1 concentrations.37,45 In donkeys 
given single IV doses of 2 mg/kg, the half-life of the parent com -
pound was ≈1 hour, and the halflife of the M1 metabolite was ≈8.5 
hours.46
Tramadol has different pharmacokinetics in neonatal and weaned 
foals. After oral administration, higher bioavailability (53% vs 20%), 
shorter time to peak concentration (1 hour vs 1.25 hours), and peak 
levels occurred with neonatal (2 weeks of age) vs weaned (4 months 
of age) foals. The elimination half-life did not significantly differ (≈2 
hours). The active metabolite (M1) remained above the reported 
therapeutic concentration for humans for 3 hours in neonatal foals 
and 8 hours in weaned foals.47 In another study, the elimination half-
life was ≈1.5 hours in foals up to 6 weeks of age.48 
In llamas administered 2 mg/kg IV , tramadol and M1 pharmaco-
kinetics values (approximate means) were: VSS, 4 L/kg and 26.5 L/kg; 
clearance, 1.7 L/kg/hour and 2.03 L/kg/hour; half-life, 2.1 hours and 
10.4 hours. IM (2 mg/kg) bioavailability was high. 49 Data in camels 
were similar to those in llamas. 24 In alpacas, oral bioavailability was 
poor (6% to 19%). 28 After IV administration (3.4 to 4.4 mg/kg), V D 
was 5.50 ± 2.66 L/kg, total body clearance was ≈4.6 L/kg/hour, and 
half-life was ≈0.9 hours. The M1 metabolite was not detected.
The elimination half-life of tramadol in sheep receiving IV trama-
dol (4 and 6 mg/kg) was 0.6 hours and 1.2 hours for M1. 27 Bioavail-
ability in goats given tramadol at 2 mg/kg IV and PO was 37%, and 
the half-life was ≈1 hour (IV) and 2.7 hours (PO). The M1 half-life 
was 2.9 hours after IV administration but was undetectable after oral 
administration.50
In red-tailed hawks given an oral dose of 11 mg/kg, plasma levels 
of tramadol reached or exceeded concentrations associated with an-
algesia in humans for at least 4 hours after administration. The elim-
ination half-lives were 1.3 hours (tramadol) and 1.9 hours (M1). 51 
Single IV doses given to Hispaniolan Amazon parrots resulted in 
half-lives of 1.54 hours (tramadol) and 2.55 hours (M2). Oral bio -
availability was ≈24%.52 
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings
Tramadol is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensitive to it 
or other opioids. The combination product containing acetamino -
phen is contraindicated in cats. In humans, the drug is contraindicat-
ed in patients with GI obstruction or paralytic ileus and in children 
younger than 12 or undergoing tonsillectomy or adenoidectomy.
Caution should be used when tramadol is given in conjunction 
with other drugs that can cause CNS or respiratory depression. Be -
cause tramadol has caused seizures in humans, it should be used 
with caution in animals with pre-existing seizure disorders, at in -
creased risk for seizures (eg, head trauma, CNS infections), or re -
ceiving other drugs that may reduce the seizure threshold. Similar to 
other opioidlike compounds, tramadol should be used with caution 
in geriatric or severely debilitated animals and in those with severe 
asthma. Animals with impaired renal or hepatic function may need 
dosage adjustments.
Although the risk for physical dependence is less than that of sev-
eral other opioids, it has been reported in humans. The drug should 
be withdrawn gradually in animals that receive it chronically. Hu -
mans can potentially abuse tramadol, and significant diversion of 
the drug reportedly occurs. Clinicians should be alert to pet owners 
seeking tramadol.
Extended-release tablets, which are not currently recommended 
or used in veterinary patients, should not be broken, crushed, or 
chewed because toxicity could occur.
Care should be taken not to confuse traMADol with traZODone.
Adverse Effects
Tramadol appears to be well tolerated in dogs and appears to have 
fewer adverse effects than methadone or morphine. 53 Tramadol has 
the potential to cause a variety of adverse effects associated with its 
pharmacologic actions, including CNS effects (eg, excessive seda -
tion, agitation, anxiety, tremor, dizziness) or GI effects (inappetence, 
vomiting, constipation, diarrhea). 
Limited information is available on the adverse effects in cats. 
Vomiting, sedation, mydriasis, dysphoria or euphoria, and constipa-
tion have been reported. In a study, neurologic effects (eg, mydriasis, 
dysphoria) were seen in 25% of cats, and the drug was observed to 
be unpalatable to cats.54 Unpalatability may lead to dose avoidance.
In horses, tramadol 5 mg/kg IV caused excitement 20; ataxia and 
muscle spasms were more frequently seen in donkeys after 4 mg/kg 
IV administration.46
In humans receiving tramadol, ≈10% develop pruritus. Injectable 
tramadol may cause respiratory and cardiac depression.
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Laboratory animals have experienced embryotoxicity and fetotoxici-


===== Plumb PDF 1290 =====
Tramadol   1263
ty at doses administered 0.6 to 3.6 times the maximum daily human 
dose. Chronic tramadol administration in pregnant patients may re-
sult in opioid withdrawal in the offspring. Tramadol was embryotox-
ic and fetotoxic in laboratory animals when given at dosages 3 to 15 
times the recommendation. 
Humans receiving long-term opioid therapy have experienced hy-
pogonadism, resulting in an impairment of reproductive functions.
Tramadol and its active M1 metabolite enter maternal milk. This 
drug is not recommended for use while nursing.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity
Acute oral overdoses can cause signs of CNS depression or serotonin 
syndrome. Clinical signs associated with an overdose in dogs include 
sedation/lethargy, vomiting, tachycardia, vocalizing, ataxia, agita -
tion, or tremor. In cats, mydriasis, hypersalivation, lethargy, ataxia, 
tachycardia, and vomiting have been reported. Signs of serotonin 
syndrome due to overdose (80 mg/kg PO) have been described in 
a cat.55 
Treatment is primarily supportive (eg, maintaining respiration, 
treating seizures with benzodiazepines or barbiturates). Naloxone 
may NOT be useful in tramadol overdoses, as it may only partially 
reverse some of the effects of the drug and may increase the risk for 
seizures. Naloxone did not decrease the drug’s lethality in tramadol 
overdoses given to mice. Cyproheptadine and phenothiazines can be 
used to treat stimulatory signs. Tramadol and the M1 metabolite are 
not removed by dialysis.56
For patients that have experienced or are suspected of having ex-
perienced an overdose, it is strongly encouraged to consult with a 
24hour poison consultation center that specializes in providing in -
formation specific for veterinary patients. For general information 
related to overdose and toxin exposures, as well as contact informa-
tion for poison control centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions
Tramadol is metabolized by CYP2B, CYP2D, and CYP3A enzyme 
families. The following drug interactions have either been reported 
or are theoretical in humans or animals receiving tramadol and may 
be of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Amantadine : Concomitant use with tramadol may increase the 
risk for seizures because tramadol at high doses has caused sei -
zures in humans56, and amantadine can lower the seizure thresh-
old57; however, an increased risk for seizures with this drug com-
bination appears unlikely in a clinical setting at recommended 
dosages. Monitor for sedation or other neurologic adverse effects 
if using this combination.
 ■ Amiodarone : May increase tramadol concentrations and de -
crease M1 (active metabolite) concentrations
 ■ Anticholinergic Agents (eg, atropine, glycopyrrolate ): 
Concurrent use may increase the risk for anticholinergic effects 
(eg, constipation, urinary retention).
 ■ Antidepressants, Miscellaneous  (eg, mirtazapine, trazo-
done): Increased risk for serotonin syndrome
 ■ Antihistamines (eg, diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine, pro -
methazine): Increased risk for CNS depression
 ■ Azole Antifungals  (eg, fluconazole, ketoconazole ): Fluco -
nazole inhibits tramadol metabolism to the inactive M2 metab -
olite without inhibiting the formation of the active M1 metabo -
lite. In dogs that were receiving fluconazole and that were given 
tramadol, tramadol and M1 concentrations increased by 31-fold 
and 39-fold, respectively.58 Ketoconazole may increase tramadol 
exposure and risk for toxicity.59
 ■ Benzodiazepines (eg, alprazolam, diazepam): Increased risk 
for respiratory depression
 ■ Cimetidine : May increase tramadol exposure and risk for 
 toxicity59
 ■ CNS Depressants, Miscellaneous (eg, dexmedetomidine, 
gabapentin, levetiracetam, methocarbamol ): Increased risk for 
CNS depression
 ■ Cyproheptadine : May decrease efficacy of tramadol
 ■ Digoxin : In humans, tramadol has been rarely linked to digoxin 
toxicity.
 ■ Erythromycin : May increase tramadol exposure and risk for 
toxicity
 ■ Iohexol : Concurrent use may increase the risk for seizures.
 ■ Ketamine : Increased risk for CNS and respiratory depression
 ■ Metoclopramide : Increased risk for seizures
 ■ Mitotane : May reduce tramadol levels and efficacy
 ■ Monoamine Oxidase  Inhibitors  (MAOIs; eg, amitraz, sele-
giline): Potential for serotonin syndrome; MAOI use within the 
past 14 days or use together should be avoided.
 ■ Ondansetron : In humans, use together may reduce the effec -
tiveness of both drugs.
 ■ Opioid Analgesics  (eg, buprenorphine, butorphanol, meth-
adone): May increase the risk for seizures, serotonin syndrome, 
and CNS and respiratory depression; methadone may inhibit tra-
madol metabolism. 
 ■ Phenobarbital : Increased risk for CNS depression. Tramadol 
may lower the seizure threshold. Phenobarbital may decrease tra-
madol levels.
 ■ Quinidine : May increase tramadol concentrations and decrease 
M1 (active metabolite) concentrations
 ■ Rifampin : May reduce tramadol levels and efficacy
 ■ S-Adenosyl Methionine (SAMe) : Theoretically, concurrent 
use of SAMe with tramadol could cause additive serotonergic ef -
fects.
 ■ Sevoflurane : Pretreatment with tramadol reduced minimum 
alveolar concentration (MAC) values by 22% to 30% in dogs 60,61 
and 40% in cats.62
 ■ Selective-Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors  (SSRIs; eg, flu-
oxetine, paroxetine, sertraline ): Can inhibit the metabolism of 
tramadol to its active metabolites, thereby decreasing its efficacy 
and increasing the risk for toxicity (serotonin syndrome, seizures)
 ■ Terbinafine : May increase tramadol levels and reduce the for -
mation of M1 metabolite due to CYP2D6 inhibition. In humans, 
this effect may persist for weeks after discontinuing terbinafine.
 ■ Tricyclic Antidepressants  (eg, amitriptyline, clomip -
ramine): Increased risk for seizures and serotonin syndrome; 
amitriptyline may inhibit tramadol metabolism.
 ■ Yohimbine : May antagonize (partial) the pharmacologic effects 
of tramadol
 ■ W arfarin : In humans, increased prothrombin time in patients 
taking tramadol has been reported (relatively rare).
Laboratory Considerations
 ■ No specific laboratory interactions or considerations were noted.
Dosages
DOGS:
Analgesic (extra-label): 4 – 10 mg/kg PO every 8 hours; pharma-
cokinetic data suggest administration every 6 hours may be nec -
essary. Tramadol’s efficacy as a single agent appears questionable. 
The long-term efficacy of tramadol may decrease with time.10
CATS:
Analgesic (extra-label): Most recommendations for administra -


===== Plumb PDF 1291 =====
1264    Tranexamic Acid
tion in cats are 1 – 2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. There is no clear 
dosage for tramadol in cats based on prospective studies. Some 
clinicians suggest that some cats may only need to be dosed every 
24 hours; others suggest doses up to 4 mg/kg. Tramadol has an 
unpleasant taste, and avoidance may be an issue. Neurologic and 
opioid adverse effects can be seen, particularly in geriatric cats at 
doses greater than 2 mg/kg.17 
HORSES :
Analgesic (extra-label): 
a) Based on pharmacokinetic studies and treated patients:  
10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours41–44
b) Chronic laminitis pain:
i. 5 – 10  mg/kg PO every 12 hours, 42,63 although the 5 mg/kg 
dose did not reliably produce analgesia.42
ii. Tramadol 5 mg/kg PO twice daily for 7 days—with ket -
amine 0.6 mg/kg/hour IV CRI over 6 hours each day for the 
first 3 days of treatment.63
BIRDS:
Analgesic (extra-label):
a) Red-tailed hawks : From a pharmacokinetic study, authors 
concluded that an oral dose of 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours 
would be a reasonable starting point; additional pharmacody-
namic and repeat dose pharmacokinetic studies are needed.51
b) Hispaniolan Amazon parrots : From pharmacokinetic and 
antinociceptive studies, 30 mg/kg PO every 6 to 8 hours may 
provide clinical analgesia. Further studies are needed to fully 
evaluate the analgesic effects of tramadol in psittacines.52,64,65
SMALL MAMMALS :
Analgesic (extra-label): 
a) Sugar gliders: 2 – 6 mg/kg PO every 12 hours66 
b) Chinchillas, guinea pigs, rodents: 5 – 10 mg/kg PO every 12 
hours67
c) Companion pigs: 4 – 6 mg/kg PO every 12 hours68
REPTILES :
Analgesic (extra-label): 
a) Red-eared slider turtles: 5 – 10 mg/kg PO69 
b) Reptiles/chelonians: 5 – 10 mg/kg PO every 48 to 72 hours. 
Good analgesic efficacy with relatively long duration when ad-
ministered PO in chelonians; less respiratory depression than 
other opioids70
Monitoring
 ■ Clinical efficacy
 ■ Adverse effects
Client Information
 ■ Contact your veterinarian if you suspect your animal’s pain is not 
controlled.
 ■ This medicine may be given with or without food. Putting the 
medicine in a small amount of canned food may hide its bitter 
taste. If your animal vomits or acts sick after receiving this drug 
on an empty stomach, give the medicine with food or a small 
treat. If vomiting continues, contact your veterinarian.
 ■ This medicine may cause changes in alertness or behavior. Use it 
with caution in working or service dogs.
 ■ The combination product with acetaminophen (Ultracet®) should 
NOT be used in cats.
 ■ Tramadol is a controlled substance in the United States. It is 
against the law to give away or sell this medication and to use it 
without a prescription.
Chemistry/Synonyms
Tramadol HCl, a  mu-receptor opioid agonist, occurs as a white 
crystalline powder that is freely soluble in water or alcohol and very 
slightly soluble in acetone. Tramadol is not derived from opium, nor 
is it a semisynthetic opioid, but it is entirely synthetically produced.
Tramadol HCl may also be known as CG-315, CG-315E, tramad-
oli hydrochloridum, or U-26225A; many trade names are available.
Storage/Stability
Unless otherwise labeled, store tramadol tablets at a controlled room 
temperature of 20°C to 25°C (68°F-77°F); excursions are permitted 
between 15°C and 30°C (59°F-86°F). Dispense in tight, light-resistant 
containers. Tramadol is a controlled substance and should be stored 
in an area that is substantially constructed and securely locked, in 
accordance with US Drug Enforcement Administration regulations.
Compatibility/Compounding Considerations
Tramadol suspensions, 5 mg/mL71 and 10 mg/mL,72 made by crush-
ing tramadol tablets and suspending in appropriate vehicles, have 
demonstrated potency and stability for up to 90 days when refriger-
ated or stored at room temperature.
Dosage Forms/Regulatory Status
VETERINARY-LABELED PRODUCTS : NONE
The Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) has 
designated this drug as a class 2 substance. Use of this drug may not 
be allowed in certain animal competitions. Check rules and regula -
tions before entering in a competition while this medication is being 
administered. Contact local racing authorities for further guidance. 
See Appendix for more information.
HUMAN-LABELED PRODUCTS :
Tramadol HCl Oral Tablets (film-coated): 50 mg; Ultram®, generic; 
(Rx); (C-IV)
Tramadol HCl Extended-Release Tablets and Capsule: 100 mg,  
200 mg, and 300 mg; Ultram ER®, Ryzolt®, generic [tablets], ConZ-
ip® [capsules]; (Rx); (C-IV). NOTE: Dogs apparently do not absorb 
these products as well as humans and potentially could overdose if 
they chew on the tablets or capsules.
Tramadol HCl Oral Solution: 5 mg/mL; Qdolo®; (Rx); (C-IV)
Tramadol is also available in a fixed-dose combination of tramadol 
HCl 37.5 mg and acetaminophen 325 mg tablets. United States trade 
name is Ultracet®; (Rx); (C-IV). W ARNING: This combination prod-
uct should not be used in cats.
In several countries outside the United States, tramadol injection is 
available commercially.
References
For the complete list of references, see wiley.com/go/budde/plumb 
Tranexamic Acid
 (tran-ex-am-ik as-id) Cyklokapron®, Lysteda®
Fibrinolysis Inhibitor 
Prescriber Highlights 
 ▶ Used to prevent or reduce bleeding in dogs and cats
 ▶ Contraindications include hypersensitivity and in patients with 
a history of, risk for, or active thromboembolic disease.
 ▶ Causes dose-dependent vomiting; may be useful as an emetic
 ▶ Thromboembolic events and visual disturbances have oc-
curred in humans.
 ▶ Inadvertent intrathecal administration is rapidly fatal.


===== Plumb PDF 1292 =====
Tranexamic Acid   1265
Uses/Indications 
Tranexamic acid is used to prevent and reduce postoperative bleed-
ing and to stop traumatic bleeding in dogs and cats. It may be effec-
tive in controlling hyperfibrinolysis associated with Angiostrongylus 
vasorum infection.1 It has also been used as an emetic in dogs.2
Pharmacology/Actions 
Tranexamic acid reduces bleeding by inhibiting the breakdown of 
fibrin. It reversibly binds to lysine binding sites on plasminogen to 
prevent the binding of plasminogen to fibrin and thus prevents the 
formation of plasmin. Inhibiting plasmin-mediated fibrin dissolu -
tion stabilizes the blood clot matrix. In horses, tranexamic acid is 
≈10 times more potent in vitro than aminocaproic acid; in dogs, it 
is ≈4 times more potent. 3,4 The minimum plasma concentration of 
tranexamic acid required to completely inhibit experimentally in -
duced hyperfibrinolysis is ≈145 µg/mL in dogs 3 and ≈6 µg/mL in 
horses.4
Tranexamic acid is emetogenic in dogs, causing dose-dependent 
vomiting within 2 to 3 minutes of administration. Dogs vomited only 
once or twice, and the emetogenic effect persisted for 4 to 5 minutes.2 
In a larger cohort of dogs, vomiting occurred in 85% of dogs receiv-
ing tranexamic acid. The median time to onset of vomiting was ≈2 
minutes, median duration of emesis was ≈2.5 minutes, and median 
of 2 episodes of emesis.5 Emetogenic effects of tranexamic acid may 
be mediated by NK1 receptors. 2 It can antagonize GABA and gly -
cine receptors, and these actions may contribute to its proconvulsive 
 effect.6 
Pharmacokinetics 
No veterinary pharmacokinetic information was located.
In humans, tranexamic acid is ≈45% bioavailable after oral ad -
ministration, with peak concentrations occurring at 3 hours. 7 Ab-
sorption appears unaffected by food. It is widely distributed with a 
volume of distribution of ≈0.4 L/kg. It passes into aqueous humor, 
breast milk, and crosses the placenta. It does not bind to plasma 
proteins. Tranexamic acid is not appreciably metabolized and is 
excreted unchanged in the urine with a terminal elimination half-
life of ≈2 hours after IV administration 8 and ≈11 hours after oral 
 administration.8
Contraindications/Precautions/Warnings 
Tranexamic acid is contraindicated in patients that are hypersensi -
tive to it and in patients with a history of, risk for, or active throm -
boembolic disease. In humans, it is contraindicated in patients with 
subarachnoid hemorrhage as cerebral edema has occurred. 7,8 Pa -
tients with renal impairment require dosage reduction. 
In humans, inadvertent intrathecal administration has resulted in 
seizures and cardiac arrhythmias. 8 Thrombosis and thromboembo-
lism have been reported with IV administration. Tranexamic acid 
should be discontinued if ocular or vision disturbances occur. Pa -
tients treated for upper urinary tract bleeding have developed uret -
eral obstruction caused by clot formation.
Adverse Effects 
Vomiting can occur immediately or within minutes of IV adminis -
tration, is dose dependent, and more likely with rapid IV bolus ad -
ministration.2,9 Administration of maropitant IV 10 minutes before 
treatment with tranexamic acid has been shown to prevent emesis.10 
Tonic-clonic seizures have been reported in dogs.11,12
In humans, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are dose related; mus-
culoskeletal pain, thrombosis, and visual changes, including ocular 
or retinal occlusion, have been reported. 7,8 Hypotension can occur 
when administered IV too rapidly. Anaphylactic reactions have been 
reported, and convulsions have been reported during surgery. 
Reproductive/Nursing Safety
Tranexamic acid crosses the placenta and reaches concentrations 
approximating those found in maternal blood. 7,8 No impairment of 
fertility or evidence of fetal harm was observed in studies with labo-
ratory animals, including doses up to 4 times the maximum human 
oral dose; however, safe use of tranexamic acid during pregnancy has 
not been established. 
Tranexamic acid is distributed into milk; use with caution in lac-
tating patients or consider milk replacer.
Because safety has not been established in animals, this drug 
should only be used when the maternal benefits outweigh the poten-
tial risks to offspring.
Overdose/Acute Toxicity 
GI distress, hypotension, myoclonus, and thromboembolic events 
may occur. Retinal changes, including degeneration, have occurred 
in dogs, cats, and rats that received 3 to 40 times the human dose for 
6 days to 1 year.7,8 GI decontamination should not be necessary but 
can be considered in patients that did not vomit. Provide supportive 
and symptomatic treatment. 
Inadvertent intrathecal administration can be rapidly fatal; con -
tact an animal poison control center immediately. 
For patients that have experienced or are suspected to have expe-
rienced an overdose, consultation with a 24-hour poison consulta -
tion center specializing in providing veterinary-specific information 
is recommended. For general information related to overdose and 
toxin exposures, as well as contact information for poison control 
centers, refer to Appendix.
Drug Interactions 
The following drug interactions have either been reported or are the-
oretical in humans or animals receiving tranexamic acid and may be 
of significance in veterinary patients. Unless otherwise noted, use 
together is not necessarily contraindicated, but weigh the potential 
risks and perform additional monitoring when appropriate.
 ■ Chlorpromazine : May increase risk for bleeding
 ■ Estrogens : Increased risk for thrombotic events with combined 
use
 ■ Thrombolytics (eg, alteplase): Concomitant use may reduce 
efficacy of both agents.
Laboratory Considerations 
 ■ None noted
Dosages 
DOGS:
Adjunctive treatment of bleeding (extra-label): 10 mg/kg IV 
over 2 minutes, followed by 10 mg/kg/hour IV CRI for 3 hours9 
Control of hyperfibrinolysis associated with Angiostrongylus 
vasorum infection (extra-label): 10 – 20 mg/kg IV over 15 to 20 
minutes; repeat 6 to 8 hours later based on thromboelastography 
(TEG) testing1
Induce emesis (extra-label): In one study, 50 mg/kg IV bolus in-
duced vomiting in all dogs (n = 10) without adverse effects; lower 
doses (20 – 40 mg/kg IV) were not uniformly effective to induce 
emesis.2
CATS:
Control of bleeding during surgical carcinoma and sarcoma 
removal (extra-label): 15 mg/kg IV bolus given during anesthetic 
induction reduced surgical blood loss and shortened the activated 
clotting time (ACT) without altering prothrombin time (PT) or 
activated prothrombin time (aPTT).13
Monitoring 
 ■ Thromboelastography (TEG analysis)
 ■ Baseline and periodic CBC and platelets as indicated by clinical 
condition


===== BSAVA PDF 384 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
368
Drug interactions: Concurrent use of SAMe with tramadol, 
meperidine, pentazocine, MAOIs including selegiline, SSRIs such as 
fluoxetine, or other antidepressants (e.g. clomipramine, 
amitriptyline) could cause additive serotonergic effects. SAMe may 
increase the clearance of drugs that undergo hepatic 
glucuronidation, including paracetamol, diazepam and morphine.
DOSES
Dogs: All uses: At least 100 mg for every 10 kg p.o. q24h.
Cats: All uses: 100 mg/cat p.o. q24h.
Refer to individual products for dosing advice as regimens vary. 
Suggested starting dose in absence of other information is 20 mg/
kg p.o. q24h. Administer on an empty stomach at least 1 hour 
before food.
References
Skorupski KA, Hammond GM, Irish AM et al . (2011) Prospective randomized clinical trial 
assessing the efficacy of Denamarin for prevention of CCNU-induced hepatopathy in 
tumor-bearing dogs.  Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine  25, 838–845
Vandeweerd JM, Cambier C and Gustin P (2013) Nutraceuticals for canine liver disease: 
assessing the evidence. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice 43 , 
1171–1179
Salbutamol
(Ventolin*) POM
Formulations: Inhalational: 100 μg per metered inhalation 
(Evohaler).
Action: Selective beta-2 stimulation causes smooth muscle 
relaxation and bronchodilation.
Use:
• Treatment of bronchospasm in inflammatory airway disease and 
irritation in cats and dogs.
Experimental studies have shown chronic use in cats can exacerbate 
airway inflammation, leading to recommendations that salbutamol 
be reserved for acute/short-term management in this species.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: No information available.
Adverse reactions: In humans, side effects of the beta-2 agonists 
include headache, muscle cramps and palpitation. Other side effects 
include tachycardia, arrhythmias, peripheral vasodilation, and 
disturbances of sleep and behaviour. Shivering and agitation is 
occasionally seen in dogs.
Drug interactions: In humans, there is an increased risk of side 
effects if salbutamol is used by patients also taking diuretics, digoxin, 
theophylline or corticosteroids.
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A


===== BSAVA PDF 385 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
369
Z
Y
X
W
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
V
DOSES
Dogs: Bronchodilation: 100–300 μ g (micrograms)/dog q4–6h or as 
needed for relief of bronchospasm.
Cats: Bronchodilation: 100 μg (micrograms)/cat q4–6h or as 
needed for relief of bronchospasm. 
References
Reinero CR (2009) Enantiomer-specific effects of albuterol on airway inflammation in 
healthy and asthmatic cats. International Archives of Allergy and Immunology  150, 43–50
Sarolaner
(Simparica, Stronghold Plus) POM-V 
Formulations: Oral: 5 mg, 10 mg, 20 mg, 40 mg, 80 mg, 120 mg 
tablets. Spot-on solution for cats with selamectin: 3 sizes.
Action: Sarolaner acts at ligand-gated chloride channels, in 
particular those gated by the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA), thereby blocking pre- and post-synaptic transfer of 
chloride ions across cell membranes.
Use:
• Treatment of fleas, ticks, ear mite infestations (Otodectes cynotis) 
in dogs and cats, demodicosis (Demodex canis) and Sarcoptes 
scabiei in dogs. Parasites need to start feeding on the host to 
become exposed to sarolaner; therefore, the transmission of 
infectious parasite-borne diseases cannot be excluded.
• Treatment of biting lice infestations (Felicola subrostratus), adult 
roundworms (Toxocara cati) and adult intestinal hookworms 
(Ancylostoma tubaeforme ) (spot-on for cats).
• Prevention of heartworm disease caused by  Dirofilaria immitis.
Safety and handling: Normal precautions should be observed.
Contraindications: Do not use in dogs <8 weeks or <1.3 kg. Do 
not use in cats <8 weeks old or <1.25 kg.
Adverse reactions: Mild GI signs may occur. Mild pruritus at site 
of application of spot-on product.
Drug interactions: Sarolaner is highly bound to plasma proteins 
and might compete with other highly bound drugs such as non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and the cumarin 
derivative warfarin. No interactions were observed when sarolaner 
was co-administered with milbemycin oxime, moxidectin and 
pyrantel pamoate.
DOSES
Dogs: 2–4 mg/kg. Administer every month.
Cats: 6 mg/kg selamectin and 1 mg/kg sarolaner. Administer monthly. 
References
Crosaz O, Chapelle E, Cochet-Faivre N et al . (2016) Open field study on the efficacy of 
oral fluralaner for long-term control of flea allergy dermatitis in client-owned dogs in 
Ile-de-France region. Parasites and Vectors 9 , 174


===== BSAVA PDF 386 =====
BSAVA Small Animal Formulary 10th edition: Part A – Canine and Feline
370
Secobarbital (Quinalbarbitone/
Cinchocaine)
(Somulose) POM-V CD SCHEDULE 2 
Formulations: Injectable: 400 mg/ml secobarbital with 25 mg/ml 
cinchocaine solution.
Action: Rapidly and profoundly depresses the CNS, including the 
respiratory centres. Cinchocaine has marked cardiotoxic effects at 
high doses. When given in combination, the barbiturate produces 
rapid loss of consciousness and cessation of respiration while the 
cinchocaine depresses cardiac conduction, resulting in early cardiac 
arrest. Since cardiac arrest is not dependent on development of 
profound hypoxia, euthanasia with the secobarbital/cinchocaine 
combination is generally not accompanied by the gasping that may 
occur with other agents.
Use:
• For euthanasia of cats and dogs.
Speed of injection is very important. An injection rate that is too 
slow may induce normal collapse but prolong the period until death. 
It is always advisable to have an alternative method of euthanasia 
available. Perivascular administration of secobarbital may delay the 
onset of effect and cause pain and result in excitement. Placement 
of a venous catheter is therefore recommended and care should be 
taken to ensure that the injection is correctly placed in the vein.
Safety and handling: This is a potent drug which is rapidly and 
highly toxic to humans. Extreme care should be taken to avoid 
accidental self-administration. Use an i.v. catheter instead of a 
needle whenever possible. Only administer in the presence of an 
assistant/other individual. Wear suitable protective gloves when 
handling. Wash off splashes from skin and eyes immediately. In the 
event of accidental self-administration, by injection or skin 
absorption, do not leave the person unattended, seek urgent 
medical assistance advising the medical services of barbiturate and 
local anaesthetic poisoning, and show the label advice to a doctor. 
Maintain airways in the injured person and give symptomatic and 
supportive treatment. Cinchocaine can cause hypersensitivity 
following skin contact; this can lead to contact dermatitis, which can 
become severe.
Contraindications: Somulose must not be used for anaesthesia 
as it is non-sterile and cardiotoxic.
Adverse reactions: No information available.
Drug interactions: No information available.
DOSES
Dogs, Cats: Euthanasia: 0.25 ml/kg i.v. over 10–15 seconds to 
minimize premature cardiac arrest. 
Z
Y
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
