
--- PDF 75 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 57
c)	 Alpha-	 2 	adrenergic	agonists
i)	 CNS
Central	 depression	 at	 the	 locus	 coeruleus 	
(awareness	 center	 of 	 the	 brain). 	
Presynaptic	 alpha-	 2 	agonists	 inhibit	 nor- 	
epinephrine	 (NE)	 release	 leading	 to 	
decreased	neural	activity.
1)	 Alpha-	 2 	agonists	 may	 stimulate	 the	 chemo -
receptor	 trigger	 zone	 outside	 of 	the	 blood–
brain	barrier	to	cause	emesis.
ii)	 Cardiovascular
1)	 Biphasic	 cardiovascular	 response	 due	 to	 acti-
vation	 of 	postsynaptic	 a 2 	receptors	 and	 a 1 	
receptors	 on	 peripheral	 vessels	 leading	 to 	
vasoconstriction	 and	 baroreceptor-	 mediated 	
reflex	bradycardia.
2)	 Secondary	 vasodilation	 without	 increase	 in	
heart	 rate	 from	 centrally	 mediated	 presyn-
aptic	 activity	 causing	 an	 increase	 in	 vagal	
outflow.
3)	 Overall	 decrease	 in	 CO	 up	 to	 60%	 with	 these	
drugs;	 however,	 myocardial	 perfusion	 is	
maintained.
iii)	 Respiratory
1)	 Centrally	 mediated	 reduction	 in	 respiratory	
rate	 and	 minute	 ventilation	 with	 a	 mild	
increase	 in	 partial	 pressure	 of 	 carbon	
dioxide.
iv)	 Musculoskeletal
1)	 Reliable	 muscle	 relaxation	 mediated	 at	 the	
level	of 	the	spinal	cord.
v)	 Renal
1)	 A 2 	agonists	 consistently	 cause	 diuresis	 by 	
several	 mechanisms	 including	 reduced	 pro -
duction	 of 	anti- 	diuretic	 hormone	 (ADH), 	
inhibition	 of 	the	 action	 of 	ADH	 on	 the	 col-
lecting	 tubules	 leading	 to	 excretion	 of 	
sodium,	 and	 decreased	 micturition	 pressure 	
and	bladder	capacity.
vi)	 Dexmedetomidine	and	medetomidine
1)	 Highly	selective:	1620:1	α 2 :α 1 	ratio.
d)	 Opioids
i)	 Opioids	 are	 classified	 based	 on	 their	 action	 at	
various	 opioid	 receptors:	 μ,	 κ,	 and	 δ.	 See	
Table 6.1	for	doses.
ii)	 CNS
1)	 Bind	 to	 spinal	 and	 supraspinal	 presynaptic	
opioid	 receptors	 in	 the	 dorsal	 horn	 and	 post -
synaptic	 μ	receptors	 in	 dorsal	 root	 ganglia	
leading	 to	 a	 decrease	 in	 propagation	 of 	noci-
ceptive	signal.
2)	 CNS	 excitation	 consistent	 with	 generalized	
excitement	 and	 convulsant	 electro	 encepha-
lography	 (EEG)	 activity	 with	 higher	 doses	 of 	
morphine	 in	 cats,	 less	 common	 at	 clini-
cal	doses.
Table 6.1 Sedation protocols.
Drug IV mg/kg IM mg/kg Comments
Opioid
 ● Butorphanol
 ● Methadone
 ● Buprenophine
 ● Hydromorphone
 ● Morphine
 
0.2–0.5
0.1–0.5
0.005–0.04
0.05–0.1
0.05–0.3
 
0.2–0.5
0.1–0.5
0.005–0.04
0.05–0.1
0.05–0.3
Hydromorphone/morphine	may	cause	dysphoria	and	emesis
Morphine	not	recommended
Acepromazine
Hydromorphone
0.01–0.05
0.05–1.0
0.01–0.05
0.05–1.0
Can	be	given	SQ
Alfaxalone
±	opioid
±	midazolam
CRI
0.5–3
 
0.2–0.4
0.05–0.2	(mg/kg/min)
1–3
 
0.2–0.4
May	be	volume-	 limiting
Dose- 	dependent	immobility
Dexmedetomidine
±	opioid
0.001–0.005
0.1–0.3
0.005–0.010
0.2–0.5
CRI:	0.5–3 mcg/kg/h	IV
Ketamine
±	dexmedetomidine
3
0.005
Deep	sedation/immobilization
Telazol
±	opioid
±	a 2 	agonist
2–3 2–3 IM	preferred
Combination	produces	better	sedation/immobilization


--- PDF 76 ---
Anesthetic Protocols for Systemically Healthy Cats
58
3)	 High	 pharmacogenetic	 variability	 can	 lead 	
to	 large	 individual	 response	 to	 opioids. 	
Euphoria	 and	 dysphoria	 can	 be	 seen	 to 	
varying	 degrees	 depending	 on	 the	 drug, 	
route	 of 	administration,	 and	 patient	 status. 	
Therapeutic	 plan	 including	 opioids	 should 	
be	 used	 in	 combination	 to	 minimize	 these 	
effects	 and	 should	 be	 tailored	 to	 the 	
patient.
iii)	 Cardiovascular
1)	 Cardiac	 output	 may	 decrease	 minimally	 or	
increase	 in	 the	 presence	 of 	 excitement.	
Minimal	 vascular	 effects	 seen	 at	 clini-
cal	doses.
2)	 Histamine	 release	 associated	 with	 intrave -
nous	 morphine	 and	 meperidine	 may	 cause	
vasodilation.
iv)	 Respiratory
1)	 Dose- 	dependent	 respiratory	 depression	
through	 μ	receptor	 activation,	 and	 decreased	
response	 to	 changes	 in	 partial	 pressure	 of 	
carbon	dioxide.
v)	 Thermoregulation
1)	 Administration	 of 	 opioids	 can	 lead	 to	
increases	 in	 body	 temperature,	 most	 notable	
in	 cats	 with	 the	 use	 of 	hydromorphone	 of 	up	
to	41–42	 °C	for	5	hours.
vi)	 Metabolism
1)	 Morphine	 and	 buprenorphine	 metabolized	
through	 hepatic	 glucuronidation;	 primary	
metabolites	 are	 sulfate	 conjugates.	 Scarce	
formation	 of 	the	 active	 metabolite	 of 	mor -
phine	 (morphine-	 6- 	glucuronide)	 may	 be	
responsible	 for	 reduced	 efficacy	 in	 cats	 com-
pared	 to	 other	 species.	 Elimination	 of 	half-	
life	 is	 similar	 to	 other	 species	 with	 a	 slower	
clearance.
vii)	 Antitussive	versus	emetic
1)	 Fentanyl,	 butorphanol,	 methadone,	 and	
tramadol	 can	 display	 antitussive	 effects	
through	 central	 inhibition	 of 	cough	 center	
through	μ	and	κ	receptors.
2)	 Hydromorphone	 and	 morphine	 can	 cause 	
emesis	 through	 the	 chemoreceptor	 trigger	
zone	outside	the	blood–brain	barrier.
3)	 Repeated	 doses	 may	 not	 cause	 repeated	
emesis	 due	 to	 concurrent	 central	 antiemetic	
activity.
e)	 Gabapentin
i)	 Antiepileptic	 shown	 to	 reduce	 anxiety	 by	 block -
ing	 activity	 at	 a	 voltage- 	dependent	 subunit 	
( α2 δ-	2)	 of 	the	 voltage- 	gated	 calcium	 channel. 	
Well	 tolerated	 by	 cats	 at	 10–40	 mg/kg	 PO	 produc-
ing	 peak	 sedation	 at	 1.5–2	 hours	 after	 administra-
tion.	 Combination	 of 	gabapentin	 with	 trazodone 	
at	 least	 2	 hours	 prior	 to	 transportation	 may 	
improve	 efficacy	 in	 reducing	 stress	 associated 	
with	 transportation	 and	 handling	 for	 IV 	catheter 	
placement.
f)	 Trazodone	hydrochloride
i)	 Serotonin	 antagonist	 and	 re-	 uptake	 inhibitor.	
Should	 be	 given	 orally	 at	 home	 prior	 to	 trans -
port	 to	 hospital	 with	 peak	 sedation	 varying	
between	 1.5	 and	 2.5	 hours	 and	 lasting	 up	 to	 4	
hours.	5–8	 mg/kg	PO	is	well	tolerated.
E)	 Injectable	 anesthetics	 used	 as	 induction	 agents	
(Table 6.2)
a)	 Dissociative	anesthetics
i)	 CNS
1)	 Dissociation	 of 	the	 thalamocortical	 and	 lim-
bic	 systems.	 N-	 methyl-	 D-	 aspartate	 (NMDA) 	
receptor	 antagonist	 preventing	 binding	 of 	
excitatory	 neurotransmitters	 with	 a	 weak 	
effect	acting	at	opioid	receptors.
Table 6.2 Induction agents.
Drug Dose (mg/kg) Route Comments
Ketamine
 ● midazolam
2–5
0.2–0.4
IV ,	IM Painful	injectant
Telazol 2–5 IV ,	IM Painful	injectant
Propofol 2–8 IV Not	recommended	for	use	if 	anesthetizing	
multiple	times	per	week
Alfaxalone 2–5 IV ,	IM May	cause	rigidity	if 	used	alone
Etomidate 1.5–4 IV Hyperosmolar	and	contains	propylene	
glycol— 	dilute	to	reduce	irritation	to	veins


--- PDF 77 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 59
2)	 Produces	 a	 cataleptic	 state	 where	 there	
appears	 to	 be	 consciousness	 without	 reac-
tion	 to	 noxious	 stimuli.	 Provides	 analgesia	
in	 chronic	 pain	 patients	 and	 amnesia,	 but	
does	 not	 produce	 enough	 muscle	 relaxa-
tion	alone.
3)	 Anesthetic	 doses	 increase	 cerebral	 blood	
flow,	 intracranial	 pressure,	 and	 cerebral	
oxygen	demand.
ii)	 Cardiovascular	effects
1)	 Direct	 myocardial	 depression	 with	 indirect	
increase	 in	 cardiac	 output,	 mean	 arterial	
pressure,	 pulmonary	 arterial	 pressure,	 and	
heart	 rate	 through	 increased	 adrenergic	
stimulation.	 Increased	 work	 results	 in	
increased	myocardial	oxygen	demand.
iii)	 Respiratory
1)	 Can	 cause	 apneustic	 breathing	 pattern;	
endotracheal	 intubation	 and	 airway	 protec-
tion	are	recommended.
iv)	 Ketamine
1)	 Phencyclidine	 derivative	 existing	 as	 racemic 	
mixture	 of 	R	 (−)	 and	 S	 (+)	 isomers	 in	 benze -
thonium	chloride	preservative	solution.
2)	 Metabolized	 to	 active	 metabolite,	 norketa-
mine,	 through	 hepatic	 demethylation	 and	
excreted	largely	unchanged	in	urine.
v)	 Telazol ®
1)	 Tiletamine,	 a	 phencyclidine	 derivative,	 is	
only	 available	 in	 combination	 with	 the	 ben-
zodiazepine	 zolazepam	 in	 the	 United	 States.
2)	 Zolazepam	 effect	 lasts	 longer	 than	 tileta-
mine	 in	 cats;	 therefore,	 after	 a	 period	 of 	
time,	 sedation	 resembles	 other	 benzodiaz-
epines	and	emergency	delirium.
3)	 Duration	 is	 dose- 	dependent	 between	 30	 and	
60	 minutes.
b)	 Hypnotics
i)	 Propofol
1)	 Highly	 lipid	 soluble	 alkyl	 phenol	 derivative	
acting	 at	 GABA A 	receptors	 causing	 inhibi-
tion	 of 	 postsynaptic	 neuron	 activity;	
decreases	 cerebral	 perfusion	 pressure	 and	
cerebral	metabolic	oxygen	consumption.
2)	 Vasodilation	 and	 negative	 inotropy	 result	 in	
decreased	 blood	 pressure	 and	 can	 result	 in	
systemic	 hypotension	 at	 clinical	 induc-
tion	doses.
3)	 Respiratory	 depression	 is	 associated	 with	
dose	 and	 rate	 of 	administration;	 transient	
apnea	 commonly	 occurs	 with	 increased	 rate	
of 	infusion.
4)	 Extrahepatic	 metabolism	 of 	propofol	 in 	
pulmonary	 tissue	 is	 an	 important	 pathway. 	
Hepatic	 metabolism	 likely	 through	 glucu-
ronidation	 pathways	 is	 not	 well	 classified 	
in	 cats;	 however,	 may	 cause	 prolonged 	
recovery	 if 	used	 as	 a	 constant	 rate	 infu-
sion	(CRI).
5)	 Available	 without	 preservative	 or	 with	 2%	 ben-
zyl	 alcohol	 preservative	 (Propoflo™	 28)	 for 	
extended	 28- 	day	 shelf 	life.	 Caution	 with	 the 	
repeated	 use	 of 	Propoflo	 28,	 as	 there	 are 	previ -
ous	 reports	 of 	benzyl	 alcohol	 toxicity 	due 	to 	
decreased	 hepatic	 metabolism.	 One	 study 	
found	 no	 adverse	 effects	 of 	a	 single	 induction 	
dose	of 	Propoflo	28.
ii)	 Etomidate
1)	 Maintains	 cardiovascular	 stability	 without	
potentiation	 of 	 catecholamine-	 induced	
arrhythmia.
2)	 Transiently	 decreases	 cortisol	 production	 at	
clinical	doses.
3)	 Propylene	 glycol	 diluent	 causing	 high	 osmo -
lality	 and	 risk	 of 	hemolysis	 and	 hemoglobi-
nuria	if 	not	appropriately	diluted.
c)	 Alfaxan ®	Multidose
i)	 CNS
1)	 Neuroactive	 synthetic	 steroid	 that	 works	 to	
modulate	 neurodepression	 through	 GABA A 	
receptor	 agonism	 through	 hyperpolariza-
tion	 and	 inhibition	 of 	 the	 neuronal	
excitability.
ii)	 Cardiovascular
1)	 Mildly	 cardiovascular	 depression	 when 	
administered	 intravenously.	 A	 dose- 	
dependent	 reduction	 of 	heart	 rate,	 CO,	 and 	
blood	 pressure	 can	 become	 more	 evident 	
when	 administered	 concurrently	 after	 other 	
anesthetic	 drugs	 that	 have	 a	 negative	 effect 	
on	 the	 cardiovascular	 system	 such	 as	 ace -
promazine.	 Hypotension	 and	 decreased	 CO 	
more	 evident	 when	 supraclinical	 doses 	
administered.
2)	 Dose- 	dependent	 respiratory	 rate	 depression	
and	 transient	 apnea	 may	 lead	 to	 hypoxia	
associated	 with	 hypoventilation	 (less	 than	
propofol	 and	 barbiturates	 at	 equipo -
tent	doses).
iii)	 Metabolism
1)	 Rapid	 hepatic	 metabolic	 clearance	 with	
potentially	 minimal	 metabolism	 by	 renal	
and	 pulmonary	 tissues.	 Hepatic	 disease	 may	
prolong	recovery.


--- PDF 78 ---
Anesthetic Protocols for Systemically Healthy Cats
60
2)	 Mean	 terminal	 plasma	 half-	 life	 (t1/2)	 is	
approximately	 45	 minutes.	 Less	 likely	 to	
accumulate	 than	 propofol	 in	 cats	 after	
repeated	doses	or	CRI.
iv)	 Recovery
1)	 Increased	 auditory	 sensitivity	 may	 be	 seen	
during	 recovery	 in	 cats	 administered	 alfax -
alone	 either	 by	 IM	 or	 IV 	route	 with	 twitch-
ing,	 paddling,	 face	 rubbing,	 opisthotonos,	
and	 tremors.	 The	 incidence	 of 	 adverse	
behaviors	 during	 recovery	 is	 reported	 higher	
for	IV 	route	than	IM	route.
F)	 Volatile	 anesthetics—	 isoflurane	 (Iso),	 sevoflurane	
(Sevo),	and	desflurane	(Des)
a)	 Mechanism	of 	action
i)	 Exact	 mechanism	 is	 unknown;	 however,	 more	
recent	 studies	 suggest	 they	 act	 at	 protein	 recep -
tors	 of 	neuronal	 tissue	 as	 well	 as	 GABA A 	and	
NMDA	 receptors	 at	 the	 level	 of 	the	 brain,	 spi-
nal	cord,	and	synapses.
ii)	 CNS
1)	 Decreased	 afferent	 transmission	 of 	noxious	
stimulus	 from	 spinal	 cord	 to	 the	 brain	 with	
concurrent	 decrease	 in	 efferent	 motor	
response	 to	 pain.	 Depression	 of 	neuronal	
activity	 with	 highest	 level	 of 	dampening	 at	
the	 thalamus	 and	 midbrain	 reticular	
formations.
2)	 Inhibition	 of 	presynaptic	 neurotransmitter	
release	 and	 postsynaptic	 channel	 activity	 is	
believed	 to	 be	 through	 various	 neuronal	
receptors.
3)	 Decreased	 cerebral	 metabolic	 rate	 and	 oxy -
gen	 consumption;	 variation	 in	 cerebral	
blood	flow	is	multifactorial.
iii)	 Cardiovascular	system
1)	 Inhalants	 cause	 a	 dose- 	dependent	 reduction	
in	 systemic	 vascular	 resistance,	 mean	 arte -
rial	pressure,	and	cardiac	output.
2)	 Desflurane	 may	 increase	 cardiac	 output	 or	
heart	 rate	 through	 associated	 sympathetic	
stimulation.
3)	 Sevoflurane	 and	 desflurane	 may	 have	 lower 	
arrhythmogenicity	than	isoflurane.
iv)	 Metabolism
1)	 Mainly	 excreted	 unchanged	 in	 exhaled	 air.	
Approximately	 2%	 of 	sevoflurane	 undergoes	
hepatic	metabolism.
v)	 Renal	system
1)	 Minimal	 effect	 on	 renal	 blood	 flow	 and	
physiology.
2)	 Interaction	 of 	sevoflurane	 with	 carbon	 dioxide 	
absorbents	 has	 been	 shown	 to	 lead	 to	 forma-
tion	 of 	nephrotoxic	 Compound	 A (trifluorome -
thyl	 vinyl	 ether)	 in	 experimental	 settings. 	
Highest	 risk	 occurs	 over	 long	 periods	 of 	anes -
thesia	 with	 rebreathing	 system,	 low	 oxygen 	
flows,	 and	 carbon	 dioxide	 absorber	 with	 lime. 	
No	 studies	 or	 clinical	 reports	 of 	Compound	 A 	
toxicity	in	cats.
b)	 Isoflurane,	 sevoflurane,	 and	 desflurane	 are	 the 	
most	 commonly	 available	 volatile	 anesthetics	 in 	
the	 United	 States.	 Isoflurane	 and	 sevoflurane	 are 	
most	 commonly	 used,	 and	 desflurane	 requires	 a 	
specialized	 vaporizer	 due	 to	 its	 physiochemical 	
properties.
c)	 Anesthetic	 potency	 is	 measured	 by	 minimum	 alveo -
lar	 concentration	 (MAC).	 MAC-	 incision	 is	 listed	 in 	
Table 6.3.	 MAC-	 awake	 is	 approximately	 one	 third	 of 	
MAC-	 incision.	 Cats	 typically	 have	 a	 higher	 MAC 	
than	other	domestic	species.
d)	 Solubility	 of 	inhalants	 is	 measured	 by	 blood:gas	
partition	 coefficient.	 Lower	 solubility	 leads	 to	 a	
faster	 change	 in	 alveolar	 concentrations,	 leading	 to	
a	 faster	 induction	 and	 recovery	 period.	 Solubility:	
desflurane	 <	 sevoflurane	 <	 isoflurane.
G)	 Airway	management
a)	 Face	 mask	 providing	 flow	 by	 oxygen	 during		 sedation	
for	minor	procedures	helps	maintain	oxygenation.
b)	 Cuffed	 endotracheal	 tubes	 maintain	 a	 patent	 airway	
with	 increased	 protection	 from	 fluid	 or	 regurgitant	
from	 reaching	 lower	 airways.	 Murphy	 eye	 endotra-
cheal	 tubes	 are	 recommended	 in	 cats	 to	 provide	 an	
alternate	 route	 of 	air	 flow	 if 	end	 of 	endotracheal	
tube	becomes	occluded.
c)	 Supraglottic	 airway	 device	 (v- 	gel)	 can	 be	 placed	
with	 lower	 drug	 requirement,	 reduced	 chance	 of 	
Table 6.3 MAC of commonly used inhalant anesthetics in cats.
Inhalant MAC50
Isoflurane 1.6%
Sevoflurane 2.7%
Desflurane 9.8%


--- PDF 79 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 61
laryngospasm,	 and	 may	 provide	 enough	 of 	a	 seal	 to	
mechanically	 ventilate.	 Disadvantage	 of 	 these	
devices	 is	 that	 they	 can	 be	 easily	 dislodged	 with	
changes	in	position.
H)	 Breathing	circuits
a)	 Rebreathing
i)	 Circle	 system	 allows	 for	 rebreathing	 of 	exhaled	
gases.	 Recommended	 for	 larger	 patients	 due	 to	
increased	 resistance	 and	 work	 of 	breathing	 as	 a	
result	 of 	a	 system	 of 	absorbent	 and	 unidirec-
tional	 valves.	 This	 system	 removes	 carbon	 diox -
ide	 by	 passing	 exhaled	 gas	 through	 absorbent	
while	 recirculating	 some	 inhalant	 and	 fresh	
oxygen	to	patient.
ii)	 One- 	way	 valve	 system	 allows	 unidirectional	
gas	 flow	 from	 expiratory	 limb	 through	 carbon	
dioxide	 absorbent.	 Advantages	 of 	this	 system	
are	 lower	 oxygen	 flow	 rate	 and	 inhalant	
requirements	as	well	as	decrease	in	waste	gas.
iii)	 Uptake	 phase	 flow	 rate:	 1–2	 l/min	 for	 15	 minutes.
iv)	 Maintenance	 rate:	 approximately	 30	 ml/kg/
min;	no	less	than	0.5	 l/min.
b)	 Non-	 rebreathing
i)	 Low-	 resistance	 breathing	 system	 recom-
mended	for	patients	less	than	5	 kg	b.w.t.
ii)	 High	 oxygen	 flow	 rates	 required	 with	 mini-
mized	 dead	 space	 to	 move	 carbon	 dioxide	 away	
from	 patient	 through	 expiratory	 limb	 of 	system.
iii)	 Disadvantage	 of 	high	 flow	 rate	 may	 lead	 to	
excessive	loss	of 	body	heat.
iv)	 Minimum	 flow	 rate:	 >250	 ml/kg/min;	 no	 less	
than	500	 ml/min.
 Recommended Readings
Boller,	E.	and	Boller,	M.	(2015).	Assessment	of 	fluid	balance	
and	the	approach	to	fluid	therapy	in	the	perioperativce	
patient.	Vet. Clin. Small Anim.	45:	895–915.
Khan,	S.K.,	Hayes,	I.,	and	Buggy,	D.J.	(2013). 	
Pharmacology	of 	anesthetic	agents	II:	inhalation 	
anesthetic	agents.	Contin. Educ. Anaesth. Crit. Care Pain	
106–111.
Muir,	 W .W .,	Ueyama,	 Y.,	Noel-	 Morgan,	J.	et al.	(2017).	A	
systematic	review	of 	the	quality	of 	IV 	fluid	therapy	in	
veterinary	medicine.	Front. Vet. Sci.	4:	127.


--- PDF 80 ---


--- PDF 81 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Second Edition. Edited by Kenneth J. Drobatz,  
Erica Reineke, Merilee F. Costello, and William T. N. Culp.
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
63
A)	 Introduction	and	the	physiology	of 	pain
a)	 The	 International	 Association	 for	 the	 Study	 of 	Pain 	
(IASP)	 offers	 one	 of 	the	 most	 widely	 accepted	 defi-
nitions	 of 	pain:	 “Pain	 is	 an	 unpleasant	 sensory	 or 	
emotional	 experience	 associated	 with	 actual	 or 	
potential	 tissue	 damage	 or	 described	 in	 terms	 of 	
such	damage.”
b)	 Pain	 is	 the	 emotional	 and	 conscious	 interpretation 	
of 	nociception,	 which	 means	 that	 it	 is	 an	 individual 	
experience.	 While	 it	 is	 difficult	 for	 veterinary 	
patients	 to	 communicate	 the	 emotional	 experience 	
of 	pain,	 it	 is	 generally	 considered	 that	 if 	a	 proce -
dure	 or	 disease	 is	 considered	 to	 be	 painful	 to	 a	 per -
son,	 it	 should	 be	 considered	 painful	 to	 a	 veterinary 	
patient.
c)	 Nociception	 is	 the	 detection	 of 	noxious	 stimuli	 by	
the	 free	 nerve	 endings	 of 	nociceptors	 in	 the	 periph-
ery.	 The	 process	 of 	 nociception	 is	 a	 four- 	step	
process— 	each	 of 	these	 steps	 is	 a	 potential	 target	 for	
analgesic	 agents	 and	 comprises	 the	 approach	 of 	
multimodal	analgesia.
i)	 Transduction	 is	 the	 production	 of 	an	 action	
potential	by	the	nociceptors.
ii)	 Transmission	 is	 the	 propagation	 of 	this	 action	
potential	to	the	dorsal	horn	of 	the	spinal	cord.
iii)	 Modulation	 occurs	 within	 the	 spinal	 cord	 where	
it	 is	 either	 inhibited	 or	 amplified	 and	 projected	 to	
the	brain.
iv)	 Perception	 occurs	 in	 the	 brain	 where	 nociception	 is 	
interpreted	and	becomes	a	conscious	experience.
d)	 This	 simple	 process	 can	 be	 altered	 by	 the	 release	 of 	
inflammatory	 mediators	 and	 due	 to	 the	 plasticity	 of 	
the	 central	 nervous	 system	 through	 a	 process	 of 	
sensitization.
i)	 Peripheral	 sensitization	 occurs	 when	 a	 noxious 	
stimulus	 is	 powerful	 enough	 to	 result	 in	 tissue	 dam-
age.	 This	 damage	 results	 in	 tissue	 inflammation 	
which	leads	to	a	milieu	of 	chemicals	to	be	released.
1)	 Prostaglandins,	 histamine,	 serotonin,	 and	
bradykinins	 are	 some	 of 	the	 chemicals	 that	
make	 up	 the	 so- 	called	 “sensitizing	 soup”	 that	
is	released	from	damaged	tissues.
2)	 Ultimately	 these	 chemicals	 cause	 sensitiza-
tion	 of 	the	 nociceptors	 by	 reducing	 the	 thresh-
old	for	action	potential	generation.
3)	 This	 augments	 any	 additional	 stimulation	 to	
the	 site	 of 	damage	 and	 is	 termed	 peripheral	
sensitization.
–	This	 ultimately	 may	 lead	 to	 hyperalgesia	
and	allodynia.
Kelley M. Varner and Giacomo Gianotti
7
Analgesia in the Critically Ill Cat
 
UNIQUE FEATURES
 ● Pain is the emotional and conscious interpretation of nociception. Untreated pain can lead to a variety of behavioral, neural, 
endocrine, immune, hematologic, and metabolic changes that lead to suffering and distress, as well as delayed wound 
healing.
 ● Assessment of pain in feline patients is particularly challenging due to their behavioral responses to stress and hospitalization. 
Critically ill animals can be even more challenging, as many are weak or obtunded and may not have the ability to respond with 
dramatic behavior.
 ● Each institution should pick a pain scale that works for their hospital, providing training to the staff, and implement its use to 
guide changes in analgesic protocols, doses, and dosing intervals.
 ● The analgesic plan should include agents that target different sites along the pain pathway. The use of multiple agents allows for 
dose reduction which is particularly important in cats due to their altered drug metabolism and excretion.


--- PDF 82 ---
Analgesia in the Critically Ill Cat
64
ii)	 Central	 sensitization	 occurs	 due	 to	 the	 plasticity	
of 	the	 spinal	 cord.	 Upon	 receiving	 a	 stimulus	
from	 the	 peripheral	 nervous	 system,	 excitatory	
neurotransmitters,	 glutamate,	 and	 substance	 P	
are	 released	 on	 the	 dorsal	 horn	 of 	the	 spinal	 cord.	
N-	 methyl-	 D-	 aspartate	 (NMDA)	 and	 α-	amino-	 3-	
hydroxy-	 5-	 methyl-	 4-	 isoxazolepropionic	 acid	
(AMPA)	 receptors	 are	 stimulated,	 which	 leads	 to	
the	 opening	 of 	ion	 channels	 and	 phosphoryla-
tion	of 	regulatory	proteins.
1)	 Repeated	 AMPA	 receptor	 activation	 leads	 to	
the	 removal	 of 	magnesium	 ions	 from	 the	
NMDA	 receptor	 allowing	 for	 amplification	 of 	
responses	 and	 increased	 receptive	 field	 size	 of 	
the	spinal	cord.
e)	 The	 type	 of 	pain	 experienced	 is	 different	 based	 on	
the	 site	 of 	nociception	 and	 the	 chronicity	 of 	the	
timeline.	 It	 is	 important	 to	 identify	 the	 origin	 of 	the	
process,	 as	 it	 will	 help	 guide	 the	 analgesic	 protocol,	
as	 certain	 agents	 are	 associated	 with	 greater	 efficacy	
in	 different	 conditions.	 For	 example,	 lidocaine	 is	
considered	 a	 stronger	 analgesic	 for	 visceral	 pain	
than	for	somatic	pain.
i)	 Somatic	 pain:	 arises	 from	 bone,	 skin,	 or	 muscle.	
This	 type	 of 	pain	 is	 typically	 well	 located	 and	
described	in	terms	of 	being	sharp	pain.
ii)	 Visceral	 pain:	 arises	 from	 distension,	 stretching,	
or	 inflammation	 of 	the	 visceral	 organs.	 This	 type	
of 	pain	 is	 poorly	 localized	 and	 described	 in	 terms	
of 	being	dull	and	aching.
iii)	 Acute	 pain:	 is	 traditionally	 associated	 with	 sur -
gery,	 trauma,	 or	 disease.	 It	 is	 physiologic	 pain	
that	 is	 protective	 of 	the	 animal.	 Ultimately,	 this	
pain	 can	 evolve	 into	 inflammatory	 pain	 and	
peripheral	sensitization.
iv)	 Chronic	 pain:	 is	 the	 pain	 that	 persists	 beyond 	
what	 is	 protective	 of 	the	 animal.	 Typically	 occurs 	
for	 weeks,	 months,	 or	 even	 years	 beyond	 the	 reso -
lution	 of 	the	 original	 trauma	 or	 associated	 with	 a 	
chronic	 disease	 process	 such	 as	 osteoarthritis. 	
This	 may	 progress	 to	 central	 sensitization	 and 	
wind	up.
f)	 Due	 to	 the	 plasticity	 and	 complex	 nature	 of 	the	 cen-
tral	 and	 peripheral	 nervous	 system,	 pathologic	 pain	
states	 may	 develop	 in	 cases	 where	 analgesia	 is	
delayed	or	inadequate.
i)	 Hyperalgesia:	 is	 an	 exaggerated	 response	 to	 a	
noxious	 stimulus	 at	 the	 site	 of 	injury	 that	 may	
extend	to	areas	outside	the	site	of 	injury.
ii)	 Allodynia:	 is	 a	 process	 by	 which	 stimuli	 that	 are	
typically	 considered	 non-	 painful	 result	 in	 the	
perception	of 	pain.
iii)	 Wind	 up:	 is	 a	 complex	 process,	 involved	 in	
chronic	 pain,	 which	 increases	 the	 responsive -
ness	of 	sensory	input	to	the	spinal	cord.
iv)	 Neuropathic	 pain:	 is	 associated	 with	 damage	 to	
components	 of 	either	 the	 peripheral	 or	 central	
nervous	 system.	 Usually,	 this	 is	 characterized	 by	
hyperalgesia	and	allodynia.
g)	 Consequences	of 	pain	and	contributing	factors.
i)	 When	 left	 untreated,	 pain	 can	 have	 several	 con-
sequences	 that	 can	 lead	 to	 distress	 and	 unneces -
sary	suffering.
ii)	 Stress:	 is	 an	 animal’s	 biological	 response	 to	 fac-
tors	that	disrupt	or	threaten	homeostasis.
iii)	 Distress:	 a	 state	 produced	 when	 the	 biologic	 cost	
of 	stress	 negatively	 affects	 biologic	 functions	 crit -
ical	 to	 the	 animal’s	 well-	 being.	 This	 can	 cause	
pain	 or	 suffering	 to	 become	 unbearable	 and	
make	the	animal	miserable.
iv)	 Suffering:	 the	 endurance	 of 	or	 submission	 to	
physical	or	mental	stress,	pain,	or	loss.
h)	 The	 stress	 response	 is	 an	 adaptive	 pattern	 of 	behav -
ioral,	 neural,	 endocrine,	 immune,	 hematologic,	 and	
metabolic	 changes	 directed	 toward	 the	 restoration	 of 	
hemostasis.
i)	 Pain	 induced	 by	 acute	 processes	 such	 as	 surgery	
or	 trauma	 evokes	 the	 sympathetic	 nervous	 sys -
tem,	 secretion	 of 	cortisol,	 sodium	 and	 water	
retention,	 hypermetabolism,	 and	 alterations	 in	
protein	and	carbohydrate	metabolism.
ii)	 When	 stress	 is	 severe	 or	 allowed	 to	 go	 untreated,	
it	 becomes	 maladaptive	 producing	 self- 	sustaining	
neural	 and	 endocrine	 cascades	 that	 ultimately	
disrupt	hemostasis.
iii)	 Memory	 and	 current	 physical	 status	 play	 an	
important	 role	 in	 the	 animal’s	 adaptive	 and	
behavioral	responses.
iv)	 Biological	components	of 	the	stress	response:
1)	 Intense	 pain	 stimulation	 activates	 several	
areas	 in	 the	 brain	 including	 the	 locus	 coer -
uleus,	 limbic	 regions,	 and	 cerebral	 cortex	
through	 the	 concentration	 of 	corticotropin-	
releasing	factor.
–	This	 leads	 to	 increased	 release	 of 	 the	
adrenocorticotropic	 hormone	 (ACTH),	
cortical	 norepinephrine,	 dopamine,	 and	
5-	 hydroxytryptamine.
2)	 Activation	 of 	the	 sympathetic	 nervous	 system	
leads	 to	 increases	 in	 heart	 rate	 and	 blood	 pres -
sure	 and	 ultimately	 increased	 myocardial	
work	and	oxygen	demand.
3)	 The	 neuroendocrine	 axis	 when	 stimulated	 by	
corticotropin-	 releasing	 factor	 and	 vasoactive	


--- PDF 83 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 65
intestinal	 peptide	 stimulates	 the	 pituitary	
gland	 to	 release	 ACTH,	 melanocortin,	 prolac-
tin,	 vasopressin,	 thyroid- 	stimulating	 hor -
mone,	and	growth	hormone.
–	This	 leads	 to	 increased	 catabolism,	 the	
mobilization	 of 	 substrates	 to	 provide	
energy	 for	 tissue	 repair,	 and	 salt	 and	 water	
retention	 to	 maintain	 fluid	 volume	 and	
cardiovascular	homeostasis.
v)	 The	 immune	 system	 can	 be	 activated	 or	
depressed	by	stress.
1)	 Chronic	 pain	 can	 produce	 sustained	 increases	
in	 catecholamines,	 cortisol,	 and	 glucagon,	
which	 leads	 to	 suppression	 of 	the	 humoral	
and	cellular	immune	responses.
2)	 The	 release	 of 	endogenous	 opioids	 may	 also	
play	a	role	in	immune	suppression.
3)	 Local	 inflammatory	 responses	 to	 tissue	
trauma	 lead	 to	 the	 production	 of 	cytokines.	
IL-	 1	 and	 IL-	 6  induce	 the	 release	 of 	acute-	
phase	reactants.
4)	 The	 acute-	 phase	 response	 leads	 to	 the	 release	
of 	 C-	 reactive	 proteins,	 fibrinogen,	 mac-
roglobulins,	 and	 antiproteinases,	 which 	
when	 produced	 in	 excess	 can	 contribute	 to 	
the	 development	 of 	the	 severe	 inflammatory 	
response	syndrome.
B)	 Assessment	of 	pain
a)	 Assessment	 of 	pain	 in	 feline	 patients	 is	 already	 par -
ticularly	 challenging	 due	 to	 their	 behavioral	
responses	 to	 stress	 and	 hospitalization.	 The	 critically	
ill	 animals	 can	 be	 even	 more	 challenging,	 as	 many	
are	 weak	 or	 obtunded	 and	 may	 not	 have	 the	 ability	
to	respond	with	dramatic	behavior.
i)	 It	 is	 important	 to	 remember	 that	 some	 of 	these	
patients	 cannot	 move,	 stand,	 withdraw,	 or	 vocal-
ize	 in	 response	 to	 stimulation	 such	 as	 incisional	
palpation.
b)	 It	 is	 important	 to	 evaluate	 the	 patient	 initially 	
while	 they	 are	 undisturbed.	 This	 includes	 body 	
position	 and	 engagement	 with	 their	 surroundings. 	
Once	 this	 initial	 evaluation	 has	 been	 performed, 	
then	 the	 cage	 should	 be	 approached,	 and	 the	 cat 	
engaged.
i)	 If 	the	 cat	 is	 sleeping	 in	 a	 curled-	 up	 position,	 they	
should	 not	 be	 interrupted	 for	 pain	 scoring,	 as	 the	
patient	 is	 already	 demonstrating	 they	 are	 com-
fortable	enough	to	sleep	peacefully.
c)	 There	 are	 several	 validated	 pain	 scores	 for	 use	 in	
acute	 pain	 in	 cats.	 Each	 score	 has	 its	 benefits	 and	
drawbacks.	 Likely,	 the	 most	 important	 thing	 is	 for	
each	 institution	 to	 pick	 one	 pain	 scale	 and	 become	
familiar	with	it	and	use	it	on	every	patient.
d)	 Evaluation	of 	physiologic	parameters.
i)	 Evaluating	 physiologic	 parameters	 as	 they	 relate	
to	 pain	 is	 already	 in	 question	 and	 can	 be	 consid-
erably	more	challenging	in	critically	ill	patients.
ii)	 Often	 these	 patients	 suffer	 from	 fluid	 imbalances	
and	 cardiovascular	 disease	 that	 alter	 the	 heart	
rate	 making	 this	 unreliable.	 Additionally,	
increases	 in	 heart	 rate	 associated	 with	 pain	 are	
often	 present	 only	 in	 those	 patients	 who	 are	 also	
showing	 obvious	 signs	 of 	distress,	 many	 criti-
cally	ill	patients	do	not	have	this	ability.
1)	 When	 the	 heart	 rate	 declines	 following	 admin-
istration	 of 	an	 opioid,	 this	 is	 often	 perceived	 as 	
resolution	or	at	least	some	ease	in	discomfort.
2)	 However,	 opioids	 have	 activity	 on	 the	 sympa-
thetic	 outflow,	 and	 often	 the	 reduction	 in	
heart	 rate	 is	 secondary	 to	 these	 vagomimetic	
effects.
iii)	 Tachypnea	 is	 another	 commonly	 used	 marker	 for	
discomfort.	 However,	 many	 critically	 ill	 patients	
also	 have	 respiratory	 or	 cardiovascular	 condi-
tions	that	may	contribute	to	tachypnea.
iv)	 Blood	 pressure	 has	 been	 correlated	 with	 pain	 in	
feline	 patients,	 but	 can	 be	 challenging	 to	 repeat -
edly	perform.
v)	 Increases	 in	 body	 temperature	 have	 also	 been	
touted	 as	 an	 indicator	 of 	pain,	 but	 again	 many	
critically	 ill	 patients	 have	 alterations	 in	 tempera-
ture	 that	 are	 associated	 with	 their	 systemic	 con-
ditions	 including	 inflammation	 and	 hypothermia	
following	general	anesthesia.
1)	 Cats	 are	 also	 known	 for	 experiencing	 hyper -
thermia	after	the	administration	of 	opioids.
e)	 Behavior	changes
i)	 Cats	 evolved	 as	 solitary	 animals	 and	 as	 such	 have	
not	 developed	 the	 ability	 for	 interspecies	 and	
intraspecies	 social	 communication	 to	 the	 same	
degree	as	dogs.
ii)	 Behavior	 changes	 in	 cats	 have	 been	 reported	 to	
include	 reduction	 of 	normal	 activity,	 appetite	
loss,	 tendency	 to	 hide	 or	 evade	 interaction,	 exces -
sive	licking	of 	the	affected	area,	etc.
iii)	 There	 is	 a	 study	 about	 the	 “half-	 tucked-	 up”	 and	
“crouching”	 positions	 that	 are	 easily	 recogniza-
ble	in	painful	cats.
1)	 These	 positions	 were	 not	 seen	 before	 treat -
ment,	 occurred	 with	 the	 highest	 frequency	
immediately	 following	 surgery,	 were	 seen	
more	 frequently	 in	 patients	 who	 received	 no	
postoperative	 analgesia,	 and	 seemed	 to	


--- PDF 84 ---
Analgesia in the Critically Ill Cat
66
decline	 in	 frequency	 following	 administration	
of 	the	analgesia.
f)	 Feline	acute	pain	scales
i)	 Glasgow	CMPS-	 Feline
1)	 Components
–	Vocalization,	 posture	 and	 activity,	 atten-
tion	 to	 wound,	 ear	 position,	 the	 shape	 of 	
muzzle,	 response	 to	 interaction	 with	 the	
observer,	 palpation	 of 	the	 painful	 area,	 and	
qualitative	behavior.
2)	 Observation	 of 	 the	 cat	 begins	 with	 them	
undisturbed	and	is	followed	by	interaction.
–	Each	 item	 is	 scored	 and	 then	 summed	 to	
develop	the	score	of 	the	cat.
–	Intervention	 occurs	 when	 the	 score	 is	
greater	than	or	equal	to	5/20.
3)	 The	 scoring	 system	 is	 easy	 to	 use	 and	 has	 been	
validated	for	use	in	acute	pain	in	cats.
ii)	 UNESP-	 Botucatu	MCPS
1)	 Components
–	Reaction	 to	 palpation	 of 	the	 flank,	 reaction	
to	 palpation	 of 	the	 surgical	 wound,	 vocali-
zation,	 posture,	 comfort,	 activity,	 attitude,	
appetite,	and	blood	pressure.
2)	 Evaluation	 starts	 by	 observing	 the	 undis -
turbed	 cat	 and	 then	 the	 cat	 is	 approached	 for	
the	evaluation	of 	the	remaining	items.
–	Each	item	is	scored	from	0	to	3.	 The	sum	of 	
all	these	scores	is	the	final	score	of 	that	cat.
–	Intervention	 is	 recommended	 at	 a	 score 	
equal	 to	 or	 greater	 than	 7/20	 unless	 bleed 	
pressure	 is	 not	 included,	 and	 then	 it	 is	 6/20.
3)	 The	 score	 was	 developed	 for	 use	 in	 cats	 with	
postoperative	pain.
4)	 Video-	 based	 training	 of 	the	 scale	 is	 availa-
ble	online.
iii)	 Feline	Grimace	Scale
1)	 Components
–	Ear	 position,	 orbital	 tightening,	 muzzle	 ten-
sion,	whisker	position,	and	head	position.
2)	 Each	 component	 is	 rated	 0–2,	 0  =  absent,	
1  =  moderate	 appearance,	 2  =  obvious	
appearance.
–	The	 final	 score	 is	 the	 sum	 of 	scores	 divided	
by	the	number	of 	scored	action	units.
–	Intervention	 is	 recommended	 with	 a	 score	
>0.39/1.0.
3)	 This	 scale	 is	 easy	 and	 quick	 to	 use,	 and	 is	
reported	 to	 have	 high	 discriminative	 ability,	
good	 overall	 inter-	 rater	 and	 intra-	 rater	
reliability.
4)	 Training	is	available	with	the	original	article.
iv)	 Colorado	 State	 University	 Feline	 Acute	 Pain	 Scale
1)	 Components
–	Assess	 psychologic	 and	 behavioral	 compo -
nents	 including	 resting	 body	 position,	
interaction	 with	 surroundings,	 vocaliza-
tion,	 and	 responsiveness.	 It	 also	 assesses	
responses	to	palpation	and	body	tension.
2)	 A	 score	 equal	 to	 or	 greater	 than	 2/5	 requires	
intervention.
3)	 Found	 to	 have	 moderate	 to	 good	 inter-	 rater	
reliability	 when	 used	 by	 veterinarians	 to	
assess	 pain	 level	 or	 need	 to	 reassess	 the	 anal-
gesic	plan.
g)	 See	 Table	7.1	–	Acute	Pain	Scales	for	cats.
C)	 The	approach	to	multimodal	analgesia
a)	 The	 analgesic	 plan	 should	 include	 agents	 that	 target 	
different	 sites	 along	 the	 pain	 pathway.	 The	 use	 of 	mul-
tiple	 agents	 allows	 for	 dose	 reduction	 which	 is	 par -
ticularly	 important	 in	 cats	 due	 to	 their	 altered	 drug 	
metabolism	and	excretion	when	compared	to	dogs.
i)	 This	 is	 likely	 of 	particular	 importance	 in	 patients	
suffering	from	hepatic	and	renal	insufficiency.
b)	 Most	 analgesic	 plans	 consist	 of 	two	 to	 four	 agents	
that	act	on	separate	levels	of 	the	pain	pathway.
i)	 The	 appropriate	 opioid	 is	 usually	 the	 foundation	
of 	every	analgesic	protocol.
1)	 While	 this	 is	 traditional,	 they	 are	 not	 always	
required,	 particularly	 in	 situations	 where	 the	
patient	 has	 been	 provided	 a	 locoregional	
anesthetic	 technique	 and	 a	 nonsteroidal	 anti-	
inflammatory	agent.
ii)	 In	 any	 condition	 where	 inflammation	 is	 present, 	
and	 the	 patient	 is	 a	 good	 candidate,	 a	 non- 	steroidal 	
anti-	 inflammatory	 drugs	 (NSAID)	 is	 usually	 the 	
second	component	of 	an	analgesic	plan.
iii)	 Appropriate	 locoregional	 techniques	 including	
epidurals	 and	 nerve	 blocks	 halt	 nociceptive	
transmission	 and	 have	 been	 gaining	 popularity,	
particularly	 as	 opioid	 availability	 has	 become	 so	
variable.
iv)	 Finally,	 an	 adjunctive	 agent	 can	 be	 added	
depending	on	the	need	and	the	disease	process.
1)	 These	 agents	 include	 alpha-	 2	 agonists,	 disso -
ciative	anesthetics,	and	anticonvulsants.
D)	 Systemic	options	for	analgesia
a)	 Opioids
i)	 Act	 at	 spinal	 and	 supraspinal	 sites	 leading	 to	 a 	
reduction	 in	 cAMP	 formation,	 membrane	 hyper -
polarization,	 inhibit	 voltage- 	sensitive	 Ca 2+ 	
channels,	 and	 depress	 terminal	 release	 of 	neuro -
transmitters	from	the	cell.


--- PDF 85 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 67
ii)	 In	 cats,	 opioids	 evoke	 sympathetic	 stimulation	
and	 responses	 can	 include	 mydriasis	 and	
increases	in	blood	pressure	and	heart	rate.
iii)	 Behavioral	 changes	 can	 be	 seen	 in	 cats	 when	
administered	 opioids.	 Often	 these	 are	 signs	 of 	
euphoria	 and	 include	 purring,	 kneading,	 and	
rubbing	 against	 objects	 or	 caregivers.	 However,	
signs	 of 	dysphoria	 can	 also	 be	 seen	 with	 cats	
demonstrating	 signs	 of 	fear	 and	 anxiety	 includ-
ing	vocalization.
iv)	 Additionally,	 some	 of 	the	 pure	 mu	 agonists	 (mor -
phine,	 hydromorphone,	 and	 oxymorphone)	 can	
cause	 nausea,	 vomiting,	 and	 excessive	 salivation	
in	 these	 patients.	 In	 humans,	 nausea	 is	 consid-
ered	 to	 be	 highly	 uncomfortable	 and	 distressing,	
and	 it	 is	 reasonable	 to	 assume	 this	 is	 also	 true	 of 	
our	 feline	 patients.	 These	 agents	 should	 be	 used	
in	 combination	 with	 an	 anti- 	emetic	 such	 as	
maropitant.
v)	 Morphine
1)	 Pure	 mu	 agonist,	 this	 drug	 is	 the	 prototype	 to	
which	 all	 other	 opioids	 are	 compared	 in	 terms	
of 	potency.
2)	 Most	 commonly	 administered	 via	 the	 epi-
dural	or	spinal	route.
3)	 Rapid	 IV 	administration	 is	 associated	 with	
histamine	release	and	vomiting.
vi)	 Methadone
1)	 Pure	 mu	 agonist	 with	 NMDA	 receptor	 antag -
onism	(like	ketamine).
2)	 This	 agent	 is	 not	 associated	 with	 histamine	
release.
3)	 Not	 associated	 with	 nausea	 or	 vomiting,	 so	
may	 be	 a	 benefit	 in	 patients	 suffering	 from	
gastrointestinal	(GI)	disease.
vii)	 Hydromorphone
1)	 Pure	 mu	 agonist	 that	 is	 five	 to	 seven	 times	
more	potent	than	morphine.
Table 7.1 Acute pain scales for cats.
Pain scale Components Observation Intervention score Training available
Glasgow	
CMPS-	 Feline
Vocalization
Posture	and	activity
Attention	to	wound
Ear	position
Shape	of 	muzzle
Interaction	with	observer
Palpation	of 	painful	area
Qualitative	behavior
Begins	with	observing	the	
cat	prior	to	interaction
 
Then	the	observer	interacts	
with	the	patient
 
Each	item	is	scored	and	
then	summed
>5/20 No
UNESP-	 Botucatu	
MCPS
Reaction	to	palpation	of 	
the	flank	and	wound
Vocalization
Posture
Activity
Attitude
Appetite
Blood	pressure
Evaluation	begins	with	the	
cat	undisturbed
 
Each	item	is	scored	0–3	and	
then	summed
>7/20
 
If 	unable	to	obtain	
blood	pressure	>6/20
Video-	 based	training	is	
available	online
Feline	Grimace	
Scale
Ear	position
Orbital	tightening
Muzzle	tension
Whisker	position
Head	position
Each	component	is	rated	
0–2	and	then	summed.	 This	
sum	is	then	divided	by	the	
number	of 	scored	units
>0.39/1 Training	is	available	with	
the	original	article
Colorado	State	
University	Feline	
Acute	Pain	Scale
Resting	body	position
Interaction	with	
surroundings
Vocalization
Responsiveness	to	
palpation
Body	tension
Scale	of 	1–5 >2/5 No
 
However,	this	is	a	very	
simple	scale	and	minimal	
training	is	required


--- PDF 86 ---
Analgesia in the Critically Ill Cat
68
2)	 Very	 effective	 analgesic	 and	 has	 a	 relatively	
long	duration	of 	action.
3)	 Associated	 with	 significant	 nausea	 and	 vomit -
ing	 following	 administration.	 This	 is	 more 	
likely	 when	 administered	 via	 the	 intramuscular 	
route	or	when	injected	rapidly	intravenously.
–	Maropitant	 has	 been	 demonstrated	 to	
reduce	 the	 incidence	 of 	vomiting	 in	 cats	
that	 are	 pretreated	 before	 morphine	 and	
dexmedetomidine	administration.
–	Maropitant	 has	 been	 demonstrated	 to	
reduce	 the	 incidence	 of 	vomiting	 in	 dogs	
receiving	hydromorphone.
4)	 Hydromorphone	 has	 been	 associated	 with 	
hyperthermia	 in	 cats	 following	 its 	
administration.
viii)	 Oxymorphone
1)	 Pure	 mu	 agonist,	 ten	 times	 more	 potent	 than	
morphine.
2)	 Similar	 to	 hydromorphone;	 anecdotal	 evidence 	
would	 suggest	 that	 less	 vomiting	 is	 noted	 with 	
this	agent	compared	to	hydromorphone.
ix)	 Fentanyl
1)	 Pure	mu	agonist.
2)	 The	 relatively	 short	 duration	 of 	action	 makes	
it	ideal	for	constant	rate	infusion	(CRI).
3)	 Related	with	dysphoria	at	high	doses.
x)	 Remifentanil
1)	 Synthetic	pure	mu	agonist.
2)	 Administered	as	a	CRI.
–	Undergoes	 rapid	 plasma	 hydrolysis	 by 	
plasma	 esterases,	 means	 a	 rapid	 offset	 of 	
action	 after	 the	 termination	 of 	the	 infusion.
 ● Good	 choice	 for	 animals	 with	 hepatic	
dysfunction.
 ● The	 appropriate	 analgesic	 plan	 must	 be	 in 	
place	 before	 the	 termination	 of 	infusion, 	
as	 even	 after	 hours	 of 	infusion,	 activity	 is 	
terminated	in	approximately	5 minutes.
3)	 Bolus	 injection	 results	 in	 profound	 bradycar -
dia	and	should	be	avoided.
4)	 Ideally,	 this	 is	 run	 through	 a	 catheter	 that	 is	
not	 used	 for	 the	 administration	 of 	intrave -
nous	 fluids	 or	 other	 medications	 to	 decrease	
the	risk	of 	an	accidental	bolus.
xi)	 Buprenorphine
1)	 Partial	mu	agonist,	kappa	antagonist.
2)	 Acceptable	 for	 the	 management	 of 	mild	 to	
moderate	pain.
3)	 Once	 administered	 binds	 tightly	 to	 mu- 	opioid	
receptors	 and	 will	 outcompete	 pure	 mu	 ago -
nists	that	are	administered.
–	A	ceiling	effect	on	analgesia	is	observed.
–	Should	 buprenorphine	 not	 provide	 enough	
analgesia,	 additional	 agents	 will	 have	 to	 be	
administered	 until	 buprenorphine	 activity	
decreases	in	4–8	hours.
4)	 Relatively	 good	 oral	 bioavailability	 when	
administered	via	the	orotransmucosal	route.
5)	 Euphoria	 is	 commonly	 observed	 after 	
administration.
6)	 Simbadol	 is	 a	 sustained-	 release	 option	 and	
provides	up	to	24	 hours	of 	analgesia.
xii)	 Butorphanol
1)	 Kappa	agonist,	mu	antagonist.
2)	 Limited	analgesic	efficacy.
–	Suitable	 for	 sedation	 for	 nonpainful	
procedures.
3)	 It	 can	 be	 used	 to	 reverse	 dysphoria	 or	 overse -
dation	caused	by	pure	mu- 	opioid	agonists.
–	0.03	 mg/kg	 diluted	 to	 5	 ml	 in	 0.9%	 saline	
and	slowly	titrated	until	signs	resolve.
–	Repeated	 pain	 scoring	 is	 required	 follow -
ing	 this	 to	 ensure	 appropriate	 analgesia	 is	
maintained.
xiii)	 Tramadol
1)	 Available	in	oral	and	injectable	formulations.
–	Most	 commonly	 used	 as	 an	 option	 for	 oral	
administration.
2)	 Weak	 opioid	 agonist	 and	 a	 serotonin	 and	 nor -
epinephrine	reuptake	inhibitor.
–	Risk	 of 	 developing	 serotonin	 syndrome	
when	 administered	 with	 other	 serotonin	
inhibitors,	 monoamine	 oxidase	 inhibitors,	
and	tricyclic	antidepressants.
3)	 The	 very	 bitter	 taste	 limits	 its	 utility,	 as	 cats	 may 	
salivate	profusely	after	drug	administration.
xiv)	 Naloxone
1)	 Antagonizes	mu	and	kappa	opioid	receptors.
2)	 Used	 for	 the	 reversal	 of 	pure	 mu	 opioids,	 but	
can	also	be	used	to	antagonize	butorphanol.
3)	 Can	 be	 administered	 as	 a	 bolus	 injection,	 or	
diluted	in	0.9%	saline	and	titrated	to	effect.
xv)	 See	 Table	7.2	–	Commonly	used	opioid	doses
b)	 NSAIDs
i)	 These	 agents	 are	 widely	 used	 for	 their	 anti-	
inflammatory,	antipyretic,	and	analgesic	effects.
ii)	 Associated	 with	 a	 large	 number	 of 	 potential 	
adverse	 effects	 including	 gastrointestinal		 irritation, 	
protein-	 losing	enteropathy,	and	renal	damage.
1)	 Because	 of 	these	 effects,	 their	 utility	 in	 the	
critically	ill	is	often	limited.
2)	 Caution	 should	 be	 used	 when	 administering	
these	 agents	 to	 patients	 with	 signs	 of 	hypov -
olemia,	 hypotension,	 coagulopathies,	 and	
renal	or	hepatic	dysfunction.


--- PDF 87 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 69
3)	 Dehydration	 and	 hypovolemia	 should	 always	
be	corrected	before	administration.
4)	 Administration	 of 	 oral	 agents	 should	 be 	
done	 with	 food,	 as	 gastrointestinal	 irritation 	
is	common.
iii)	 Monitoring
1)	 While	 the	 risk	 of 	healthy	 cats	 developing	 renal 	
injury	 following	 administration	 of 	appropri-
ately	 dosed	 NSAIDs	 is	 low,	 it	 is	 recommended 	
that	 baseline	 values	 of 	serum	 creatinine,	 blood 	
urea	 nitrogen	 (BUN),	 and	 symmetric	 dimethy -
larginine	 (SDMA)	 be	 obtained	 in	 combination 	
with	a	urine- 	specific	gravity.
iv)	 Meloxicam
1)	 Cyclooxygenase-	 2	 (COX-	 2)	 preferential	 agent.
2)	 Can	 be	 administered	 by	 subcutaneous	 injection 	
once	for	treatment	of 	mild	to	moderate	pain.
–	This	 can	 be	 followed	 by	 once- 	daily	 oral	
dosing	for	4 days.
3)	 Partially	 excreted	 through	 the	 fecal	 route,	 so	
originally	 was	 thought	 to	 be	 preferred	 in	 cats	
with	renal	dysfunction.
v)	 Robenacoxib
1)	 COX-	 2	selective	agent.
2)	 It	 can	 be	 administered	 by	 subcutaneous	 injec-
tion	 once	 followed	 by	 once- 	daily	 oral	
administration.
3)	 Good	 for	 the	 treatment	 of 	pain	 and	 inflamma-
tion	 associated	 with	 musculoskeletal	 disorders.
vi)	 Carprofen
1)	 Can	 be	 administered	 by	 subcutaneous	 injec-
tion	 once	 for	 the	 management	 of 	postsurgi-
cal	pain.
vii)	 Ketoprofen
1)	 Can	 be	 used	 for	 relief 	of 	acute	 pain	 and	
inflammation	 associated	 with	 musculoskele -
tal	disorders.
2)	 Can	 be	 administered	 by	 subcutaneous	 injec-
tion	once	daily	for	up	to	3 days.
3)	 It	can	be	administered	orally	for	up	to	5 days.
viii)	 Acetylsalicylic	acid
1)	 Not	approved	for	use	in	cats.
2)	 Commonly	 used	 as	 an	 antithrombotic	 agent	
to	 help	 prevent	 thromboembolism	 associated	
with	cardiomyopathy.
3)	 Administered	 orally	 every	 72	 hours	 with	 no	
restriction	on	the	duration	of 	administration.
c)	 Dissociative	anesthetics
i)	 NMDA	 receptors	 are	 activated	 during	 excitatory	
neurotransmission	 and	 when	 sustained	 nocicep -
tion	 occurs,	 and	 they	 are	 involved	 in	 central	
sensitization.
1)	 NMDA	 receptor	 antagonists	 such	 as	 ketamine	
may	 have	 utility	 in	 the	 management	 of 	
chronic	pain	and	the	wind-	 up	phenomenon.
2)	 While	 these	 agents	 may	 have	 utility	 as	 adjunc-
tive	 agents,	 they	 should	 never	 be	 used	 as	 a	
stand-	 alone	analgesic.
ii)	 Ketamine
1)	 NMDA	receptor	antagonist.
2)	 Most	 commonly	 used	 as	 a	 CRI	 in	 patients	
with	 pain	 that	 is	 refractory	 to	 treatment	 with	
opioids,	NSAIDs,	and	alpha-	 2	agonists.
3)	 Likely,	 most	 efficacious	 in	 conditions	 where	
the	 patient	 is	 suffering	 from	 chronic	 pain	 and	
wind-	 up.
Table 7.2 Commonly used opioid doses.
Drug Dose Route Interval Side effects/comments
Morphine 0.1–0.5	 mg/kg
0.1–0.2	 mg/kg/h
0.1	 mg/kg
IM,	SC
IV
Epidural
4–6	 hours
8–12	 hours
Histamine	release
Urine	retention
Methadone 0.1–0.5	 mg/kg
0.1–0.2	 mg/kg
IM,	SC,	IV
Epidural
4–6	hours
4	hours
NMDA	antagonist	activity
Minimal	nausea/vomiting
Hydromorphone 0.05–0.1	 mg/kg IM,	SC,	IV 4–6	hours Hyperthermia
Oxymorphone 0.05–0.2	 mg/kg IM,	SC,	IV 4–6	hours
Fentanyl 3–5	 μg/kg
2–10	 μg/kg/h
IV 5–90	 minutes
CRI
Marked	bradycardia	can	be	seen	
with	bolus	injection
Remifentanil 2–10	 μg/kg/h IV CRI Bolus	administration	should
be	avoided— 	severe	bradycardia
Buprenorphine 0.01–0.02	 mg/kg IM,	SC,	IV ,	OTM 6–8	hours Long	time	interval	to	onset
of 	action	(30–40	 minutes)
Butorphanol 0.1–0.5	 mg/kg IM,	SC,	IV 2–4	hours Analgesic	potential	is	limited


--- PDF 88 ---
Analgesia in the Critically Ill Cat
70
iii)	 Amantadine
1)	 It	 has	 a	 relatively	 low	 affinity	 to	 NMDA	 recep -
tors,	 but	 has	 shown	 promise	 in	 the	 treatment	
of 	neuropathic	pain	in	veterinary	species.
2)	 Has	 been	 associated	 with	 reduced	 opioid	
requirements	in	humans.
d)	 Anticonvulsants
i)	 Gabapentin
1)	 Gabapentin	 is	 an	 analog	 of 	the	 inhibitory	
neurotransmitter	 γ-	aminobutyric	 acid,	 but	
does	not	exhibit	activity	on	GABA	receptors.
2)	 Acts	 primarily	 by	 binding	 to	 voltage- 	gated	
calcium	channels.
3)	 It	 can	 be	 used	 for	 the	 management	 of 	acute	
and	chronic	pain.
–	It	 should	 not	 be	 used	 as	 a	 sole	 agent	 in	 the	
management	of 	acute	postoperative	pain.
–	A	 good	 oral	 alternative	 for	 the	 manage -
ment	of 	chronic	pain.
4)	 Has	 been	 shown	 to	 improve	 activity	 levels	 in	
cats	suffering	from	osteoarthritis.
5)	 The	 administration	 of 	this	 agent	 can	 be	 asso -
ciated	with	sedation.
e)	 Alpha-	 2	agonists
i)	 Dexmedetomidine	and	medetomidine
1)	 Commonly	 used	 for	 premedication	 and	 sedation.
2)	 Provide	 excellent	 muscle	 relaxation	 and	 anal-
gesia	 and	 is	 an	 excellent	 adjunct	 to	 an	 opioid	
for	 the	 management	 of 	pain	 in	 feline	 patients.
3)	 Nausea	 and	 vomiting	 are	 associated	 with	 bolus 	
administration	of 	dexmedetomidine	in	cats.
4)	 Reductions	 in	 heart	 rate	 and	 cardiac	 output	
are	 associated	 with	 bolus	 injections	 and	 are	
limited	when	administered	as	a	CRI.
–	Have	 been	 shown	 to	 be	 beneficial	 in	 cats	
suffering	 from	 obstructive	 hypertrophic	
cardiomyopathy	 at	 maintaining	 myocar -
dial	 perfusion	 and	 decreasing	 myocardial	
oxygen	demand.
 ● These	 benefits	 are	 not	 seen	 in	 cats	 suf-
fering	from	restrictive	cardiomyopathy.
5)	 Often	 many	 stressed	 patients	 benefit	 from	 the	
sedation	 of 	 dexmedetomidine	 to	 improve	
their	comfort	in	the	hospital	setting.
ii)	 Atipamezole
1)	 Reversal	 agent	 for	 dexmedetomidine	 and	
medetomidine.
2)	 It	 should	 be	 administered	 intramuscularly,	 as	
intravenous	 administration	 can	 result	 in	 pro -
found	and	refractory	hypotension.
f)	 See	 Table	 7.3	 –	 Oral	 dosages	 for	 NSAIDs	 and	
Adjunctive	agents.
g)	 See	 Table	7.4	–	Doses	for	CRIs	of 	adjunctive	agents
E)	 Locoregional	techniques
a)	 Local	anesthetics
i)	 Local	 anesthetics	 prevent	 nociceptive	 transmis -
sion	 and	 are	 the	 only	 pharmacologic	 agents	
available	 that	 terminate	 nociceptive	 signals	 at	
the	source.
ii)	 Local	 anesthetics	 may	 be	 administered	 by	 a	 vari-
ety	of 	routes:
1)	 Topical	 administration	 of 	lidocaine-	 prilocaine	
(EMLA)	cream.
2)	 Local	infiltration.
3)	 Target	perineural	administration.
4)	 Fascial	plane	blocks.
5)	 Epidural	or	spinal	administration.
Table 7.3 Oral dosages for NSAIDs and adjunctive agents.
Drug Dose Route Interval Side effects/comments
Tramadol 2–4	 mg/kg PO 6–12	 	 hours Avoid	use	with	selective	serotonin	reuptake	
inhibitors	(SSRI)	and	monoamine	oxidase	inhibitors	
(MAO)	inhibitors
Gabapentin 10	 mg/kg PO 12	 	hours Can	cause	sedation
Amantadine 2–5	 mg/kg PO 24	 	hours May	be	of 	benefit	with	neuropathic	pain
Meloxicam 0.3	 mg/kg
0.1	 mg/kg
0.05	 mg/kg
SC
PO
PO
Once
Once
q24	 	 h
May	be	followed	by	0.05	 mg/kg	PO	for	4 days
 
After	oral	loading,	dose	may	be	continued	long	term
Robenacoxib 1	 mg/kg
2	 mg/kg
PO
SC
q24	 	 h
Once
Up	to	6 days
Once
Carprofen 4	 mg/kg SC Once Once	only
Ketoprofen 2	 mg/kg
1	 mg/kg
SC
PO
q24	 	 h
q24	 	 h
Up	to	3 days
Up	to	5 days
Acetylsalicylic	acid 1–25	 mg/kg PO q72	 	 h Indefinite	duration


--- PDF 89 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 71
6)	 Intrapleural	 administration	 through	 chest	 tubes.
7)	 Administration	 directly	 into	 the	 wound	 via	
wound- 	soaker	catheters.
8)	 Intravenous	administration	of 	lidocaine.
iii)	 Ideally,	 patients	 undergoing	 anesthesia	 for	 sur -
gery	 should	 have	 an	 appropriate	 locoregional	
technique	 performed	 as	 part	 of 	a	 multimodal	
analgesic	strategy.
1)	 This	 may	 include	 ultrasound- 	guided	 blockade 	
of 	the	 saphenous	 and	 sciatic	 nerves	 of 	the	 pel-
vic	 limb	 or	 radial-	 ulnar-	 musculocutaneous	 and 	
medial	(RUMM)	blocks	in	the	thoracic	limb.
2)	 For	 abdominal	 procedures,	 transverse	 abdom-
inal	 plane	 blocks	 provide	 desensitization	 of 	
the	ventral	abdomen.
3)	 Intercostal	 nerve	 blocks	 can	 provide	 analgesia	
for	 patients	 undergoing	 lateral	 thoracotomy	
procedures.
4)	 Local	 infiltration	 can	 be	 performed	 at	 the	 site	
of 	the	 surgical	 incision	 for	 the	 placement	 of 	
chest	tubes	or	central	lines.
5)	 Epidural	 administration	 of 	opioids	 and	 local	
anesthetics	 can	 provide	 12–24	 hours	 of 	anal-
gesia	 for	 patients	 undergoing	 procedures	 on	
the	pelvic	limb,	abdomen,	and	thorax.
–	The	 utilization	 of 	 an	 epidural	 catheter	
allows	 for	 repeated	 administration	 of 	
analgesics.
6)	 Complete	 details	 on	 how	 to	 perform	 these	 tech-
niques	 can	 be	 found	 in	 Barr	 and	 Gianotti	 (2019).
iv)	 In	 situations	 where	 a	 locoregional	 block	 cannot	
be	 performed,	 utilization	 of 	liposomal	 bupiv -
acaine	can	greatly	benefit	critically	ill	patients.
1)	 Liposomal	 bupivacaine	 can	 provide	 up	 to	
72	 hours	of 	analgesia	at	the	incision	site.
2)	 It	 is	 infiltrated	 at	 the	 incisional	 site	 in	 each	 tis -
sue	layer	at	a	dose	of 	0.4	 ml/kg.
3)	 At	 this	 time,	 it	 is	 not	 recommended	 to	 infil-
trate	 this	 agent	 in	 wounds	 that	 are	 infected	 or	
are	considered	contaminated.
v)	 Lidocaine	 and	 bupivacaine	 are	 the	 two	 most	
commonly	 utilized	 local	 anesthetics	 in	 veteri-
nary	patients.
1)	 Lidocaine	 has	 a	 quick	 onset	 of 	action,	 but	 a	
short	duration	of 	action.
–	Dose	1–4	 mg/kg.
–	Intravenous	 lidocaine	 has	 shown	 promise	
as	 an	 analgesic;	 however,	 due	 to	 reduced	
metabolism,	 it	 is	 not	 recommended	 for	 CRI	
in	 cats	 due	 to	 the	 potential	 for	 cardiovascu-
lar	toxicity.
2)	 Bupivacaine	 has	 a	 slower	 onset	 of 	action,	 but	
a	longer	duration	of 	action.
–	Dose	1–2	 mg/kg.
–	Care	 should	 be	 taken	 to	 prevent	 inadvert -
ent	 intravenous	 administration	 due	 to	 bupi-
vacaine’s	profound	cardiovascular	toxicity.
3)	 Dexmedetomidine	 may	 be	 added	 to	 local	
anesthetics	 to	 prolong	 their	 duration	 of 	action.
–	Dose:	1	μg/1	 ml	of 	local	anesthetic.
b)	 Epidural	administration	of 	analgesics
i)	 Typically,	 local	 anesthetics	 and/or	 opioids	 are	
administered	 through	 the	 lumbosacral	 space;	
however,	 in	 cats,	 the	 dural	 sac	 extends	 further	
caudal	 than	 in	 the	 dog,	 and	 so	 there	 is	 increased	
risk	 of 	dural	 sac	 puncture	 and	 administration	 of 	
intrathecal	drugs.
1)	 If 	cerebro- 	spinal	 fluid	 (CSF)	 is	 noted,	 then	 the	
dose	 should	 be	 decreased	 to	 half 	of 	the	 epi-
dural	dose	before	administration.
ii)	 The	 sacrococcygeal	 space	 is	 easily	 accessed	 in	 the	
cat	 and	 epidural	 administration	 of 	drugs	 from	
this	 location	 is	 easily	 performed	 using	 a	 nerve	
stimulator.
iii)	 One	 publication	 has	 shown	 promise	 in	 providing	
analgesia	 and	 facilitation	 of 	urinary	 catheteriza-
tion	in	cats	with	urethral	obstructions.
iv)	 Contraindications
1)	 Local	infection.
2)	 Sepsis.
3)	 Bleeding	disorders.
4)	 Hypovolemia/shock.
v)	 Drugs
1)	 All	 drugs	 administered	 through	 this	 route	
should	 be	 preservative-	 free	 due	 to	 the	 risk	 of 	
neural	toxicity	of 	the	preservatives.
2)	 Local	 anesthetics	 can	 be	 administered	 at	 low	
volumes	 for	 coverage	 of 	the	 pelvic	 limb.	 Caution 	
should	 be	 used	 when	 the	 epidural	 is	 necessary 	
for	 coverage	 of 	thoracic	 pain,	 as	 local	 anes -
thetics	 can	 cause	 weakness	 of 	the	 respiratory 	
muscles	necessitating	mechanical	ventilation.
c)	 Wound- 	soaker	catheters
i)	 Wound- 	soaker	 catheters	 can	 be	 placed	 at	 the	 time 	
of 	surgery	 in	 sites	 of 	large	 wounds	 that	 are	 not 	
easily	covered	by	other	locoregional	techniques.
Table 7.4 Doses for CRIs of adjunctive agents.
Drug Dose Route Interval
Dexmedetomidine 0.25–1	μg/kg
0.25–3	μg/kg/h
IV
IV
Bolus	as	needed
CRI
Ketamine 0.3–0.6	 mg/kg
0.1–0.6	 mg/kg/h
IV
IV
Once
CRI


--- PDF 90 ---
Analgesia in the Critically Ill Cat
72
Table 7.5 Local anesthetic doses for locoregional administration.
Procedure Indications Drugs Dose
Epidural Hindlimb,	perineal	surgery/trauma Morphine 0.1–0.15	 mg/kg
Caudal Buprenorphine
Bupivacaine
0.004–0.012	 mg/kg
0.5–1.0	 mg/kg
Epidural
High
Sternotomy,	cranial	abdominal	surgery Morphine
Buprenorphine
0.1–0;	15	 mg/kg
0.004–0.012	 mg/kg
Interpleural Chest	trauma,	thoracotomy Bupivacaine 1.5	 mg/kg
ii)	 These	 catheters	 are	 a	 potential	 source	 of 	infec-
tion	 and	 should	 only	 be	 maintained	 for	 2–3 days	
postoperatively.
iii)	 Bolus	 administration	 of 	1	 mg/kg	 of 	bupivacaine	
every	 8	 hours	 may	 be	 performed	 or	 a	 CRI	 of 	lido -
caine	may	be	used.
d)	 Intrapleural	administration
i)	 Thoracic	 surgery	 can	 be	 very	 painful	 and	 patients	
who	 undergo	 median	 sternotomies	 are	 some	 of 	
the	 most	 challenging	 patients	 when	 it	 comes	 to	
managing	their	comfort.
ii)	 Those	 with	 indwelling	 chest	 tubes	 can	 benefit	
from	 the	 administration	 of 	local	 anesthetics	 into	
the	pleural	cavity.
iii)	 Bupivacaine	 can	 be	 administered	 at	 a	 dose	
of 1.5	 mg/kg	 through	 the	 chest	 tube	 followed	 by	
2–5	 ml	of 	0.9%	saline	every	4–6	hours	as	needed.
e)	 See	 Table	 7.5	 –	Local	 anesthetic	 doses	 for	 locore -
gional	administration.
F)	 Example	protocols
a)	 Blocked	cat
i)	 Buprenorphine	IV 	0.01–0.03	 mg/kg	q8h.
ii)	 Sacrococcygeal	 epidural	 with	 0.5%	 bupivacaine	
0.2	 ml/kg.
iii)	 A	 dexmedetomidine	 CRI	 can	 be	 considered	 par -
ticularly	 in	 those	 patients	 that	 are	 very	 stressed	
and	 are	 at	 risk	 of 	pulling	 out	 their	 urinary	
catheters.
1)	 1	 μg/kg	 bolus	 IV 	 followed	 by	 CRI	 at	
0.25–1.0	 μg/kg/h.
iv)	 Maropitant—	 NK1	 receptor	 antagonist— 	decreases 	
incidence	 of 	 vomiting	 associated	 with	 opioid 	
administration	 and	 may	 play	 a	 role	 in	 providing 		
visceral	analgesia.
b)	 Postoperative	GI	foreign	body
i)	 Opioid:	 may	 choose	 a	 bolus	 dose	 or	 CRI	 depend-
ing	on	equipment/staffing.
1)	 Methadone:	0.1–0.2	 mg/kg	IV 	q4–6h.
2)	 Hydromorphone:	0.01–0.05	 mg/kg	IV 	q4–6h.
3)	 Fentanyl	CRI:	0.1–0.3	 μg/kg/min.
ii)	 Dexmedetomidine:	 loading	 dose	 1	 μg/kg	 IV ,	
	followed	by	CRI	at	0.25–1	 μg/kg/h.
1)	 One	 may	 consider	 doing	 a	 ketamine	 CRI	
should	 the	 patient	 be	 a	 poor	 candidate	 for	
dexmedetomidine.
iii)	 Maropitant—	 NK1	 receptor	 antagonist—	
decreases	 incidence	 of 	vomiting	 associated	 with	
opioid	 administration	 and	 may	 play	 a	 role	 in	 pro -
viding	visceral	analgesia.
iv)	 Once	 eating,	 consider	 transitioning	 to	 tramadol	
and	gabapentin	for	analgesia	at	home.
c)	 Cat	with	chronic	osteoarthritis
i)	 The	 long-	 term	 use	 of 	NSAIDs	 in	 cats	 is	 contro -
versial;	 however,	 these	 are	 the	 only	 agents	 proven	
to	 decrease	 pain	 scores	 in	 cats	 suffering	 from	
chronic	osteoarthritis.
1)	 Serial	 serum	 chemistries	 to	 assess	 changes	 in	
renal	 values	 along	 with	 urinalysis	 are	 indi-
cated	 in	 any	 cat	 that	 is	 maintained	 on	 NSAIDs	
long	term.
2)	 Titration	 to	 the	 lowest	 effective	 dose	 should	
be	 the	 goal;	 many	 cats	 do	 well	 on	 every	 other	
day	dosing	of 	NSAIDs.
3)	 Maintaining	 hydration	 is	 of 	utmost	 impor -
tance;	 encouraging	 drinking	 with	 fresh	 circu-
lating	 water	 and	 the	 addition	 of 	wet	 food	 to	
the	diet	should	be	considered.
ii)	 Gabapentin	 has	 not	 been	 shown	 to	 decrease	 pain	
scores,	 but	 has	 been	 shown	 to	 improve	 activity	
scores.	 Gabapentin	 is	 primarily	 renally	 excreted,	
and	 so	 lower	 doses	 should	 be	 considered	 in	 cats	
with	renal	insufficiency.
iii)	 Tramadol	 can	 also	 be	 considered	 in	 those	 that	
are	 particularly	 painful;	 however,	 it	 has	 a	 very	
bitter	taste	and	is	often	not	well	tolerated.


--- PDF 91 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 73
Reference
Barr,	C.	and	Gianotti,	G.	(2019).	Alternatives	to	opioid	
analgesia	in	small	animal	anesthesia.	Vet. Clin. Small 
Anim. Pract.	49	(6):	981–1156.
Recommended Readings
Cambridge,	A.,	 Tobias,	K.,	Newberry,	R.,	and	Sarkar,	
D.	(2000).	Subjective	and	objective	measurements	of 	
postoperative	pain	in	cats.	J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.	217	(5):	
685–690.
Gaynor,	J.	and	Muir,	 W .	(2002).	Handbook of Veterinary Pain 
Management.	St.	Louis:	Mosby.
Guedes,	A.,	Meadows,	J.,	Pypendop,	B.	et al.	(2018).	
Assessment	of 	the	effects	of 	gabapentin	on	actiivty	levels	
and	owner-	 perceived	mobility	impairment	and	quality	of 	
life	in	osteoarthritic	geriatic	cats.	J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.	
253	(5):	579–585.
Gunn-	 Moore,	D.	(2010).	NSAIDs	and	cats -	 	it’s	been	a	long	
journey.	J. Feline Med. Surg.	12	(7):	519–538.
Hansen,	B.	(2005).	Analgesia	and	sedation	in	the	crtically	ill.	
J. Vet. Emerg. Crit. Care	285–294.
Hernandez- 	Avalos,	I.,	Mota-	 Rojas,	D.,	Mora-	 Medina,	P.	et al.	
(2019).	Review	of 	different	methods	used	for	clinical	
recognition	and	assessment	of 	pain	in	dogs	and	cats.	Int. 
J. Vet. Sci. Med.	7	(1):	43–54.
Martin-	 Flores,	M.,	Saki,	D.M.,	Learn,	M.	et al.	(2016).	Effects	
of 	maropitant	in	cats	receiving	dexmedetomidine	and	
morphine.	J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.	1257–1261.
Posener,	L.P.,	Gleed,	R.,	Erb,	H.,	and	Ludders,	J.	(2007).	
Post-	 anesthetic	hyperthermia	in	cats.	Vet. Anesth. Analg.	
248	(11):	40–47.
Shipley,	H.,	Guedes,	A.,	Graham,	L.	et al.	(2018).	Preliminary	
apprasial	of 	the	reliability	and	validity	of 	the	Colorado	
State	University	feline	acute	pain	scale.	Journal Feline Med. 
Surg.	21	(4):	335–339.
Steagall,	P.	(2020).	Analgesia	what	makes	cats	different/
challenging	and	what	is	critical	for	cats.	Vet. Clin. North 
Am. Small Anim. Pract.	50	(4):	749–767.
Steagall,	P.	and	Monteiro,	B.	(2019).	Acute	pain	in	cats	recent	
advances	in	clinical	assessment.	J. Feline Med. Surg.	21	
(1):	25–34.
Waran,	N.,	Best,	L.,	 Williams,	 V .	et al.	(2007).	A	preliminary	
study	of 	behaviour-	 based	indicators	of 	pain	in	cats.	
Anim. Welf.	16	(S):	105–108.


--- PDF 92 ---


--- PDF 93 ---
75
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Second Edition. Edited by Kenneth J. Drobatz,  
Erica Reineke, Merilee F. Costello, and William T. N. Culp.
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
The goal of fluid therapy is to expand intravascular vol-
ume, restore circulatory function, and ultimately deliver 
oxygen to tissues.
In the clinical setting, this translates to:
A) Providing for normal ongoing losses (maintenance) 
until the patient becomes self-  sufficient with oral intake.
B) Replacing existing fluid deficits.
C) Replacement of fluid losses due to ongoing disorders 
such as vomiting, diarrhea, or urinary losses during the 
illness and fluid therapy plan.
Although in most situations the importance of fluid ther -
apy is quite clear, there are different opinions regarding the 
type of fluid, volume of fluid, and rate of fluid to be admin-
istered. Fortunately, as long as the heart and kidneys are 
working appropriately, normal homeostatic mechanisms 
allow a reasonable margin of error in the estimation of the 
fluid deficit and therapy required.
A) Crystalloid solutions (Table 8.1)
a) Isotonic crystalloid, electrolyte solutions are consid-
ered the mainstay of fluid therapy in veterinary 
medicine.
b) Consist primarily of water with a sodium or glucose 
base, plus the addition of other electrolytes and/or 
buffers.
c) Can be used as maintenance or replacement 
solutions.
d) Crystalloid solutions can be divided into specific cat -
egories (isotonic, hypotonic, or hypertonic) based on 
the sodium concentration and osmolality of the fluid:
i) Isotonic crystalloids contain a sodium concen-
tration or osmolality similar to that of the cells 
in the body. This is the most common fluid type 
used in veterinary medicine. Examples include 
Normosol- R, 0.9% NaCl, Plasma- Lyte 148, and 
lactated Ringer’s solution (LRS).
ii) Hypotonic solutions contain a lower sodium 
concentration or osmolality than the cells of 
the body (0.45% NaCl, D 5 W).
iii) Hypertonic solutions contain a higher concen-
tration of sodium or osmolality than cells of the 
body (i.e., 7.2–23% NaCl).
e) Using isotonic crystalloids, only one- third of the vol-
ume administered remains within the intravascular 
space 1 hour after administration; therefore, larger 
volumes need to be used as compared to other types 
of fluid (Griffel and Kaufman 1992; Elgart 2004).
f) Examples of situations when crystalloid fluid ther -
apy is indicated include volume depletion second-
ary to the losses associated with vomiting, diarrhea, 
Fluid Therapy
Garret Pachtinger
8
UNIQUE FEATURES
 ● Compared to dogs, cats are more susceptible to fluid overload resulting in respiratory distress. Therefore, the patient 
should be monitored closely when using crystalloids, colloids, or other fluid therapies (e.g., blood products).
 ● Feline vascular volume (40–60 ml/kg) differs from canine vascular volume (90 ml/kg). As a result, fluid resuscitation 
needs will differ between cats and dogs.
 ● Physiologic responses in shock may be variable in the cat (i.e., while the physiologic response to decreased cardiac 
output in most species is tachycardia, cats can have a normal or bradycardic response to shock).


--- PDF 94 ---
Fluid Therapy
76
third spacing, or diuresis (polyuria), as well as for 
replacement of intravascular volume seen with 
losses in shock and hemorrhage.
g) Shock dose: 40–60 ml/kg in the cat. Most patients 
do not require the entire shock dose, and it is advis -
able to divide the total shock volume into two to 
four aliquots, giving each over 20–30 minutes and 
reassessing the patient between each increment to 
determine its effectiveness.
i) An example would be to give a 5- kg cat in shock 
75–100 ml over approximately 30 minutes and 
then reassess to determine effectiveness and 
future plan.
B) Colloid solutions
a) When compared to crystalloids, colloids contain 
larger molecular weight substances, remain in the 
intravascular space longer, increase oncotic pres -
sure, and increase vascular volume by retaining 
fluid within the vascular space (Rizoli  2003; 
Concannon et al. 1992).
b) Colloid therapy is often used in conjunction with 
crystalloid fluid therapy because colloids provide 
intravascular volume, while crystalloids correct both 
intravascular and extravascular deficits (Table 8.2).
c) Use of colloids is generally considered when there is 
a low colloid osmotic pressure (<15 mmHg), or a 
low total protein (<3.5–4), or when edema develops 
following administration of isotonic crystalloids.
d) Colloids can be divided into two categories:  natural 
and synthetic.
i) Natural: albumin is the only naturally occur -
ring colloid.
1) At this time, no species-  specific albumin is 
available for cats.
2) Plasma contains approximately 25–30 g/l of 
albumin. If a 5- kg cat has a serum albumin 
of 1.5 g/dl, the cat would require approxi-
mately 0.5 l of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) to 
increase the albumin to 2.5 g/dl (calculated 
using the following formula: albumin defi-
cit = 10 × [desired Alb − patient Alb] × body 
weight (kg) × 0.3).
3) Although administration of plasma is the 
optimal choice for albumin replacement, 
the cost of plasma, its limited supply, and 
the amount necessary to increase colloid 
osmotic pressure make plasma an unrealis -
tic choice for colloid fluid therapy.
ii) Synthetic: there are three types of synthetic col-
loids (gelatins, hydroxyethyl starches (HES), and 
dextrans). The hydroxyethyl starches are the 
most common synthetic colloid used in veteri-
nary medicine. They can be further divided into 
distinct categories based on the degree of substi-
tution (of hydroxyl with hydroxyethyl groups) 
and the organization of that substitution on vari-
ous carbon positions, termed the C2:C6 ratio.
1) Initial boluses of hetastarch or VetStarch 
given at a dosage of 2–5 ml/kg given over 
15–20 minutes can be used in the cat.
2) Maintenance therapy at 0.5–2 ml/kg/h can 
be used for oncotic support.
e) Currently, synthetic colloid therapy is a controversial 
topic in medicine. Recent human studies have ques -
tioned the safety of synthetic colloids, particularly 
when administered to critically ill patients (Jones 
et al. 1997; Zarychanski et al. 2013). The controversy 
stems from adverse effects, notably a potential 
increased risk of acute kidney injury (AKI).
f) With the concern for illness as a result of HES solu-
tions, several veterinary studies have attempted to 
investigate whether our patients may also be at the 
risk. Two published studies have investigated 
the  effects of synthetic colloids on canine renal 
function. One retrospective study in dogs did not 
show an increased risk of developing AKI with the 
T able 8.1  Fluid categories.
T ype of solution Examples
Crystalloid
Isotonic Normosol- R®, 0.9% NaCl, Plasma- Lyte 
148®, lactated Ringer’s solution (LRS)
Hypertonic 7.27–23% NaCl
Hypotonic 0.45% NaCl, D 5 W
Colloid
Natural Albumin
Synthetic Hetastarch, dextrans, gelatins
Other Packed red blood cells, plasma, PPN
T able 8.2  Shock doses of intravenous fluids.a
Fluid type Dose
Isotonic 
crystalloid
40–60 ml/kg; ¼ to ⅓ given over 20–30 minutes. 
Reassess patient to determine need for 
additional bolus or placement of fluid rate.
Synthetic 
colloid
2–5 ml/kg given over 20–30 minutes. Reassess 
patient to determine need for additional bolus 
or placement of fluid rate.
Hypertonic 
saline 
(7.2%)
2–3 ml/kg given over 20–30 minutes. Reassess 
patient to determine need for additional bolus 
or placement of fluid rate.
a  Doses are dependent on patient- type and fluid- type and may need 
to be altered based on underlying conditions such as cardiac disease.


--- PDF 95 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 77
use of HES (Sigrist et  al.  2017a,b). Another study 
did show that dogs receiving HES (10% 250/0.5) 
were at an increased risk of death and AKI com-
pared to dogs that did not receive HES with similar 
disease severity during the same time period (Hayes 
et al. 2016).
g) Two retrospective studies have also been published 
evaluating the effect of HES on renal function in 
cats, neither of which found an association with 
evidence of increased renal impairment or mortal-
ity (Sigrist et al. 2017a,b; Yozova et al. 2017).
h) This author believes more information is needed, 
not only in dogs, but also cats, before enough infor -
mation is available to make an informed decision 
about the use of synthetic colloids in veterinary 
medicine.
i) The main adverse effects of synthetic colloid admin-
istration are coagulopathy and decreased coagula-
bility. When dosages >20 ml/kg/24 h are used, 
coagulopathic effects may become apparent. 
Hetastarch has been reported to be more likely to 
cause these changes as compared to VetStarch in 
dogs (Bacek et  al.  2011). Little information exists 
specifically reviewing these fluid types in cats as 
related to coagulopathy.
C) Hypertonic solutions (i.e., hypertonic saline)
a) Provide rapid volume expansion with lesser volume 
administration.
b) Cause an increase in the osmotic gradient, which 
“pulls water” from the interstitial space and intra-
cellular space into the intravascular space, expand-
ing intravascular volume.
c) May be most efficacious in patients with acute 
hypovolemic shock (and therefore normal intersti-
tial hydration) and may also be useful in resuscita-
tion of patients with head trauma.
d) Since the initial volume expansion is followed by 
redistribution, hypertonic saline should not be used 
alone but followed with crystalloid fluid therapy.
e) Due to the large sodium concentration and osmotic 
pull of fluid from the interstitial and intracellular 
spaces, hypertonic solutions are contraindicated in 
dehydrated or hypernatremic patients.
f) A bolus of 2–3 ml/kg over 15–20 minutes is recom-
mended in cats.
g) A recipe for administration of hypertonic saline 
with a synthetic colloid is to dilute 23.4% NaCl with 
6% hetastarch or VetStarch (volume NaCl and vol-
ume colloid) to make a 7.5% solution of NaCl.
D) Specific conditions requiring fluid therapy
a) Shock (Table 8.3): a complex group of conditions that 
result from inadequate oxygen delivery to tissues. 
While numerous classification schemes have been 
developed, clinically useful categories in feline emer -
gency medicine include hypovolemic shock, cardio -
genic shock, obstructive shock, and distributive 
shock (sepsis/SIRS; see Chapter 3—  Shock).
i) Hypovolemic shock: can be either absolute or 
relative in nature.
1) Causes of absolute hypovolemic shock: 
hemorrhage, vomiting, diarrhea, and severe 
polyuria without adequate polydipsia.
2) Causes for relative hypovolemic shock: ana-
phylaxis or the use of vasodilatory drugs and 
an increased microvascular permeability.
ii) Cardiogenic shock: caused by a reduced car -
diac output and often associated with cardiac 
disease. The end result of cardiogenic shock is 
global hypoperfusion.
iii) Distributive shock: most commonly associated 
with SIRS, sepsis, or anaphylaxis triggered by a 
dysfunction of the microcirculation that leads 
to inappropriate, widespread vasodilatation 
and results in relative hypovolemia.
iv) Obstructive shock: results from a mechanical 
interference with ventricular filling. Examples 
include pericardial effusion leading to pericar -
dial tamponade, caval syndrome of heartworm 
disease, aortic thromboembolism, and intracar -
diac neoplasia.
1) From clinical experience, both hypovolemic 
and distributive shock syndromes respond to 
aggressive fluid therapy. Obstructive shock 
responds to fluid therapy, but identification 
and correction of the underlying cause will 
more rapidly improve patient outcome. Due 
to the underlying cardiac disease, fluid ther -
apy is contraindicated in cardiogenic shock.
T able 8.3  Shock categories and causes.
Category Cause
Hypovolemic 
shock
Loss of intravascular volume from 
hemorrhage, vomiting, diarrhea, and severe 
polyuria without adequate polydipsia
Cardiogenic 
shock
Cardiac disease leading to a reduced cardiac 
output
Distributive 
shock
SIRS, sepsis, or anaphylaxis triggered by a 
dysfunction of the microcirculation that leads 
to inappropriate, widespread vasodilatation 
and results in relative hypovolemia
Obstructive 
shock
A mechanical interference with ventricular 
filling from pericardial effusion leading to 
tamponade, caval syndrome of heartworm 
disease, aortic thromboembolism, and 
intracardiac neoplasia


--- PDF 96 ---
Fluid Therapy
78
b) Dehydration (Table 8.4)
i) Treatment involves administration of crystal-
loid fluids to both correct the fluid deficit as 
well as replace ongoing loss.
ii) The fluid deficit is calculated based on the 
patient’s body weight (kg) and the percentage 
of dehydration (see Box 8.1).
iii) Ongoing losses may be caused by diarrhea, 
vomiting, polyuria (without sufficient polydip -
sia), or other conditions that lead to an abnor -
mal fluid loss.
1) Losses such as these can be estimated by 
weighing diapers. This can be performed by 
subtracting the normal diaper weight from 
the diaper with the fluid loss 
(10 g = 0.01 kg = 10 ml). Urinary losses can 
also be closely monitored by placement of 
an indwelling, closed collection system uri-
nary catheter.
2) Measurement of body weight at least once 
daily is essential to guide fluid therapy. In a 
patient with a dynamic state, measuring 
body weight multiple times per day can pro -
vide a rapid assessment of fluid status. If the 
patient is rapidly gaining weight, it is likely 
their fluid intake exceeds output (e.g., uri-
nary output). If they are rapidly losing 
weight, this may indicate their outs (e.g., 
urinary, gastrointestinal, and/or respiratory 
losses) exceed their fluid intake.
3) Other common assessments of fluid therapy 
and hydration status include skin turgor, 
packed cell volume (PCV), total  protein con-
centration (TP), and urine-  specific grav -
ity (USG).
– A decrease in the interstitial compart -
ment volume leads to decreased 
skin turgor.
– PCV , TP , and USG are expected to all 
increase with a decreased fluid intake or 
increase in losses resulting in a decrease 
in the interstitial compartment volume as 
well as a decrease in plasma volume 
which may also result in other clinical 
changes including tachycardia and alter -
ations in peripheral pulses.
– Additionally, USG can be measured to 
assess for adequacy of diuresis in the 
absence of the kidneys’ ability to concen-
trate urine (e.g., renal failure, administra-
tion of diuretics, etc.).
c) Potassium supplementation (Table 8.5)
i) Potassium is vital in the function of tissues 
such as muscles and nerves.
ii) Causes for hypokalemia include (but are not 
limited to) the following:
1) Anorexia.
2) Diabetes mellitus.
3) Administration of potassium- free or low- 
potassium fluids.
T able 8.4  Physical assessment of dehydration.
Estimated % 
dehydration Clinical signs
<4 Not detectable
4–5 Subtle loss of skin elasticity, “tacky” mucous 
membranes
6–8 Decreased skin turgor (when the skin is 
tented there is a slight delay in return to 
normal position), dry mucous membranes, 
slight prolongation of capillary refill time, 
eyes may be dull
10–12 Prolonged capillary refill time (>2 seconds), 
dry mucous membranes, sunken eyes, tented 
skin does not return to normal position, 
possible tachycardia, and weak pulses
12–15 Pale mucous membranes, capillary refill time 
>3 seconds, signs of shock, dementia, death 
imminent
Box 8.1  Fluid  Calculations
Feline maintenance fluid administration: 50–60 ml/
kg/24 hours
Fluid deficit from dehydration (in ml) = % dehydra-
tion × body weight (kg) × 1000 ml
Ongoing losses per hour in ml: estimation of 
loss/24 hours
T able 8.5  Potassium supplementation chart.
Serum potassium 
concentration (mEq/l)
mEq KCl to add 
to 500 ml fluid
Maximum infusion 
rate (0.5 mEq/kg/h)
<2.0 40 6 ml/kg/h
2.1–2.5 30 8 ml/kg/h
2.6–3.0 20 12 ml/kg/h
3.1–3.5 14 18 ml/kg/h
>3.5–<5 5 25 ml/kg/h
Note: potassium doses should not exceed K- Max (0.5 mEq/kg/h) 
unless clinically required and only when extremely close monitoring 
is implemented.


--- PDF 97 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 79
4)  Gastrointestinal fluid loss (vomiting or 
diarrhea).
5)  Renal disease/failure.
6)  Hyperaldosteronism (Conn’s syndrome)—  a 
rare disease that leads to loss of potassium via 
the kidneys due to the activity of aldosterone 
(see Chapter 32—Electrolyte Disorders & 
Chapter 34—Pediatric Emergencies).
7)  Iatrogenic causes such as the administration 
of diuretics (e.g., furosemide).
iii)  Signs of hypokalemia include weakness, 
 ventroflexion of the neck, lethargy, mental 
depression, arrhythmias, and death from res -
piratory muscle paralysis.
iv)  Potassium can be supplemented orally or added 
to intravenous fluids.
1)  Oral supplementation can be done by admin -
istering potassium gluconate (Tumil-  K, 
Daniels Pharmaceuticals) at a dose of 
2  mEq/4.5  kg PO q12h.
2)  If oral supplementation is not possible or 
severe hypokalemia is present, intravenous 
potassium administration should be 
considered.
3)  The amount of potassium to add to mainte -
nance fluids should be based on measured 
serum potassium (when giving boluses of 
intravenous fluids, potassium should NOT 
be supplemented due to the risk of rapid 
hyperkalemia and cardiotoxicity, see 
Table 8.5).
4)  If oral or intravenous potassium adminis -
tration is not possible, subcutaneous 
administration with solutions containing 
up to 30  mEq/l of KCl can be adminis -
tered safely.
5)  Potassium doses should not exceed K-  Max 
(0.5  mEq/kg/h) unless clinically required. 
If required, strict monitoring should 
include heart rate, respiratory rate and 
effort, electrocardiogram (ECG), blood 
pressure, and mentation. Frequent evalu -
ation of electrolytes (hourly to no less 
than every 6 hours) should be performed 
as well.
d)  Bicarbonate supplementation
i)  Usually reserved for a severe metabolic acidosis 
and pH disturbance (pH <7.1–7.2; base deficit 
>10; bicarbonate <14  mEq/l).
ii)  Bicarbonate-  deficit equation (mEq of bicarbo -
nate to administer):
1)  0.3  ×  b.w. (kg)  ×  (24 – patient bicarbonate).
2)  One-  fourth to one-  third of this deficit 
should be given slowly over 2–4 hours.
3)  Alternatively, 1–3  mEq/kg can be adminis -
tered with 1  mEq/kg for mild acidosis and 
3  mEq/kg for severe acidosis.
4)  Blood gases should be taken after comple -
tion of this aliquot to determine if addi -
tional bicarbonate administration is 
necessary (i.e., if the patient pH is still less 
than 7.2 or clinical signs related to acidemia 
such as decreased response to pressor 
 therapy, etc.).
5)  Bicarbonate administration is not 
 recommended if blood gases are not available.
6)  Bicarbonate is not recommended if there is 
a respiratory dysfunction leading to an 
already elevated CO 2 , as bicarbonate will be 
broken down into H 2 O and CO 2 , further 
exacerbating the existing respiratory com-
promise and hypercapnia.
7)  Complications of bicarbonate administra-
tion include hypernatremia, hyperosmolal-
ity, and additional electrolyte disturbances 
(decrease in ionized calcium and potas -
sium) due to its alkalinizing effects.
e)  Maintenance fluid therapy (Box 8.1)
i)  Defined as the volume needed per day for fluid 
balance (i.e., the intake of fluids should be 
equal to the loss of fluids).
ii)  Daily fluid requirements (ml/kg/day) parallel 
daily energy requirements (kcal/kg/day).
iii)  Normal feline energy requirements are 
50–60  kcal/kg/day. Therefore, a rough estimate 
for fluid balance would be 50–60  ml/kg/day for 
the maintenance fluid requirement (see 
Box 8.2).
iv)  Alternatively, an approximate dose for fluid 
maintenance is 2–3  ml/kg/h.
f)  Ongoing loss therapy
i)  The amount lost through vomiting, diarrhea, 
polyuria, and so on that should be measured/
estimated and then added to the maintenance 
and dehydration fluid calculations
1)  Example: A 5-  kg patient is estimated to 
be  vomiting approximately 10  ml every 
4 hours.
24 46 24hours hourse pisodes in hours/,
61 06 0vomiting episodesm lm l.
Therefore, the patient’s ongoing loss is estimated to be 
60  ml over 24  hours.


--- PDF 98 ---
Fluid Therapy
80
g)  Fluid diuresis
i)  The goals are to increase the glomerular filtra-
tion rate, increase renal perfusion, and enhance 
the renal excretory function.
ii)  Specific disease states where fluid diuresis may 
be considered include renal disease to eliminate 
renal toxins and improve azotemia as well as in 
cases of toxin ingestion to hasten the elimina -
tion of toxins that are excreted by the kidneys.
iii)  In these situations, crystalloid fluids are the flu-
ids of choice.
iv)  Fluid rates required to induce a sufficient diure -
sis can be as high as two to four times a patient’s 
maintenance requirements. Expected urine 
output for adequate fluid diuresis is  2–6  ml/kg/h.
v)  “Ins” and “outs” should be measured every 2–4 
hours. A urinary catheter with a closed collec -
tion system is recommended to allow accurate 
monitoring and calculation of “outs.”
vi)  During fluid diuresis, careful monitoring 
should be made for signs of fluid overload such 
as abnormal lung sounds (crackles), abnormal 
heart sounds (murmur or gallop rhythm), gen-
eralized edema, hypertension, or jugular 
venous distension. As compared to dogs, cats 
are less likely to develop chemosis with fluid 
overload.
E)  Constant rate infusion (CRI) formulas
Formula 1:
CRIdosem gk gh body weight kg
bagvolumem l flu// iid ratem lh
dose of drug mg toaddt obag
/ .
Example: Morphine CRI at 0.1  mg/kg/h for 10-  kg cat 
with IV fluid rate of 20  ml/h:
 
01 10 1000 20
50 1
./ //
.
mg kg hk gm lm lh
mgadded toa lbag
Formula 2 (for use if multiple CRI medications will 
be needed at the same time):
Fluids will run at 1  ml/kg/h
 
CRIdosem gk gh bagvolumem l
dosem gt oadd tobag
//
.  
Additional maintenance fluids will need to be piggy -
backed or placed through another catheter if additional 
fluids are required, as the CRI rate for this formula will 
only be 1  ml/kg/h.
Formula 3:
 
Dosage kg Wk gm gtoadd to ml
base solutionat
ar ate
g // min 250
  of ml h15 /.
Formula 4:
 RD WV M/. .16 67
Abbreviation Key
M  = milligrams of drug to add to the base solution.
D  = dosage of drug in micrograms per kilogram per minute.
Box 8.2  Sample  Feline Fluid Therapy Case
Example: A 5-  kg cat with a 1-  day history of vomiting 
and diarrhea. On physical examination, the cat is 5% 
dehydrated (tacky mucous membranes, CRT 1.5 seconds, 
very slight decrease in skin turgor). The cat is vomiting 
10 ml every 4 hours. PCV 45, TS 7.4, Na 153, K 3.2, BUN 
41, creatinine 1.8, glucose 140.
Plan: use a balanced electrolyte solution and replace 
the deficit over 12 hours.
 
Dehydrationd ehydration bw kg
ml of fluidneeded
%
.
1000
00 55 5 1000 250 ml
 
Maintenanceh ours kcal kg day
ml kg day
m
12 50 60
50 60
300
//
//
lld ay
ml hours
mlin hours
/
/300 24
150 12
 
Ongoinglossesm li nh ours
ml in hour
10 4
30 12 s
 
Totalm lm lm l
ml hours
ml hour hours
250 150 30
4301 2
35 81 2
/
./  
Additives to the fluids:
Potassium is added to the fluid bag (14 mEq/500 ml) 
based on the KCl replacement chart.
During the fluid therapy and continued hospitaliza -
tion, monitoring will include physical examination 
parameters (heart rate, pulse quality, respiratory rate, 
respiratory effort, mentation, etc.), electrolytes, blood 
pressure, mentation, and continued losses.


--- PDF 99 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 81
W  = body weight in kilograms.
V  = volume in milliliters of base solution.
R  = fluid rate in milliliters per hour.
16.67 = conversion factor.
To determine the appropriate R  if dosage is adjusted, the 
formula would be:
 RD WV M/. .16 67
References
Bacek L.M.M, Martin L.G, Spangler E.A., and Macintire D.K 
(2011). Determination of the In vitro Effects of Two Forms 
of Hydroxyethyl Starch Solutions on Thromboelastography 
and Coagulation Parameters in Healthy Dogs International 
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium
Concannon, K.T., Haskins, S.C., and Feldman, B.F. (1992). 
Hemostatic defects associated with two infusion rates of 
dextran 70 in dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res.  53 (8): 1369–1375.
Elgart, H.N. (2004). Assessment of fluids and electrolytes. 
AACN Clin. Issues  15 (4): 607–621.
Griffel, M.I. and Kaufman, B.S. (1992). Pharmacology of 
colloids and crystalloids. Crit. Care Clin.  8: 235.
Hayes, G., Benedicenti, L., and Mathews, K. (2016). 
Retrospective cohort study on the incidence of acute 
kidney injury and death following hydroxyethyl starch 
(HES 10% 250/0.5/5:1) administration in dogs (2007–2010). 
J. Vet. Emerg. Crit. Care (San Antonio)  26: 35–40.
Jones, P.A., Tomasic, M., and Gentry, P.A. (1997). Oncotic, 
hemodilutional, and hemostatic effects of isotonic saline 
and hydroxyethyl starch solutions in clinically normal 
ponies. Am. J. Vet. Res.  58: 541–548.
Rizoli, S.B. (2003). Crystalloids and colloids in trauma 
resuscitation: a brief overview of the current debate. 
J. Trauma  54 (Suppl): S82–S88.
Sigrist, N.E., Kalin, N., and Dreyfus, A. (2017a). Changes in 
serum creatinine concentration and acute kidney injury 
(AKI) grade in dogs treated with hydroxyethyl starch 
130/0.4 from 2013 to 2015. J. Vet. Intern. Med.  31: 
434–441.
Sigrist, N.E., Kalin, N., and Dreyfus, A. (2017b). Effects of 
hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 on serum creatinine 
concentration and development of acute kidney injury in 
nonazotemic cats. J. Vet. Intern. Med.  31: 1749–1756.
Yozova, I.D., Howard, J., and Adamik, K.N. (2017). Effect of 
tetrastarch (hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4) on plasma 
creatinine concentration in cats: a retrospective analysis 
(2010–2015). J. Feline Med. Surg.  19: 1073–1079.
Zarychanski, R., Abou-  Setta, A.M., Turgeon, A.F. et al. 
(2013). Association of hydroxyethyl starch administration 
with mortality and acute kidney injury in critically ill 
patients requiring volume resuscitation: a systematic 
review and meta-  analysis. JAMA  309: 678–688.
Recommended Readings
Brady, C.A. and Otto, C.M. (2001). Systemic inflammatory 
response syndrome, sepsis, and multiple organ dysfunction. 
Vet. Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract.  31: 1147.
Brown, R. (1984). Potassium homeostasis and clinical 
implications. Am. J. Med.  77: 3–10.
Cote, E. (2001). Cardiogenic shock and cardiac arrest. Vet. 
Clin. North Am. Small Anim. Pract.  31: 1129.
Crystal, M.A. and Cotter, S.M. (1992). Acute hemorrhage: a 
hematologic emergency in dogs. Compend. Contin. Educ. 
Pract. Vet.  14: 1.
Day, T.K. (2003). Current development and use of 
hemoglobin-  based oxygen -  carrying (HBOC) solutions. 
J. Vet. Emerg. Crit. Care  13 (2): 77–93.
DiBartola, S.P. (2005). Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid Base 
Disorders , 3e. WB Saunders.
Gibson, G.R., Callan, M.B., Hoffman, V . et al. (2002). Use of a 
hemoglobin-  based oxygen-  carrying solution in cats: 72 
cases (1998–2002). J. Am. Vet. Assoc.  221 (1): 96–102.
Glowaski, M.M., Moon-  Massat, P.F., Erb, H.N. et al. 
(2003). Effects of oxypolygelatin and dextran 70 on 
hemostatic variables in dogs. Vet. Anaesth. Analg.  30 
(4): 202–210.
Gutierrez, G., Reines, H.D., and Wulf-  Gutierrez, M.E. (2004). 
Clinical review: hemorrhagic shock. Crit. Care  8 (5): 
373–381. Epub 2004 Apr 2.
Haldane, S., Graves, T.K., Bateman, S., and Lichtensteiger, 
C.A. (2007). Profound hypokalemia causing respiratory 
failure in a cat with hyperaldosteronism. J. Vet. Emerg. Crit. 
Care  17 (2): 202–207.
Johnson, A.L. and Criddle, L.M. (2004). Pass the salt: 
indications for and implications of using hypertonic saline. 
Crit. Care Nurse  24 (5): 36–38. 40–4, 46 passim.
Kelly, N. and Rentko, V .T. (1998). Comparative 
cardiovascular response by Oxyglobin versus packed red 
blood cells in acute anemia. J. Vet. Emerg. Crit. Care  8 
(3): 252.


--- PDF 100 ---
Fluid Therapy
82
Kirby, R. (1995). Septic shock. In: Current Veterinary Therapy 
XII (ed. J.D. Bonagura). Philadelphia: W .B. Saunders.
Kumar, A. and Parillo, J.E. (2001). Shock classification, 
pathophysiology, and approach to management. In: 
Critical Care Medicine: Principles of Diagnosis and 
Management in the Adult, 2e (ed. J.E. Parillo and 
R.P. Dellinger). Philadelphia: Mosby.
Mendez, C.M., McClain, C.J., and Marsano, L.S. (2005). Albumin 
in clinical practice. Nutr. Clin. Pract. 20 (3): 314–320.
Moore, K.E. and Murtaugh, R.J. (2001). Pathophysiologic 
characteristics of hypovolemic shock. Vet. Clin. North Am. 
Small Anim. Pract. 31: 1175.
Muir, W .W . (1990). Overview of shock. In: proceedings of the 
14th annual Kal Kan Symposium Emergency/Critical Care, 
7. Columbus, OH.
Orton, E.C. and Muir, W .W . (1983). Hemodynamics during 
experimental gastric dilitation and volvulus in dogs. Am. 
J. Vet. Res. 44: 1512–1515.
Rahilly, L. (2006). Hypoalbuminemia: pathophysiology and 
treatment. Conference Proceedings, International Veterinary 
Emergency and Critical Care Symposium.
Rixen, D. and Siegel, J.H. (2005). Bench- to- bedside review: 
oxygen debt and its metabolic correlates as quantifiers of 
the severity of hemorrhagic and post- traumatic shock. Crit. 
Care 9 (5): 441–453. Epub 2005 Apr 20.
Velasco, I.T., Pontieri, V ., Rocha, E., and Silva, M. (1980). 
Hypertonic NaCl and severe hemorrhagic shock. Am. 
J. Physiol. 239: H664–H673.
Vercueil, A., Grocott, M.P., and Mythen, M.G. (2005). 
Physiology, pharmacology, and rationale for colloid 
administration for the maintenance of effective 
hemodynamic stability in critically ill patients. Transfus. 
Med. Rev. 19 (2): 93–109.
Walton, R.S. (1996). Polymerized hemoglobin versus 
hydroxyethyl starch in an experimental model of feline 
hemorrhagic shock. Proceedings IVECCS. San Antonio.
Westphal, M., James, M.F., Kozek- Langenecker, S. et al. 
(2009). Hydroxyethyl starches: different products-  different 
effects. Anesthesiology 111: 187–202.
Wingfield, W .E., Betts, C.W ., and Rawlings, C.A. (1976). 
Pathophysiology associated with gastric dilatation-  volvulus 
in the dog. JAAHA 12: 136–142.


--- PDF 101 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Second Edition. Edited by Kenneth J. Drobatz,  
Erica Reineke, Merilee F. Costello, and William T. N. Culp.
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
83
A)	 Importance	of 	nutritional	support
a)	 Loss	 or	 decrease	 in	 food	 intake	 is	 often	 the	 first	 sign	
of 	illness	 in	 cats.	 An	 important	 consideration	 is	 that	
almost	 all	 diseases	 induce	 dramatic	 changes	 in	
energy	 and	 nutrient	 metabolism	 which	 put	 criti-
cally	 ill	 patients	 at	 high	 risk	 for	 malnutrition	 and	 its	
subsequent	 complications.	 Whereas	 healthy	 ani-
mals	 primarily	 lose	 fat	 when	 fasted,	 sick	 or	 injured	
animals	 catabolize	 lean	 body	 mass	 when	 they	 are	
not	provided	with	sufficient	calories.
b)	 Hospitalized	 cats	 are	 particularly	 stressed,	 which	
contributes	 to	 decreased	 food	 intake.	 Anorexia	 in	
cats	 can	 be	 particularly	 challenging	 to	 manage	 and	
can	 have	 serious	 metabolic	 consequences	 if 	left	
untreated.
c)	 An	 important	 point	 to	 make	 is	 that	 successful	 man-
agement	 of 	anorexia	 in	 cats	 is	 to	 reverse	 the	 primary	
condition,	 rather	 than	 using	 appetite	 stimulants	 or	
simply	 encouraging	 eating	 by	 offering	 “appetiz-
ing”	food.
d)	 The	 goals	 of 	nutritional	 support	 include	 correction	
of 	nutritional	 deficiencies	 and	 imbalances	 and	 pro -
vision	 of 	adequate	 energy	 substrates,	 protein,	 and	
micronutrients.
e)	 Prevention	 of 	further	 catabolism	 of 	lean	 body	 tissue	
and	 reversal	 of 	metabolic	 derangements	 are	 other	
important	goals	of 	nutritional	support.
f)	 Because	 nutritional	 interventions	 are	 not	 without	
risk,	 appropriate	 nutritional	 assessment	 can	 help	
select	 which	 patients	 are	 most	 likely	 to	 benefit	 from	
nutritional	 support	 and	 to	 help	 minimize	
complications.
B)	 Indications	for	nutritional	intervention
a)	 Nutritional	 assessment	 identifies	 malnourished	
patients	 that	 require	 urgent	 nutritional	 support	 as	
well	 as	 those	 in	 which	 nutritional	 support	 is	 likely	
to	be	necessary	to	prevent	malnutrition.
b)	 Overt	 indicators	 of 	 malnutrition	 include	 recent	
weight	 loss,	 poor	 hair	 coat	 quality,	 muscle	 wasting,	
signs	 of 	inadequate	 wound	 healing,	 hypoalbumine -
mia,	 and	 lymphopenia.	 However,	 these	 abnormali-
ties	 are	 not	 specific	 to	 malnutrition	 and	 do	 not	
occur	early	enough	in	the	process.
c)	 Key	 factors	 to	 consider	 in	 the	 nutritional	 assess -
ment	include	the	following:
i)	 Anorexia	lasting	greater	than	3 days.
ii)	 Serious	 underlying	 disease	 (e.g.,	 severe	 trauma,	
sepsis,	peritonitis,	acute	pancreatitis,	burns).
iii)	 Large	 protein	 losses	 (e.g.,	 draining	 wounds,	
exudative	effusions)
d)	 Patients	 with	 obvious	 protracted	 disease	 courses	 in	
which	 the	 cat	 is	 likely	 to	 be	 hospitalized	 for	 over	
5  days	 should	 be	 strongly	 considered	 to	 receive	
nutritional	support.
Daniel L. Chan
9
Nutritional Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient
UNIQUE FEATURES
 ● A particular concern with hospitalized cats is the development of food aversion. For this reason, stressful means for nutritional 
support such as force feeding or syringe feeding are not recommended.
 ● The importance of appropriate nutritional support in critically ill cats is highlighted by the development of hepatic lipidosis, which 
is usually secondary to another underlying condition and results from energy and protein deprivation. This is particularly true, but 
not exclusively seen in obese cats.
 ● Particular differences in the nutritional requirements of cats include a higher requirement for dietary protein (6 g of pro-
tein/100 kcal of food consumed) and strict requirements for taurine and arginine, explaining why enteral formulas designed for 
people are usually unsuitable for use in cats.


--- PDF 102 ---
Nutritional Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient
84
e)	 Nutritional 	assessment 	also 	identifies 	factors 	that 	
can 	affect 	the 	nutritional 	plan, 	such 	as 	electrolyte 	
abnormalities, 	 hyperglycemia, 	 hypertriglyceri -
demia, 	or 	comorbid 	illness 	such 	as 	significant 	
hepatic, 	cardiac, 	or 	renal 	disease.
f)	 Appropriate 	laboratory 	analysis 	(i.e., 	serum 	biochem -
ical 	profile) 	should 	be 	performed 	in 	all 	patients 	in 	
which 	nutritional 	support 	is 	being 	considered 	because 	
abnormalities 	may 	influence 	the 	nutritional 	plan.
g)	 Before 	 commencing 	 nutritional 	 support, 	 the 	
patient 	should 	be 	rehydrated, 	adequately 	resusci -
tated, 	that 	is, 	cardiovascularly 	stable, 	and 	have 	had 	
significant 	electrolyte 	and 	acid–base 	abnormalities 	
addressed.
C)	 Determine 	the 	route 	of 	nutritional 	support
a)	 If 	there 	are 	no 	signs 	of 	overt 	gastrointestinal 	dys -
function, 	for 	example, 	protracted 	vomiting 	or 	diar -
rhea 	that 	results 	in 	overt 	dehydration 	(>8%) 	or 	
compromised 	 intravascular 	 volume 	 status, 	 the 	
enteral 	route 	of 	delivery 	should 	be 	chosen.
b)	 Enteral 	nutrition 	is 	the 	most 	practical, 	economi -
cal, 	and 	physiologically 	sound 	approach 	of 	deliv -
ering 	nutrients. 	Except 	for 	feeding 	tube 	problems, 	
there 	 are 	 fewer 	 complications 	 associated 	 with 	
enteral 	nutrition 	compared 	with 	parenteral 	nutri -
tion 	(PN).
c)	 Even 	when 	enteral 	nutrition 	does 	not 	completely 	
meet all 	of 	the 	patient’s 	energy 	and 	nutrient 	needs, 	
delivery 	of 	food 	via 	the 	gastrointestinal 	tract 	(as 	lit -
tle 	as 	30% 	of 	resting 	energy 	requirements 	[RER]) 	is 	
still 	beneficial 	in 	that 	it 	modulates 	gastrointestinal 	
motility 	and 	immune 	function, 	and 	maintains 	the 	
integrity 	of 	the 	intestinal 	barrier.
d)	 For 	patients 	that 	cannot 	tolerate 	enteral 	feedings 	
or 	in 	which 	there 	is 	concern 	for 	aspiration 	of 	food 	
into 	the 	airways, 	for 	example, 	pharyngeal 	dysfunc -
tion 	or 	dyspnea, 	the 	parenteral 	route 	should 	be 	
considered.
D)	 Enteral 	nutrition
a)	 If 	the 	enteral 	route 	is 	chosen, 	the 	most 	appropriate 	
type 	 of 	 feeding 	 tube 	 for 	 that 	 patient 	 must 	 be 	
considered.
b)	 Factors 	to 	consider 	in 	choosing 	a 	particular 	feeding 	
tube 	include 	the 	anticipated 	duration 	of 	nutritional 	
support, 	the 	need 	to 	circumvent 	certain 	segments 	of 	
the 	gastrointestinal 	tract 	(e.g., 	because 	of 	esophagi-
tis), 	the 	form 	of 	nutrition 	to 	be 	delivered 	(e.g., 	liquid 	
diet 	vs. 	blenderized 	diet), 	suitability 	of 	the 	patient 	
to 	withstand 	anesthesia, 	and 	clinician’s 	preference 	
and 	experience.
c)	 Feeding 	tube 	options
i) 	Nasoesophageal/nasogastric 	tubes
1)	 Technically, 	this 	is 	the 	simplest 	type 	of 	feed-
ing 	tube 	to 	place 	(see 	Figures 9.1–9.6).
Figure 9.1 Underweight cat ready to receive placement of 
nasoesophageal/nasogastric tube.
Figure 9.2 Instilling local anesthetic (e.g., proxymetacaine) 
into nares. Note how the head is tilted straight up so that the 
topical anesthetic will follow gravity into the nasal cavity.
Figure 9.3 Initial placement of nasoesophageal/nasogastric 
tube into nares. Note that initial placement should be directed 
toward the ventromedial aspect of the nares.


--- PDF 103 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 85
2)	 This 	is 	a 	good 	option 	if 	only 	a 	short 	(fewer 	
than 	3 days) 	course 	of 	nutritional 	support 	is 	
anticipated.
3)	 Patients 	that 	are 	unstable 	for 	anesthesia 	can 	
have 	these 	tubes 	placed 	with 	minimal 	seda-
tion 	(if 	any 	is 	required) 	and 	topical 	anes -
thetic 	instilled 	in 	nasal 	passages.
4)	 Major 	limitations 	include 	using 	liquid 	diets 	
only, 	patient 	discomfort, 	and 	requirement 	of 	
Elizabethan 	collars 	or 	other 	measures 	to 	pre -
vent 	dislodgement 	of 	tube.
5)	 Most 	 nasoesophageal/nasogastric 	 feeding 	
tubes 	in 	cats 	are 	either 	3.5 	Fr 	or 	5 	Fr 	in 	size.
6)	 Correct 	placement 	within 	the 	esophagus/
stomach 	should 	be 	checked 	by 	either 	radi -
ography, 	 fluoroscopy, 	 or 	 end- 	tidal 	 CO 2 	
measurement.
–	Tubes 	placed 	within 	the 	esophagus 	should 	
not 	yield 	appreciable 	CO 2 	(Figure 9.6).
–	The 	tip 	of 	the 	feeding 	tube 	should 	lie 	in 	
the 	distal 	third 	of 	the 	esophagus, 	but 	it 	
could 	also 	be 	placed 	in 	the 	stomach.
ii) 	Esophageal 	tubes
1)	 These 	are 	probably 	the 	most 	versatile 	and 	
useful 	feeding 	tubes 	for 	critically 	ill 	cats.
2)	 These 	are 	relatively 	simple 	to 	place, 	require 	
only 	short 	anesthesia 	(should 	not 	be 	placed 	
with 	sedation 	alone), 	and 	allow 	use 	of 	blen-
derized, 	calorically 	dense 	diets.
3)	 Most 	cats 	tolerate 	esophageal 	tubes 	without 	
need 	of 	Elizabethan 	collars 	and 	can 	eat 	volun -
tarily 	with 	these 	tubes 	in 	place, 	compared 	with 	
cats 	with 	nasoesophageal/nasogastric 	tubes, 	
which 	may 	not 	have 	an 	interest 	in 	eating.
4)	 A 	full 	description 	of 	the 	technique 	in 	placing 	
these 	tubes 	can 	be 	found 	in 	the 	caption 	for 	
Figure 9.7a–n.
5)	 The 	 positioning 	 of 	 the 	 tube 	 should 	 be 	
assessed 	 via 	 radiography, 	 fluoroscopy, 	 or 	
end- 	tidal 	CO 2 	before 	use 	(see 	Figure  9.8). 	
The 	distal 	tip 	should 	lie 	within 	the 	distal 	
third 	of 	the 	esophagus 	or 	stomach.
6)	 The 	most 	common 	sizes 	of 	esophageal 	feed-
ing 	tubes 	for 	cats 	are 	12 	Fr 	and 	14 	Fr.
–	Proper 	placement 	of 	an 	esophagostomy 	
feeding 	tube 	requires 	the 	distal 	tip 	to 	be 	
placed 	in 	the 	distal 	esophagus 	at 	the 	level 	
no 	 farther 	 than 	 the 	 ninth 	 intercostal 	
space. 	This 	may 	require 	premeasuring 	the 	
tube. 	In 	some 	cases, 	the 	tip 	of 	the 	tube 	
Figure 9.6 Attaching the end of the tube to the end- tidal CO2 
monitor to evaluate for proper placement. CO2 should not be 
detected if proper placement has occurred. If the tube is in the 
trachea or airways, CO2 will be detected with respiration. Proper 
placement could also be confirmed by thoracic radiography. The 
tube should end in the distal third of the esophagus or within 
the stomach.
Figure 9.4 Nasoesophageal/nasogastric tube has been placed 
the proper distance. Note how the exit of the tube is nearly flush 
with the lateral aspect of the nares and then is directed up 
toward the forehead between the eyes. The tube also could be 
directed to the lateral side of the face, but whiskers should be 
avoided, as this will more likely cause irritation to the cat.
Figure 9.5 Tube is secured to skin using a butterfly tape and 
sutured to the skin.


--- PDF 104 ---
Nutritional Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient
86
may 	be 	placed 	into 	the 	stomach 	which 	
can 	be 	used 	for 	gastric 	decompression. 	
Rather 	than 	cutting 	the 	distal 	tip 	and 	cre -
ating 	a 	sharp 	edge, 	the 	exit 	side 	hole 	may 	
be 	elongated 	using 	a 	small 	blade.
–	The 	patient 	should 	be 	anesthetized 	and 	
preferably 	intubated. 	While 	in 	right 	lat -
eral 	recumbency, 	the 	left 	side 	of 	the 	neck 	
should 	be 	clipped 	and 	a 	routine 	surgical 	
scrub 	is 	performed.
–	A 	curved 	Rochester 	Carmalt 	is 	placed 	into 	
the 	mouth 	and 	down 	the 	esophagus 	to 	the 	
midcervical 	 region. 	 The 	 jugular 	 vein 	
should 	be 	identified 	and 	avoided.
–	The 	tip 	of 	the 	Carmalt 	is 	then 	pushed 	dor -
sally, 	 pushing 	 the 	 esophagus 	 toward 	
the 	skin.
a
b
c
 f
d
e
f
Figure 9.7 (a)–(n) Step- by- step technique for esophagostomy tube placement.


--- PDF 105 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 87
–	The 	tip 	of 	the 	Carmalt 	is 	palpated 	over 	the 	
skin 	to 	confirm 	its 	location, 	and 	an 	inci-
sion 	is 	made 	through 	the 	skin 	onto 	the 	tip 	
of 	the 	Carmalt 	in 	the 	esophagus. 	The 	
mucosa 	 of 	 the 	 esophagus 	 is 	 relatively 	
more 	difficult 	to 	incise 	than 	the 	skin.
–	The 	tip 	of 	the 	instrument 	is 	then 	bluntly 	
forced 	through 	the 	incision, 	which 	can 	be 	
slightly 	enlarged 	with 	the 	blade 	to 	allow 	
opening 	of 	the 	tips 	of 	the 	Carmalt 	and 	
placement 	 of 	 the 	 esophagostomy 	 tube 	
within 	the 	tips.
–	The 	Carmalt 	is 	then 	clamped 	closed 	and 	
pulled 	from 	the 	oral 	cavity.
–	Disengage 	the 	tips 	of 	the 	Carmalt, 	curl 	the 	
tip 	 of 	 the 	 esophagostomy 	 back 	 into 	
the mouth, 	and 	feed 	it 	into 	esophagus. 	As the 	
curled 	tube 	is 	pushed 	into 	the 	esophagus, 	
g
h
i
j
k
l
Figure 9.7 (Continued)


--- PDF 106 ---
Nutritional Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient
88
the 	proximal 	end 	is 	gently 	pulled 	simulta -
neously. 	This 	will 	result 	in 	a 	subtle 	“flip” , 	as 	
the 	tube 	is 	redirected 	within 	the 	esophagus. 	
The 	tube 	should 	easily 	slide 	back 	and 	forth 	a 	
few 	millimeters, 	confirming 	that 	the 	tube 	
has 	straightened.
–	Visually 	inspect 	the 	oropharynx 	to 	con-
firm 	that 	the 	tube 	is 	no 	longer 	present 	
within 	the 	oropharynx.
–	The 	 incision 	 site 	 should 	 be 	 briefly 	
rescrubbed 	before 	a 	purse- 	string 	suture 	is 	
placed, 	 followed 	 by 	 a 	 “Chinese 	 finger 	
trap,” 	further 	securing 	the 	tube 	in 	place.
–	A 	light 	wrap 	is 	applied 	to 	the 	neck.
7)	 There 	is 	no 	minimal 	amount 	of 	time 	the 	
tubes 	need 	to 	stay 	in 	place, 	and 	they 	can 	be 	
pulled 	at 	any 	time. 	Tubes 	can 	remain 	in 	
place 	for 	months, 	if 	necessary.
8)	 The 	most 	common 	problems 	with 	esopha-
geal 	feeding 	tubes 	are 	tube 	occlusion 	and 	
cellulitis 	at 	the 	skin 	incision 	site.
iii) 	Pharyngostomy 	tubes.
1)	 These 	are 	technically 	slightly 	more 	difficult 	
tubes 	to 	place 	correctly, 	and 	associated 	com-
plications 	are 	significant.
2)	 Pharyngostomy 	 tubes 	 have 	 been 	 largely 	
replaced 	by 	esophagostomy 	tubes 	and 	are 	
not 	recommended.
iv) 	Gastrostomy 	tubes
1)	 Indications 	for 	placement 	of 	gastrostomy 	
tubes 	 (both 	 percutaneous 	 endoscopically 	
guided 	[PEG] 	or 	surgically 	placed).
–	Need 	for 	long- 	term 	nutritional 	support 	
(greater 	than 	4 weeks).
–	Need 	to 	bypass 	the 	mouth, 	pharynx, 	or 	
esophagus, 	for 	example, 	mandibular 	frac-
tures 	or 	sites 	of 	radiation 	therapy.
–	Patients 	undergoing 	endoscopic 	evaluation
2)	 Placement 	of 	gastrostomy 	tubes 	(typically 	
22–28 	Fr 	tubes) 	allows 	feeding 	of 	various 	
blenderized 	canned 	diets, 	which 	may 	not 	be 	
amenable 	for 	feeding 	via 	other 	smaller 	tubes.
3)	 Placement 	of 	these 	tubes 	requires 	full 	anes -
thesia 	and 	specialized 	equipment.
v) 	Low- 	profile 	gastrostomy 	tubes
1)	 These 	tubes 	are 	generally 	used 	to 	replace 	a 	
long- 	standing 	gastrostomy 	tube 	with 	a 	more 	
“cosmetic” 	tube 	when 	very 	long- 	term 	nutri-
tional 	support 	is 	anticipated; 	for 	example, 	
several 	months 	as 	in 	cases 	of 	patients 	under -
going 	chemotherapy.
2)	 The 	decision 	to 	use 	these 	tubes 	is 	based 	
mainly 	on 	practical 	and 	cosmetic 	reasons 	
rather 	than 	medical 	reasons.
3)	 In 	cats, 	replacement 	of 	a 	standard 	gastros -
tomy 	tube 	(in 	place 	for 	at 	least 	a 	month) 	
m
n
Figure 9.7 (Continued)
Figure 9.8 Correct placement of the esophagostomy tube 
should be confirmed with either radiography or fluoroscopy.


--- PDF 107 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 89
with 	a 	low- 	profile 	gastrostomy 	tube 	requires 	
general 	anesthesia.
vi) 	Jejunostomy 	or 	jejunal 	tubes
1)	 Placement 	of 	jejunostomy 	tubes 	is 	indicated 	
when 	 the 	 patient 	 necessitates 	 abdominal 	
surgery 	and 	there 	is 	a 	need 	to 	bypass 	a 	cer -
tain 	segment 	of 	the 	gastrointestinal 	tract.
2)	 A 	significant 	amount 	of 	technical 	expertise 	
is 	required 	to 	place 	these 	tubes.
3)	 Major 	complications:
–	Tube 	dislodgement 	and 	leakage 	around 	
stoma 	site, 	which 	can 	prove 	fatal 	due 	to 	
septic 	peritonitis.
–	Diarrhea:
 ● Generally 	related 	to 	the 	composition 	or 	
osmolarity 	 of 	 the 	 diet, 	 rather 	 than 	
being 	caused 	by 	the 	mode 	of 	feeding.
4)	 Feeding 	via 	jejunostomy 	feeding 	tubes 	is 	
best 	achieved 	using 	liquid 	diets 	designed 	for 	
cats 	and 	administered 	as 	continuous 	infu-
sions 	rather 	than 	bolus 	feeding.
5)	 A 	newer 	technique 	involves 	placing 	a 	jejunal 	
tube 	(J) 	through 	an 	existing 	percutaneous 	
endoscopy- 	guided 	gastrosmomy 	tube 	(PEG), 	
the 	so 	called 	“J- 	through- 	PEG” 	tube 	approach 	
that 	circumvents 	the 	need 	for 	abdominal 	
surgery 	or 	a 	jejunal 	incision.
6)	 These 	tubes 	are 	considerably 	more 	difficult 	
to 	place 	and 	increase 	total 	anesthesia 	time 	
dramatically.
7)	 J- 	through- 	PEG 	tubes 	are 	placed 	by 	thread-
ing 	a 	feeding 	tube 	through 	a 	PEG 	tube; 	the 	
distal 	tip 	is 	placed 	within 	the 	jejunum 	with 	
the 	aid 	of 	endoscopy. 	The 	jejunal 	tube 	is 	
grasped 	 with 	 a 	 biopsy 	 wire 	 and 	 pushed 	
through 	the 	pylorus, 	and 	the 	procedure 	is 	
repeated 	until 	approximately 	20 	cm 	of 	feed-
ing 	tube 	is 	within 	the 	jejunum.
E)	 Parenteral 	nutrition
a)	 PN 	should 	only 	be 	considered 	for 	patients 	with 	
overt 	 gastrointestinal 	 dysfunction 	 such 	 as 	 pro -
tracted 	vomiting, 	severe 	ileus, 	or 	diarrhea.
b)	 Inappetence 	is 	not 	sufficient 	justification 	for 	PN.
c)	 PN 	is 	usually 	a 	mixture 	of 	an 	amino 	acid 	solution 	
with 	lipids 	and 	dextrose. 	Vitamins, 	trace 	minerals, 	
and 	certain 	medications 	can 	be 	safely 	added 	to 	PN.
d)	 General 	considerations 	for 	using 	PN 	include 	the 	
following:
i) 	Careful 	selection 	of 	patients 	most 	likely 	to 	ben-
efit 	from 	this 	form 	of 	support.
ii) 	The 	ability 	to 	place 	appropriate 	catheters 	(dou-
ble- 	 	or 	triple- 	lumen 	catheters).
iii) 	The 	ability 	to 	safely 	compound 	and 	administer 	
PN. 	Solutions 	are 	mixed 	aseptically, 	usually 	
through 	intravenous 	filters, 	and 	administered 	
continuously 	via 	infusion 	pumps.
iv) 	Frequent 	 monitoring 	 for 	 possible 	 complica-
tions 	is 	imperative.
e)	 Measures 	to 	reduce 	complications 	associated 	with 	
PN 	include 	careful 	patient 	selection 	and 	conserva-
tive 	estimation 	of 	energy 	requirements.
f)	 Peripheral 	parenteral 	nutrition 	(PPN; 	Table 9.1):
i) 	This 	type 	of 	PN 	refers 	to 	the 	administration 	of 	
nutrients 	intravenously 	that 	are 	suitable 	for 	
peripheral 	administration, 	as 	these 	solutions 	
have 	lower 	osmolality 	(<1000 	mOsm/l) 	than 	
PN 	solutions 	which 	must 	be 	administered 	cen-
trally 	(>1200 	mOsm/l).
Table 9.1 Peripheral parenteral nutrition (PPN) calculations.
1) 	Calculate 	resting 	energy 	requirement 	(RER)
RER = 70 	× 	(current 	body 	weight 	in 	kg) 0.75 	
RER = ___kcal/day
2) 	Calculate 	the 	partial 	energy 	requirement 	(PER)
Plan 	to 	supply 	70% 	of 	the 	animal’s 	RER 	with 	PPN:
PER = RER 	× 	0.70 = ___kcal/day
3) 	Proportion 	of 	nutrient 	requirements 	according 	to 	body 	
weight:
(Note: 	for 	animals 	 3 	kg, 	the 	formulation 	will 	exceed 	
maintenance 	fluid 	requirements.)
a) 	Cats 	3–5 	kg:
PER 	× 	0.20 = ___kcal/day 	carbohydrate 	required
PER 	× 	0.20 = ___kcal/day 	protein 	required
PER 	× 	0.60 = ___kcal/day 	lipid 	required
b) 	Cats 	6–10 	kg:
PER 	× 	0.25 = ___kcal/day 	carbohydrate 	required
PER 	× 	0.25 = ___kcal/day 	protein 	required
PER 	× 	0.50 = ___kcal/day 	lipid 	required
4) 	Volumes 	of 	nutrient 	solutions 	required:
a) 	5% 	dextrose 	solution = 0.17 	kcal/ml
___kcal 	carbohydrate 	required/day 	÷	0.17 	kcal/ml = ___ 	ml/
day 	dextrose
b) 	8.5% 	amino 	acid 	solution = 0.34 kcal/ml
___kcal 	protein 	required/day 	÷	0.34 	kcal/ml = ___ 	ml/day 	
amino 	acids
c) 	20% 	lipid 	solution = 2 	kcal/ml
___kcal 	lipid 	required/day 	÷	2 	kcal/ml = ___ 	ml/day 	lipid
=___ 	total 	ml 	of 	PPN 	to 	be 	administered 	over 	24 	hours
Note: 	This 	formulation 	provides 	approximately 	a 	maintenance 	fluid 	
rate. 	Commonly 	used 	8.5% 	amino 	acid 	solutions 	(i.e., 	Travasol) 	with 	
electrolytes 	contain 	potassium. 	The 	PPN 	solution 	made 	according 	to 	
this 	worksheet 	will 	provide 	approximately 	maintenance 	levels 	of 	
potassium. 	Rates 	of 	other 	IV 	fluids 	being 	concurrently 	administered 	
should 	be 	adjusted 	accordingly.


--- PDF 108 ---
Nutritional Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient
90
ii) 	PPN 	may 	be 	indicated 	in 	patients 	in 	which 	
central 	parenteral 	nutrition 	(CPN) 	is 	not 	feasi -
ble; 	for 	example, 	when 	a 	central 	catheter 	can -
not 	be 	placed.
iii) 	Because 	PPN 	is 	a 	“less 	concentrated” 	form 	of 	
PN, 	it 	contains 	fewer 	calories 	and 	so 	only 	meets 	
some 	of 	the 	caloric 	and 	nutrient 	requirements 	
of 	patients.
1)	 The 	decrease 	in 	the 	osmolarity 	of 	the 	solu -
tion 	in 	PPN 	is 	achieved 	by 	the 	use 	of 	5% 	dex -
trose 	as 	opposed 	to 	50% 	dextrose. 	Additionally, 	
the 	targeted 	amount 	of 	calories 	is 	between 	65 	
and 	80% 	of 	RER 	with 	PPN.
iv) 	PPN 	is 	perhaps 	associated 	with 	fewer 	complica -
tions 	as 	compared 	with 	CPN, 	and 	this 	may 	be 	
related 	 to 	 the 	 differences 	 in 	 total 	 calories 	
delivered, 	composition 	of 	solutions, 	or 	different 	
patient 	populations.
v) 	PPN 	can 	also 	be 	used 	to 	supplement 	cats 	that 	
can 	only 	tolerate 	small 	amounts 	of 	enteral 	
feeding.
vi) 	As 	PPN 	is 	typically 	formulated 	with 	5% 	dex -
trose, 	there 	is 	potential 	for 	fluid 	overload; 	the 	
final 	volume 	of 	PPN 	should 	always 	be 	assessed 	
for 	appropriateness 	for 	given 	patients.
g)	 Central 	parenteral 	nutrition 	(Table 9.2)
i) 	The 	indication 	for 	use 	of 	CPN 	in 	cats 	typically 	
involves 	a 	case 	with 	overt 	and 	intractable 	gas -
trointestinal 	dysfunction. 	These 	patients 	have 	
severe 	vomiting, 	diarrhea, 	and/or 	malabsorp -
tive 	conditions, 	and 	it 	is 	anticipated 	that 	enteral 	
nutrition 	will 	not 	resume 	promptly.
Table 9.2 Central parenteral nutrition (CPN) calculations.
1) 	Calculate 	resting 	energy 	requirement 	(RER)
RER = 70 	× 	(current 	body 	weight 	in 	kg) 0.75
RER = ___kcal/day
2) 	Protein 	requirements	 (g/100 	kcal)
Standard	 6
Reduced 	(hepatic/renal 	disease)	 3–4
Increased 	(excessive 	protein 	losses)	 7–8
(RER   100) 	× 	___ 	g/100 	kcal = ___ 	g 	protein 	required/day
3) 	Volume 	of 	nutrient 	solutions 	required
a) 	8.5% 	amino 	acid 	solution = 0.085 	g 	protein/ml
___ 	g 	protein 	required/day   0.085 	g/ml = ___ 	ml/day 	of 	amino 	acids
b) 	Nonprotein 	calories:
The 	calories 	supplied 	by 	protein 	(4 	kcal/g) 	are 	subtracted 	from 	the 	RER 	to 	get 	total 	nonprotein 	calories 	needed.
___g 	protein 	req./day 	× 	4 	kcal/g = ___ 	kcal 	provided 	by 	protein
RER – 	kcal 	provided 	by 	protein = ___ 	total 	nonprotein 	kcal/day 	required
c) 	Nonprotein 	calories 	are 	usually 	provided 	as 	a 	50:50 mixture 	of 	lipid 	and 	dextrose.
20% 	lipid 	solution = 2 	kcal/ml
To 	supply 	50% 	of 	nonprotein 	calories
___ 	lipid 	kcal 	required   2 	kcal/ml = ___ 	ml 	of 	lipid
50% 	of 	dextrose 	solution = 1.7 	kcal/ml
To 	supply 	50% 	of 	nonprotein 	calories
___ 	dextrose 	kcal 	required   1.7 	kcal/ml = ___ 	ml 	of 	dextrose
4) 	Total 	daily 	requirements
___ 	ml 	of 	8.5% 	amino 	acid 	solution
___ 	ml 	of 	20% 	lipid
___ 	ml 	of 	50% 	dextrose
___ 	total 	ml 	of 	CPN 	solution 	to 	be 	administered 	over 	24 	hours
Note: 	Using 	a 	common 	8.5% 	amino 	acid 	solution 	containing 	potassium 	(i.e., 	Travasol), 	CPN 	made 	according 	to 	this 	worksheet 	will 	provide 	
potassium 	at 	higher 	than 	maintenance 	levels. 	CPN 	for 	animals 	that 	are 	hyperkalemic 	should 	be 	formulated 	using 	amino 	acid 	solutions 	without 	
electrolytes. 	Rates 	of 	other 	IV 	fluids 	being 	concurrently 	administered 	should 	be 	adjusted 	accordingly.


--- PDF 109 ---
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 91
ii)	 Patients	 with	 overt	 malnutrition,	 for	 example,	
greater	 than	 15%	 loss	 of 	body	 weight,	 may	 not	
be	 adequately	 supported	 with	 PPN	 and	 may	 be	
best	treated	with	CPN.
iii)	 Due	 to	 higher	 osmolarity	 and	 increased	 risk	 of 	
thrombophlebitis,	 CPN	 usually	 requires	 cen-
tral	 venous	 administration,	 that	 is,	 jugular	
catheters	 or	 femoral	 catheters	 threaded	 to	 the	
caudal	vena	cava.
iv)	 In	 patients	 where	 placement	 of 	such	 catheters	
(e.g.,	 double-	 	 or	 triple-	 lumen	 catheters)	 is	 not	
feasible,	PPN	may	be	the	only	option.
F)	 Calculation	of 	caloric	requirements
a)	 The	 patient’s	 RER	 is	 the	 number	 of 	calories	 required	
for	 maintaining	 homeostasis	 while	 the	 animal	 rests	
quietly.
b)	 Estimation	 of 	energy	 requirements	 is	 calculated	 as	
follows:
i)	 RER = 70(body	weight	in	kg) 0.75
c)	 Several	 factors	 impact	 the	 overall	 total	 energy	
expenditure,	 including	 level	 of 	activity	 and	 the	
effects	of 	disease	processes	on	metabolism.
d)	 Clinically,	 energy	 expenditure	 is	 difficult	 to 	
measure;	 therefore,	 estimation	 of 	energy	 require -
ments	 is	 the	 standard	 for	 calculating	 nutritional 	
support.
i)	 Formerly,	 there	 was	 an	 emphasis	 on	 adjusting	
energy	 expenditure	 by	 simply	 multiplying	 the	
RER	 with	 an	 arbitrary,	 extrapolated	 illness	 fac-
tor.	 More	 recently,	 this	 practice	 is	 purported	 to	
increase	 rates	 of 	complications	 without	 improv -
ing	 outcome.	 Therefore,	 recent	 recommenda-
tions	 propose	 initial	 caloric	 targets	 to	 be	 simply	
the	estimated	RER.
e)	 One	 of 	the	 reasons	 for	 starting	 with	 RER	 is	 that 	
the	 main	 purpose	 of 	nutritional	 support	 in	 criti-
cally	 ill	 patients	 is	 to	 support	 energy	 and	 sub -
strate	 requirements,	 not	 resulting	 in	 immediate 	
weight	gain.
f)	 Only	 after	 the	 patient	 is	 deemed	 to	 be	 recovering	
and	 tolerating	 feedings	 well	 should	 caloric	 targets	
be	 raised,	 usually	 by	 10–20%	 increments	 if 	there	 is	
failure	to	gain	weight.
G)	 Types	of 	diets
a)	 The	choice	of 	an	appropriate	enteral	diet	to	be	used	
for	tube	feeding	depends	on	several	factors:
i)	 The	 underlying	 disease	 process	 and	 presence	 of 	
comorbid	conditions.
ii)	 The	size	and	type	of 	feeding	tube	placed.
iii)	 Access	to	veterinary	specialized	diets.
iv)	 Owner’s	 ability	 to	 obtain	 and	 administer	 pre -
scribed	diet.
b)	 Veterinary	liquid	diets
i)	 There	 are	 only	 a	 few	 products	 commercially	
available	that	are	suitable	for	cats.
1)	 Human	 enteral	 formulas	 lack	 several	 key 	
nutrients,	 such	 as	 arginine	 and	 taurine, 	
which	 precludes	 recommending	 the	 use	 of 	
such	products.
ii)	 These	 diets	 are	 ideal	 for	 cats	 that	 have	 nasoe -
sophageal	 and	 jejunal	 tubes	 in	 place,	 although	
liquid	diets	can	be	used	with	any	feeding	tube.
iii)	 In	 certain	 critically	 ill	 cats,	 a	 slow	 continuous 	
infusion	 of 	liquid	 diets	 through	 nasoesophageal 	
or	 esophagostomy	 tubes	 may	 be	 tolerated	 despite 	
occasional	 vomiting.	 Infusion	 rates	 between 	
0.5	 ml/kg/h	and	2	 ml/kg/h	are	recommended.
iv)	 One	 of 	the	 major	 disadvantages	 of 	liquid	 diets	
is	 the	 high	 fat	 and	 protein	 content,	 which	 may	
not	 be	 appropriate	 for	 all	 patients	 (e.g.,	 cats	
with	 steatorrhea	 or	 hepatic	 encephalopathy,	
respectively).
v)	 The	 caloric	 density	 of 	most	 liquid	 diets	 is	
approximately	 1	 kcal/ml,	 which	 could	 translate	
to	 large	 volumes	 of 	the	 diet	 being	 necessary	 to	
meet	energy	requirements.
c)	 Veterinary	canned	diets
i)	 Placement	 of 	larger	 feeding	 tubes,	 for	 example, 	
esophagostomy	 and	 gastrostomy	 tubes,	 allows 	
feeding	 of 	more	 calorie- 	dense	 diets	 (some	 as 	
high	 as	 2	 kcal/ml).	 This	 results	 in	 smaller	 vol-
umes	 of 	food	 being	 administered	 at	 each	 feeding.
ii)	 In	 addition	 to	 “critical	 care	 diets,”	 almost	 any	
canned	 product	 can	 be	 prepared	 to	 make	 tube	
feeding	 amenable.	 This	 usually	 requires	 blend-
erizing	 a	 canned	 diet	 with	 a	 certain	 amount	 of 	
water	 and	 sometimes	 straining	 the	 mixture	
through	 a	 sieve	 before	 being	 able	 to	 feed	 via	
feeding	tubes.
iii)	 Examples	 of 	how	 common	 veterinary	 diets	 can	
be	 modified	 to	 make	 them	 amenable	 for	 tube	
feeding	are	listed	in	 Table 9.3.
H)	 Role	of 	appetite	stimulants
a)	 As	 appetite	 suppression	 is	 always	 a	 consequence	 of 	
the	 underlying	 disease	 rather	 than	 the	 actual	 pri-
mary	 problem,	 the	 use	 of 	appetite	 stimulants	 is	 sel-
dom	 recommended	 in	 the	 initial	 treatment	 of 	
critically	ill	cats.
b)	 The	 use	 of 	appetite	 stimulants	 while	 cats	 are	 hospi-
talized	 (e.g.,diazepam)	 is	 usually	 ineffective	 and	 not	
recommended.
c)	 The	 more	 appropriate	 use	 of 	appetite	 stimulants	 is	
when	 the	 patient	 is	 recovering	 from	 the	 underlying	
disease	and	has	been	discharged	from	the	hospital.


--- PDF 110 ---
Nutritional Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient
92
d)	 A	 commonly	 used	 appetite	 stimulant	 in	 cats	 recov -
ering	 from	 illnesses	 is	 mirtazapine	 administered	
orally	 at	 3–4	 mg/cat	 q72h.	 This	 approach	 is	 not	
appropriate	for	severely	ill	hospitalized	cats.
e)	 The	 use	 of 	appetite	 stimulants	 is	 not	 without	 risks.	
Reports	 of 	toxicity	 have	 been	 reported	 in	 cats	 receiv -
ing	“therapeutic”	dosages.
I)	 Monitoring	and	reassessment	of 	the	patient
a)	 As	 with	 all	 interventions,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 empha-
size	 the	 role	 of 	close	 monitoring	 of 	patients	 receiv -
ing	nutritional	support.
b)	 Feeding	 tubes	 and	 PN	 catheters	 must	 be	 monitored	
for	 mechanical	 problems	 as	 well	 as	 infections	 at	
entry	 site.	 Catheter	 and	 feeding	 tube	 sites	 should	 be	
evaluated	 daily	 for	 signs	 of 	inflammation	 and/or	
infection.
c)	 Recommended	 monitoring	 for	 patients	 receiving	
PN	 include	 frequent	 evaluation	 of 	heart	 rate,	 res -
piratory	 rate,	 temperature,	 blood	 glucose,	 blood	
urea	 nitrogen,	 and	 triglycerides.	 In	 particularly	
debilitated	 cats,	 monitoring	 of 	magnesium,	 potas -
sium,	and	phosphorus	is	also	recommended.
i)	 Periodic	 nutritional	 reassessment	 can	 guide 	
whether	 there	 should	 be	 an	 adjustment	 of 	nutri-
tional	 support;	 for	 example,	 increase	 calories 	
delivered	 by	 20%	 if 	there	 is	 persistent	 weight	 loss 	
in	 the	 face	 of 	nutritional	 support	 or	 decrease	 or 	
stop	delivery	of 	nutrition	if 	complications	arise.
 Recommended Readings
Chan,	D.L.	(2004).	Nutritional	requirements	of 	the	critically	
ill	patient.	Clin. Tech. Small Anim. Pract.	19	(1):	1–5.
Chan,	D.L.	and	Freeman,	L.M.	(2015).	Parenteral	nutrition	in	
small	animals.	In:	Nutritional Management of Hospitalized 
Small Animals	(ed.	D.L.	Chan),	100–116.	 West	Sussex:	
Wiley	Blackwell.
Chan,	D.L.	(2018).	Feeding	tube	complications.	In:	Textbook 
of Small Animal Emergency Medicine	(ed.	K.	Drobatz,	
E.A.	Rozanski,	K.	Hopper	and	D.	Silverstein),	578–581.	
Wiley	Blackwell.
Mazzaferro,	E.M.	(2001).	Esophagostomy	tubes:	don’t	
underutilize	them!	J. Vet. Emerg. Crit. Care	11	(2):		
153–156.
Pyle,	S.C.,	Marks,	S.L.,	and	Kass,	P.H.	(2004).	Evaluation	of 	
complications	and	prognostic	factors	associated	with	
administration	of 	total	parenteral	nutrition	in	cats:	75	
cases	(1994–2001).	J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.	255	(2):		
242–250.
Quimby,	J.M.	and	Lunn,	K.F.	(2013).	Mirtazapine	as	an	
appetite	stimulant	and	anti- 	emetic	in	cats	with	chronic	
kidney	disease:	a	masked	placebo- 	controlled	crossover	
clinical	trial.	Vet. J.	197	(3):	651–655.
Yu,	M.K.,	Freeman,	L.M.,	Heinze,	C.R.,	and	t	al.	(2013).	
Comparison	of 	complications	in	dogs	with	nasoesophageal	
versus	nasogastric	tubes.	J. Vet. Emerg. Crit. Care	23	(3):	
300–304.
Table 9.3 Enteral nutrition calculations for tube feeding.
1)	 Calculate	resting	energy	requirement	(RER)
RER = 70	 ×	(current	body	weight	in	kg) 0.75 	
2)	 Product	selected:	__________
Caloric	density	of 	diet:	_____	kcal/ml
3)	 Total	volume	to	be	administered	per	day
kcal	required/day = ___	ml/day
kcal/ml	in	diet
4)	 Administration	schedule
½	of 	total	requirement	on	Day	1 = ___ml/day	(Day	1)
Total	 requirement	 on	 Day	 2	 and	 beyond  =  ___ml/
day	(Day	2)
5)	 Feedings	per	day
Divide	 total	 daily	 volume	 into	 4–6	 feedings	 (depending	
on	patient	tolerance	for	feedings) = ___feedings/day
6)	 Volume	per	feeding
Divide	total	ml/day	by	the	number	of 	feedings	per	day
=___ml/feeding	(Day	1)
=___ml/feeding	(Day	2)
7)	 Diet	options
A)	 Nasoesophageal	and	jejunostomy	tubes
i)	 Liquid	diets	only
ii)	 Royal	 Canin	 Recovery	 Liquid	 Canine	 &	 Feline	
(0.9	 kcal/ml)
iii)	 Royal	Canin	Feline	Renal	Support	(0.9	 kcal/ml)
N.B.	 Human	 liquid	 diets	 are	 unbalanced	 for	 cats	 and	
should	not	be	used
B)	 Esophagostomy	and	gastrostomy	tubes
i)	 Hill’s	a/d	canned
Supplies	 1.3	 kcal/ml	 straight	 from	 can,	 but	 needs	
further	dilution
1	can	+50	 ml	water = 1.0	 kcal/ml
1	can	+25	 ml	water = 1.1	 kcal/ml


--- PDF 111 ---
93
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Second Edition. Edited by Kenneth J. Drobatz,  
Erica Reineke, Merilee F. Costello, and William T. N. Culp.
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
A)	 Respiratory	emergencies
a)	 Triage
i)	 Telephone	triage
1)	 If 	the	 owner	 reports	 any	 concern	 for	 ability	
to	 breathe,	 increased	 respiratory	 rate,	 or	
effort,	 the	 cat	 should	 be	 brought	 in	 immedi-
ately	for	assessment.
2)	 Ensure	 that	 there	 is	 no	 closer	 appropriate	
facility.
ii)	 Waiting	room	triage
1)	 Complaint	 of 	potential	 respiratory	 problems	
warrants	 immediate	 attention	 and	 move -
ment	of 	the	patient	to	the	treatment	area.
2)	 Obtain	 brief 	 history,	 specifically	 asking	
about	 signalment,	 rapidity	 of 	onset,	 cough,	
history	 of 	heart	 disease,	 asthma,	 trauma,	 or	
any	other	respiratory	problems.
b)	 Initial	assessment	(Figure 10.1)
i)	 Complete	 physical	 examination	 is	 often	 not	
possible	 (or	 recommended)	 initially	 in	 cats	
with	severe	respiratory	distress.
ii)	 Clinical	 signs	 of 	 respiratory	 distress	 include	
rapid,	 shallow,	 or	 noisy	 breathing.	 Open-	 mouth	
breathing	 is	 occasionally	 present.	 Some	 cats	
demonstrate	 orthopnea,	 preferring	 to	 sit	 only	
in	 a	 sternal/hunched	 position.	 Cats	 will	 often	
have	 widely	 dilated	 pupils	 and	 may	 have	
excessive	 salivation.	 Cats	 with	 primary	 cardiac	
or	 pulmonary	 disease	 may	 have	 only	 been	
appreciated	 to	 be	 lethargic	 at	 home;	 however,	
following	 a	 car	 trip,	 they	 may	 demonstrate	
overt	 distress.	 Note	 that	 cats	 can	 have	 signifi-
cant	 respiratory	 compromise	 primarily	 mani-
fested	 only	 as	 increased	 respiratory	 rate	 until	
stressed,	 at	 which	 time	 full	 clinical	 signs	 of 	res -
piratory	distress	become	evident.
iii)	 Assess	 whether	 the	 cat	 seems	 to	 be	 in	 immedi-
ate,	 life-	 threatening	 respiratory	 failure.	 Note	
cyanosis,	 gasping,	 and	 pulmonary	 edema	 (PE)	
visible	 at	 nares,	 or	 rarely	 severe	 hypoventila-
tion,	 recognized	 by	 intermittent	 apnea	 in		 lateral	
recumbency.
iv)	 If 	life-	 threatening	 state	 is	 assessed,	 cautiously	
sedate	 (if 	necessary)	 and	 intubate.	 Use	 of 	an	
opioid	 and	 a	 benzodiazepine	 is	 recommended,	
such	 as	 butorphanol	 0.2	 mg/kg	 and	 diazepam	
0.4	 mg/kg	 IV 	(medial	 saphenous	 vein	 often	 eas -
iest).	 Propofol	 and	 alfaxalone	 alone	 are	 a	 poor	
choice,	 due	 to	 their	 cardiovascular	 depressant	
properties.	 Maintain	 on	 100%	 O 2 	with	 manual 	
positive	 pressure	 ventilation.	 Be	 prepared	 to	
suction	 any	 pulmonary	 edema.	 If 	 obvious	
increased	 inspiratory	 effort,	 be	 prepared	 for	 a	
tracheostomy	in	case	of 	laryngeal	mass.
Elizabeth Rozanski
10
Respiratory Emergencies and Pleural Space Disease
	
UNIQUE FEATURES
 ● Identification of the specific underlying cause will result in more effective therapy.
 ● Increased respiratory rate and effort due to pleural effusion should improve rapidly following thoracocentesis.
 ● Failure to improve after thoracocentesis or rapid return of respiratory distress should prompt concern for iatrogenic 
pneumothorax.
 ● The average cat thorax will contain 200–300 ml of effusion or air before respiratory distress will develop.
 ● Heart failure is less common than often believed.
 ● Pleural effusion can be seen with left- sided heart failure.


--- PDF 112 ---
Respiratory Emergencies and Pleural Space Disease
94
v)	 Allow	 the	 cat	 time	 (approximately	 10	 minutes)	
to	 recover	 from	 the	 stress	 of 	transport	 in	 a	 low-	
stress	 environment	 with	 oxygen	 supplementa-
tion.	 Typically,	 an	 oxygen	 cage	 is	 used	 for	 this	
purpose,	 although	 the	 cat	 should	 be	 closely	
observed.	 Other	 options	 include	 an	 oxygen	
hood	 or	 flow-	 by	 administration	 of 	oxygen	 with	
a	 mask	 or	 oxygen	 line	 if 	the	 patient	 will	 tolerate	
it	 with	 minimal	 stress	 and	 movement.	 Prepare	
to	 intervene	 quickly	 (e.g.,	 intubate	 or consider	
thoracocentesis	 if 	pleural	 space	 disease	 is	 sus -
pected)	if 	respiratory	distress	worsens.
vi)	 Observe	the	breathing	pattern	and	effort.
vii)	 Proceed	 with	 physical	 exam.	 Assess	 for	 the	 fol-
lowing	specifically:
1)	 Increased	 respiratory	 rate	 and	 effort	 or, 	
conversely,	 intermittent	 (or	 agonal) 	
gasps. 	If 	agonal	 or	 intermittent	 apnea	 is 	
present, 	begin	 cardiopulmonary	 resuscita-
tion	(CPR).
2)	 Evidence	 of 	 abdominal	 or	 paradoxical	
breathing.
3)	 Upper	 airway	 noise/stertor/stridor;	 recall	
auscultation	 over	 trachea	 may	 help	 localize	
noisy	breathing	to	upper	airway.
4)	 Increased	or	decreased	lung	sounds.
5)	 Crackles	 (fluid	 in	 alveoli,	 not	 specific	 for	
heart	failure).
6)	 Expiratory	wheezes.
7)	 Compressibility	of 	cranial	thorax:
–	 Decreased	 compressibility	 may	 indicate	
a	cranial	mediastinal	mass.
–	 Older	 cats	 can	 normally	 often	 have	 a	
decreased	 compressibility	 and	 can	 con-
fuse	this	diagnostic	clue.
8)	 Subcutaneous	emphysema.
9)	 Heart	murmurs.
10)	 Gallop	 rhythms	 (may	 be	 best	 heard	 with	
the	bell).
11)	 Nasal	discharge.
12)	 Cough	 (inducible	 with	 tracheal	
compression?).
13)	 Rectal	 temperature	 (typically	 low	 with	
heart	failure).
14)	 Assess	 degree	 of 	hypoxemia	 with	 pulse	 oxi-
metry;	 this	 is	 often	 unrewarding	 in	 cats	
with	 poor	 perfusion;	 prolonged	 efforts	 are	
not	required.
viii)	 Attempt	 to	 localize	 the	 disease	 to	 the	 upper	 air -
way,	 lower	 airway,	 pulmonary	 parenchyma,	 or	
pleural	space.
1)	 Loud,	noisy	breathing—	 upper	airway.
2)	 Prolonged	 expiration	 with	 crackles	 and	
wheezes—	 lower	airway.
–	 Cats	 with	 lower	 airway	 disease	 may	 also	
have	 an	 abdominal	 push	 at	 the	 end	 of 	
Cat with 
respiratory
distress?
No Evaluate that problem
Yes
Loud sounds? 
Yes
Upper
airway disease
most likely
No Dull sounds;
abdominal effort?
Yes
Low temp?
Murmur?
Gallop?
Yes
Likely heart
disease
No Probably not heart.
Airway or noncardio-
genic disease Pleural space
disease
Yes
No
Increased lung
sounds, crackles,
wheezes?
Figure 10.1 Flow chart.
