
--- PDF 145 ---
131
Fig. 3.14. Secure the hood around the patient’s head with a length of gauze. Insert a length of flexible oxygen tubing 
into the side of the hood and administer supplemental humidified oxygen at 50 to 100 mL/kg/min.

--- PDF 146 ---
132
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Procedures
TRANSORAL WASH
Introduction
A transoral wash may be performed whenever samples of the airway are required for bacterial or viral 
culture, or to obtain cells for cytologic evaluation. Although bronchoalveolar lavage is considered to 
be the gold standard for obtaining airway samples, it requires specialized equipment and a deep plane 
of general anesthesia. Samples obtained from a transoral wash may be cultured for bacteria or viruses 
and may be evaluated for neoplastic cells, bacteria, fungal infection, or parasitic organisms or ova.
Supplies Needed
Sterile endotracheal tube
Sterile gloves
Sterile 0.9% saline
Sterile red rubber or rigid polypropylene catheter
Port- a- Cul™ culture swabs
Lavendar and red- topped vials
Indications
Obtain bacterial or viral cultures from airway
Obtain cells for cytologic evaluation of airway
Contraindications
Condition in which light- plane general anesthesia is determined to be too dangerous in a very 
unstable patient
Limitations
Samples obtained may be more reflective of large airways, and not reflective of what is deeper in 
the lungs.

--- PDF 147 ---
133
Fig. 3.15. Supplies needed for sample collection via transoral wash.
Fig. 3.16. After induction of anesthesia, wear sterile gloves to pass a new, sterile endotracheal tube in as sterile a manner 
as possible. Have flow- by oxygen supplementation and an Ambu- bag available. Be prepared to give supplemental breaths 
to the patient in between airway washes.
Helpful hint: Have all necessary supplies prepared and in place before placing the patient under anesthesia.

--- PDF 148 ---
134
Fig. 3.18. Instill 5 to 10 mL of sterile 0.9% saline into the airways via the red rubber or polypropylene catheter, then 
vigorously coupage the patient’s thorax.
Fig. 3.17 . Pass a red rubber tube or rigid polypropylene catheter through the endotracheal tube into the patient’s airway.

--- PDF 149 ---
135
Fig. 3.19. Following instillation of sterile saline into the trachea, have an assistant coupage the thorax bilaterally.
Fig. 3.20. Withdraw the fluid from the polypropylene catheter. Note: Not all of the fluid instilled will be withdrawn from 
the airways.

--- PDF 150 ---
136
Fig. 3.21 . The sample collected can be submitted for fluid analysis, cytology, and bacterial/viral cultures as indicated.

--- PDF 151 ---
1373 Oxygen Supplementation and Respiratory Sampling Techniques
SUGGESTED READING
Finke MD. Transtracheal wash and bronchoalveolar lavage. Top Compan Anim Med 2013; 28(3):97– 102.
Manning AM. Oxygen therapy and toxicity. Vet Clin North Amer Sm Anim 2002; 32(5):1005– 1020.
Murphy ML, Hodgson DS, Bello NM. Accuracy of oxygen delivery through bubbler humidifiers and nasal 
catheters. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(3):356– 367.
Tong CW, Gonzalez AL. Respiratory emergencies. Vet Clin North Amer Sm Anim 2020; 50(6):1237– 1259.

--- PDF 152 ---


--- PDF 153 ---
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Procedures, Third Edition. Timothy B. Hackett and Elisa M. Mazzaferro. 
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
139
CHAPTER 4
INTRODUCTION
Pericardial tamponade and even small amounts of fluid within the pericardial space can greatly 
impede cardiac preload and, subsequently, cardiac output. The recognition of and rapid removal of 
pericardial effusion can be life- saving in some patients.
Supplies Needed
Electric clippers and blades
Antimicrobial scrub solution
1- mL syringe with 25- gauge ¾- inch needle
Number 11 scalpel blade
14-  or 16- gauge long over- the- needle catheter
30-  or 60- mL catheter- tip syringe
Three- way stop- cock
Intravenous extension tubing
Bowl or graduated cylinder for sample collection
Red- topped and EDTA tubes
Electrocardiogram (ECG) monitor
Indications
Pericardial effusion impairing cardiac preload and cardiac output
Diagnosis of inflammatory and neoplastic pericardial effusions
Contraindications
Coagulopathies secondary to Vitamin K antagonist rodenticide intoxication
Pericardiocentesis

--- PDF 154 ---
140
Fig. 4.1 . Electrical alternans is a characteristic ECG abnormality observed when the heart is floating and swinging within 
the fluid in the pericardial sac, creating small, then larger ECG complexes. Low- amplitude ECG waveforms can also be 
associated with pericardial effusion, although they can also be associated with severe obesity, hypothyroidism, 
hypothermia, and hypovolemic shock.
Figs. 4.2a–b. Ventrodorsal and lateral thoracic radiographs from a patient with pericardial effusion, demonstrating a 
large globoid cardiac silhouette.
(a)
(b)


--- PDF 155 ---
141
Fig. 4.3. Lateral thoracic silhouette from a dog with minimal pericardial effusion. Note the relatively normal- sized 
cardiac silhouette, elevation of the heart from the sternum and enlarged caudal vena cava.
Helpful hint: The cardiac silhouette may appear normally sized on the ventrodorsal, dorsoventral, or lateral 
thoracic radiographs if the pericardial effusion is acute and has occurred quickly, without time for the pericardium 
to stretch. The patient with acute pericardial effusion may demonstrate severe cardiovascular compromise without 
radiographic signs of a globoid cardiac silhouette. The clue will be to evaluate the caudal vena cava, and if enlarged, 
pericardial effusion should be suspected. The heart may appear elevated from the sternum due to lack of inflow of 
blood into the right heart due to tamponade. One may suspect pneumothorax. If the patient is stable enough, 
perform a ventrodorsal radiograph. Dogs with pericardial effusion will have pulmonary vessels to the edge of the 
thorax and cranial to the diaphragm to the edges of the periphery; dogs with pneumothorax will not have pulmonary 
vessels to the level of the periphery.
Fig. 4.4. Supplies needed to perform a pericardiocentesis include antimicrobial scrub solution, a number 11 scalpel 
blade, sterile gloves, 14-  or 16- gauge long over- the- needle catheter, 2% lidocaine, small syringe with 25- gauge needle, 
IV extension tubing, three- way stop- cock, and 30-  or 60- mL syringe.

--- PDF 156 ---
142
Fig. 4.5. Clip a large area of fur on the right lateral thoracic wall, caudal to the point of the elbow (fifth to seventh 
intercostal space).
Fig. 4.6. Aseptically scrub the clipped area with antimicrobial scrub.

--- PDF 157 ---
143
Fig. 4.7 . Insert a bleb of 2% lidocaine dorsal to the sternum and just caudal to the point of the elbow or at the fifth to 
seventh intercostal space.
Fig. 4.8. Rescrub the clipped area and drape with sterile field towels. Make a small nick incision through the 
anesthetized area of skin using a number 11 scalpel blade. Note: Attach the patient to an ECG monitor, if available, to 
monitor for cardiac dysrhythmias while performing the pericardiocentesis.

--- PDF 158 ---
144
Fig. 4.9. Wearing sterile gloves, insert the over- the- needle catheter through the nick incision and through the body wall 
at the fifth to seventh intercostal space. Watch for dysrhythmias on the ECG monitor.
Fig. 4.10. Watch for a flash of blood in the hub of the catheter.

--- PDF 159 ---
145
Fig. 4.11 . Once a flash of blood is observed, push the catheter off of the stylette, and then remove the stylette.
Fig. 4.12. Attach the hub of the catheter to the male end of the length of IV extension tubing, then withdraw fluid from 
the pericardial sac.
Helpful hint: Removal of even a small amount of fluid can drastically improve cardiac output by improving cardiac filling.

--- PDF 160 ---
146
Fig. 4.13. Place a small amount of pericardial fluid in plain and EDTA- sample tubes for fluid analysis. Watch the plain 
tube carefully for the presence of a clot. Clot formation may indicate an active bleed. Set aside some of the fluid for 
culture, in the event that the fluid is due to bacterial or fungal pericarditis.
Fig. 4.14. The pericardial catheter can be sutured in place with a finger- trap suture in cases where repeated 
pericardiocentesis may be needed. Note: Over- the- wire pericardial catheters are available from some manufacturers.

--- PDF 161 ---
1474 Pericardiocentesis
SUGGESTED READING
Cook S, Cortellini S, Humm K. Retrospective evaluation of pericardial catheter placement in the management 
of pericardial effusion in dogs (2007–2015): 18 cases. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2019, 9:413–417.
Hagley SP. Ch 18: Pericardiocentesis. In: Advanced Monitoring and Procedures for Small Animal Emergency 
and Critical Care. Burkitt Creedon JM, Davis H, (eds). John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ 2023, 
pp. 241–250.
Humm KR, Keenaghan- Clark EA, Boag AK. Adverse events associated with pericardial effusion in the dog: 
85 cases (1999–2006). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009, 19(4):352–356.
MacDonald KA, Cagney O, Magne ML. Echocardiographic and clinicopathologic characterization of  
pericardial effusion in dogs: 107 cases (1985–2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009, 235(12):1456–1461.

--- PDF 162 ---


--- PDF 163 ---
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Procedures, Third Edition. Timothy B. Hackett and Elisa M. Mazzaferro. 
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
149
CHAPTER 5
INTRODUCTION
Nutritional support of the critically ill patient is important to provide necessary proteins, carbohy-
drates, and lipids for energy and repair processes in a variety of illnesses. The placement of an 
enteral feeding tube for nutritional supplementation is preferred over parenteral nutrition and 
should be considered in any patient that has a functional gastrointestinal tract. This chapter 
describes the placement and maintenance of a variety of enteral feeding devices, including nasoe-
sophageal, nasogastric, and esophagostomy tubes.
NASOESOPHAGEAL AND NASOGASTRIC TUBES
Introduction
Nasoesophageal and nasogastric feeding tubes should be considered in any patient that requires 
short- term enteral nutritional support when the patient either cannot or will not voluntarily eat and 
has no esophageal disorder. Specialized veterinary liquid enteral diets are commercially available 
for use with nasoenteral feeding. In addition to providing enteral nutrition, nasogastric tubes can 
be used to suction air and fluid from the stomachs of patients with severe ileus.
SUPPLIES NEEDED
Needle holders
Proparacaine or other topical drops or lubricant
Lubricating gel
Nonabsorbable suture (2–0 or 3–0)
5-  to 10- Fr feeding tube or red rubber catheter
Permanent marker
Elizabethan collar
Nutritional Support 
and Orogastric Lavage

--- PDF 164 ---
150
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Procedures
Indications
Short- term enteral nutrition in patients that are inappetent
Suctioning of gas or fluid from stomach in patients with severe ileus
Contraindications
Epistaxis
Esophageal disease/dysfunction
Megaesophagus
Esophageal foreign body or stricture
Nasopharyngeal trauma
Recumbent or unconscious patients
Regurgitation
Thrombocytopenia

--- PDF 165 ---
151
Fig. 5.1 . Supplies needed for placement of a nasoenteral feeding tube include the enteral feeding tube or red rubber catheter, 
topical anesthetic such as proparacaine, lubricating gel, nonabsorbable suture, permanent marker, and needle holders.
Fig. 5.2. Tilt the patient’s head upward toward the ceiling and place several drops of topical anesthetic into the nostril.

--- PDF 166 ---
152
Fig. 5.4. Mark the tube with a permanent marker at the measurement of the tip of the nose. Prefabricated tubes often 
have preprinted centimeter measurements.
Fig. 5.3. Measure the tube from the tip of the nose to the last rib for nasogastric placement. If you prefer to place a 
nasoesophageal tube when gastric suctioning is not necessary, measure the tube from the tip of the nose to the 
mid- thorax.

--- PDF 167 ---
153
Fig. 5.5. Lubricate the tip of the with lubricating gel.
Helpful hint: Hold the tube as close to the patient’s muzzle as possible, to prevent excessive movement and to 
prevent the patient from sneezing the tube out during placement. Push the patient’s nose toward the ceiling when 
passing the tube to extend the neck, and then direct the patient’s nose ventrally once the tube is at the point of the 
pharynx. Watch for a swallowing motion as the patient should swallow the tube.
Fig. 5.6. Insert the tip of the tube into the ventromedial portion of the patient’s nostril.

--- PDF 168 ---
154
Fig. 5.7 . The tube is inserted to the correct location as premeasured then marked with permanent marker.
Fig. 5.8. If the tube is located in the stomach correctly, aspiration of gastric contents can be used as an indicator of 
correct placement.
Helpful hint: Taking an abdominal radiograph is always a good idea, as some tubes can be inserted too far and may 
not always allow for complete aspiration of air or fluid, depending on the location of the distal tube in the stomach 
and patient position.

--- PDF 169 ---
155
Fig. 5.9. Secure the tube with suture as close to the nostril as possible without causing an acute turn or kink that could 
cause the tube to occlude.
Fig. 5.10. Place a finger- trap suture around the tube to decrease tension on the suture.

--- PDF 170 ---
156
Fig. 5.11 . Suture the tube to the side of the face, near the ramus of the mandible.
Helpful hint: If the tube is bothersome to the patient and is causing sneezing, apply more topical anesthetic as 
needed to minimize patient discomfort. Check the placement of the tube with a lateral thoracoabdominal radiograph. 
Once correct tube placement has been confirmed, the tube can be used immediately. Always start a feeding by 
instilling a small amount of sterile water. At any time if the patient coughs during instillation of water, repeat thoracic 
radiograph(s) to make sure that the tube is not in the trachea. Upon tube removal, make sure that the tube is kinked 
well, and then pull briskly, to prevent fluid from entering the trachea and lungs.
Fig. 5.12. The tube is secured in place. An Elizabethan collar should be worn at all times to prevent the patient from 
scratching and dislodging the tube.

--- PDF 171 ---
1575 Nutritional Support and Orogastric Lavage
ESOPHAGOSTOMY TUBES
Introduction
Placement of an esophagostomy tube should be considered whenever a patient is inappetent 
because it either will not or cannot voluntarily eat (i.e., severe maxillofacial trauma, oral or oro-
pharyngeal neoplasia or mass effects, and inappetence). Esophagostomy tubes are simple to place, 
require minimal equipment, and can be used immediately. An esophagostomy tube is contraindi-
cated in patients that cannot protect their airway, have vomiting or regurgitating, or have functional 
or mechanical esophageal disease such as megaesophagus, severe esophageal erosions, neoplasia, 
or strictures.
Supplies Needed
Surgical Instruments
Number 10 scalpel blade
Scalpel handle
Needle holders
Mayo scissors
Rochester carmalt (curved)
Nonabsorbable suture (various sizes, depending on the size of the tube and patient)
Permanent marker
Red rubber catheter or other prefabricated esophagostomy tube
Electric clipper and blades
Antimicrobial scrub
Christmas tree adapter
Male adapter
Bandage material or prefabricated esophagostomy tube collar
Gauze 4 x 4 inch squares
Cotton roll gauze
Kling
Elasticon® or VetrapTM
Optional equipment: Esophagostomy tube insertion device
Indications
Inappetence
Maxillofacial trauma
Oropharyngeal neoplasia, mass lesions, surgery
Severe dental disease
Contraindications
V omiting
Regurgitation
Esophageal stricture or foreign body
Megaesophagus
Conditions that make patient unable to protect its airway
Severe cough
Pneumonia

--- PDF 172 ---
158
Helpful hint: Take care that the cut edges are smooth to prevent irritation to the esophagus.
Fig. 5.13. Supplies needed for placement of an esophagostomy tube include a scalpel handle and scalpel blade (Number 
15 or Number 11 preferred over Number 10 blade, to avoid making the entrance site into the skin too large), thumb 
forceps, needle holder or straight needle with nonabsorbable suture, and the esophagostomy tube. In this photo, the Mila 
esophagostomy tube is pictured along with the introducer. If a prefabricated tube or introducer is not available, a red 
rubber catheter and a curved Carmalt can be used for placement. Depending on the size of the patient 14-  to 20- Fr red 
rubber catheters can be used. If a red rubber catheter is used, cut the distal end of the tube on a diagonal proximal to the 
holes in the tube to increase the diameter of the tube through which food is passed.
Fig. 5.14. Anesthetize and intubate the patient. Place the patient in right lateral recumbency. Clip and the left lateral 
neck from the ramus of the mandible caudally to the thoracic inlet and dorsally and ventrally to midline. Aseptically 
scrub the clipped area. Measure the distal end of the tube from the mid- thorax to the tube entrance site in the left lateral 
cervical region. Mark the tube at the point of insertion with a permanent marker. Prefabricated tubes sometimes have 
measurements already printed on the tube.

--- PDF 173 ---
159
Fig. 5.15. Drape the clipped area with sterile field towels and secure the towels with towel clamps. Gently pull the 
tongue rostrally, then insert Rochester carmalt into the mouth down into the throat into the esophagus. As the patient is 
intubated, the carmalt will automatically enter the esophagus. Direct the curved tips laterally to the skin at the level of the 
mid- cervical region. You should be able to palpate the tips of the carmalt under the skin with your fingertips. Take care to 
visualize the jugular vein and direct the tips of the Carmalt dorsal to the jugular vein. In this photo, the jugular vein can 
be visualized ventral to the index finger, while the tip of the index finger is palpating the tips of the carmalt.
Fig. 5.16. Open the tips of the carmalt and palpate. Using a number 11 scalpel blade, make a stab incision through the 
skin and underlying fascia, into the esophagus through the open tips of the carmalt. Using the scalpel blade, make a nick 
incision through the skin over the tips of the carmalt.

--- PDF 174 ---
160
Fig. 5.17 . Close the tips of the carmalt, and then push the tips of the carmalt through the edges of the skin incision.
Helpful hint: In some cases, it may be necessary to gently incise the esophagus over the tips of the carmalt. Make 
sure to keep the tips of the carmalt in sight, so as to create only one hole in the esophagus.
Fig. 5.18. Grasp the distal end of the esophagostomy tube and clamp it in the tips of the carmalt.
Helpful hint: At this point, it is easy to also grasp the tissue in the mouth, oropharynx, or esophagus within the 
hinges of the carmalt. If this occurs, it will not be easy to bring the tube forward rostrally. If you are having difficulty, 
push the tube and carmalt caudally back through the skin incision, open the hinges of the carmalt, redirect the carmalt 
slightly, and then repeat grasping the distal end of the esophagostomy tube procedure without the tissue closed within 
the hinges of the carmalt.

--- PDF 175 ---
161
Fig. 5.19. Pull the carmalt and esophagostomy tube rostrally out of the mouth. The proximal end of the esophagostomy 
tube will be facing caudally at this point.
Helpful hint: If you are not able to bring the tube rostrally through the oral cavity, make sure that the esophagostomy 
tube or carmalt is not wrapped around the tie- gauze of the endotracheal tube.
Fig. 5.20. Unclamp the distal end of the esophagostomy tube from the carmalt, and then turn and push the distal end of 
the esophagostomy tube caudally back into the esophagus. Take care to avoid getting the tube stuck on the endotracheal 
tube and the tie that secures the endotracheal tube in place.
Helpful hint: Make sure that the patient is well- anesthetized before attempting this step to avoid biting your fingers 
with stimulation in the mouth.

--- PDF 176 ---
162
Fig. 5.21 . While pushing the distal end of the esophagostomy tube caudally into the esophagus, pull gently on the 
proximal end of the tube to create some tension until you feel the tube “flip.”
Fig. 5.22. The esophagostomy tube has “flipped” rostrally toward the front of the patient and is in position, where the 
distal end of the tube is in the esophagus. At this point, gently twist the tube to make sure it is in the correct place.

--- PDF 177 ---
163
Fig. 5.23. Place a holding suture or loose purse- string suture around the tube entrance site. Leave the ends of the 
suture long.
Fig. 5.24. Use the long suture ends to secure a finger- trap suture around the base of the tube, where it enters the skin to 
further secure the tube in place.

--- PDF 178 ---
164
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Procedures
Fig. 5.27 . Prepare to insert the introducer into the mouth. Note the distal end of the introducer is curved, to be directed 
laterally to the skin surface once it is inserted into the esophagus.
PLACEMENT OF ESOPHAGOSTOMY TUBE USING INTRODUCER
Fig. 5.26. Clip and aseptically scrub the left lateral cervical region as previously described. Insert the distal end of the 
tube into the mouth and into the esophagus. The distal end of the esophagostomy tube should be inserted to the mid 
thorax as measured.
Fig. 5.25. Place the anesthetized patient in right lateral recumbency. Measure from the proposed tube entrance site to the 
mid thorax.

--- PDF 179 ---
165
Fig. 5.28. Push the introducer into the mouth to the level of the esophagus and tube entrance site. Carefully visualize 
and avoid the jugular vein. Direct the distal end of the introducer laterally to the skin.
Fig. 5.29. Palpate the end of the esophagostomy tube introducer under the skin. Make a small incision through the skin 
over the tip of the introducer using a number 11 scalpel blade.
Fig. 5.30. Push the end of the introducer through the skin.

--- PDF 180 ---
166
Fig. 5.31 . Attach the proximal end of the esophagostomy tube to the distal end (noncurved) of the introducer.
Fig. 5.32. Pull the introducer with the esophagostomy tube attached caudally and laterally, out through the skin incision.
Fig. 5.33. The esophagostomy tube in place. Secure the esophagostomy tube with a purse- string and finger trap sutures 
as previously described.

--- PDF 181 ---
1675 Nutritional Support and Orogastric Lavage
OROGASTRIC LAVAGE
Introduction
Orogastric lavage is an important method for removal of ingesta from the stomach of animals that 
have ingested toxic substances or excessive food, a condition known as “food bloat.” The tech-
nique should be performed only in animals placed under general anesthesia with a cuffed endotra-
cheal tube in place, and maintained on gas or intravenous anesthesia and oxygen. Orogastric lavage 
should be considered whenever a patient is not able to vomit, or if induction of emesis is contrain-
dicated in animals with neurologic abnormalities that cannot protect their airways.
Supplies Needed
Orogastric tube or 60- mL conical shaped syringe
Two buckets or bowls, depending on large or small patient size
Warm tap water
Lavage pump
Mouth gag
1- inch white tape or permanent marker
Indications
Removal of toxins
Removal of food from stomach
Gastric decompression
Contraindications
Should not be performed in awake, nonintubated animals that cannot protect their airway
Gastric perforation
Removal of caustic substances

--- PDF 182 ---
168
Fig. 5.34. Place the patient in sternal or lateral recumbency following induction of general anesthesia. Measure the 
orogastric tube from the tip of the nose to the last rib.
Fig. 5.35. Mark the tube with a piece of 1- inch white tape or permanent marker.

--- PDF 183 ---
169
Fig. 5.36. Lubricate the tube with water soluble lubricant.
Fig. 5.37 . Place a mouth gag into the mouth to keep the jaws open. Insert the lubricated tube through the mouth, into the 
esophagus to the level of the last rib, into the stomach.

--- PDF 184 ---
170
Fig. 5.38. Attach the proximal end of the orogastric tube to the lavage pump (or 60- mL conical tipped syringe filled with 
tap water warmed to body temperature), and instill tap water into the stomach. Monitor the patient for respiratory distress 
or excessive abdominal distension. Disconnect the proximal end of the orogastric tube from the lavage pump and allow 
fluid and gastric contents to flow into a second collection bucket. Save specimens for lateral toxicologic analysis, if 
necessary. If you are using a red rubber catheter in a small patient, aspirate on the empty 60- mL syringe to aspirate 
gastric contents into the syringe, then empty into a bowl.
Fig. 5.39. To remove the tube, kink the end of the tube as you are removing it from the patient’s stomach and esophagus, 
to prevent residual fluid from leaking from the tube as it is removed.

--- PDF 185 ---
1715 Nutritional Support and Orogastric Lavage
SUGGESTED READING
Chan DL. Nutritional support of the critically ill small animal patient. Vet Clin North Amer Small Anim Pract 
2020, 50(6):1411–1422.
Fink L, Jennings M, Reiter AM. Esophagostomy feeding tube placement in the dog and cat. J Vet Dent 2014, 
31(2):133–138.
Nathanson O, McGonigle K, Michel K, Stefanovski D, Clarke D. Esophagostomy tube complications in dogs 
and cats: retrospective review of 225 cases. 2019, J Vet Int Med 33(5):2014–2019.
Smart L, Lau J. Specialized gastrointestinal techniques. In: Advanced Monitoring and Procedures for Small 
Animal Emergency and Critical Care. Burkitt Creedon JM, Davis H, (eds). John Wiley and Sons, 
Hoboken, NJ. 2023, pp. 523–527.
Tan AWK. Assisted enteral feeding. In: Advanced Monitoring and Procedures for Small Animal Emergency and 
Critical Care. Burkitt Creedon JM, Davis H, (eds). John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ 2023, pp. 567–583.

--- PDF 186 ---


--- PDF 187 ---
173
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Procedures, Third Edition. Timothy B. Hackett and Elisa M. Mazzaferro. 
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
CHAPTER 6
URINARY CATHETER PLACEMENT IN MALE AND FEMALE DOGS
Introduction
Placement of a urinary catheter often serves a dual purpose in critically ill small animal patients. 
In nonambulatory animals, a urinary catheter attached to a closed collection system is invaluable 
in maintaining cleanliness and preventing urine scald and decubital ulceration. Urine collection 
and quantitation is often necessary when assessing hydration and perfusion parameters and renal 
function. Finally, urethral catheterization and maintenance of an indwelling urinary catheter is 
necessary in the treatment of urethral obstruction in cases of feline lower urinary tract disease and 
urethral calculi. This chapter describes the placement of various types of urinary catheters in male 
and female dogs and cats.
Supplies Needed
Electric clippers and blades
Antimicrobial scrub solution
Sterile gloves
1- inch white tape
20-  to 30- mL syringe
Sterile 0.9% saline solution
Sterile field towels
Urine collection system/bag
Sterile lubricating jelly
Christmas tree adapter
3–0 nonabsorbable suture
Foley or red rubber catheter
Urinary Catheter Placement, 
Urohydropulsion, and Temporary 
Antepubic Cystostomy Catheter 
Placement

--- PDF 188 ---
174
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Procedures
Feline urinary catheter
For female dogs:
Vaginal speculum
Sterile otoscope head
Light source
Indications
Maintenance of patient cleanliness in nonambulatory patients
Urine collection for urinalysis
Urine output monitoring
Treatment of urethral obstruction
Urethral trauma
Urethral prolapse
Contraindications
Not indicated in patients that are ambulatory and do not have urethral obstruction, or do not require 
urine output monitoring.

--- PDF 189 ---
175
Fig. 6.1 . Supplies needed for placement of a urinary catheter can differ in males and females. Required supplies include 
electric clippers and blades, antimicrobial scrub solution, sterile gloves, sterile 0.9% saline solution, 20-  and 30- mL 
syringes, 1- inch white tape, 3-  to 6- mL syringes, sterile needle holder, nonabsorbable suture, sterile field towels, urinary 
catheter, sterile lubricating jelly, Christmas tree adapter, light source, and a closed urine collection system. For female 
urinary catheter placement, a sterile vaginal speculum or sterile otoscope head and light source may come in handy.
Helpful hint: Use care to not cause skin irritation.
Fig. 6.2. Clip fur close to the tip of the prepuce.

--- PDF 190 ---
176
Fig. 6.3. Retract the prepuce to expose the penis, and then scrub the tip of the prepuce and penis with antimicrobial 
scrub solution.
Fig. 6.4. For non- Foley catheters, measure the catheter from the tip of the penis to the urinary bladder. This is to ensure 
that you do not insert the catheter too far into the urinary bladder, which could cause it to coil and create a knot making it 
difficult or impossible to remove.
Helpful hint: Use care to not contaminate the catheter by touching it to the patient’s fur.